THE Honorable, pleasant and rare conceited History of Palmendos.

Son to the famous and fortunate Prince Palmerin d'Oliua, Emperor of
Constantinople and the Queen of Tharsus.

Translated out of French by A. M. one of the Messengers of her Majesty's
Chamber.

Patere aut abstine.

AT LONDON

Printed by I. C. for Simon Watersonne, and are to be sold in Church-yarde at
the sign of the Crown.

Anno. Domini.

1589.

Fortissimo, et militiae naualis Peritissimo viro, Domino Francisco Draco
Equiti Aurato.
DEsinat Herculeas iam Grecia vana columnas Mirari, aut Minyas, Dulichi^mue
ducens. Amphitryoniadem super as fortissime Drace, Iasonaque, et comites,
Penelopesque virum. Neptunusque suum credit tibi iure tridentem, Cedit Sceptra
libens, imperi^mque maris. Palmendos tanto latus, tutusque Patrono Audet in
innumeras peruolitare manus. Zoilus inuideat rumpantur et ilia Codro, Palmendos
Draco vindice tutus erit. It, volat, et gaudet, spernit que minacia verba,
Nempe soles tumides spernere Drace minas.

Antonius Mondaius.
To the courteous Reader.
Having finished this History of P^lmendos, I commit the same to thy favorable
censure. And though it be not floorished forth with borrowed phrases of
eloquence, yet hope I thou will accept it freendly, as thou have done
heertofore my works of the like matter. To make any commendation thereof to
thee, I will not, first read thy fill thereon, and after judge as thou find
occasion: yet with thy wonted favor, to encourage me in proceeding in
translation of (...), which by the next Term I hope will be accomplished.

From my house at Cripple gate the fifth of February. 1589. Thine in all
courtesy. Anth^ny Monday.

The history of Palmendos, son to the famous Palmerin d'Oliua, Emperor of
Constantinople, and the Queen of Tharsus.
Discoursing likewise of the Prince Rifarano, Son to Tryneus Emperor of
Allemaigne, and Aurecinda, Si^er to the Soldane of Persia: their K^ghtly deeds
of Chiu^e, (...) adventures, and worthy resolution.
CHAP. I.
How Belcar and Tyrendos being in the C^urte of the Emperor Palmerin,
received their order of knighthoode, and how Belcar departed secretly from
Constantinople: and of the C^mbat h^e fought in the Realm of Macedo^, against
the three Sons of a Knight tha^ lodged him.

NOt long after the destruction of the magni^cent and proud Monarchy of the
Romans, wa^ erected a new Empire in Greece, which the (...) bounty divine,
fauo^red with continual happiness, placing the good Prince Palmerin d'Oliua, in
the Crown and lawful government thereof: as well in respect of his great
prowess, high and knightly paradores, which with vigilant ^are he used for
the defense of such an estate, the only renown whereof brake the desseig^es
of many, that by hostility sought to disquiet him: a^ als^ in regard of the
notable lineage and posterity discending from him, of whose virtues and
heroycall perfections, this present History of Palmendos his Son is
contrived, and therefore to be placed at the end of his Fathers travels. In
which discourse already extant, (gentle Readers) you have understood, how the
Emperor Palmerin so looued and honored Knights errant, that from the furthest
parts of the world they came to his Court, because yeerelie he continued a
sumptuous spectacle in form of a Tourney, for the exercise of knightly and
millitarie discipline: and with such religious zeal was this worthy practice
followed, as the Court might well be called yt School of Arms, and Nursse of
civility. For this cause, many Kings, Princes, and great Lords, sent their
Sons to be there educated, among whom, the good Knight Frysoll King of
Hungaria sent one of his, named Belcar, and the Duke Eustace of Mecana another,
called Tirendos: that they might deserve their knightho^de at the hand of the
Emperor, the true mirror and Idea of manhood, and so consequently they to
participate some part of his bounty and prow^sse.

THe time then being come, that Belcar Son to King Frysoll, should (...) his
order of knighthood, he humbly entreated the Emperor, that he might enjoy it
at his hand, and Tirendos Son to Duke Eustace of Mecana, desirous of the
self same honor, made like request unto his Majesty, whereto the good
Emper^ur (who looued them both with singular affection, knowing h^w well
Chivalry would be employed by them) ^ight willingly condiscended.

Hereupon, after they had performed the accustomed vigill, he knighted these
two Princes with great royalty, desiring God to bestow such favor on them, as
at no time they might degenerate from their famous pr^decessours. And to
Belcar, ^mbracing him in his arms, he said* My good Nephewe, heaven accomplish
in you such perf^ctiens of manhood, as each one may know you to be the Son
of the worthy Knight Sir Frysoll, a Prince so hardy and valiant, as any that
ever followed Arms. The ceremonies being ended, they all returned to the
Palace, where the new Knights being unarmed, rich Robes and Mantles were
brought them, for greater honor of the feast, which in the Court at this the
exceeded. But Belcar took little pleasure, in beholding the diverse occurrences
at this assembly, because his mind was more bus^ed with expectation of future
glory, which made him thus to comm^ne with himself. Belcar, thou have now no
longer time to rest, seeing thou have rec^iued the honorable order of
knighthood, and that at the hand of the Empe^ur thyn^ Uncle, whom the divine
providence has endued with so many la^dable virtues: nor does any thing want
in the King the Father, that is required in a man at Arms. If then hitherto
thou have lived in pleasure and delights, henceforth thou must bequeath thy
self to travail, to show that thou do resemble and imitate in some things
thine Ancestors, who with great labor and industry have attained such fame
and renow^e, as the memory thereof shall remain immortali. And if thou will not
darcken this honor, then must thou hasten thy departure from y^ Court, and
follow the search of strange adventures, as they did in their days for thine
example.

After many and sundry thoughts, that fought together within his spirit, he
concluded to depart acccmpanied but with one Squire, and that so secretly as
could be devised. Thence would he travail directly toward Macedon, to make
the first proof of his valor in yt adventure of Francelina, who was
enchaunted in y^ I^le of Carderia, as was declared in the History of Palmerin
d'Oliua. And at this time was little talk of any other thing, then of the
number of Knights that daily sought to win her in marriage, and with her the
Kingdom of Thessalie: for such (...) the promised guerdon and recompense, to
him that could deliver her out of the enchaunted Castle, but hitherto all the
Knights lost their labor, for no one was able to finish the ^duenture. Belcar
being earnestly provoked with the fame of this occasion, which was generally
r^puted strange and full of ^aunger, resolved to frame his journey thither,
because he^ earnestly desired to bring the enchauntment to end: his reason
herein not to be disallowed, for beyond the atchiuement of great honor and
praise, he should be (...) with so fair a Princess, as could not be judged
inferi^r to any. In this surpassing desire, conceal^d from a^ie one but
himself, in regard of his perfect hope to compass the same: three days he
honored the feast with his presence, and the fourth da^ early in the morning,
putting ^n a cost^ie Green Armor, which for this purpose he had secretly
provided, carrying likewise in his Shee^de for his ^uise, a Castle Guelles in a
Field argent, unseen of any he left y^ City, ryding on toward the Realm
of Macedon.

The Emperor soon after understanding heerof, was not a little glad of his
worthy enterprise, which he witnessed in the presence of al his Lords and
Barons, saying. So help me God, as my opinion and hope is persuaded, that
Belcar will so honorably follow Arms, as each of ^ou will rejoice to hear
y^ discourse of his fortunes: heaven favor and further his attempts, directing
all his action^ in ^uch (...), as no tongue may control his noble forwardnes.
Belcars departure was liked of every one, except Tirendos, who was thereat
meruailously offended, because he had not acquainted him with his intent, for
gladly would he have borne him company, and therefore he determined never to
give over traua^ till he found him, as it came to pass very soon after. In
mean while, Belcar made such speed in his journey, as without meeting any
aduent^re to hinder him, in short ti^e he attayn^d the limits and con^nes of
the Empire: and entering the Frontiers of Macedon, that night he was lodged in
the Castle of an old courteous Knight, who sitting at his Gate, and seeing
Belcar pass by in the ^ning somewhat late, (...): for that night to let (...)
be hi^ Host, which he not willing to refuse, was well content to accept (...)
offer. A^er that Belcar was unarmed, the old Knight so well liked his br^e
^onstitution of body, his (...) and mo^est (...) ^hes, (...) ^ad great
pleasure to ^tte and talk with him* and falling from one (...) to another, the
good old^ Knight perceived in the en^e* that `his guest was one in great favor
with the Emperor Palm^rin.

Now must I let you understand, that this courteous old Knight had three Sons,
by nature prouds and evil dysposed, envying the liberal hospitality which
their father used to travailing passengers: wherefore the good old man, too well
acquainted with their ma^icious behavior, took them aside to admo^sh the,
that they should use no frow^ing or discourtesie to his guest. Know my Sons
(quoth he) that this night we hau^ in our house one of the Emperors ^nights,
whose counte^aunce does witness that he is of high descent: I pray you
therefore do him all the honor you may, entertayning him with cheerful and
hearty good will, not using any speeches but such as are modest and meet for
Gentlemen. They answered y^ they would fulfill his (...), yet their Father was
no sooner gone, but they concluded altogether, on the morrow to assail Belcar
at the entrance of a Forr^st. which was not far distant from the Castle, to
try if he were such a man as the^r Father commended him to be: and being thus
resolved, they would not b^ seen at Supper* but ea^lie in the morning clasping
on their A^nour, they rode to the place of their appointment. The reu^rend
Father, seeing the ingratitude and disobedience of his Sons, did all the
honor he possibly could to Belcar, who requiting (...) gentleness with many
thanks, in the morning set forward on his journey: and scantly had he ridden
two leagues, but he met the three br^thren under a wood side, when the eldest
of the^ came to him with these speeches. Sir Knight, you must of necessity
Ioust with me, otherwise your passage may not be permitted, for now am I
destrous to make proof, if thou be so valiant as men do esteem thee. Belcar,
who stood in doubt of a greater ambushe, took his Lance from his Squire, and
in very courteous manner thus replied. You may be ashamed Sir Knight, to (...)
any Gentleman belonging to the Emperor in this sort, and happily you may
deal with such a one, who shall give you but little time to sit down and
rep^nt ye. Trouble not your mind with such imaginations, quot^ another of the
Brethren, but prepare your self to try y^ event. At which words they fetched
their carire, and encountered together with such vigor, as their Lances flew
in shyuers up into the air, Belcar being not mooned in-his saddle, where
contrariewise, he gave his enemy such a puissaunt strok^ with the counterbuffe
of his staff, as it was too late for him to call for a Surgeon. When the
other two Brethren saw this spectacle, and being persuaded that their elder
Brother was wounded to the death: prou^ked with extreme rage and indignation,
they came to Belcar with these words.

In an evil hour (Knight) did thou give that blow, because thy ^eath shall
recompense the same. So ran they both together fiercely against him, the one
failing in the meeting, and the others hap so good, as he gave Belcar a
small wound on the arm: yet being of resolute courage he buckled with them
so close, as one of the^ he sent to keep company with his eldest brother, and
the other he brought into such extremity, that he fell from his Horse deprived
of his senses. The Squire that came with these three brethren, seeing the bad
fortune of his Masters Sons, rode presently back to the Castle, and finding
the aged Knight in his Chamber, thus began.

Alas my Lord, in an unhappy hour did you entertain the Knight that lodged
here the last night, who (as it seems) came only to kill your Sons. So
delivered he the whole discourse of the fight, which pr^uoked the sad Father to
shed forth aboun^nce of tears: yet did he especially condemn his Sons,
whose pride and arrogancy had thus caused their own death. His Servant
understanding the cause of his laments, went presently to the place where the
Brethren were discem^ited, and there they found two of them deprived of life,
the third likewise in very great danger, unless speedy provision were made
to prevent it. So causing him to be laid in a Litter, and the other two on a
knightly Beer, they thus brought them to their Fathers Castle, where their
Lady mother met them with wonderful effuse of tears and lamentations, as one
would have judged her alt^gether void of sense and difcretion, then any way
pertaker of human wit or reason. Like sorrow was made by one of her
daughters, who loved her brethren very dearly, and after she had somewhat
pacified herself, she made a solemn vow to her mother, never to take rest in
her mind and thoughts, until she were thoroughly revenged on the (...). Wherefore
when her two dead brethren were buried* she departed against her Fathers will,
accompanied only with two Squires to seek Belcar, intending to be avenged on
him by one mean or other.

CHAP. II.
How Belcar came unknown into Macedon, where he bare away the pryze of the
Tourney, which King Florendos had appointed, to honor the marriage of the
Princess Denisa: and ^owe he discovered himself to Alderina, Daughter to the
Duke of Pontus and Durace.

BElcar ryding in great haste toward Carderia, sinding ye heat of the day
very troublesome, he alighted at a fair Fountain to refresh himself a while,
where long he had not stayed, but in a pathe leading directly to y^ same place,
he beheld a company of Knights and Ladies coming, attended on with a very
sufficient train. It was the Duke of Pontus and Durace, who rode to Macedon,
to the marriage which the King Florendos had made, between his Daughter Denisa
and the King of Thrace, Nephew to the Wife of Caniano. This Duke had his
espoused Lady Laurana with him, as also one of his fair Daughters named
Alderina, who rode foremost ^n the troop, beguiling the time in talk with her
Ladies: yet intending to stay till the heat was past, and in the mean while
to sollace herself at the Fountain. There she arrived before Belcar had p^t
on his Helmet, so that she beholding his amiable countenance, his rich Armor*
and yet having no company but one Squire: as a Lady^ wise and w^ll governed she
saluted him very graciously, whereat Belcar was somewhat amazed, doubting she
kn^w of whence and what he was. But soon did he alter that opinion, and
rather thinking this kindness to proceed o^ ^ebonaire curtisie, imagined her of
high calling, for which cause he made her humble reverence, and seeing how
many followed this Lady, among whom he might peradventure be known, he called
for his Horse, minding to ride a contrary way. Alderina heerat ^om what
moved, because she desired to know of whence he was, thus spoke. Sir
Knight, abide here hardly at your ease, and for our coming do not for sake
a place so sweet and delectable: you see the heat of the day is such, as
scantly will permit ye to travail. If you go to adventure your fortune in
the Tourney at Macedon, you may ride with the Duke my Father, who will be very
glad of your company: and much more my self, because my good hap was first to
find you here.

Belcar, humbly thanking her for this courtesy, made an excuse that he could
not go to Macedon, because he had urgent asfaires else where, and whether he
must travel with all speed: wherefore taking his leave again of her, he rode
which way him liked best, only to escape unknown of this company. And
meeting a Squire, that came after the train with the carriage, he demanded if
he knew the Lord that rode by so well accompanied, to whom y^ Squire answered,
that it was the Duke of Pontus, who rode to Macedon, to the feast of the King
Florendos, for the marriage of his Daughter Denisa, and y^ the Duke had his
fair Daughter Alderina with him, to see the Iousts and Turnament which was
now prepared. So soon as Belcar heard these words, he presently coniectured,
that the Lady which came first to the Fountain was the Dukes daughter, of whom
report had made great commendation. Heervppon he determined to go see this
assembly, in the most secret manner he could devise: for he had time enough
to accomplish his voyage. So for sooke he the way to the Isle of Carderia,
framing his journey toward Macedon, and com ming near the City, he ouertooke
two Knights y^ rode to the Tryumphe: they having riciprocallie saluted each
other, the two ^nights demanded of Belcar if he came to Iouster I come (quoth
he) to see what men at Armcs will enter the field at this time of brave
^rercise. Then let us ride together if you please, (said they) for we left our
Countries for the self same cause. Thus rode they on friendly together, and
arriving at Macedon, they found the Field all covered with Tents, which
belonged to the Noble personages that were come to the feast. For this cause,
the two Knights gave in charge to their Squires, to provide their Pauillion,
which was purposelie brought with them, entreating Belcar like wise to keep
them company: whereto (because he would not enter the City) he gladly
consented, thin^ing he should hard^ie find a more con^enient lodging.

On the morrow there arrived the Duke of Pontus, before whom rode y^ King
Florendos, as one willing to welcome his new kindred: but Alderina showed such
maiesly in countenance, as every eye wondered at her rare perfections, not
withstanding, she was some what sad and pensiuethe cause proceeding from her
desire, to know the Knight she saw at the Fountain, whom yet she could not by
any means forgette. When Belcar beheld her arm in arm with the King of
Thrace, and in what costly garments she was attired: he imagined her more
fair then when he saw her at the Fountain, so that he resolutlie intended,
if he could not ^nish the adventure of Francelina, to give himself to
travail, and to enterprise such attempts, as might be thought worthy the love
of this Lady. All this while the Queen Griana, wife to the King Florendos,
very honorably entertained the Duchess Laurana, and the young Princess
Denisa accompanying Alderina, would not for sake her till the marriage night.

On the morrow following, the King, the Nueene and the new married couple, came
into the Field to behold the Turney, where they were no sooner mounted on the
Scaffoldes, which were sumptuously adorned as beseemed so great personages: but
both on the one side and the other, they might behold great store of armed
Knights, chiefly they that came from the Court of the Emperor, who because
he could not be present at his Sisters marriage, sent many of his balde Barons
to honor the assembly. The brave exploits in feats of Arms there performed,
surpassed them of greatest reputation, and among other, the Dukes of Anemon and
Mensa so well behaved themselves, as they had well near gained the honor of
the first assault, if Belcar had not suddenly arrived, who stayed a while to
behold the order of the Io^stes, intending to help y^ weaker part, when at
length he said to his companions: follow me my Friends to assist the
vanquished. So giving his Horse the spurs, he ran fiercely with his Sword
drawn, against Bellequin the Son of Mosso, who did the greatest harm to the
other side: and with him he met ^o bravely in his carire, as Horse and man
went both to the ground. Afterward, he dealt so roughly with all them that
durst meet him in the face, as in short time courage began to revive in those
Knights, who (in the judgment of all the beholders) were before esteemed
vanquished.

Which the Duke of Anemon perceiving, and his company to grow into such
disgrace, he was thereat exceedingly offended, and thrusting himself among the
thickest, gave ^elcar a very great stroke with his Sword^ on the Helmet: for
which he received speedy repayment, for Belcar, raising himself in his
stirrops, returned the Duke such a cruel blow through the sight of his Helmet,
as he fell to the ground astonished betweeue his Horse legs. Then breaking in
amidst the preasse, he gave such sharp entertainment to all that met him, as
the King Florendos, and the other great estates that accompanied him, were
driven thereby into great admiration: nor was he known to any there but the
Princess Alderina, who being seated on the right hand of y^ Queen Denisa,
could not smoother her thought^, but thus spoke, What think you (Madame) of
the Knight in Green Arm^r? What d^ I think ^ aunswer^d the Queen, cert^ ^uer
did I s^e the man, who ^ight equal or paragon himself with hun, for that he
alone has done more in this ^ourney then all ye other: and greatly would it
content me, to know if he be descended of noble blood, as he deliuer^ g^d
testimony of his knowledge in feats of Arino^.

Madame, (q^oth Alderina) I cannot think him less then you doubt of, in
respect he concealeth himself so close lie, and would not willingli^ be known
of any. Here with she recounted how she found him at the Fountain, bare
headed without his Helmet: and this I can assure you, quod ^he, that as you
confess him valiant at Arms, so can I witness him of such brave ^cature and
complexion, as there is no one absolute point wanting in him. Your speeches
said the Queen, makes me much more desirous to know him, wherefore I will
send one to him for the same purpose. Then I beseech your Majesty, answered
Alderina, to send one of my Pages, who shall attend for him til the end of
the Tourney, and then conjure him in your name, that he send you word of
whence and what he is: and if he stand loathe to be known, to resolve him from
your Majesty and me, that no living creature shall b^wraie him by our means.
Your counsel I very well allow, said the new ^aried Queen, but I would
that this Embassage should rather go from you, because he remembering what
knowledge you had of him at the Fountain, will happily manifest himself unto
you rather then any other. Heer^vppon Alderina called one of her Pages named
Gracia^, artificially instructing him in his erran^e to the Green Knight:
that using instant entreaty, accompanied with a singular desire, he should
gain the m^ane to return with his name and parentage.

All this while Belcar showed such rare deeds of Chivalry, as having well
labored the adversary, and none left that would^ confront him: he went a^
Co^querour forth of the Lystes, where he met the two Knights that came with
him thither, who stayed more destro^s to note his behavior in the ^ight, then
to intrude themselves in place of such danger, and being not a little glad
of the honor he had done them, in that their companion bare away the palm
of victory, they rode on each side of him toward their Tent, being
followed all the way by the Princess Page, who awayting due time to deliver
his message, took Belcars Horse by the bridle, and vs^ng such means of
secret conference, as Belcar stouped to hear him, he softly thus whispered
with him. Sir ^mght, I would it might like you to ride aside a little, that I
may deliver a matter of secret to you. He who* was so courteous and affable as
any man could be, presently left his two companions, when Gracian thus began
his message. My Lord, Alderina Daughter to the Duke of Pontus and Durace, has
at this time sent me to ye, to let you understand, that she has received just
cause of offense toward you, in that she ^omming to see this Tourney, you
dis^ained to make offer of your company. Notwithstanding, if you will grant
one request that she makes by me, forgetting al passed ungentleness, she will
gladly leave further to misd^me of you. My Friend answered Belcar, the thing
must be very difficult or unpossible, that I would not enterprise, to obtain
the gracious pardon of so choice a Lady as is thy Mistress: it may be, that
I have trespassed in duty toward her excellency, but in sooth mere
ignorance of her estate was the on^lie cause. And when I left her at the
Fountain, far was my intent from coming to this Tourney, in so much as I
was thereto (in a manner) constrained, notwithstanding excuses of as great
importance as those I used to thy gentle Lady.

It rests now (quoth the Page) that you grant my Mistress her earn^st
desire, which is, to know what you are, and why you conceal your self in
such sort: for beholding your noble and valiant behavior, she sets you
beyond all other in her conceit, and promises withal, v^der the word of so
great a person as she is, not to reveal it to any, if you be willing it
should be so. Highly may I commend my fortune, said Belcar, that a Princess
so gentle and perfect, would daine to enquire after my poor deserts: and
though I had vowed to conceal my self from the whole world, yet would I
strain courtesy with that vow for her sake. Say to her therefore, courteous
Page, that my name is Belcar, Nephewe to the Emperor of Constantinople, and the
cause why I wo^lde not willingly be known to any, is the small portion of
time since I received my Knighthoode: and having not yet done any thing
worthy my name, or to be accounted among the actions of honor, I determined
not to publish ye same, until I might d^ it with g^d testimony. Thou may also
assure her from me, ye henceforth I shall serve as her devoted Knight: hoping
under favor of her name to gain such account, as I and mine shall remain
perpetually bound to her excellency. And when I have accomplished any thing,
that may be reputed worthy honorable commendation, I will come my self, and
offer therwithall to her my heart, which has received such an impression of
obeysaunce to her, as henceforth it will attempt nothing but in her sweet
regard. Pr^fe may she make hereof in commanding me, for such is my desir^ to
be employed in her service, as were I assured my death consisted in the
attempt, yet could not any fear thereof with-holde me. Let me further
entreat her, not to disclose my name to any one, because at this time I will
not vis^te the ^ing Florendos and the Queen, albeit I am so n^re allied unto
them. With this answer returned Gracian to his Lady, who attended his
coming in great devotion, that he was no sooner entered the Chamber, but she
demanded the success of his message. All well Madame, answered the Page, but
you must keep it very secret, because the Knight himself has so des^red.
Which after she had faithfully promised to do, he told her that the Knight
was Belcar, Son to the King of Hungaria. May it be so? quoth the Queen Denisa,
then is he my Nephew, and thinks he scorn to be known to us? right gladly
would I have seen him, for from our infancy we were nourished together: and
well may you assure your self Madame Alderina, that he has been evermore
benign and courteous, which makes me not rejoice a little, that his fortune in
Arms is equal with his other virtue, yet seeing he desires to pass unknown,
let us keep the same so secret as we may. It were needles to demand if
Alderina were pleased, when she heard that Belcar was issued of so great and
illustrious blood, offering himself withal so religiously her Knight:
wherefore she now began extremely to affect him, and imprinted the
remembrance of him so lively in her spirit, as nothing might deface it
again. Thus hourly raunged loves passions in her heart, wherein they took
immediate ambush, so soon as she beheld him at the Fountain.

CHAP. III.
How Belcar fearing to be known, departed secretly from Macedon, and by the
way met with a Knight whom he vanquished: and how he fought a cruel combat
with him that defended the bridge, where the fair Francelina was enchaunted.

SO soon as Belcar had ended with Alderinaes Squire, he minded to depart
presently, fearing least the King Florendos would send for him, as indeed he
did soon after: for he greatly desired to know the Knight, that bare away
the honor of the Tourney. But his expectation was greatly deceived, in that
Belcar was alreadi^ departed: whereof the King could not be per^waded, but
that he missed his presence in the Tryumphe following, which he compared with
the pastime of little Children, in respect of the former day, when the unknown
Knight performed matters of incredible valor. And albeit the Queen Denisa and
the Princess Alderina, heard every judgment passing ^n the Knight, yet would
they yield no other answer, but that he seemed to be one of the best
esteemed Knights in the Emperors Court. Belcar then having graciously thanked
his two companions, for the courtes^e and humanity they had used toward him:
took his friendly farewell of them, fayning an carnest constraint, which
commanded his presence in mat ters of importance. The Knights loathe to l^ose
so g^od a Freende, made offer to accompany him in his travail: but he excused
their request with a necessary d^nyall, wherewith they were pleased, and he
had liberty to depart.

And ryding along the way where he met Alderina, he happened into a fair
green Meddow, where (because no lodging was near at hand) he determined to
make his hostage that night: but as he thought to enter a sound sleep, a
sudden imagination caught hold on his senses, presenting them with the rare
beauty of Alderina, during which passion, he was constrained thus to parle
with himself. In sooth Belcar, right well may thou be charged with
discourtes^e and ingratitude, having made so slender show of civility to so
fair a Princess as is the Dukes Daughter of Pontus: full well may it beseenie
thee to amend this fault, and by the dutiful repentance fitting a Knight,
recover the note of thy former blemishe. After many amorous discourses, he
concluded (if he could finish the adventure of Francelina) to make choice of
this Lady only as his Wife. And in these imaginations a sweet slumber
ouertooke him, wherein he continued till the next morning, when (...), (...)
rydi^g not p^t the sp^ce of two ^iles, ^e met with ^ ^night ^t Ar^es: who
dem^unded if he came from Macedon, and if the n^ptials of the Kings daughter
were finished: Be^car answered, the they were now in performing, a^ if it liked
him to tra^aile thither, he should there find matt^r enough to be impl^yed in.
The Knight left Bel^ar t^ ^is journey, and so without any further speeches
they (...).

But if you be (...) to know the man, it w^ Cardino, who departed from
Constantinople with Colmelio, in search of the Damsel that brought such a
^daine m^sage to the Emperor Palmerin, as you may read in the last Chapter of
his History. And (...) they had trau^led many Countries to ^nde her, yet
(...) they not hear any tidings of her: because she presently returned to
the Castle of Carderia, from whence the Fayries sent her to the Court on that
occasion, the intent thereof being no other, but only to extol and commend
the future pro^sse of Palmendos, Son to the Q^eene of Tharsus and y^ Emperor
Palmerin, and that the Knight who should come to finish the encha^tment of
Francelina, might be received with greater honor and magnificencs. Cardino had
trie^ his fortune in this adventure, but he could speed no better then others
had d^ne before him, wherefore hearing of the Feast and open Court held at
Macedon, he went as one doubtful to come short to the Tryumphes, til Belcar
had thereof certainly resolved him. These Knights were not parted the space
of a mile, but Cardino met the Damsel, who was Sister to the two Brethren
slain by Belcar in the Wood, she having followed him to the Court of the
King Florendos, was advertised by a Squire of his success in the Tourney, and
how he rode the common high way leading to Carderia, whereupon she made good
haste after him, and met with Cardino soon after ter their departure, to
whom she began in this manner.

I (...), (...) ^et a (...) in ^rcene (...), the most trayte^ous and (...) all
man that thi^ (...) li^th: for my Father ha^ing ^ne him all the honor he could
devise, while (...) ^ght he c^e and lodged at his Ca^, and on the morr^w (...)
(the more to content him) commanded my (...) ^retheren to accompany him
somewhat on y^ way: (...), (...) and unthankful wretch, without any occasion
^e we two of them, and put the third in great ^aunger of life. And in this
just cause I pursue y^ vyl^ine, in hope to meet with some worthy man, who
dete^ing such (...) and horrible ingratitude, will (in ta^ing compas^ion on ^y
gre^fe) revenge this injury. So ^ell could the traytre^ couller her sp^ches,
and set such a (...) f^le on her rautelous prosopopey: as she imprinte^ in the
heart of Cardino, a dutiful regard to revenge ^ch wrong, wherefore he thus
answered.

(...), if it be so as you say, the ^night cannot excuse himself, but that he
is both a Traitor and a fellon, nor will the God of Heaven ^uffer him to
escape (...) in this world. The Damsel with terrible oaths protested what
she had said, desiring him to give her aid, if no other occasions might
hinder her suit. Right gladly (quod Cardino) will I (...) my duty herein,
for that I am a professed enemy to such offenders, and shall cause him to pay
dearly for his treachery. So rode he with the Damsel after Belcar, but all
that day they c^ulde not overtake him. On the morrow they got ^ight of him
on the edge of a Mountain, whereat the Damsel not a little contented,
desired Cardino now to rouse his forces, against the Tyrant that had so
dishonored her. Cardino promising to accomplish her desire, gave the spurs
to his horse and galloped after Belcar, and in a great brauado thus ^ried to
him. Stay Traitor, unworthy y^ name of a Knight, and receive thy guerdon at my
hand, for slaughtering them that entertained thee with all humanity. Belcar
hearing himself thus iniuried, was immedi^e pr^ked unto choler, and turning
toward h^ that touched him with disloyallie, he thus sterneli^ answered.
But little to thy profit will it be, to pursue me with such ^alfe and lying
accusations. So clasping his (...), he r^n suriously against Cardi^o, who met
him with no (...) ^rage and viuacitis, and breaking hi^ La^e bravely, (...)
what scared the ^kinne of his en^mie ^ but Belcar welcomed him with so sound a
salutation, as he fell down with the saddle between his legs, ^o sore
astonished with (...) fall as he was not able to stir hand nor foot, which
Belcar perceiving, rode on and there ^ft him. The (...) seeing Cardino in such
woeful plight, ^lighted from her P^lfray, and with the help of his Squire
binding up hy^ wounds, determined to bring him to s^ne place for help, using
the greatest shows of lamentation that could ^ee. Ah heaven (quoth she) why
give ye strength to wicked (...) against the good and vertuo^s? suffer not
that di^oiall (...) to do any further danger, but rather (...) some
mis^rable end to his unworthy life. By this (...) the Squire had ^unted
Cardino on his Hor^e, and so they returned the same way they came, happening to
the place where Belcar had broken his fast the morning before.

There they understood by the Host, that he was gone to prove the adventure
of Francelina, whether the Damsel would gladly have followed him: yet was
she loathe to leave Cardino in such danger, and therefore abode ther^ with him
three days, using all the means she could to heal him, because for her
sake he was so wounded: where we will leave them, and return to the only
thread of our ^istorie.

So long rode Belcar* that he arrived within half a days journey of the
Castle where Francelina was, thy^ Fortress appertained to a Lady y^ was a
widd^we, who had two fair Daughters, and a Son already knighted, of no less
valor in feats of Arms, then learned and well s^ene in ^ers ^r disciplines.
In this place was he meruailou^ ^ll entertained, the Lady of the Castle
being a Woman of great honor, and her Daughters of veris Courtly and civil
behavior. After Supper, Belcar entre^ into (...) with them, and among many
other thinge^, enqu^ed the cause that moo^ed so many Knights to (...) the
a^ture of that Isle, when the Ladies Sonn^, who was named Lypes, answered him
in this sort. (...) me Sir, I have evermore accounted the man but ^lis
councelled, that takes such pains to travel hither, seeing it is so long time
since any Knight arrived here, who returne^ not without dishonor: because the
action and exp^oit of thi^ ^chauntment (so wonderfully compa^d by the three
Fairies) is of such (...), as it behooves him that shall finish the same, to
be of most rare and exquisite perfection.

But tell me then (quoth Belcar) the state of this adventure, and wherein
consists the greatest peril there^ o^* (...) as yet have I not met with any
one that ^uld tell (...), to satis^e my long and earnest desire. Better th^n
a^y other, answered Lypes, (...) I dysceurse the ^me unto you, because I have
often accompanied Knights trauaili^g the there as you now do, and seen many
Com^t with him that de^endes the entrance on the Bridge, (...) to their great
disadvantage. Know then gentle Sir^ the Isle of Carderia stretchet^ in diameter
very farbeein^ on the one side enclosed with the Sea, and on the other are most
wholesome Bathes and (...), which hinder the falte ^ters from c^mming near:
the Cast^ll: at the foot whereof is builded a mer^ilous arti^cial (...),
heretofore accessable for all Knights errant, but ^nce the time that
Fra^celina was enclosed wit^in the great Dun^ion, there might not enter any
stranger, those o^ ye Isle ^elie come and go, but others not. Up^ this Bridge
are erected three Turrets, one of them being i^ the midde^t, and the other two
at either end. In the (...) is a Knight, surpassing the common stature and
proportion of men, so ^erce, hardy and courageous, as since the time of this
enchauntment, he has not been dealt withal by any one, that could in ought
disable his prowess: only the Lord of the Isle of Lique excepted, Son to him
whom the Emperor Palmerin ^anquished, when in the Tourney he conquered the
Sagittarie. He, being named Lynedes, was so resolute and magnanimious, as he
fought against the Knight of the Bridge from morning til night, and though the
Com^at was fierce and cruel, yet could no want of cour^ge be discerned in
him: which fell not out so with the gardant of the Bridge, because the loss of
his blood so weakened him, as his heart began utterly to dismay. But ^ huge ill
favored Dwarffe, who never styres from the Beacon of the first Turret, to
discover such Knights as come along the Field, by winding an enchaunted Horn
that hunge about his neck, therewith so reui^ y^ Knight^ strength again, as
though he had ^ut even then ^ntred the Comb^t.

In this sort the fight continued till S^e setting, when Lynedes perceiving
hi^ enemy to were feeble again, and that the Dwarffe as yet blew not his
Horn: brought the Knight of the Bridge into such extreamitie, as he fell
upon his hands to the ground. Then running nimbly over the Bridge, he came to
the Turret in the midst (...), the Gat^s whereof being open before: clapped
toget^er at his arrival with such a fearful trembling of y^ whole buylding,
as Lynedes fell to the earth in a swoune. In this traun^e he remained a great
while, that his Squires (...) he (...) dead indeed, bemoned (...) Master with
wi^ ^ery greeuo^s lamentations: but when he came to h^ former feeling, they
sa^e he was so cruelly woundedas they carried him into his Tent, where three
days he remained to reobtaine his health, and on the fourth, feeling himself
able to sit on horseback, and not willi^ to make any further proof of this
adventure, he departed thence sorrowing for his bad ^ortune. And this I tell
ye ^ir for ^ certainty, that when the Dwar^fe ^its as ^entinel in the
Lantern of y^ first Tower, perceiving the Knight of the Bridge to have the
worst of the Combat: with the sound of his Horn he renus his strength, which
is the cause that no man is able to ^le with h^. Seeing then this ^terpryse
brings such danger* and oftentimes death withal: I could wysh that
hereafter no man would attempt his own ruin.

(...) t^ll me matter of marvel, answered Bekar and ry^ht skylfull were the
Fayries in framing this enchantment, so it should (...), that they have not
enclosed the Lady there without great occa^ion, being a^sured y^ some ^night
shall ^d the adventure: to which each one trauaileth with this couragi^us hope^*
that he is the ^n for whom it is ^eserued. Nor can I be dissuaded from it,
if (...) heretofore have (...) in that error, therefore no (...) of what
shall hap^ (...) h^der my determination. If I happen in my trial to be
overcome, I shall ^ut increase the (...) of them* that ^ld not attain y^
^eight of their enterpris^, and no other dishonor can I receive. Lypes
^arnestly entreated him to forbear the voyage, and so did his Sisters
likewi^e, into whose grace he was greatly entered, especially the youngest,
fair and debonay^ (...) the other: but all their perswasiue reasons could not
change him, for Bel^ar having travailed ^o far for tha^ purpose, might not
by any occasion whatsoever be wythdrawne from making proof of his fortune.
When Lypes saw him so obstinatlie inclined, he made offer to bear him company,
if it were but only to show hi^ (...) ^ay* (...) ^reendly courte^e Belcar
accept^d* so one the (...) they mounted on horseback, and came to y^ I^e about
mid day. There was set up a rich ^ent for this young Prince, which the
Sisters to Lypes had sent thither by thr^ Squires ^ with all necessary
provision for his attempt, and in the evening Belcar went to view y^ Isle,
regarding the Tower wherein Francelina was imprisoned: inuocating on God in his
spirit, to ^ue him with such ability, as he might deliver her, and bear away
the honor of the adventure. These imaginations so busied his thoughts as all
that night he could entertain no other, but oftentimes thus talked with
himself. Ah Belcar, why should thou thus delay time, and not rather
courageously att^mpt the execution of this enterprise: admit thou want
answerable force to a matter of such dignity: yet should the renown and
generositie of thine anncestours stimulate thee heereto, being Son to one of
the best Knights that lives this day under the Zodiac, and Nephew to y^ great
Emperor, with whom none may be equalled. In these conceits he consumed the
night, and in the morning (having Armed himself) came to the Bridge, where in
a con uenient place near the first Tower, he espied the Knight that defended
the passage: whose huge stature somewhat amazed Belcar, and as he ^ffered to
^teppe on the Bridge, the Knight very proudely thus spoke.

Withdraw thy self Knight, unless thou will enter ^ght with me, for I am
here to deny passage to any. For no other cause come I, answered Belcar, but
to try thy man hoode, and pass the Bridge if possibly I may. With these words
he gave the Knight such a sound stroke on the Helmet, as he thought the fire
flewe forth of his eyes, and so they began a long and dangerous Combat, the
Knight gyuing Belcar many cruel blows with his iron Mace, and he defending
them so well as he could: till having somewhat wearyed his enemy, and
thinking to do as he heard of Lynedes, but the Knight gave him such a forcible
stroke on the shoulder, as he was constray^ed to set one knee to the ground
to escape the fall. Herwith y^ Dwarffe blewe his Horn, which re^oyced them
within the Castle: albeit the Prince was astonished thereat, yet he dyssembled
the same from being espied. The Knight having recovered his former strength,
assailed Belcar with marvelous fury, who notwithstan^ing held out
couragious^ye: and one thing comforted him ab^ue all other, which was, that
none of his adversaries blows gave him any bleeding wound, but bruised his
flesh a little under his A^mour, whereby he fought at his own pleasure. Three
times the Owarffe blew to animate his Cha^pion, by which means Belcar was over
much labored, because he could find no opportimitie to rest h^selfe: but
considering if he showed less valor then he had d^ne, in vain he might
account his trauayling thither, and greatly would it redound to his shame, if
the E^perour should be advertised thereof. In the end, he had brought his enemy
into such a state, as he g^t on the Bry^ge without any more resistance, and
came to the Tower that stood in the midst thereof, but the Gates closed
together so fur^ously, as he was smitten to the earth depryued of his senses.
Lypes being glad that he had recovered the Bridge, came to him, and with the
help of the Squires carried him into the Tent, where suddenly vnarming him,
they applied such remedies as br ought him to his former senses. He had no
sooner feeling of himself, but he entered into many rufull lamentations, as
well for his misfortune and dysgrace, as also with the pain he felt of his
adversaries strokes, whereof his Armor being battered to pieces was a
sufficient witness. Comfort your self my Lord (quoth Lypes) and let your
wonted courage exile this anguish, remibring that these eight years no Knight
came to the Isle, only Lynedes excepted, that wunne like honor as you have
done at this instant: greater reason have ye then to cherish your fortune,
then thus to condemn it with acclamations. Ah my friend, answered Belcar,
little pleasure take I in this succe^se, for that my intent proceeded further,
but seeing there is no remedy, I must with patience bear my shame. For of
matters so deuillishly enchaunted, can seldom arise grea ter good: but cursed
be the Fa^ries and their hellish charms that deal so discourteously with
poor travailing Knights.

CHAP. IIII.
How Belcar concluded to combat with all such as came to prove the adventure
of Francelina: and how^ (among other) he fought with the Marquess of Tr^sse,
whom he vanquished, and afterward with Tirendos, to whom he made himself
known.

BElcar being indiffer ently calmed by the courteous behavior of Lypes,
determined to recover his passed foil by actions of Chivalry, and therefore
resolved to continue in that place, to combat with all such as came to try the
adventure: but to his intent he added this principally, y^ what deeds of Arms
he there performed, or in any other place where he might be employed, all
should be for the love of Alderina, Daughter to the Duke of Pontus, whom above
all other he meant most constantly to jove. And if his fortune were to be
vanquished by any Knight, he would then forthwith return to the Cour^ of the
King Florendos. This disseigne he discovered to Lypes, who was not a little
glad thereof, saying, that he should apprehend great matters by his enterprise,
because continually many good Knights resorted thither. And because (quoth he)
you are so resolutlie minded, nothing shall make me to forsake your company:
but to behold the knightly Chivalry, which I am out of doubt to see executed
by you. I offer my self to acco^panie you in all loyal service. Now the
better to furnish their wants, he sent to his Mothers house for all kind of
provision, y^ might agree with the time of their abode there. By this time
Belcar found himself able to bear Arms, and therefore went to take his place
of change, at what time the Marquess of Trosse came to hazard his fortune.
This Marquess was a brave and hardy man at Arms, and although ^e came from
his Country well accompanied we Knights, Squires and Pages: yet caused he them
to stay a pretty distaunce from this place, and came thither but with one
Squire that carried his Lance. When Belcar saw him make so courageously
toward the Bridge, he mounted on horseback, and coming to him, thus spoke.

Gentleman, you may not pass here, except you first try the Iouste with me,
because I have established here such a Law, as no Knight shall have battle
with hi^ that kept the Bridge, until he have first dismounted me: for having
received some foil in this place, not many days since, I will not suffer any
one to prevail in this adventure, unless he^ bring me first into subi^ction.
Great boldness is this in you (answered the Marquess) that you will take in
hand to bear a burden of such weight: but I think you do it to this end,
that you would depart hence with greater shame and confusion, then ever you
sustained heretofore. That quarrel (quoth Belcar) shall our Swords soon
discide, and so without any more speeches they fell to the Combat, wherein the
Marquess she wed very knightly and gallant behavior, albeit Belcar cast him
from his Saddle, and afterward fought with him on foot a long while: but in
the end the Marquess was vanquished, and understanding the name of his
Conqueror, returned to the place where he left his company, and after he had
recovered better health, he rode strait to Macedon, where he recounted his
overthrow by Belcar. Of these news the King Florendos and y^ Queen were
very joyful, saying they had a Nephew that was so named, wherefore they
desired to know what Arms he wore? when the Marquess told them he was in
Green Armor. Without question (quoth the King) it was the same ^night that
w^ne the honor of the Tourney, and went hence secretly least he should be
known, wherewith I cannot be justly offended, because both in this
enterprise and knightly valor, he resembles his worthy Father King Frysoll.

Each one in Court was well pleased with these tidings, but above all other
the Princess Alderina, because she had bequeathed his remembrance to the
secret closet of her heart, and as the days, so her lovely affections to him
increased, in respect of the great praises was eueri^ where bruted of him,
which made many worthy Knights to adventure their fortune with him, with
whose conquest he still gave grace to his own report. But let us now return
to the Da^osell that followed Belcar, to be revenged for her Bretherens death,
she seeing Cardino was indifferently recovered, took her leave of him,
because she intended to prosecute her (...). It so fell out, that Tirendos,
Son to the Duke Eustace, who travailed to find his companion Belcar, arrived
at the same lodging where the Dam^sell was, and noting her complaints, which
she could deliver very artificially: he took compassion on her, promising
to assist her in what he could. Demanding the cause of her sorrowful
lamentations, she told him, how she had two Brethren traitorously ^layne, by
a dis^oyall Knight who^ her Father entertained into his Castle, and she
pursuing the murderer, met a courteous Knight that undertook to revenge her
cause: yet his misfortune was such, as he was likewise daungerously wounded,
which made her greefes the more impati^nt. These flattering gloses so beguiled
Tirendos, as he again made her promise of his aid, enquiring of her where y^
wounded Knight was?

My Lord (quoth she) he is here in his Chamber, meetelie well recovered by my
pains and diligence. No sooner was Tirendos entered the Chamber, but he
immediatlic knew Cardino, for whose hurt he was a great deal more sorrowful:
and therefore vowed to him and the Damsel, if ever he met the Knight to b^e
revenged on him. After many courteous embracings and kind speeches, he told
Cardino, how Belcar and he were both Knighted in one day, by the Emperor of
Constantinople, from wh^nce h^e very sudda^nlie and secr^tlic departed: and
ever since have I followed in search of him, yet in no place can I hear any
tidings of him. What Arms does he bear? said Cardino. White, as I take it,
answered Tirendos, and such as are both rich and costly. No such Knight have
I seen, (quoth Cardino) happily he may be now at Macedon, at the magnificent
nuptialles of the Princess Denisa.

Thither would I go, said Tirendos, had I not past my promise to this
Damsel: nor can my mind enjoy any quiet, until I have sound the Knight
that so wronged her and you. All this night they were merry together,
especially the Damsel for Tirendos his promise, because he seemed a man of
sufficient valor to accomplish her d^e. On the morrow they took their leave
of Cardino, and iournied toward the Isle of Carderia, where they arrived as
Belcar was managing his great Horse: and no sooner had the Damsel espied him,
but she presently kn^w him by his Armor, wherefore dissem^ling pitiful
looks, she thus spoke to Tirendos. Behold Sir the Traitor that did my
Brethren to death, I think the heavens stayed him in this place, that
vengeance might be taken on him for the shame he has done me. Tirendos was
not a little glad hereof, because he should now make the first trial of his
Chivalry. But Belcar (who knew him by his Armor, being the same wherein he
receiu^d his order) was scant well pleased with his presence, because he
doubted that he was sent to find him: not withstanding, he would make a little
proose of him in the Ioust, and therefore he came to him with these words. You
may pa^e no further this way Sir Knight, because I stand here to make den^l
thereof. Little count shall I make answered Tirendos of such as thou art, that
traitorously murderest Gentlemen, who gave thee welcome beyond thy deserte,
which I will cause thee buy full dearly. That would I feign see, said
Belcar, if it be in thee to make me confess that which I never thought, much
less committed. Thou lie as a homicide, answered Tirendos, I will make good
what I have said, therefore get ye to your tools. Heerewith they gave the
spurs to their Horses, and met very valiantly together, so that with
breaking their Lances, they gave each other a little wound, Belcar loosing
his ^rrops, and Tirendos cast forth of his saddle to the ground: but
recou^ring himself presently, he came against his enemy with his Sword
drawn, saying. Alight Sir you were be^, or I shall s^ay your Horse.

That will I gladly do (quoth Belcar) but it shall be to embrace y^, for I
have no will to enter Combatte with ye^ Alas Sir, said Tirendos, it is n^ time
now to sco^fe, albeit I am from my Ho^, I am not vanquishe^* Great pleasure
took Belcar to reason with hi^ ^inguler goo^ friend, and alighting from his
Horse, thus replied. I speak for your good (Sir) if you can see it^ but seeing
reason will not rule you, I am content to deal with you a little. Tirendos
somewhat offended at ^s ^ll, began to strike (...) B^lcar very ^ughlie: but
he who was loathe to wrong his friend, thr^w his Sword and Shield to the
ground, and with open Arms came to embrace him, saying. My perfect friend
Tirendos, I have heretofore had experience of thy valiant behavior, wherefore
forgive thy Brother Bel^ar, (...) not acquainting thee with my departure from
Constan^, yet ^as I assured that thou would follow in sear^he of me.

How now? quoth Tirendos, are you then my Lord and loving Freende. Belcar? in
sooth the error committed, w^ only ignorance of you: put off your Helmet that
I ^y he resolved, for your disguised Armor made me (...) mistake y^. So
casting down their Helmets, they embraced each other very courteously, when
Tirendos thus spoke to Belcar. Hardly can I be persuaded my Lord, that you
wo^ld consent to such treason as this Damsel hat^ ^nformed me wit^al Declare
I pray you (quod Belcar) (...) ^aryseth this sl^under, for an other Knight (who
I think I have slay^e or sore wounded) pursued me with the like quarrel:
doubtless this Damsel is some badde Woman, to accuse me with any such
disloyalty. She told me, said Tirendos, that y^u being honorably
eutertay^ed at her Fathers Castel^, where one night you were very friendly
lodge^: on the morrow her three Brethren (...) you company on the way, and
two of them without (...) ^se you m^rdered, leaving the third in very great
danger.

(...) traiterous Damsel, answered Belcar, what an evident sla^nder has she
raised on me? and herewith he rehearsed the wh^ dis^ourse, according as you
have read it in the first Chapter of this (...)* She seeing the two Knights
agree thus (...), with the tears in her eyes gave forth these speeches.
Miserable and unfortunate that I am, what a subtle (...) do I hear? this
Knight i^ as false and difloyall to me in not revenging my shaine, a^ the (...)
that has so high^y wronged me: but seeing I am thus circ^muented, and he a
perjured wretch by breach of his promise, unless I speedilic die, I will
caus^ him to repent it, and be sufficiently revenged on them (...).

So galloped she the same way she came, and Belcar with Tirendos went into
the Tent, where they discour^ed together on many matters: Tirendos declaring
^owe Cardino was the other Knight that fought in the Damsels cause, for which
yt Prince was greatly ^ffended with himself, and to wear away that conceit,
acquainted. Tirendos with his fortune at the Castle, and of the (...) h^ had
taken ^n hand, which he liked so well, as he concl^ded l^kewise to bear him
company. Thus Lypes and they two remained there together, oftentimes resorting
to (...) his mother and Sisters, who would not suffer them to want ^y thing:
and such was the fame of Belcars victories, as the whole Realm of Macedon and
the Emperors Court of Greece, was cloyed with the daily reports thereof. But
here will we leave these Champious awhile, and speak of the good Knight
Palmendos, Son to the E^perour Palmerin, and the Queen of Tharsus. (...)

CHAP. V.
How Palmendos understanding that he was Son to the Emperor Palmerin, caused
himself to be armed Knight. And how he entreated license of the Queen his
Mother to go see Constantinople, which at length very hardly he obtained,
and what happened thereon.

CArefully did yt Queen of Th^sus nourish her young Son Palmendos, whom
she had by the Emperor Palmerin, when he followed yt exercise of Arms and was
entertained by y^ Admiral Alfarano in the Realm of Pasmeria, as you may read
in his worthy History. This Child, as he grew in years, so did he increase
in all virtuous behavior, being unable to shadow his royal descent: yet to
hinder his desire from search after his Father, (the Queen and all yt
Nobility so entirely affecting him) no knowledge might be given him thereof,
least by that mean he should become a Christian. And that he might be
instructed in those heroycall quallities, which be^eeme a Prince of so high
calling, the Queen committed him to the charge of the Brother to the deceassed
King her husband: a Knight of great wisdom and valor, by whom he was so
worthily educated, as he wunne the love of every one ingenerall. Rigor he
wou^d requite with mercy and clemency, and charity he preferred all his
actions: notwithstanding, as he showed courteous and benign countenance
toward the good, so did he sternelie and severely oppose himself against the
badde, so that by his exquisite prudence and choice care in honorable causes,
in his youth he would learn to manage the affairs of the Realm, wherein he
showed himself so quick of spirit and susceptible, as he wexed to be such a
pollitique oeconomie, that the Queen intended to put the royal Government
into his hands. If he were thus enriched with all perfect virtues, nothing
wanting in him for brave constitution of body, whereof he made no show of
pride or presumption: but became so famous through all the neighbor Marches
and limitrophes of Tharsus, as the very bent would come to offer him their
service.

The Court was filled with resort of Nobles and others, for beside the royal
nature he brought from his Mothers womb, according to the Idea and celestial
influence of his constellation, he was borne and naturally inclined to Arms,
which made him evermore conuersse with y^ most skillful that way addicted. But
one day before he was armed Knight, a very aged, decrepite and ouer-spent
woman, came and sat down on a step in the Porche of the Palace, attyred in
such poor Garments, as her naked flesh was seen in many places: and there
sat she trembling in such sort, as though her soul were ready to forsake her
body. Such as passed in and out the Court, were greatly amazed heereat, and
moved to pity her case very much, so that Palmendos came himself to behold
her: and seeing she would use no speeches to him, went in again and sat down
to Dinner. Afterw^rde, coming forth to walk abroad for hi^ delight, h^ found
her ^tting there still in the same place, wherefore he called his Cousin Ozalio
to (...), who was Son to his Uncle and Tutour, saying. Can we not understand
what this poor old Woman would have? Ozalio as desirous as the Prince, came
to the old Woman, demanding of whence she was, and if she stood in need of
any thing? but she without aunswering one word, gave him a very frowning
countenance, and afterward scornefullie turned her back toward him, wherewith
Ozalio somewhat offended, gave her such a spurn with his foot, as she tombled
quite beside her seat, whereat Palmendos and his Lords me^ie laughed: but
theye pastime was soon altered into admiration, for after the Woman arose
again, she seemed of such huge deformed stature, as each one was amazed that
had beheld her before, and turning her self ange^lie toward the Prince, used
these speeches.

Ah Palmendos, little regardest thou to resemble the Emperor of Constantinople
thy Father, whose gentleness and sweetness stretches as well to the meanest
persons, as them that are Lords and of great account. What gaine^t thou in
rejoicing at the injury done me by thy Knight? I pray that the great
imperious Monarch Cupid, (quod she with lifting her eyes and hands to heaven)
may so cruelly wound thy heart with the love of fair Francelina, and cause
thee to conceive such gracious thoughts of her: as thou may leave this idle
and delicious life thou leadest, to win the honor that is got with pain and
travail. So did thy Father heretofore for the Princess Polynarda, whom he
loved so religiously, as with the dexterity and strength of his body, he
assaied to gain y^ reward which Fortune provides for her cheifest favorites:
whereon imperially he is now amounted, accompanied with y^ greatest felicity,
that can happen to any one under this Hemisphere. Leave then these wanton and
Courtly surfettings, wherein thy Mother labors to contain thee, and no^e
begin to (...) Arm^, which may make ^hy name perpetual, and yield the
reward of immortal glory: for it will redound to thy great shame, being
Son to so rare and (...) a Knight, not this way to imitate his laboriou^
d^des. And when I shall see thee thorowlie wrapped in the passions of lo^* I
will think my self satis-fied with ^uenge of the di^honour, which thou have
suffered to be (...) to me in thy presence.

The old Woman so breaking off, immediately vanished away, to the great terror
of all the beholders, especially of the young Prince Palmendos, whose senses
were for a while e^raunged, and walking up and down musing on the old
Woman's words, his heart was so en^amed with the love of her he knew not, as he
was enfor^d thus to commune with himself. What may the Lady be, with whom (at
the report of this Woman) I find my self so distraughted? Daubtles if her
words be no Fables, ^t that I am Son to the Emperor of Constantinople, it
behooves (...) to enterprise such actions, as I may be judged so^what to
resemble him. While his spirit was ^hus bu^ed with diversity of these
thoughts, and no one daring to interrupt him: Ozalio went into the Queens
Chamber, and t^lling what had happened, she was therewith greatly displeased.

Immediately she came down into the great Hall, and ^ding her Son thus
perplexed, took him by the hand, causing him to sit down by her*, and then
began to him in this manner. I know not my Son what follies (it should se^)
the old Hagge has tr^ubled your mind withal: but refrain from giving
credit to them, and I shall tell ye the very truth of all. Madame answered
Palmendos, I am certain you will not dally with me, notwithstanding, I
cannot but meruail^, that you would all this while conceal the original of
my birth: for ^he Emperor Palmerin being such a worthy (...) Knight, as he
is esteemed of e^erie one, little occasion have I (...) ^isdaine to be his So^,
and you much le^e to keep it from me. Wherefore I humbly i^reate your
Majesty, to resolve me faith^ullie of this present doubt, to the e^d, if it be
so: I may ^e we my self forward in duty, in ^sing the bud to floorish, that
came from such a noble and virtuous stalk. And fear not that for his sake* I
will abandon you: because it is impossible for me to leave the Law wherein I
have heth^rto lived, for a strange opinion which I am ignorant in.

Ah my Son (quoth the Queen) the Gods so inspire and direct your desseignes,
that you may perfectly accomplish what you have pr^mised: for the only fear
to loose your company, has caused me conceal the thing you are so desirous
to know. But seeing you have heard what I can no longer dissemble: assure your
self my Son, that the old Woman has told nothing but truth. Heerev^n she
recounted the whole History, how to have issue by such a peerless Prince
(imitating Thalestria, Queen of the Amazons, who for like cause acquainted her
self with the valiant King Alexander) fhe by the counsel of a wise Magitian,
amourously beguiled the Emperor Palmerin. Lastly, she entreated him not to
^orsake her while she lived, because her life was only prolonged by his
presence.

Great matters have you told me, answered the young Prince: the Emperor then
knows not that he ^ath any Child by you? No verily, replied the Queen,
nor would I he should know for the whole world. Nor can he (I think)
understand (...) by any, said the Prince, yet (in mine opinion) I count it
necessary, that one day I should go see my Father: but trust me Madame, it
shall not he without speedy return, because I am determined not to leave
you, or give over (with my will) the Country and Kingdom which the heavens
have appointed me to rule and govern. Thus reasoned the Mother and her Son
on diverse matters, and henceforth the Prince showed himsel^e (...) lie (...),
(...) v^ry sh^rtlie to be armed Knight* and to be calle^ the Knight of Cupid,
bearing for his devise an heart (...) with an Arro^. For (...) he (...) an
(...) as red as (...), an^ ^or Ozalio, wh^ he loved as his Brother, a fair^
white Armor, and were both knighted by Ozalio (...) Father, wh^ was one of
the best Knights in all those parts.

Having thus received their order, a very sollemne ^east was made in honor
thereof, during which time, Palmendos gave away sundry sumptuous gifts: yet
could he not be (...) of Francelina, or forget one jot of the old Woman's
words, because he had lo^ged them so near his heart, as they were a martyrdom
(in manner) to him. For ^ase whereof he minded to go see Greece, as also to
visit the Emperor his Father, and learn some tidings of his ^nknowne Lady:
for he persuaded himself, that the old Woman's speeches gr^w upon no small
occasion. And finding the Queen his Mother one afternoon at good ley^re,
among diverse other pr^eedings between them, Palmendos earnestly entreated her
to grant him one reque^t: which the Queen (who looued him as her proper life,
and not thinking he would hau^ desired any such thing) agreed unto very
willingly. Then would I good Madame (quoth he) not have you conceive any
displeasure, if I make a brief voyage to Constantinople, to see the Empe^our
my Father, and the good Knights in his Court: for (...) the time you assured
me that I was his Son, my desires have been unmeasurable to trauatle this
journey. Yet I swear, by the sincere and inui^lable ^aith, which the Child
above all other owes to his Mother, to return again with all possible
speed. Ala^ my Son (q^oth the Queen) giving a bitter ^ghe, your words have
so sharply pierced my heart, as me thinks I feel my very thread of life cut in
s^nder, the fear of this present extreamitie, withheld me from uttering mine
own (...)* ^ut seeing I cannot (...) what I have willingly con^nted to, with
what (...) I can I will bear my mis-(...). One thing yet would I commend t^
thee, if zeal and love to thy M^ther may solli^ite any compassion: that thou
would return to the place of thy birth so soon as thou can, that mine
eyes beholding thee once more before I die, my soul may pass with greater
comfort into another world. So help me God, answered Palmendos, as I intend
not to break the least of your commandments, nor will I deceive you in my
short and speedy return. Since then my Son, quoth the Queen, you will
needs undertake this voyage, I would advise ye to have good store of hardy
Knights with you, that your entertainment by the Emperor may be the more
honorable. Madame, (quoth he) I am certain my Lord will not esteem any
thing the more of me for my company, because it shall suffice that I am King
of Tharsus, wherein consists the point of my renown: as for any pain of
travail, some report of good success in Chivalry shall wipe that away. For
(as you are not ignorant thereof) his Maicstie travailed alone through the
world, opposing his unconquerable mind against al adventures whatsoever: yet
did ye divine bounty evermore ^heeld him from peril and death, and as he, so
many other famous Kings and Potentates. What emprise was more dangerous th^n
y^ of Jason, when he won the Golden fleece in the Isle of Cholcos? or that of
y^ gentle Champio^ Theseus, when he conquered the Minotau^e in the inextricable
Labirinth of Creete? yet the Gods defended them in all their attempts. In my
time (Mother) I have seen, that poor and simple Ships have sailed in the Sea,
with great fortune in tempests and outrage, and at length have returned home
richly furnished: on the contrary I have noted, that sundry gallant vessels,
have cut with full sail through calm and quiet Seas, favored both with wind
and wether, and at the very entrance of the Havens mouth, have splyt on some
Rock, or sustained other mischance. Needles then were my fear of the Sea or
Fortune, because (where ere I go^) Death tracks met as my shadow, and dare not
strike till he be commanded: th^rfore I am thus determined, to have none with
me ^ut Ozalio and two Squires, because we will travail as mean^ Gentl^en, and
try (...) manhood with the (...) of Europe, before the Emper^ur shall have
a^ie knowledge of me.

The Nueene would no more contrary his intent, but referred all things to his
own disposing, wherefore Palmendos having sent for the chief Lords of the
Kealme, ^eclared to them openly his mind: giving them this express charge,
to ob^y the Queen his Mother, and his Uncle, whom he left a^ Lieutenaunt
general of y^ Province in his absence. They all sorry that he would so soon
depart, knew not how to hinder it he being so reso^ute: notwithstanding,
they promised to fulfill his command, wyshing^him a tranquile and prosperous
navigations. Soon after the Queen went into her Cabinet, where her hand
discharging the office of the tongue, she wrote a friendly Letter to the
Emperor, which she accompanied with a King, like to that she gave him at his
departure: to y^ end that by this Jewel, Palmendos might be y^ sooner known
of him.

Ship and all thing^s ready for this voyage, he took his leave of his
Lords and Subie^s, and afterward of the Queen his Mother: who biting in her
grief so well as the could, de^uered him the King and the Letter, the contents
whereof thus follows.

The Letter of the Queen of Tharsus, to the Emperor Palmerin.
To the most illustrious and famous Palmerin d^ Oliua, Emperor of
Constantinople, the most loyal of Lovers, most accomplished of Knights, and
above all the Princes that inhabit the center of the earth: the Queen of
Tharsus his entire and perpetual friend, sends health, humbly kissing the
hand of his Maiesti^.
IF the Heavens had so bountifully be^owed those perfections on me in my
cradle. which the most accomplished Ladies make their vaunt of, as Fort^ne was
afterward favorable and ^ourteous vnte me, in adorning my head with the royal
Diadem of Tharsus: needel^s had my recourse ^eene to Charms or Magic (O
favored and fortunate Prince) when I sought your ^cquaintance in the ^ealme of
Pasmeria. But since by that small talent wherewith nature endowed me, the
Destinies granted me the sweet aspect of your love, after I beheld you with
our Admiral Alfarano: my pr^stinate virtue could not prevail against
unquenchable desire, because the fame of your renown was so caractred in my
spirit, as my former chaste and bashful continency, was in the end
irrecuperably ecntaminate. Yet can I not repute this chance as matter of
^is-fortune, seeing the heavenly powers were so benign, as from that act
proceeded Palmendos our only Son: from whom I still hid that you were his
Father, albe^t by strange means he was not long since advertised thereof, from
which time he has so prevailed by entreaties, as he has constrained me (not
without great grief, and doubtful fcare never to see him again) to suffer
him come see his noble Father. And hardly could I yield thereto, but that my
confidence in you is such: as you will quickly return him again, so soon as
you have seen and known him for your Son. At this accident I* hope you will
not be offended, when you consider the world enioyes a young Prince: whose
virtuous quallities and good carriage of himself. presage his future
commendable fortune. In this sort have I sent him, accompanied only with his
Cousin, because he thus persuaded me: that when you travailed the world, it
was commonly alone, and as a simple Knight errant. And least you should be
scrupulous in acknowledging him your Son, beside the coniect^res of his
phisnomie, proportion of body, and other your perfect resemblaunces: I have by
him sent you a Ring, like that which I gave you when you parted from me* which
Ringes if you compare together, you will remember the words I ^pake wante^ no
(...). Once more I conjure ye, by the honor and reverence of the firm love,
you always bare so religiously to the only Mistress of your heart: that you
will quickly return our Son again, that he may yet be some comfort to my
following date of time, while I enjoy my being in this nether Region.

The most humble of your friends, the Queen of Tharsus.

CHAP. VI.
How Palmendos by means of a tempest on the sea, was brought to the Isle of
Delphos, where after he understood the adventure of the T^mple, he ^ent on
shore. And how he afterward conquered the Son to the Giant Baledon, who
held the Islande in forcible subjection.

PAlmendos with Ozalio and their Squires embarked, the Mariners hoysed sail
and set away merrily, the Prince commanding the Pilotte to make toward
Thrace, because he hoped to hear some tidings there of Francelina, who^ he had
made chief Mistress of his affections. But after they had sailed half a
day, a violent contrary wind arose, which drove them three days and three
nights so furiously, as the Mariners could scant tell in what part they were.
At length this rough and boisterous tempest ceased, when Palmendos being
desirous to know in what Country they were: was answered by the Master that
they were in Europe and the Mediterranian Sea, very near to the Isle of
Delphos, where after so long and uncomfortable wether, Palmendos would go on
land to refresh himself. In this Isle the Pagans were often wont in ancient
time, to come and visit the Temple of Apollo, as also to consult with his
Oracle, and at this time was Lord thereof a Giant named Baledon, the most fierce
and cruel Tirant, that lived in all those three parts of the world. This Giant
had a Son no less valiant then himself, and after he had by force gotten
this Island, he build^d a streng Castle on a little Promontorie: discending
so artificialli^ into the Sea, as having a huge Rock on ^ither side ther^of,
it was well desended from the extremity of the water. No other Port for
landing would he permit in all the Island, then this only, hemde in with
the two Rocks, between which he had fastened a great chain of iron, which
commonly lay somewhat shallowe in the water. But when any (...) came to
anchor in that Port, certain villains which he kept in Towers for the
purpose, would hoyse them up with the chain in such sort, that they could
depart no more thence except the Giant pleased: and thus would he rob and
spoil all that landed there, that al those parts lam^nted to hear of his
villainy. If happily he met with any Knights who resisted his will, then
would he outrage the^ by force of Arms, and afterward put them into an
insectious stinking Prison. The Merchaunts and others that used traffic,
from them would he take all they had, and afterward deliver them over to a most
cru^ll death, so that all such as had notice of his tyranny, fl^d that place
as the dangerous Gulf of Caribdis.

Yet not withstanding, there was in this Island a great adventure, for in the
time of the Gentiles, there inhabited a welthy Priest, a Magitian and
wonderful inueftigatour of hidden things, he was high Priest of the
Sanctuary in the Temple, as also he had the general administration through
the whole Province: he having a comlie beautiful Daughter, endued with all
virtues requisite in a Uirgin, and her he gave to the service of the Oracle. It
so fell out, that the Duke of Feria, a very gentle and gracious youth, became
enamoured of her only by report, for oftentimes he had heard her commended,
to exceed in beauty the choysest Dames of that Country: wherefore he made
sundry requests to enjoy her as his Wife, but all his labor was to no
purpose, because her father ^ould not part with her. And as it often happens,
that the Messenger who is twyse or thryse sent to one place, to obtain a
matter earnestly desired, will devise what means he can for the behoof of
his Master, more to escape the shame of refusal, then for any great good
will (happily) to the party: even so fell it out with the minister of this
suit, for seeing h^e went and returned so often without avail, he got one
d^ie to speak with the Maiden herself, whom he labored with so many
persuasions, and whetted on to join in a secret marriage: as she became
ravished with the love of the Duke, and promised if his Master could
cunningly steal her from her Father, she would go with him whether he pleased.

The Duke not a little glad of this answer, presently iournied to the Island,
where being arrived, he advertised the Damsel: that he would stay for her
in a convenient place near her fathers Palace, whether she should not fail
to come, so soon as the silent night had brought every one asleep. But the
Priest, who by means of his Magic foresaw all these practices, and knowing
the place where the Duke of Feria stayed for his Daughter: caused two fierce
enchaunted Lions to descend from yt Mountains, which ran with rau^nous
mouths on the unprovided Duke, and he no way able to defend himself, they
rent and tore him cruelly in pieces. Which pitiful spectacle when his Squire
that came with him beheld, he gave such a lamentable shrike, as the Damsel
(whose eyes and ears were car^fullie waking) easily heard it. In like sort
did diverse others of the house, who came forth with lighted Torches to
understand the cause: but the Maiden hearing too soon in what case they found
the Duke, came running from the Castle as a mad Woman to accomplish the
Sacrifice. Such was her grief to behold her vow^d Husband thus cruelly
massacred, as she taking his Rapier, set the pommell thereof to the ground,
and placing the point opposite to her heart: with marvelous violence threw
herself thereon, as one ^isdaining to live, being robbed of her love.
Nevertheless, she was herein deceived, for the Sword passing through her
right side, she fell upon the dead corpse, and so lay awhile alive, breathing
forth many grievous sighs and lamentations. And finding in her bosom a
sheet of paper, with her own blood she wrote twelve mornefull verses in
form of an Epytaph: then seeing her latest hour to hasten on, with rufull
mones she delivered these speeches. Seeing it is so, my sweet choice and
paragon of cour test, that for my sake thou have endured this martyrdom: it
will remain as a gall in my conscience, that I did not end thy funeralles
according to thy desert. And that my Father may know what wrong he has done
us, I will leave some occasion for his too late repentance: yet I desire no
other recompense, but causing our bodies to be buried in one Coffin, he will
suffer (for a perpetual remembrance of this stratageme) this Epitaphe to be
engraven thereon.

Forbear mine eyes more to bemone thy friend,
Whose peereles virtues time nor death can stain:
Despise the man that thus procurde his end,
And has (withal) his only daughter slain.
Ah angry fate, and planet most unkind,
What more inhumaine act could ye devise:
Then step between the heart, the eye and mind,
And pierce that vain which could them all suffice?
But since in life our fortune was so bad,
To miss of that which we desired most:
Yet now in death the same is freely had,
Wherefore of love in death we make our boast.
This Epitaphe ended, she yielded the human tribute to nature, for afterward
her body made no motion of vital moving: and it cannot be esteemed as
fabulous that love should cause the death of any one, because in ancient
Histories, we may find innumerable of recent and modern examples thereof. But
return we to the Pri^st, who understanding that his Daughter ran forth with
such a clamor, followed her immediately, fearing she would offer some
violence on herself, and finding her dead, holding the Epitaphe in her hand,
he was in great danger to make a third in this woeful tragedy. Ah miserable
and desolate wretch (quoth he) if thy knowledge had efficacy in working the
Duke of Ferias death, why was it not sufficient to prevent thy Daughters
mishappe? Unhappy was the hour when first I practiced this deuillish sorcerie.
Many other sorrowful lamentations he made over y^ dead bodies, whom we may
aptly compare to the loyal Lovers Piramus and Thisbie: but afterward he
erected a costly Sepulcher of Brass, and having embalmed them according to
the ancient ceremonies of funeral pomp, he intombed them in the Temple
both together, and caused the Epytaphe to be cunningly graven thereon. Not
long after, considering himself deprived of his lawful heir, and how
greatly he had perverted the course of nature, very extreme grief ended his
days: but ere he died, he enclosed the Treasure of the Temple with such
enchaunt ments, and with so strong and fearful a guard, that from the time of
his death, it was very dangerous to come near the place. And tell the time of
Palmendos arrival there, there durst not any one make trial thereof, albeit
before Baledon abused the Islande, Knights of diverse Regions came to prove
their fortune: and y^ Giant himself came thither for the same occasion, but
seeing he could not approach the Temple, perceiving the Island to be fair
and delectable: he got it by force of Arms, the people thereof being unable
to resist his hostility.

Let us now remember where we left before, the arrival of Palmendos in this
Islande of Delphos, to whom one of the Mariners told all these things, as
also the horrible villainies of the Giant: wherefore he entreated him not to
anchor in that Port, because (quoth he) we shall all be either slain or taken
prisoners. Why? said Palmendos, is no man able to punish his pride and
tyranny? seeing Fortune has conducted me hither, and will permit me but to
have a sight of him: I will not depart without some proof of my self. For if
I be Son to the Emperor Palmerin, I must not be frighted with the name of
Giants, who rather resemble huge Colosses without any souls, then human
creatures: much less strange adventures, how hard and dangerous soever they
seem. If I would acquire praise and honor immortal, long time must I
follow millitarie cxercise, as my Father did in his younger days, prevailing
against diverse such Monsters, and bringing innumerable enterprises to happy
end: turn prowe then toward shore, and boldly let us enter the Port,
without any fear of this difformed Golias. With much a do they set into
the Port, where they were no sooner entered, but they saw themselves enclosed
with the chain, which sight dismayed both the Master and Mariners: but
Palmendos and Ozalio presently put on their Helmets and Gauntlets, standing
ready for defense of all the rest.

The Giant being advertised that a rich Ship was got within the chain,
commanded his Son presently to take Arms, and with sufficient assistaunts
to go take all the Strangers prisoners: whereto the young Tyrant was very
ready, and entering with three Knights into a boat, came directly to the
Ship, where Palmendos standing foremost, the Giants Son thus spoke to him.
How dare thou Knight be so bold, as to enter our Port without license? I
dare do more then that, answered Palmendos, in despite of such disloyal
villains as you are, who by treacherous means entrap the in^cent, and
afterward exercise what cruelty you please upon them: but now is the time
come, I hope, that shall guerdon you with recompense aunswerable to such brutish
behavior. The Giants Son dyspleased with these words, sought with his
Knights to enter violently the Ship: but Palmendos and Ozalio being to high
above them, gave them so many sharp repulses, as yo^ung Baledon received his
deaths wound at the Princes hand, and Ozalio sent one of the Knights to
bear him company. With this foil y^ boat speedily returned, and they
advertised Baledon what had happened, bringing his Son slain up into his
Chamber, wherewith he was so wonderfully enraged: as he vowed to buy his blood
with the death of all the strangers. In bitter anguish of heart, he called for
his Armor, preparing himself to the dismal attempt: in mean while the two
Knights that escaped back alive, stood on the shore reuiling the Prince,
wylling him to prepare, for his death was coming.

If your Master (quoth Palmendos) be so valiant ^s you report, let him deal
alone with me in single fight, and if I chance to vanquishe him, let him
accomplish what I shall set down, and I will grant him life. On the
contrary, if he conquer me, let him do with me and mine as him pleases:
tell him, these brauadoes ^ proud speeches cannot daunt resolute minds, and
if he dare grant me safe conducte, with good assurance not to offer me any
wrong, I will presently come on shore and try my fortune with him.

CHAP. VII.
How Palmendos came on land to combat with the Giant Baledon, whom he
vanquished, and afterward delivered many Knights out of his prysons, among
whom were two young Princes, being Moors: who in travailing to the Emperors
Court, were by a tempest cast on this Islande.

RIght soon went the Knights to the Giant with Palmendos challenge, who
being very well pleased therewith, came down proudelie to y^ Port with these
speeches. Which is the wretched Knight, that dare so peremptorily venture on
shore, to receive the death he has justly deserved? I am the man, answered
Palmendos, and I will be so good as my word, if thou will faithfully promise
me safety from thy people. By the hallowed faith, said Baledon that I owe to
our Gods, thou shall be as secure as thou can require, albeit I die under thy
Sword in Combat. The Prince loathe to waste the time in words, called for a
S^iffe to carry him on shore, which the Mariners unwillingly consented to,
being loath to loose a Knight so valiant. In brief, he came on land, and no
one with him but his Cousin Ozalio, who would not at any time forsake his
company. Baledon praunceth up to the plain before his Castle, commanding
his attendants on pain of their lives, not any wa^e to trouble or molest his
enemy. Now are the Champions covered with their Swords and Sh^eldes, and with
such fury do^ the weapons clanche upon yt Armor, as though Vulcan and his
Cyclops were at work with their hammers. You must think tha^ the Giant,
being a man of monstrous stature, dealing with a young Prince, but a grystle
(in a manner) in comparison of him, did often bring his life to very perrillous
exigents: notwithstanding, so did the heavens favor P^lmendos, and despise the
manifold tyrannies of the Giant, as after a long, cruel and bloody fight,
Baledon had received so many wounds, as he was constrained to fall at the
Princes mer^ie: for which Palmendos humbly (...) heaven, boldly set his
foot upon the Giant, saying. Confess thy self (Baledon) vanquished by me,
and let me en^y the prisoners which thou unjustly detainest in thy Castle,
for the remainder of thy life hangs on the ^oynt of my Sword.

When the Giant beheld his great pomp so overthrown, and he had no mean
now left wherewith to defend himself: he breathed forth these sorrowful
speeches. Ah angry Gods, how strange and diverse are your judgments, in
suffering ^othe me and my Son to be foiled by one Knight? Now see I well,
that mine infinite and wicked offenses, committed against men without desert,
has thrown this wreakefull sentence on me. Then calling his Serua^nts, he
commanded them to conduct the Prince into the Castle, and to deliver all his
prisoners to him, with any thing else he should command them.

So went the Prince with his Cousin Ozalio and two of the Giants Servant to
the Castle, the rest remained to bring their Masters dead body, and when
they were entered the ^ase Court, they met the Gyantesse hea^ilie lamenting,
and curssing the Knight who was cause thereof. But Palmendos made no account of
her words, commanding all the prisoners to be presently brought before him,
which in sooth were very many, both Knights, Merchaunts and other trauayling
Strangers, who had long time been kept t^ere in captivity: and now seeing
they were so generally called, they verily thought to die, or endure some
cruel torment, but finding the contrary, I leave their ^oy to the Readers
judgment. Then Palmendos called for the Knights Armor, that each one knowing
his own Armor might be armed therewith: for this their happy deliuera^nce,
they all ^ell down at the Princes feet, desiring God to reward his honorable
pains.

But among the prisoners, there were two young Knights of comely statur^,
being both Moors, who had not long time been held in that servitude, and
witnessing by their countenaunces that they were descended of royal parentage.
The one of them was Rifarano, Son to Trineus Emperor of Allemaigne, and
Aurecinda the Soldans Sister, as you may read in the History of Palmerin
d'Oliua: the other was named Lecefin, Son to the Soldane of Persia: being the
youngest of three which he had by the Princess Zephira. These two young Lords
were nourished together by the Soldane, because he beheld the toward
inclination of Rifarano, whom he ever imagined would prove a worthy Knight:
and for he was Son to his Sister and the Emperor Trineus his great freende,
he looued him as Lecefin his own Child. Rifarano coming to the age of ten
or twelve years, wexed very forward in all commendable exercises, and one day
reasoning with his Mother: desired her to tell him the cause, why she went so
continually clad in mourning, the truth whereof she discoursed to him, and how
his Father was the Emperor Trineus of Allemaigne. When Rifarano understood,
that he was Son to one of the cheifest Princes in Christendom, he made
greater account of himself then he did before, and dysposed himself to
matters of higher quallitie, so that being of years to receive his
Knighthoode, he requested the Soldane to honor him therewith: which he with
right good will performed, causing Ioustes and Tournaments to sollemnize that
time withal, wherein Rifarano still bare away the pryze. Following Arms and
Chivalry he still continued, and with good success wunne such fame through
all Persia, as y^ Soldane thought to join him in marriage with the King
Maulerinos eldest Daughter. But he would never harken to such matters, for that
he had secretly vowed, first to see the Emperor his Father, whereto his
Mother (whose days long sickness had new shortened) evermore provoked him: that
Trineus beholding the fruit of her love, might think the better of his
acquaintance with her.

After the obsequies and royal funeral, as well beseemed a Princess of so
great regard, and Rifarano loathe to stay, his Mother being dead: he desired
y^ Soldane that he might travail to Constantinople, to see the Court of the
Emperor Palmerin, and thence he would^ go to his Father in Allemaigne. Albeit
very unwilling, yet ye Soldane condiscended, whereat the young Prince Lecefin,
who loved Rifarano as himself, began to conceive great sorrow: wherefore he
entreated his Father that ^ee might travail with him in company, persuading
him that it would be a cause of his Cozins more speedy return^. The Soldane
liked hereof very well, and although he was yet very young, he gave him his
knighthoode: and so with ^iuers presents from his Father and Zephira, as also
Letters to both the Emperors, accompanied with thirty hardy Knights they
took shypping, and by means of an exceeding rough tempest on the Sea, they
were driven perforce into this Isle of Delphos, where being hem^e in with the
chain, and ^lattered by the Giant to come on shore, without suspecting any
treason they went to his Castle, and finding outward friendly entertainment,
they were fetched forth of their beds and thrust into prison, and twenty of
the Knights that came with them cruelly murdered, the rest were brought into
the Dungion to their Masters, and afterward the Giant took the spoil of y^
Ship at his pleasure.

But to come to ou^ p^rpose, Rifarano and Lecefin seeing themselves delivered
from this d^llorous li^e, much worse then that of the slaves in the ^allies,
they spa^e to Palme^dos in this manner. Tell us in courtes^e, good Knight, by
what means have you obtained our liberty? for we marvel that we (...) not
the Giant, who brought us hither by (...) and ^reason. Gentlemen, (quoth the
Prince) I am a Knight borne far hence, and being by the angry Seas cast
upon this Island, I determined to come on shore, where being no way able to
escape the death present before mine eyes, I was constrained to Combat with the
Giant you talk of, who to allure me the sooner to the battle; promised me
security from any save himself. But heaven giving me strength, to erect a
mortal Trophe of his slaughtered body, has thereby given you all freedom
again.

Might we not, said Rifarano, know your name, to whom we are so much
indebted for our deliverance? as for us, it is necessary you should know of
whence and what we are, that if we should grow hereafter ungrateful for this
kindness, the meanest in the world might justly condemn us. This young
Prince, (quoth he) is named Lecefin* ^onne to the noble Soldane of Persia, and
I his unworthy Nephew, issued from Trineus Emperor of Allemaigne, brother by
marriage to the incomparable Prince Palmerin d'Oliua: heereto he added the
whole discourse of their trouble, which you have heard already. In happy time
came I hither, answered Palmendos, to succor so good and noble Knights as you
are, chiefly for your near alliance to the Emperor Palmerin, whom I
continually desire to serve, and shortly shall present my self unto him: but
first (by the favor of Fortune,) I would have his ears so acquainted with
some actions of account, as might move his spirit with the more affection to
see me. And seeing you go ^o soon to his Court, let me entreat this favor
at your hands, as to conducte this company with you which I have delivered
from prison, and present his Majesty with them from me, as also the wife and
daughter of Baledon the Giant: for it is both just and reasonable, to
dispossess this Island of such bad people, as have with such horrible
tirannies so long time abused the same. For I dare say, the people y^ inhabit
this Isle, will more gladly submit themselves to ye Emperors regiment, then be
held in slavery by such helhoundes* In mean while, we will leave some good
Knight of this soil as governor thereof in his highness name, until he have
disposed thereof as shall seem best in his wisdom. Willingly would I make
proof before your departure, of a strange adventure couched in the Temple:
that if I die in y^ attempt, you may revenge my death, and happily live to
finish the same* Rifarano and Lecefin made answer, that they would fulfill any
thing he pleased to command them, for which Palmendos requited them with many
thanks.

CHAP. VIII.
How Palmendos placed in the government of the Isle of Delphos, an ancient
wise Knight named Guillador, by whom he understood the danger and difficulty
of the adventure in the Temple, whether (notwithstanding) he afterward
travailed: and how he fortunatly ended the same.

AFter all the Knights and Gentlemen had Armed themselves, Palmendos caused the
Gyantesse and her daughter, to be fastened with a strong chain to a pillar,
least they should offer some violence on themselves, and the chain in the
Port he comman ded to be taken away, with all other dangers that might hurt
trauaillers: then sonunoning the people of the Island, he thus began to
confer with them.

My Brethren and Friends, I cannot think but you all rejoice, to see your
selves delivered from the miserable servitude, wherein the Tyrant Baledon has
long time held you, henceforth therefore I intend, that you shall acknowledge
for your liege Lord and S^ueraigne, the famous and virtuous Emperor Palmerin
d'Oliua, to whom I will make present of this Island, which the God of heaven
has su^fered me to conquer: for you know that the Giant is slain, his Wife
and Daughter likewise remain my prisoners, and to his Majesty will I shortly
send them. Let me therefore entreat ye, to continue his true and loyal
Subjects, and I shall so behave my self with his highness, as he shall
henceforth defend this Island and you: for the government whereof in mean
while, I will leave one that shall be chosen among you, who shall swear to
resign his office, to him whom the Emperor shall please to send hither.

The Knights and Gentlemen of the Island were greatly contented, hearing
Palmendos use such gracious speeches, acknowledging themselves happy to remain
y^ Emperors vassailes: whereupon they swore fidelity to him, and elected a
reverend Knight of the Island named Guillador, to whom the authority of
Deputy was committed, and then they caused the Giants body to be burned, for
the horrible villamies he had done in his life time, to which execution all
the people of the Island resorted, not so much for the sight thereof, as to
honor the Patron of their deliverance. Every thing thus wisely and
discreetlie pacified, he determined to try the adventure of ye Temple,
whereupon the new Governor desired him, not to ^azard himself in a matter so
perrillous, for that many Knights had lost their lives in the attempt: which
made Palmendos far more desirous, to know wherein y^ greatest danger thereof
consisted, at whose request, Guillador thus began the discourse. Know my
Lord, that the Temple wherein our Priests great Treasure is hid, is a place
now ouergrowne as a thicket of young Trees, by reason of the long time sin^e
a^ie one durst approach the same, and in that Wood is a savage wild Bore, of
more cruel nature certain, then that which Hercules flewe on the Mountain
Erymanthus in Arcadia. And when any one does offer to enter the Temple, he
comes forth of his den, and makes him sure for ever returning again. In
sooth, quoth the Prince, these news are very terrible in hearing, yet never
was there any adventure in the world so difficult, but one or other has
accomplished it, and I trusting only in the help of God, will try if this
enchauntment were ordained perpetual, not fearing all y^ Bores or devils in
the world.

I am sure my Lord, quoth Rifarano, that if you finish not this enchauntment,
it will never be accomplished by any other: therefore boldly set upon it,
for gladly would I endure part of the pain, and by y^ faith of a true Knight,
I shall assist ye with my uttermost endeavor. No other help do I desire,
answered Palmendos, then the favor of the Gods only, and I hope they will
not be far from me, if so I stand in need thereof: notwithstanding, I humbly
thank ye for your good will, and if I happen to fail in mine enterprise, you
shall make no better witness of your words, then courteously to hazard the
adventure, to recover the honor lost by me: for which cause, as also to
beguile the tediousnes of travail, you shall accompany me to the Temple. So
wylling the Merchaunts and other prisoners to stay in the Castle, Palmendos,
Ozalio, Rifarano, Lecefin and the rest of the Knights, being all well armed,
set toward the Temple, many of the Islande travailing with them, to guide
them the way and do other needful services. Now had Palmendos caused to be
made by marvelous subtle cunning, a coat of Arms, composed of ware and
other like clammie myxtures, wherewith he covered all his Armor, that the
sharp brystles and tu^kes of the Bore might have no power to hurt him: and in
this sort they rode on together. Being at length come to a convenient place,
which was within sight of the T^mple, he beheld y^ brushie thornie plain,
which made him doubt how he should get thither with his Horse. Yet resolute
for all chances, he takes an iron Mace, y^ he had brought from the Giants
Castle, and forward goes to the Temple: desiring all his companions, that not
one of them should follow him: wherewith Ozalio and Rifarano were somewhat
offended, yet loathe to break his commandment, they stayed, using hearty and
zealous inuocations for his good success.

Palmendos making way with his Mace through the enchaunted briars, espied a
^night before him, who presently winded a ^ghtie Horn, at the sound whereof
the o^glie and monstrous Bore came forth of his De^ne, and ran before the
Temple Gate: there staying for Palmendos with such horrible grynning of his
tusk^s, as the very sight thereof was sufficient to fray a man of good
courage. By this time the Prince gained a convenient place by the Temple side,
when beholding the cruel beast come running (...) toward him, he commended
himself to the heavens, and fell to his work. So thick as hayle ^lewe the
enchaunted bristles from the ^ore at the Prince, but the coat of ware so
confounded their strength, as they could not pierce his Armor, which only had
been the death of many Knights before: But the Prince gave the Beast such a
sound stroke with his Mace on y^ head, as he staggered to and fro unable to
sustain himself, and following this good advantage, thrust his Sword so deep
down his throat, as casting forth a great dea^e of blood upon the Prince, at
length he tombled down on his side, when half a dozen good strokes with the
Mace, made him safe for stirring any more. And alth^gh this was a natural
Bore, yet had he been deuilishlie enchaunted, and brought into that place by
the Priests Magique, as the Lions were y^ killed the Duke of Feria, this Bore
was appointed by him to guarde his Treasure in the Temple, which (as you hear)
was slain by the hand of Palmendos. And even as the Bore of Calydonia, that
was sent to torment the whole Country, died by the valor of Meleager, who
afterward made a present of his head to y^ fair Atalanta, as a notable
experience of his magnani^tis, in like sort did the Prince of Tharsus, as a
remembrance to all that should come thither, cut of the Bores head, and as a
sign of his spoil and Trophe, set it on a Pyller in the same place where he
got the victory. He had no sooner put off his coat of wa^e, which was well
laden with y^ Bores brystles: but he saw the Knight of the Horn come toward
him with a huge Mace in his hand, saying. Unhappie was thy coming (Knight)
into this Desert, when thou must buy thy boldness with thy dierest blood.
Heerewith he gave the Prince such a cruel blow, as made him set one knee to
the ground, and so long endured the sharp fight between them: as they both
being far spent and ouerlaboured, fell down to the ground not able to
stir themselves.

Palmendos in short time recovering strength arose, and seeing his enemy was
not to be found: boldly went to enter the Temple, the Gates whereof stood now
wide open* which greatly augmented his desire to enter. Being come within the
Porche, two Images of Brass stood on either side, who with monstrous Trompets
blewe such forcible wind on him, as he was three or four times carried forth
again therewith: but pressing on still with all the strength he had, he got
such sure footing within the Temple, as he felt no more of that violent wind.
Passing forward in the body of the Church, he came to the magnificent
Sepulcher, wherein the Duke of Feria and the high Priests Daughter were
interred, which was so rich, sumptuous and rarely invented, as he had never
seen the like before. Having read the Epitaph, he espied ye Sword, wherewith
the most perfect Damsel in love slew herself, then mounting on the bars
that environed y^ Tomb, he took the Sword in his hand, and in remembrance
of the accident, as also for the beauty thereof, he hunge it at his girdle,
determining to take it with him, and so walked higher to find out the Treasure.
At length he came to the Sanctuary, where stood the ancient costly Altar
for the Sacrifice, having thereon an Idol of massy Gold, upon the head
wher^of was a rich imperial Crown, and in his right hand a Scepter so
curiously framed, as it was impossible to see Jewels of greater price. In the
Idolles other hand was a Book, fast sealed with four great buckles of Gold,
and in such a meruailously costly Chair was the Image set: as nature her
self would have been driven into admiration, to behold a matter of such
surpassing exc^llencie. All about the Altar stood many Basins of Gold, and
before it hung diverse Images of silver with lighted Lamps, from whence came
such a sweet smell of Mirrhe and other Aromatique drugg^s, and the light
caused the precious stones in the Idol so to glis^er, as it would have ravished
any eye to note the Mai^stie ther^of. Palmendos carried away with
contemplating this sight, and not able to withdraw his eyes from gazing
thereon: at length beheld the dark night to draw on, the Lamp^s in this holy
conclaue having so beguiled him, wherefore he concluded not to depart thence
till the morning, that he might behold the other singularities of the place.

CHAP. IX,
What illusions appeared to Palmendos i^ the Temple, one whereof resembled the
beauty of Francelina, wherewith he had a great deal of talk: and how Ozalio
with the other Knights came and found him.

PAlmendos sat down on a curious pillar, intending to repose himself till
the next morning^ but immediately he heard such a brute and rumor, as though
the whole world had been in one moment assembled. Heerevpon he arose, and
courageously drawing his Sword (because he doubted some ambushe or new
charge) went directly to the Sepulcher of y^ Duke, where he beheld a Damsel
with her hair about her ears, and all her garments soyled with blood, which
very sight grieved him to the heart. This was the shadow and representation of
the Priests Daughter, who after she had delivered many bitter sighs, with a
voice hollow and trembling thus spoke.

Am I not more wretched and unfortunate, then any other under the Globe of
heaven? yes questionless, seeing the fatal Destini^s has appointed me, to
endure perpetual, cruel and rigorous martirdomes, for thy sake noble Duke of
Feria, the only record of mine afflicted soul, for whom love took such
privilege on me, as I feared not to offend my self with mine own hand. But
who has robbed me of the Sword, that so suddenly made the sad execution of
my life? Ah Palmendos, think not to carry it away so lightly, for that Sword
is yet more necessary for me. With these words she ran violently upon him,
and shook him as if she would have torn him in pecces: at which instant there
arose such a ^hunder and trembling of the earth, as he thought verily the
Temple would have suncke, and the four elements resolve and turn intheir
former state of Chaos. By reason hereof, the Prince could not continue his
magnammious and wonted vigor, but ^ell down depryued of his understanding, as
though pale death had taken possession of him. During this t^aunce, a fair
Uirgin richly accoustred, (whom the old ^oman that told him of so many
things at Tharsus, had sent thither by her post) came and took him by y^
hand, saying.

Arise Palmendos, my noble Lord, and come to her, who seeing the fearful
state wherein you are, only by fantasie^ represented to your eyes: d^ entreat
you not to disable your heroycall and noble courage, at the sight of vain and
fantastical visions, for it beseems not so good and accomplished Knights, as
you are, in such sort to pass through strange adventures. Be of good cheer
then, and repute this hour of your renown, to surpass all the bra^est men in
the world: because since the essence of this enchauntment, no Knight could
enter this Temple but you alone. therefore by good reason ought the treasure to
be yours, which has so long time been concealed here: take hence then the
Golden Idol on the Altar, with all the other rich and precious Jewels, and
send them to the virtuous Emperor your Father. And for your sake shall this
Temple hereafter be frequent and accessable for any, which you shall consecrate
to the name of Christ, and of the Treasure you shall yet ^nde, you shall erect
a Monastery of Uirgins, in honor of that incontaminate maiden, that brought
the Savior of all man kind into the world, who has given you strength to
run through these action^: that this place may be reverently and de^utly
used, which ^eertofore has been blasphemed with Idolatry, contr^rie to the
bounty inexpuisable, making to sinful men vowe^, offering^ and sacrifices. And
albeit you are not as yet a Christian, yet for my sake enter that unspotted
faith, for the time will come, when you shall sundry times say, happy was that
hour wherein you found me. Having taken good order for all that I have said,
contain your self no longer in these Countries, because in other clymats is
reserved a tryumphall Scepter for you, enriched with honor and eternal praises.

In vain it were to ask, if Palme^dos was filled with great marvel, hearing
the Damsels voice, who cam^ to comfort him in this austere calamity, and
could so well discipher hi^ affayre^, for the ecstasy and rauishment of hy^
spirit, which evidently appeared in his countenance, delivered ample
testimony thereof. Nor were these word^ any thing else, but fuel to e^crease
loves ^re already burning: nevertheless, seeing himself in a place so
commodious, where freely he might hold chat with this Damsel, he called up
his spirits, and boldly made this answer. Madame, for the reverend ho^our you
bear to your God, conceal not who you are that know me so well, entreating
ye to pardon my presumptuous request, because your rare and perfect beauty,
which is the only spur to my demand, has confounded me with greater
admiration, then all the strange sightes I have yet beheld: all which, (in
respect of your excellence) I hold as diabolical and ^riuolous, for you seem
celestial, and sent by the Gods into these nether Regions, where having
discovered the futur^ event of my Destinies, my heart has thereby received
incredible joy and contentment. Be not abashed courteous Knight, quoth she* at
any thing I have said, for it is long since I knew what I have uttered, and in
regard of your worthy valor, I love and esteem ye above all other in the
world, so that I have left the Countries of my original, only to see and tell
ye what I have done: desiring you to excuse me in the rest, as concealing of
whence and what I am, because at this time you cannot be satis-^ed therewith,
yet ere it be long we will m^ete again, and then shall you understand more of
me* by one request I must make to ye, which as yet may not be manifested.
Wonderful will that consolation be (quoth the Prince, to me, that you will
command any thing wherein I may express my forces, and in that devotion I
have vowed, evermore faithfully to continue your freende: offering in witness of
this obeysaunce, to serve henceforth as your Knight, with promise not to
prejudice y^ least of your commandments, so long as my sta^es give me leave
to breathe. Nor will I further press ye to tell me what ye are, seeing your
will stands not thereto: but till y^ graci^ hour o^ co^undement come, I will
accomplish your appointment, ^ecting here a Monastery of vyrgins for the
ser^ice of your God, and your words have made me thirst with vn^enchable
desire, till I be resolved as concerning that ^ayth. While she returned him
many thanks for his freendly offers, the old woman arrived, who made him
enamoured with the love of Francelina in his Realm: she taking the Damsel by
the hand, said. Go with me fair Daughter, and leave this most discourteous
Knight, who suffered me to be misused before him in Tharsus: where of I hope to
take sufficient revenge, by the extreme passions his heart shall endure
hereafter.

No sooner had she ended these words, but immediately they both vanished
away, wherewith the Prince greatly admiring: was driven into such a profounde
conceit of her rare beauty, as he thought even there to yield up his ghost,
because he imagined never to have seen her like. Herein his judgment was no
whit beguiled, for he did as many young Lovers do, show thems^lues favorable
Judges in their own causes. Now enters he into conceit, because the old woman
had taken her away, that this Damsel was Francelina, she whom he had so
lively imprinted in his heart, as for her love he had left his native Country.
Thus c^mpassed with grief on every side, he entered into these terms. Alas
old Woman, I know not what thou may be, yet very true do I find thy words:
but small to my avail did Ozalio smite thee in my presence, that I must
requite with so long, yrkesome and linger^ng penance. Ah cruel enemy, why
did thou rob mine eyes so soon of their unspeakable content? thou
sufferedst me to see, that my love might grow the more immesurable: but thy
words were such daggers to my heart, as never can I taste a sharper corasiue.
And if this were the object of Francelina, (for fayrer creature did the Sun
never shine upon) at no tume shall my soul enjoy rest, till once more I have
seen her again. Thus entercoursing a thousand opinions, he stood a long time
as driven to the Antipodes, accusing himself with base pusillanimitie, and
blaming the old woman, who had so robbed him of his forces, as he could not
stay the Lady with him, by whose presence and gracious speeches he supposed
himself in an eternal beatitude.

But now is the clowdie night chased toward the Occident, when he determined
to effect wh^ the Damsel had commanded him, and going to the Altar, he
took the golden Basins and the other sumptuous things, making them ready to
be carried thence, dispoyling likewise the Idol of the Crown, Scepter and
Book. But as he would have lifted the Image forth of y^ Chair, he found it
so heavy as he was not able to stir it: wherewith he being offended, said.
And I shall ^oo thee more honor then thou have yet received of me: so lifting
up his Mace, h^ made it fall in pee^s to the ground. From out the body of
the Image, flewe a very strange Bird all black, gyuing such fearful shrykes
and cries, as the Prince was thereat amazed: and foll^wing her out of the
Temple, he beheld a great many more such like Birds with her, they flying
altogether with that noise, the same way where Ozalio and the Knights attended,
whereat they like wise meruailing, were certified by the men of the Islande,
that this prodigy sigmsted Palmendos entrance into the Temple: for they had
heard before, by sundry learned Nigromancers, that these were certain
infernal spirits, which should be chased forth of the Country, when the
adventure of the Temple was f^nished. Rifarano, Ozalio, and all the Knights
glad of these news, went where they beheld the monstrous wild Bore, and
thence to the Temple, where Ozalio first found y^ Prince opening a great chest,
which contained the Priests principal Treasure, consisting of such rare and
inestimable Iewelles, as (it was thought) the like was never seen before.
Palmendos beholding his friend Ozalio, ran and embraced him marvelous
kindly, the like did he to Rifarano, Lecefin and the rest, all of them
extolling the happy star that guided the Prince: and he acquainted them with
all things since his departure from them, saving his conference with the
Damosel, because none of them should suspect his loo^e. The^ entreated he
Guillador to send for some skilful man, who might undertake to devise and build
the Monastery: in short time the greater part of the Clergy was sent for, and
among them to a virtuous man of special knowledge, he gave the charge and
superintendaunce of the work, as also bount^full stor^ of Gold and Silver,
which was taken out of the Priests welthy Chest. All things he committed to
the trust of Guillador, that the Temple, Monasteri^ and ways thereto, should
be done in decent order: but he whose heart was only dedicated to the Ladies
beauty, which appeared unto him under form of a bodily illusion, took small
delight in any thing else, but in her gracious and divine remembrance. Now did
he hasten the day of his departure, desiring Rifarano and Lecefin to make
speed to the Emperor, and present the Gyantesse, her Daughter and the other
prisoners to him, as also all the Treasure was found in the Temple, from a
strange Gentleman religiously vowed to his service: who in respect of great
affairs that called him el^ where, could not com^ to kiss his Majesty's
hand, which he will do with all speed possible. Rifarano and Lecefin were loathe
to l^aue Palme^dos, but seeing it must needs be so, they s^e after con^aied
the Gyantesse and her Daughter on shipboord, they making great moan to be
carried from the Ifland, In the same Ship was the Crown, Scepter, Imag^,
(...) and all the other Treasure carried, and in an other Ship, the prisoners
found in the Castle on y^ promontorie, with all things else expcdient for the
voyage: then Rifarano and Lecefin taking their leave of Palmendos and Ozalio,
went on board where the Gyantesse and the Treasure was, commanding their
Ankers to be weyed and their sails hoysed, the wind then serving fit and
fa^ourable, and so are they sailing toward Constantinople. As yet abode
Palmendos in the Isle of Delphos, to see what Guilladors workmen would
compass, in so great a work as he had given them charge of.

CHAP. X.
How Rifarano and Lecefin (with all their train arrived in Constantinople,
where they were honorably received by the Emperor and them of the Court,
greatly meruayling at the news he heard of Palmendos, and what afterward
followed.

AT what time Rifarano and Lecefin should arrive at Constantinople, there were
assembled many great Lords and Barons, in honor of a sollemne Feast, which
the Emperor made for the marriage of the Hungarian Prince, Ditreus son to
King Frysoll, and twinne Brother to (...). Dytreus so soo^ (...) he was armed
Knight, went to the (...) Court where he was woorthilie welcomm^, (...) ^lbeit
he was his Mai^ies Nephew, yet he loo^ed (...) ^th a particular affection, his
courtecus and ^iuill manners, joined with his forwardnes in Arms, gave hope
that he (...) prove a vali^nt Knight hereafter. He (...) not (...) long in
the Emperors Court and thorow^ (...) with every on^, but he grew ^namoured
with the (...) of Esquiu^, Daughter to the Soldane (...) Babylon and
Alchidiana, so that being one day in y^ Chamber of his Coz^ Philocrista,
eldest Daughter to the Emperor, devising with her and her Sister Melicia: he
got such apt time and occasion, as he made his intent known to Efquiuela, she
m^destlie answering him, that if he faithfully me^t to make her his wife, she
would settle her choice upon him only. Dytreus who was thereon res^lned,
defired the Empero^r and Empress to grant that marriage, they being willing
to gratif^e their Nephewe, as also to prefer the young Princess: with the
consent of King Frysoll, affianced them together, and Dytreus fearing the
marriage would be deferred too long, solicited the Emperor in such sort, as
he sent with all speed to make the same known to the Soldane. In mean while,
his Majesty snmmoned the cheifest Lords of the Empire, to prepare a Tryumphe
in honor of this Feast, for the accomplishment whereof nothing wanted, save
only the Ambassadors return that went to the Soldane.

But now are Rifarano and Lecefin entered y^ Haven of Constantinople, intending
to land before the Emperor should know any thing of them, because they came
not in such equipage as happily he would expect. Being then all Armed,
except with their Helmets, they rode through the City but with two Squires
only that bare their La^nces and Helmets, they being wonderfully noted of
every one, and reputed for some strange Lords of great ^irth, and in this
sort they came to the Palace, where very boldly they would have entered: but
the Guarde stayed them, to understand the cause of their coming. We are, quoth
they, two Knights of Countries far hence distant, and hither we come to see
and serve the Empero^r P^lmerin. You must then leave these offens^ Arms,
answered the Guard, if you mean to go where his high^ is: or else declare
your proper names to us, that we (...) go see if it be his pleasure you shall
come in this sort before him. Our Arms we will not leave, said Rifarano,
because it ill beseemes an honest Knight to do so: but you may go certify
his Majesty, that here is Lecefin Son to the Soldane of Persia and the
Princess Zephira, in whose company is Rifarano, Son to the Emperor Trineus
of Allemaigne, who hu^blie desire to kiss his highness hand. His Majesty had
no sooner notice of their names, but ((...) exceeding contentation) he sent his
Son Primaleon wit^ diverse other Knights, to entertain the^ as beseemed: an^
the Moore Princes seeing every one give place to him that came foremost,
immediately they reputed him to be y^ Emperors Son, whereupon they
allighted, when Primaleon courteously embracing them, said.

My Lords, you are more then welcome to my others Court, his Majesty being
not a little glad of your arrival: so taking each of them by the hand, he
conducted them into the great Hall, where the Emperor sat in hy^ Chair
attending their comming^ and they approaching the state, made offer to kiss his
highness hand, but he^ took them in his arms and would not suffer them,
saying. ^now my good Cozins, that I account my self greatly indebted to you,
in that you would forsake your own Countries to visi^e me so far off, and
that I may not fail in the use of your names, let me understand with of you is
Rifarano, albeit you both stand equal in my grace and favor: yet being
singularly desirous to continue my love to y^ Princess Zephira, I must
consequently esteem and affecte all that come from her. On the other side, as
well for the indi^oluble amity, intire^ie grounded in ^ur young years betw^ne
the Emperor Trineus and me, as also in regard of the all (...) united between
us: I am constrained to love his linag^ and po^eritie, and thus I would have
you (...) pers^aded, that greater good co^lde not happen to me, then the ^ght
of them I esteem so dearly. Heaven so pro^per and favor you in all things,
as they have thorowlie comforted my spirits, by the very hearing of my good
Freende^ and confederates the Soldane and Zephira, whose health I pray ye
resolve me of, for it is long since I heard any thing from them.

My Lord, answered Rifarano, at what time we departed Persia, we left their
persons in most safe disposition, and they by us (humbly kissing your
Majesty's ^and) have sent this Letter in ^gne of the reverence and love they
^are ye: now for they could not th^mselues come so far, they have sent this
Prince their Son, named Lecefin, in their stedde to d^ any serviceable
duty in your royal Court. As for my self, I am Rifarano, Son to
Aurecinda, expre^y lea^ing my Country to have knowledge of your excellency,
and with my vtterm^st ende^ours ^o follow your service: cr^ing this license,
that I may go see the Emp^ur Tryneus my Father, whose Son I account my self
not only happy to be, but greatly a^use my self of ingratitude, that I
have so long time deferred this voyage. Lecefin kissing the Letter, upon his
knee delivered it to the Emperor: which he commanding to be op^d, t^ke and
(...) follows.

The Letter of Zephira, wife to the Soldane of Persia, to the Emperor Palmerin.
To the right happy and most fortunate Prince, Palmerin d'Oliua, mirror of
courtesy, and surpassing all good Knights: Zephira wife to the Soldane of
Persi^, perpetual vowed freende to your imperial Majesty, kisseth your
highness hand, wyshing your increase in all felicity.
Know (most noble Emperor) that the long and vehement a^ection of my ^onne
Lecefin to see Constantinople, only to offer you his service, and behold the
magnificence of your Court: has caused the Soldane my husband and me, now to
send him in company of Rifarano, Son to the Emperor Trineus, to satis^fie
the desire they had, in visiting you on our behalf. And albeit they deserved
greater royalty for such a voyage, yet would they no other company then
thirty Knights; knowing that ostentation in show, would not purchase them
the more estimation at your hands, and therefore they come no otherwise
accou^tred. Notwithstanding, if the sincere amity you evermore showed m^e,
has acquainted you with the inward integrity of my heart, whereby you have
deigned me place among your most affectionate Friends: I desire you in regard
of that zeal, to entertain these two, and accept of this present, as coming
from the hand of her, who has not her equal in good will to your excellency.
And to witness my bounden duty in acceptance hereof, I vow both me and mine
^uermore to your obeysaunce: persuading my self, that your woonted deb^ire
courtesse, will not suffer me disdained in the offer I make.

The most obedient of your friends, Zephira, Soldanesse of Persia.


For this gentle Letter from the Soldane and Zephira, the Emperor gave Lecefin
their Son many thanks, again and again welcomming him to the Court, then
turning to Rifarano, he said. I well perceive my Lord Rifarano, that you are
the undoubted Son of the Emperor Trineus, because you so lively resemble him
in face, well have ye done to come see so good a Father, and the more do I
thank God for your arriual here, at this time when we intend to hold open
Court, to honor the approaching marriage of our beloved Cousin: and so please ye
to stay the intended Try^mphes, here shall ye see good store of worthy
Knights, that mean to tempt Fortune for the Garland of honor.

These news dread Lord, answered Rifarano, are not a little welcome to us,
in respect that next the principal p^int of our voyage, which was to kiss
your Majesty's hand: we were desirous to behold the valor of your knights,
for their renown is spredde through the whole world^, and now we shall well
witness the same, coming at a time so apt for the purpose. Nor can we forget a
worthy ^ight whom we met in our journey, being named Palmendos, without his
second or match in martial affai^es, and I think there is no one manne
living, except your highness, the mirror and Paragon of Chivalry, that
worthily may be equalled with him: right sorry are we, because we can
deliver no better knowledge of the man, by reason of his desire to pass
unknown, and therefore concealeth himself in all places where he trauaileth.
This famous man (right noble Lord) humbly kisseth your highness hand, having
sent ye such rare and inestimable riches, as when you have seen them, you
will judge that the like present was never given to a^e King or Emperor, as we
are to present you withal from this unknown Knight. The charge of this message
we undertook, in y^ our selves with diverse other Knights, were delivered from
the cruel bondage of Baledon, the Giant in the Isle of Delphos, where we
endured miseries not fit to be recounted in this gracious assembly. Yet y^
heavens gave Palmendos power to kill this Tirant, after which victory he has
seized the Island subject to your Majesty, until you send some such
Governor or Lieutenaunt as best likes you: wherwithall, as testimony of his
honorable victory, he has sent ye the Wife and Daughter to the Giant, to
dispose of them as shall seem best in your wisdom: here to be added the
whole discourse of the Temple, and how Palmendos had ended the enchaunted
adventure thereof. Without doubt, (quod the Emperor, being driven into great
mer^aile) I cannot imagine who this worthy Knight should be, for if he have
ended such a weighty enterprise, it must needs follow that he is peerless
in Chivalry: and if it be his fortune to see our Court, I shall requite him
withal the honor I can: but tell me, is he a Meore or a Christian?

A Moore borne as I think, answered Rifarano, notwithstanding he well
understands this language: and such is his brave constitution of body, as I
think a more gallant Gentleman was never seen. But may it please your
Majesty to send for the Wife of Baledon and her Daughter, as also the rich
present abiding in your Port? The Emperor requiting them with many thanks,
sent for the prisoners to be brought on land, commanding the two Princes to
be unarmed, and sent them two costly Turkish ^obes, which his Son Primaleon
and Dytreus sa^e effectually executed, with all things else necessary for men
of such calling, in mean while he sent for y^ Empress and his Daughters, to
behold the rare and precious Treasures sent by Palmendos.

When the Empress and her Daughters were come into the Hall, they entertained
the strange Knights exceeding courteously, but Lecefin regarding y^ beauty of
Phylocrista, grew into such conceit of her singular feature, as she stood in
his thoughts beyond all compare. She with her Sisters Flerida, Bazilia and
Melicia, for so were the Emperors Daughters named, gave them a Maidens welcome
to the Court, such as beseemed them toward Knight^ errant, a^ also because
they were Princes of so honorable birth. After that the Gyantesse, her
daughter, and the rest of the prisoners, through a mighty throng of people
were brought to the Palace, one of the Knights in behalf of all the rest,
kneeling before the Emperor, thus spoke.

Mighty and invincible Monarche, the hardye Champion and ^lowre of Knights
named Palmendos, who delivered us from cruel Baledon in the I^le of Delphos,
has sent us (with this inestimable Treasure) unto your Majesty, as to the
only Lord and Prince of the world, of whom he caryeth most humble and
religious opinion, that you should take compassion on our miseries, and grant
us access to our own houses. Good friends, said the Emperor, your honest
report of this Knight, to whom I am so much beholding, does make me more
earnestly long to see him in our Court, whether you all (for his sake) are so
heartily welcome, as ye shall well perceive the same before ye depart,
a^terward (in Gods name) go when ye please. And these were not words alone,
but deeds did confirm the same, the Emperor rewarding each one of them with
such liberal gifts, as they e^eemed his largess and munificence, equal with
that of Xerxes, Julius Caesar, or Alexander the great. Afterward he sent for
the Gyantesse and her daughter, and to the^ offered very honorable kindness:
but their hearts were so swollen and confounded with grief, as they would make
no answer at all, whereupon he appointed them a convenient place in the (...)*
^th pro^ision of all things for their necessary v^s: but the Gyantesse
falling into an extreme lunatie, (...) soon after thereof, yet her Daughter
became a Christian, and lived long time in the Emperors favor. Now are all y^
sumptuous vtensilles brought before his Majesty, the Idolles Chair, the
Crownc, the Scepter, Book and the r^st, which being well and advisedly
regarded, were judged the like to be never seen before: whereupon his Majesty
took the Book, laboring with all his strength and cunning to open the same,
and a^er delivered it so hi^ Barons to try what they could do, but all their
labor being lost, he said.

I think this Book can be opened by none other, then him only that
conquered it, let it therefore be carefully kept till his coming. Now call
I to mind the Damsels words, that departed so suddenly without answer:
and verily I am persuaded this Knight is the man she spoke of, who has sent
us this Treasure from the Isle of Delphos. With these speeches of the Emperor,
diverse of his Knights grew somewhat offended, to hear such commendation pass
on him who was unknown: wherefore they intended if ever he came thither, to
make such proof of his valor and prowess, as the Emperor should perceive
he spoke but by affection. Not long after, his Majesty sent one of his chief
Knights to Delphos, and with him such a train as beseemed the expedition,
there to see all things ordered to his highness use, and to prevent
insurrections if any were like to grow, giving y^ Knight charge if he found
Palmendos there, to request him with all speed to visit the Emperor. But the
Knight came to short of his intent, for he had set fail toward
Constantinople, according a^ you shall hear hereafter: notwithstanding, the
Knight was very gratio^sly welcomed thither, and the possession of y^ whole
Island ^urrendred to him, which in the e^ was trans^erred to one of Palmendos
Sons, being a (...), fair and opulent Country, nauigable for all
passengers whatsoever.

CHAP. XI.
How Palmendos sailing in the Aegean Sea, recovered the S^ldanes Son of
Babylon from Ocurites King of Culaquin, who rode along that coast of Greece:
And how after he had over come his strength, he took ^im (...) and sent him
to the Emperor Palmerin, with diverse Christians which he delivered from his
captivity.

RIfarano and Lecefin being no sooner set from Delphos, but Palmendos followed
y^ speedy building of the Monastery, causing religious observations to b^e
used in the Temple: for the people of y^ Island were good Christians, although
the Giant Baledon was a Pagan. The Monastery being stored with fair Uirgins,
he would have them called the Sisters of Francelina, and many Ladies of great
birth resorted thither, to live religiou^ly in service of the worlds Creator:
Palmendos much delighting to behold the Christians Religion, meaning when time
and place served, to be further instructed therein.

Having ordered every thing to his own contentm^nt, and placed Guillador in
Justice till the Emperor sent some other: he with Ozalio took shipping,
sailing sire days with prosperous winds toward Constantinople, yet first he
determined to land in Thr^e, (...) ^ee would hear some new^s of the
Emperors Court^, and of Francelina if possibly he could. Ryding thus with the
favor of Aeolus and Neptune, he came within sight of the ^wo destroyed Towns
Sestus and Abydos, when one of the Pylo^s certified him, that he saw diverse
Ships and Foystes eager lie ^ghting together, which made Palme^dos to come up
on the deck, to see if he could difcerne what they were. H^aring the great
tumult and cry made in the vessell^s, especially in two that seemed better
provided for war then the other: he was desirous to go more near them,
wherefore he commanded the Master so to do, that they might help them which
too much were oppressed. Now to acquaint ye with the cause heerof, it is so,
that when the Soldane o^ Babylon and Alchidiana understood the marriage
intended by the Emperor, between their daughter and Dytreus Prince of
Hungaria: they were very joyful of so great alliance, and t^erefore would
send them great store of riches by their youngest Son, who had not yet
received his order of knighthood. This young Prince was named Abenunco, a
gentle youth and very well given, who earne^ly entreated his Mother, to obtain
so much of the Soldane his Father, that after his Sisters marriage, he might
stay a while at Constantinople, which suit at her request the Soldane gra^nted,
and therefore sent him by Sea well a^companied with Knights. Abenunco say^ing
along the cost of Thrace, met with Ocurites King of Culaquin, who was Son
in law to the great Turk, and reputed the hardiest Knight among all the Turki^h
Nobility: his Majesty having given his Daughter in marriage to this Barbarian,
she being one of the most accomplished Ladies in all Heathenesse. Ocurites
knowing the ^rate mall^ce between the Emperor and his Father in Law, (the
more to please him) provided himself (...) good strength by Sea, and daily
came upon ^he Coast^ of Greece, sending (...) with strong Brigandines before
him, to dis^ouer what Christians stirred abroad, and sundry ti^es took many
of them captives, as now he intended to do by the Soldans Sonn^. When
Ocurites by y^ streamers and banderolles heard of the Babilonian Prince, and
knew (withal) that his father was a chief Freende to the Emperor: in great
fury with his Ships he set upon him, Abenunco with his Knights defended
themselves so well as they could. During this conflicte ^almendos approached
very near them, and of a Galley ^illed with Christian slaves, he demaunde^ the
cause of this ^erce encounter.

Sir, answered one of the ^aues, he to whom this great train of shypping
appertains, is Ocurites King of Culaquin, and Son to the great Turk, that
with diverse of his ^eague and faction daily coasts on Greece, to endamag^ the
Emperor Palmerin, enemy to his Father, and those he has now met withal,
belong to the Soldane of Babylon, they sailing (as we understand) toward
Constantinople. When the Prince heard what the Christian had said, he ^rauelie
encouraged his Cousin Ozalio, in a^isting the wel^willers t^ the noble Emperor:
so coming to the Kings Ship, he thus spoke.

Nor shall thou Ocurites offend so good a Prince, as is the Emperor of
Constantinople, heerewith he began to lay about him valiantly, and Ozalio
not one inche behind him, made the enemy well understand his invincible
courage. Palmendos knowing the King by his rich Armor, gave him such a
peazaunt stroke with the h^lttes of his Sword on the Helmet, as made him
stagger, and at length fall down, when offering to rise again, Palmendos
caught h^ so strongly by the Helmet, a^ he pulde it violently from of his head:
keeping him still under his Sword in such subi^tion, as at length he was carried
prisoner into the Princes Cabin, and there committed him to the charge of four
trusty Knights. In mean while Ozalio fought with the Kings Brother, who
understanding that Ocurites was taken prisoner, did what he could to recover
him again: but Ozalio stepped between him and his purpose, still laboring him
with so many, hardi^ strokes, as at length he smote his head from his
shoulders. The rest beholding their King taken and his Brother slain, bes^e
the great massacre made among them, and that they were no way able to withstand
their fortune: a number fell hedlong into the Sea, rather then they would die
under the enemies sword. Palmendos seeing no further resistaunce, but y^ the
Turks were utterly discom^ted: he caused such prisoners as were taken to be
made sure, the Ships likewise to be seized on as his own: then coming to
Ozalio, whose forwardnes he commended, he willed him to see all things disposed
as beseemed such a victory, afterward he embraced y^ Soldans Son, and diverse
courteous ceremonies passing between them, the one for his happy deliverance,
the other reporting what he had done was for the Emperors sake, at length
Palmendos used these speeches.

My Lord, willingly would I bear ye company to Constantinople, but that a
voyage of great importance does vrgentlie call me to another place, yet seeing
you are delivered from the Tyrant Ocurites, and all your Knights in sufficient
safety, let me obtain this favor at your hands, to take the King with ye to
Constantinople, and all y^ Christian prisoners delivered from captivity. Them
shall ye present on my behalf to the Emperor Palmerin, requesting that this
ancient Christian enemy may be safely kept, until I come to see his
Majesty, which shall be with all the expedition I can. Worthy Sir, aunswer^d
Abenunco, it greeues me that your iourn^y lies not presently to
Constantinople, because I should think my self happy in having your
company, being the man to wh^m I am continually bound for my life and
liberty: and ^eereof I am assured, that over and above your gracious welcome,
you shall win the honor of the famous Tryumphe, ordained by the Emperor at
the marriage of my Sister with the Prince of Hungaria.

And heartily sorry am I, answered Palmendos, that I cannot be present in so
worthy an assembly: whereof at this time you may well excuse me, not
doubting but I shall come with some sufficient amends for my stay. These
speeches he uttered, his thoughts being far otherwise, for so soon as he
heard of the Ioustes at Constantinople, he determined to go thither secretly,
without making himself known to any, but as a strange Knight to adventure his
fortune among other: wherefore he departed from Abenunco, who offered him many
rich presents for his great kindness, yet would not he accept of any.
Abenunco returned him many thanks, chiefly for his promise, that he would
in short time visit the Emperor in person: so after many courteous
speeches, and sundry familliar farewelles, Palmendos commanded his Pilot to
launche into the high Seas, for that he intended an other kind of course.

CHAP. XII.
How Abenunco arrived at Constantinople, whose coming greatly reioiced the
Emperor, but much more his Sister Esquiuela. And how Lynedes Lord of the
Isle of Lique, and the County of Pelada his Cousin, came to Ioust against the
Knights of the Court, attending the Tourney for the marriage of Ditreus.

GReatly did Abenunco commend his fortune, in finding so good succor at a
time of such necessity, and all the Knights in his company held opinion, that
Palmendos was the only flower of Chivalry: but above all other the Christian
slaves, accou^ting their deliverance for a miracle, imagined the Author thereof
was some great Freende to the Emperor. In this joy they sailed till they came
to Constantinople, where his Majesty being advertised that the Soldans Son
was arrived, commanded Primaleon, Ditreus, and many of his best Barons to go
conduct him to the Court. In mean while, Abenunco clothing himself most
sumptuously, caused the King Ocurites and the Christian prisoners to be carried
on shore, that h^e might not fail in the charge given him by Palmendos: so the
Babilonian Prince riding to the Court, with all the prisoners going orderly
before him, he gave charge to one of his cheifest Knights, that he should
present them to his Majesty, and being come into the Emperors presence, the
Knight deliu^red these speeches.

High and mighty Monarche of the world, b^hold here the King of Culaquin,
Son to the great Turk, who keeping the Seas with a strong power to
endaunger your Empire, our Master the Prince. Abenunco and we, ^ell into his
^aunger: from which ^ worthy Knight named Palmendos, by deeds of rare and
hautie Chivalry, deli^ered v^ in a time most needful, and therefore has
sent both v^ and hi^ to your excellency, ^esiring that Ocurites should be
safely kept till he come himself. These sundry good turne^ received from a
Knight unknown, drove the Emperor into wonderful admiration, and for he
could not imagine whence they should proccede, therefore he was the more
desirous to behol^e the Knight: whereupon he committed the King into a strong
Tower, commanding he should have all things necessary for his health, and a
Page to attend on him least he should offend himsel^e.

But now is Abenunco by Primaleon and the other Princes brought to the
Emperor, who embracing him very honorably in his arms, gave him such
entertainment as beseeme^ his estate, and for he was not yet knighted, he
willed he should be be^fellow to his Son Primaleon, which united a faithful
league of amity between them, hoping one day to travel as companions in
Arms together. Abenunco having likewise told the Emperor of his good
success, and wonderful deliverance by the means of Palmendos: gave no
little contentment to Rifarano and Lecefin, who imagined themselves as mnch
beholding to the Prince as any. Afterward he was conducted to the Empress
Chamber, where she and her Ladies graciously welcomed him: but especially the
Princess Esquiuela his Sister, because he came to confirm what she most
desired. My Lord and Brother, quoth she, nothing could happen to my greater
contentment, then to have your presence in the honor prepared for me, whereto
seeing our gracious parents could not come, they have for my sake sent you in
their place: and doubt not but your ^ntertainment shall be such, as shall agree
with their expectation and your own woorthines. Fair Sister, answered
Abenunco, the Soldane our Father ^earing what honor the Emperor intended, by
gi^ing you in marriage to the Prince Ditreus his Nephew, has s^t me to tha^ the
Emperor on his behalf, offering for this contract to articulate with his
Majesty, in all such things (...) with honor he shall demand. As for our
gracious Mother Alchidiana, she has sent ye by me Jewels (...) Treasur^
beseeming your degree, that on your marriage ^y ye may witness the royal race
from whence you are descended, not doubting but before you depart this Court,
to make the magnificence of the Babilonian Prince so famous, as the most
opulent Lord of Asia shall not compare therewith. Diverse other speeches passed
between the Brother and the Sister, till the Coffers of Treasure were brought
and delivered to the Princess, which when Ditreus beheld, h^ judged them to
exceed the limits of all frugalitie, and might full well beseem the greatest
state in Christendom. Now did the Emperor cause the Tourney to be openly
proclaimed, and the fifth day following the marriage was solemnized, great store
of worthy Knights resorting day by day to the Court, that all y^ field
appointed for Try^mphes was covered over with Tents.

Among other came thither Lynedes the Lord of Lique, he that hazarded himself
so far in the adventure of Francelina, being (in sooth) reputed one of the
most valiant men at Arms in all Greece, and the renown of this marriage drew
him from his Castle, accompanied only with the County of Pelada his Cousin,
who albeit he was younger then Lynedes, yet was he thought little inferior to
him in Chivalry. This County had espoused a Lady of great parentage, and
lou^d her with such singular affection, as he brought her in company to see
the Ioustes at Constantinople. Being there arrived, they would not enter the
City, but set up their Tent far distant from all the rest, and afterward
sent a Squire to the Court, to publish that whosoever would ha^ard himself in
y^ Tourney: should ^nde two Knights there ready in the field, that would
Ioust with any one durst enter the Lystes, such therefore as were min^d to
make pr^ofe of their valor, might be entertained for three or four courses.
These speeches being heard by the Duke of Pera, he stepped to the Squire, and
thus answered.

You may my Freende return to your Masters, and say that such as are minded
to ^oust, will not stay long ere they enter the Field: then turning to the
Knights of the Court, he proceeded in this manner. Doubtless these Knights are
valiant and hardy, that are loathe to she we themselves ^othfull in any veruous
exercise. With this answer the Squire went back to the Tent, and the two
Cozins being satis-fied there with, prepared ^rong Lances at the entrance of
their Pauilton, for all such as should come to ^oust against them: but the
County intreted Linedes, to suffer him make ye first trial of his fortune,
which he did in regard of his love to his Lady, who had caus^d the Tent to be
so commodiously placed, as she might at pleasure behold all the pastimes,
decking h^rselfe in most gorgious attire, and bravely attended on by her
waighting woman, to out countenance such as came against her Lord and Husband.

The Emperor understanding what m^ssage y^ Squire had brought, imagined that
these two Knights were Palmendos and his Cousin Ozalio: for when one thing
continually beats on a man's conceit, he imagines ^uerye thing conformable
to the same. Wherefore h^ told his opinion to the Prince Rifarano, who could
not think them to be the Lords of Tharsus, yet to satisfy the Emper^urs
mind, he mounted on horseback, and acc^mpanied with other Knights of the
Court, r^de to the Tent where the two Cozins (...). Saluting the Squir^s, he
^ntred finding Lynedes vna^ed, but his Cousin was provided at all p^ints except
his Helmet: whereupon he demanded if they were the Knights that sent the
challenge to the Court? to whom the Lord of Lique. answered, that they were,
th^n Rifarano proceeded thus. Gentlemen, ye have attempted a thing (in mine
opinion) but little for your ease: but I think you did it to this end, that
you might meet with ^me one to abate your pride and presuniption.

When that comes to pass, answered Lynedes, we shall but accompany many
other, who unable to effect their hautie enterprises, have remained frustrate
in their disseignes: in vain therefore shall ye take any further care for our
affairs, but if you will go Arm your self, return and prove what this
Knight can do, who is more destrous to fight with his Sword then his tongue,
other wise you offer injury to the order, which every noble mind prefers
as his proper life. Rifarano some what moou^d with these words, took his leave
and returned to the Emperor assuring him that these Knights were not Palmendos
and Ozalio, not withstanding they seemed good and hardy Champions, descended
of some great birthe, in that they were so woorthilie accompanied, with women
of choice and singular beauty, as also Gentlemen of c^uill behavior.
Heerevpon many Knights ^ousted with the County, who still bare away the honor
of the ^elde, Lynedes all this while not arming himself, for the worthy
success of his Cousin deserved high commendation, whereof his Lady was not a
little proud, to s^e her husband perform such Chivalry. Rifarano and
Lecefin envying the Counties glory, intended to see how they should speed in
the ^oust, yet they desired ^o defer it til the last day, when they vanquishing
the Counti^ and Lynedes his Cousin, might bear away the whole praise of the
Triumph: but others came in mean while and altered their intent, as you at
large shall perceive hereafter.

CHAP. XIII.
How Arnedes Son to the King of France, and R^inde his Cousin, Son to the
King of Castile, came to Constantinople, where Arnedes vanquished Lynedes and
his Cousin in the Ioust, by which occasion they were greatly ^onoured of the
Emperor.

THe King of France, Father to Jews Duke of Burgundy, b^eing at y^ extreme
point of his life, among other things remembered, that when the peace was
concluded between the Emperor Palmerin and him, they determined upon an
alliance by marriage, if God granted them issue whereby to do it: to the end
that in the heroycall house of France, Sons and daughters might be
nourished, proceeding from such worthy aunc^ers, as the like might not be
found through the whole world.

For this cause, when the time likewise should conveniently agree therewith,
he commanded his Son to remember the Emperor of his promise: which Prince
Jews promising his dying Father to perform, with exceeding sorrow
accomplished his funeralles, and making ^hoyse afterward for his own fancy,
in hope to fulfill his Fathers desire in his issue, he married with the
daughter to the King of Castile, by whom he had three Sons, and two
Daughters that were borne at a birth. His eldest S^nne was named Arnedes, whose
mind was evermore given to Arms and Millitarie discipline, wherein time and
use made him so expert, as he was esteemed the oneli^ Champion of France. It
came so to pass, as the King of France married one of his Daughters with the
King of Scicilie, at whose marriage Arnedes wunne such fame by his Chivalry,
as the report of him was blazed through many provinces. To this marriage
likewise came one of his Cozins, Son to the King of Castile, and named
Recinde, who conceived so good liking of Arnedes behavior, that they swore an
inviolable league of amity between them twain, never to forsake each others
company in matters of Arms: where with the Queen was ^ighly contented,
because she looued her Cousin Recinde with entire affection.

King Jews seeing his Son. Arnedes of years to have a Wife, and fearing he
should else where dispose his lyking, one day called him into his Chamber, and
thus conferred with him. My Son, such is the natural inclination of my love
toward thee, as I would not wyshe any thing to thee, but to have thee as well
contented therewith as my self: to this end I use these speeches, for that our
late kingly Father of famous memory, at the very shutting up of his latest
days, gave me charge to join thee in marriage with the Emperors Daughter of
Constantinople, that such issue (as no doubt) shall proceed from you bot^e,
may some what resemble their famous auncesters. Wherefore I am determined,
right soon to send an Embassage to him, to solicit this marriage which I hope
he will like well of: and this I can assure thee, if Fame tell no leasings,
that the Princess Philocrista now aged sixteen y^eres, is a Lady of such
rare and singular beauty, as Nature has not framed the like under the moving
of these eight Spheres.

When the Prince Arnedes saw that his Father talked so courteously with him
about these affairs, he humlye entreated him not to travail any further in ye
matter, for there was time enough hereafter to deal in such occasions:
wherewith the King paci^ed him, because he saw his Son so cold (as he
thought) in matter of marriage, nor would he trouble him any more therewith
afterward. But the young Prince, wise and advised in concealing his own
desires, having long before heard fair Pilocrista commended beyond compare, as
also the deeds of the Knights in the Emperor Palmerins Court, he had no
leisure now to forbid them his remembrance, so that feign would he compass a
secret iourn^y to Constantinople, intending if the Princess pleased, to
demand her of the Emperor in marriage, and if his Majesty would not consent
thereto, he intended to do such exployts in Greece, as the honorable praise
of them should compass^ his love. This was the project of Arnedes resolution,
which in secret he impar^ed to his Cousin Recind, who with mighty persuasions
annimated him herein: vowing that till death they would loyalli^ (...)
freendly companions, and so well govern themselves by disgu^ng their persons,
and contrarying their languages in these affairs, as the mo^ skillful head
sh^ulde not search the depth of their intent. When the two Cozins were thus
determined, Arnedes imagining it no wisdom to iugle with his Father, went and
requested a favor at his highness hand, the effect whereof was thus.

Gracious Lord and Father, quoth he, my desire is (without your displeasure)
that I may got ^ee the Princess Philocrista, as well to like as love before
any motion of marriage: and for my Cousin Recinde will bear me company, I would
have your Majesty so persuaded, y^ in secret disgui^ng we will pass unknown
of any, much less give occasion of suspect what we are, not doubting but by
our virtuous behavior, to yield you content by our ^oyage, and our selves
good report. Beside, the world is well acquainted therewith, that this Emperor
of Constantinople had not w^nne such fame and renown, but only by the
innumerable Trophes, erected in diverse Regions of his youthful travails,
which are examples sufficient for Knights of high desire, not to desist from
worthy enterpryfes for the object of death, who without regard of time or
place, pursues in ambush the steps of the woorthiest. Nor let doubt of our
stay in Greece hinder us, good father: for as we go not to build any dwelling
there, so is y^ hope of our return to be expected more speedy. It greatly
dyspleaseth me, answered the King, that I have promised to mine own
dyscontentment, and which much more will redownde to your disadvantage: but
seeing I have past my word, and in this sort you mean personally to vysite
Greece, go in Gods name, who guide and send you safely home again, else will
your stay more hurt me then you can imagine.

Humbly taking his leave of the King, because he would not have his departure
known, he secretly got him to Marseilles, accompanied with none but his
Cousin Recinde, his Dwarffe and three other, where ^nding a Ship ready, they
hoysed sail and away, landing at the first Port they came to in Greece, and
commanding the Ship to stay for them at Constantinople. One day Arnedes and
Recind rested themselves where they landed, and the next day rode forward on
their journey, understanding by the way what brave Tryumph^s were ordained at
the Court, which pleasing them not a little, they made such dilligent speed,
as they arrived there three days before the sports were ended: even at the
very instant, when the County had vanquished an other Knight in the ^oust.
Arnedes beholding the brave behavior of the Conqueror, and that the Knights
made dainty who should try his fortune next, noting beside the honorable
assembly there present with the Emperor (who meruail^d what these two new
come Knights should be, until he had aduisedlic marked their Arms, when
immediately he judged them to be Frenchmen:) gave the spurs to his Horse and
ran against the Conntye, each of them breaking their staves gallantly
without any further danger. At the second course the County was vnhorssed by
Arnedes, whereat the Emperor and his Lords very much (...), highly commending
the behavior of the French Knight. Needs must we think that Lynedes was
offended, seeing his Cousin thrown so furiously to the ground, wherefore Arming
himself speedily and mounting on horse back, with a very strong Lance he
angerly encountered Arnedes, who gave his en^mie as good as he brought. Lynedes
was very chollericke that he had spedde no better, whereupon at the second
race, Arnedes met him so full in the carrire, as he cast him out of his saddle
over the crupper of his Horse: he thinking to recover himself, and loathe to
forsake the raynes of his bridle, caused his horse to fall bacwarde upon him,
that he was the worse for this fall long time after. But Arnedes he remained
fresh and frollick, as though he had yet done nothing at all, wherefore he
came to his companion, saying.

Now let us go kiss my Lord the Emperors hand, seeing there is no more to be
done here: and so in y^ troop they withdrew themselves, each one merua^ling at
this Frenchmans valor, because they knew Lynedes was accounted one of the
hardiest Knights in Greece. When the Emperor saw them coming toward him, he
a^aunced himself to entertain them, and embracing them graciously in his
arms, said. Right welcome are ye Gentlemen into this C^untrey, where you have
exceedingly contented me by your fortunate success: let me therefore know of
whence and what ye are, that I may love and esteem ye accordingly. It is the
wonted grace and virtue of your Majesty, answered Arnedes, that makes ye
evermore regard poor travailing Knights, although their deserts be nothing
equivalent: the renown whereof spreading through al Regions, caused us forsake
France to come offer ye our service. We are, my Lord, Knights attending on
the King of France, where hearing ye daily report, what magnificent Chivalry
was here continua^ie exercised: we came (so please it your Mai^stie) to live
in you^ Court, as men willing to learn the rule^ of Martial discipline, not
doubting but to gain such grace, as shall satisfy the desire that moved us
heereto. I th^nke you, quoth the Emperor for the pain you have en^d in this
^ourney, which amply ^eclares the generositie of your brave minds, because
such principles cannot proceed but from hautie and resolute courage: with
these words (for this day) he returned to the Palace, commanding Arnedes to
go on his right hand, and Recinde on his left, they both meruailing to se^ the
goodly train of Knights that attended on the Emperor.

All the way his Majesty eyed Arnedes very much, imagining he saw the lively
countenance of Jews Duke of Burgundy: and therefore desired to know his name
and parentage. telling him who^ he resembled in many points. In truth my Lord,
answered the French Prince, it not beseemes me to dally with your Majesty, I
am King Jews his eldest Son. therefore I am the more like to him. And for his
sake, said the Emperor, must I needs love ye the more, because heretofore I
received by him and his Brother very great honor: yet for his highness
perceived that Arnedes was willing to be unknown, he cut off these speeches,
and being come to y^ Palace, after the Princes were both unarmed, he
welcomed them as beseemed their estates.

Primaleon daily accompanied Arnedes and Recinde, because his Father had so
commanded him, yet could not the French Prince but marvel, that all this
while h^ might not see Philocrista, the ^ause whereof was, the Ladies were
loathe to be seen till Dytrcus wedding day, when ^ach one would then s^rpasse
in bra^erie, till which time he was glad and feign to hold himself contented.
Now had Bruquell his Dwarffe leisure to get acquaintance with Risdeno
Primalcons Dwarffe, for they were both of like stature and quality, and
therefore their familiarity was not long in breeding. Lynedes and the County
displeased with their hard fortune, yet they were in hope to recover their
foil at the marriage Tourney, which made their greefes the better pacified:
now leave we them a while, to speak somewhat of the Princes of Tharsus.

CHAP. XIIII.
How Palmendos and Ozalio landed four days iourn^y from Constantinople, from
whence they parted after they had changed their Armor: and how by the way
they lodged in the house of an ancient Knight, of whom Palmendos heard the
dyscourse of the adventure of Francelina, and what they did afterward.

OUr gentle Knight Palmendos, merrily sailed on, hoping in short time to
content his earnest desire^, and having left Abenunco by Sestus and Abydos, he
commanded his Pilot to strike to the nerest Port for Constantinople, so with
favorable wind and weather they came to Saint Lordin, which is a marine
City, four days journey from Constantinople. There he and Ozalio went on
shore, only to change their Armor and Sheelds, because they would gladly
escape unknown: and having made ^ quick dispatch, they rode till they came to
y^ house of an ancient Knight, poor in goods, but noble of heart and person,
who invited them freendly to be his guestes: and there were they right
courteou^y entertained, though not with dainty and delicate viands, yet with
indifferent good cheer and kind humanity, which specially proceeded from the
Knights Wife and her fair Daughter, who dilligentlie noted the behavior of
these Knights. Such was the countenance of the young Damsel, as by the
continual office of her eyes, her heart began to be somewhat touched, and feign
would she participate of the pleasure her mind conceived: whereto Palmendos
likewise was somewhat provoked, seeing his eyes over busted with bathing in the
floode of delight, which the presence o^ this Damsel only procured.

All Supper time these queint glaunces endured, when among other talk they had
together, the old Knight demanded of his guestes, if they travailed to the
Tourney at Constantinople: for yesterday, quoth he, came I thence, not a
little meruailing, to see the number of Knights come thither from all
Countries: herewith he discoursed the success of Arnedes against the County
of Pelada and his Cousin, likewise how the two Frenchmen continued Masters of
the ^elde. But can none in all the Emperors Court, quoth Palmendos, where
are such store of valiant Gentlemen, out go those French Cozins in deeds of
Arms? Truly Sir, answered the old Knight, it is a matter much to be
ineruailed, nevertheless, I think if Belcar Son to the King of Hungaria and
Brother to the Bridegr^me that shall be, could come thither, he would
dispossess y^ Frenc^ men of the victory, which they have gotten of the
Cou^and Lynedes, considering what fame is daily bruited abroad of him, for
his rare prowess in garding the adventure of Francelina. And since ye time of
his famous attempt, no Knight has arrived there in hope to end the
enchantment, but Belcar evermore has been his Conqueror, yet Francelina
continues in the Castle of the Fayries still* and shall till some Knight
(more fort^nate th^n Belcar) can get her forth, notwithstanding, he has
vowed no one shall d^ it, seeing himself has failed in the trial, except be
first surpass him in valor and prowess. Palmendos hearing the name of
Francelin^, was assayledwith such a sudden and vehement passion, proceeding
from the unquenchable flame, wherein his heart lay ^urning for her love: as his
countenance altered, and his very soul^ was touched with the word Francelina.
Wherefore most instantly he desired the ^night his Host, to tell him of what
race the Lady was descended, and (withal) to proceed in discourse of the
^uenture, which so many worthy ^ights had lost their labors about: lik^wise
to tell hi^ in what Country the C^stel was, where the Fairies ha^ appointed
this enchauntment, because he h^d sundry ti^ h^d speeches thereof, yet could
not meet with any o^e to resolve him of the truth.

^nowe then good Sir, answered the old Knight, that this Lady is on^ of the
fairest and most gracious Princesses^* that this earthly habitation enioyes
between the t^o Tropiques of heaven, Daughter to the King of Thess^lie, now
^risoner to the great Turk, she being ta^n ^orth of her Cradle, and encl^sed
in the Cast^ll of Cande^ia* by the three enchaunting Sisters of the Island,
bec^se ^hey: foresaw by their Magical art, that her Father (who was their
no^le Fr^ende) never could (...) delivered from the captivity of the I^fidels*
but by ^he (...) pe^ect ac^omplished Knight. Thus did they direct^ this
enchauntm^nt, that the renown of (...) beauti^* ^t be bl^zed by them through
all Region^, and desir^ to gain the kingd^me of Thessalie, (for he that shall
deliver (...); must enjoy her as his Wife, next heir after the death of ye
captive King) might ^ncourage (...) to come proo^e this adu^ture: whether many
(...) in hope of h^y conquest, as the before n^med Prin^. Belcar did, bu^ he
wa^ts strength as sundry other have do^ne, yet* will he ^ke the access to this
Fortress more diffyc^lt* ^till he for^hom the Princess is des^, arrive there
with so^h (...) and mag^animite, ^shall enforce him to fors^ the p^e. Many
over (...) concerning the History of Franceli^a (alrea^) (...) in the B^ke of
Palmerin d'Oliua,) did the old (...) count to the Prince Palmendos, who h^uing
(...) gre^ attention noted all, was strooken m^te and ^ch am^zed: for so was
his spirit carried awai^ with ^we and dyue^ thoughts, that he could hardly tell
what to do ^r s^y* Now he remembers the old Woman's words, an^ saw th^re was
some likelihoode of truth in them, thinking because she had spoken so much of
Francelina, that she was o^e (...) the Fayries which framed this enchauntment:
the end^ and abolishing whereof he thought was rese^d for him only,
comparing all pa^ed comectures together, which made his heart conceive
incredible joy, and thus (...) to p^rle with himself.

Alas Palmendos, well might thou account thy self favored of thy stars
and Fortune, if thou could conquer a Lady of so fair and perfect beauty,
and ^herby attain the Kingdom of Thessalie, adi^yning to the (...) of thy
Lord and Fath^rs Empire. Such was his inwa^ joy conceived by these news, in
hearing her spoken o^ whom his heart most of all honored, as he said to the
old^ Knight. When you understand, gentle Sir, tha^ Palmendos is come to the
Emperors Court, let me (...) y^ to travail thither, and there shall I cause
^im ^o (...) the courtesy, which we being strangers have here received. Then
commanded he one of his Squires to bring a great bag of Gold and Jewels,
which he powered forth upon the Table, giving the old Knight and his
Daughter the most part thereof: to the end he should see her honorably
married, and furnish her with all things beseeming such a beautiful Bride. The
Knight and his daughter seeing so much Treasure, fell down on their knees and
wou^d have kissed his hand: but he very kindly took them up in his ar^es,
saying this was nothing in resp^ct of that he would do for the^ (...). For his
mind being ever given to liberality, received such cont^ntment by the
speech^ o^ his Host: as rare and precious thinge^ seemed of no account, for
her sweet sake who was y^ Goddess and (...) of his h^rt. All this night he
passed in premeditating what he ought to do in the present occasion, at
length he resolved to go see the Tourney, without making himself known to
any one, because soon after he would Journey to the Isle of Carderia,
heerupon he sent a Squire in the morning to S. Lordin, to leave order that the
^hyp should meet him at Macedon. Then courteously taking their leave, Ozalio
and he rode toward Constantinople, whether the old Knight would have borne them
company, but Palmendos persuaded him to the contrary, and so set away in
great haste, arriving in the evening within two miles of Constantinople, from
whence he sent ^ Squire to the City, to understand what was done at the
Court, and when the cheifest day for the Tourney should be. The Squire well
discharged ^is Masters command, and returned with full satis-fying him in
every point, therefore Palmendos and Ozalio determined between themselves, not
to ride together in company, but each one alone with hi^ ^quire, and to
return thence very secretly again: nor would they stay there but the two
cheifest daye^, le^st happily they might be discovered, and so slac^ their
io^rney to the Isle of Carderia.

CHAP. XV.
^owe Palmendos came to Constantinopl^, where he ^nne the honor and pryze of
the first Tourney: and how he intended to depart thence on the morrow, least
he should be sought for on that occasion, and what else happened.

When the long expected day o^ marriage was come, the Emperor with all his
Knight^ were very richly clothed, but especially Arnedes, Son to the King of
France, he was exceeding brave both in attire and countenance, for the hope
he had to see fair Philocrista, to whom he had religiously dedicated hi^
heart.

Now set they forward in order to the Temple, the Empress with Phylocrista
and her other Daughters accompanied the Bryde, with all the Ladies of blood
royal in the Court: so that i^ one should sit down to decipher their
sumptuous attire, or else in speeches to commend their surpassing beauty, it
would ouer-trauaile the eloqu^nce of Demosthenes or Cicero. But Philocrista was
the fairest star among them all, which drew the Prince Arnedes mind into
such admiration, as had not his eyes been witnesses of the same, hardly
could report have induced him to believe it. For even as the Sun, the most
excellent of all the Planettes, she wing it self in the Horyzon, does
confound the brightness of all the stars together, and dazels their eye^
which long gaze thereon: even so resembled the Princess Philocrista, whose
cel^stiall portrature disgraced all the other Ladies, and altered the judgment
of Arnedes in such sort, as he reputed her far beyond the (...), that appeared
to the Sheephearde Paris on the Mountain of Ida, when of him she was judged to
be fairest of the three.

The Empress and her Ladies all mounted on their Palfrayes, with such pomp
and state as was never seen the like: Primaleon on a lusty Courser of
Barbary, with rich caparisons after the Turkishe manner, conducted the Bryde,
and Abenunco her Brother rode with the Princess Philocrista. Lecefin who
looued her more advisedly, rode on her other ^e for companies sake, but
Arnedes who^ love impatiently ouermaistred, used such means by managing his
Horse, as he got the Prince of Babylon out of his place, moved thereto by
earnest desire, that he might contemplate her beauty more easily: whereat
Lecefin wa^ meruailously offended, conceiving a mortal hatred ^gaint him,
perce^ing he had a ryuall in his love. Recind accompanied the Princess
Melicia, who in his eye seemed both fair and modest, Rifarano telling her by
the way, that this Knight came with him which conquered the County, and for
his laudable virtues deserved estimation: whereupon she began to confer with
Recinde, which she could do with singular regard, in respect of the rare
gyfts bestowed on her by nature. In brief, this royal train is come to the
Temple, and there is the marriage solemnly effected, returning to the Palace
with selfsame majesty they went thither. What should we waste time in
speaking of the Feast, when there is none so simple but considers, that the
Feasts of Emperors exceed common repetition: then may we repute this
sollemnitie aunswerable to that of the Gods, made at y^ nuptialles of Peleus
with the Goddess Thetis. After Dinner the Lords and Ladies fell to dancing,
a fit occasion sor Lovers to commune with their Ladies, yet dyssembled with
such cunning modesty, as the eye and action were chief messengers of the
heart, each Lady holding such opinion of her beloved, as their several hope
was for the honor of the Tourney.

The time being so passed over, a^ the new married couple must to y^ place of
amourous contentation, the Empress with her Daughters brought Esquiuela into
y^ bri^ Chamber, leaving her in bed attending for the coming of the
Bridegroom, who was soon after honorably conducted thither by the Emperor,
and so committed to enjoy her whom he had so long desired. Now are y^ Knight^
close in their Chambers, when Arnedes thus communed with Recinde. What think
ye Cousin of the beauty of Mada^e Philocrista? did you ever see a more rare
and perfect creature? right soon must I give end to these urgent affairs, and
ease the burden of mine oue^-charged spirit: therefore will I presently
dispatch a Courrier to the King my Father, that he may with speed send
honorable Ambassadors to the Emperor, whereby this desired marriage may be
concluded. Mean while I will sound the bottom of this amorous floode, and try
if the judgment of fair Philocrista, be aunswerable to her exeelling
beauty, and if the inward virtue agree with the outward singular perfections.
I may repute my self the happiest Knight in the world, in compassing the love
of so inestimable a Jewel. In sooth my Lord, answered Recinde, great cause
have ye to commend the Lady, and I desire that the like fortunate success may
befall me, as I doubt not but will speedily happen to you: for on mine own
behalf, the grace and courtesy of Melicia has given me a favorable
entrance, which if it proceed not to my hearts desire, much better had it been
that I never had seen her. With these words Arnedes embraced his Cousin,
saying. How sweetly d^o these speeches sound in mine ears, seeing thereby
thou art my trusty companion in all things: let this hope persuade thee,
that he on whom all actions do depend, will by his divine bounty so direct
our course, as we shall enjoy a succes-full end. If I speed according to my
harte^ content, in thy cause will I endeavor my self to the uttermost:
therefore let us continue our resolute courage, and make the Grecians
understand, that France yields as good Knights as any Country else, and thus
concluding, they slept for that night.

On the morrow, the Emperor, the Empress, the Bride and the young
Princesses, went to the Scaffoldes richly prepared for t^ sight of the
Tourney, where no boyde place was left, but every where filled with Lords,
Ladies and Gentl^women. Wonderful was the resort of Knights and har^ie
Champions, each one in Armor very costly and curious, having their feathers,
pendents and favors, decked with the devises and coullers of their Ladies, as
it was a most beautiful spectacle to behold them, yet heereon consists not
the substance of our History. Now strive Lynedes and the County his Cousin
like two furious Lions, to recover the foil they sustained by Arnedes: who
perceiving this was the time te^winne him honor, when the Goddess of his
thoughts sat to behold him, welcomed the challengers as he had done
before. In like sort did Rifarano behave himself, for he unhorsed every
Knight that ran against him. But by this time i^ Ozalio got in through y^
thronge, and he begins to deal with the Courtiers very roughly, which made
the Lords and Ladies wonder what he was. And then Palmendos seeing his
Freende well wearied, comes bravely prauncing into the field, so disguised as
Abenunco and Rifarano could not know him. A while he stood regarding the
Emperor his Father, so honorably placed with his noble Lords and Barons on
the Scaffoldes: then viewing the Empress with her gracious train of Ladies,
he wondered at such pomp and magnificence, thus speaking to himself.

Sovereign Creator and director of all things, h^w (...) I bound in duty
to thy Majesty, having made me the Son of such a Father: as not (...) is
reputed the best Knight under heaven, but also is the mightiest Prince on the
face of the earth. Seeing then thou have bestowed on me such grace and favor,
as I should issue from ^ch an excellent personage, I must endeavor my self to
resem ble him, and by some thing declare that I am his Son: for though now I
go against the Knights of his Court, I hope he shall have small cause to
mislike of me, when he knows my forwardnes in other matters on his Majesty's
behalf.

Then beholding a Knight ready to encounter him, he brake off his musings, and
gave him so brave a welcome, as he tombled hedlong down to the ground. Like
succcsse had diverse other Knights of the Court, which Arnedes angerlie seeking
to revenge, accompanied the other in misfortune, and after him Pernedin, Son
to the Duke of Pera, one of the best esteemed Knights in Greece. Risarano next
ran against Palmendos, and three courses they past bravely with the break
of the Lance, but at the fourth Rifarano was dismounted: whereupon Recinde
came to revenge his Cousin Arnedes foil, whose fortune was as bad as any of the
other, and Lecefin had his disgrace likewise for company.

The E^perour moved to admire this Chivalry, ignorant who this gallant
should be, affirmed that he never saw his equal in prowess: the like did
Primaleon, being very desirous to know his name, to whom Abenunco answered,
that he imagined him to be Palmendos, because he much resembled him in brave
constitution of body. At these speeches the Emperor was exceeding joyful,
requesting Abenunco to go understand the truth thereof: but Palmendos had so
thrust himself in the thickest of the crowde, which now went forth of the
Lystes, because the sports were ended for that day, as Abenunco could by no
means come near him, and therefore was feign to return unresolved. So went
Palmendos closely to his lodging again, where being unarmed, he found he had
received three wounds that day in y^ ^oust, the greatest whereof he took by
Recinde the Prince of Spain, but when he^ sa^e Ozalio in good disposition, he
was right joyful, commending him for his worthy behavior. And for he was
wounded, he stayed there two days without returning to Constantinople, least
if he went again, his intent might be prevented: afterward he rode to the
Realm of Macedon, in the self same Arms he wore at the Tourney, continually
having Francelina in his mind.

CHAP. XVI.
What conference Arnedes had with the Princess Philocrista after Supper,
whereupon he sent a messenger to the King his Father: and how after Recinde,
Rifarano and other, had won the pryze of the second Tourney, they intended
to follow in search of the Prince Palmendos.

Very much ashamed were ^he vanquished Knights, of y^ hard entertainment they
had received by Palmendos* and most of all the Prince Arnedes, because he was
vnhorssed before his Mistress Philocrista, wherefore he vowed to be revenged,
or he would die the death, and so diverse other Knights that mur^ured against
the Conqueror, did the like. But the Emperor perceiving this coffeehouse,
came to Arnedes, Recinde, and Rifarano, and to put them from these melancholy
conceits, he showed them very pleasant countenance: saying they ought not
to mislike with what* had happened, in that themselves showed very sufficient
Chivalry, and desired them at the next Tourney to compass the knowledge of
the strange Knight. If he come again, answered Arnedes, it may be happily
to his disa^auntage: for he having already disgraced so many, the sport^ will
hardly end without his foil. By this time was Abenunco come back to the
Emperor, declaring how he could not speed of his intent, wherewith his
Majesty somewhat offended, said.

Nor will any quiet sleep enter my head, until I know the name of that
worthy Knight: and were it not I should be esteemed over fond, I would my
self travail till I found him. All the Knights meruailing at these speeches,
concluded when the Tryumphes were ended, if so be the strange Knight returned
not again, to adventure themselves in the search of him: and they who were
most forward heereto, were Arnedes, Recinde, Rifarano, Lecefin, and Pernedin,
Son to the Duke of Pera, these gallant^ without any further conference
together, constantly vowed to die, or bring back the Knight again to the
Emperor, if they might meet with him in any place. Supper being ended,
Primaleon and Ditreus took Arnedes and Recinde with them, going to sit and
devise with the Ladies, when Arnedes got the mean to court Philocrista, and
Recinde his chosen Mistress Melicia: what contentment they received by this
good opportunity, I refer to such as are desirous to break the Ise of their
amorous passions, to them that hold them in so severe servitude. Diverse
familiare speeches tossed up and down, as of the Tourney and their unhappy
disgrace: Philocrista pitying that Arnedes should take it so discontentedly,
thus spoke. Me thinks (Sir) you should not be offended at so small a matter,
for oftentimes ^he best Knights have no better success: and we have so well
beheld your valiancie, that y^ Conquer^rs have cause to complain of your
coming, as the banquished have of the Knight departed, who as yet is unknown
to any in this Court. Arnedes hearing the gentle speeches of Philocrista,
bashful modesty with-helde him a while from ma^ng any answer, yet at
length love unlocked his li^ in this manner.

Madame, quoth he, the rare ornaments wherewith nature has accompanied your
divine perfection, causes you to speak so favorably on my behalf, although
no desert in me can apprehende the least part of this kindness: but were I
possessed with any such ab^litie, the very glaunce of her eye, who h^th ^ower
to command me, would increase my strength and make me invincible, wherefore my
des^res cannot be satis^ed, till* I recover my liberty lost in this Tourney,
the conceit whereof is more intolerable to me, then the labor to Sisiphus in
rolling the restless stone. The heavens will further your attempt herein,
answered Philocrista, and I heartily desire it may so come to pass, because it
were against reason, that you coming so far to see my Lord the Emperor,
should receive so unkind a reward for your labor. This sweet reply redo^bled
the French Princes joy, for which he humbly thanked Philocrista, with so many
courtesses and amorous shows, as she well perceived the effect of his grief,
proceeded from the passions of a lovers spirit.

Recinde (on the others^de) had ^o communed with Melicia, as she perceiving
how many offers he made to be her Knight, favorably gave him entertainment:
and more then any thing el^, it pleased him to note her beauty, wisdom and
good grace, which set his eyes and all his senses to work. And if they that
are in such delight with their Ladies, give some refrigeration to their hearts
enflamed with the fire of love: how could Lecefin but be in extreme iealouzie,
seeing his ryuall thus to parle with Philocrista? gladly could he have wished
him without ransom in the strongest prysonne of Persia. But now is the hour
of rest come, when the Emperor withdr^ ^imselfe to his Chamber, and all the
Knights likewise to the^ lodgings, where Arnedes still meditating on the word^
(...) his belou^d, immediately wrote to the King his father, that he should
send Ambassadors to the Emperor for conclusion of the marriage: and til they
came he would there ^tay at the Court, without any further speeches of the mat
ter till their arrival, so sealing hi^ packet as it should be deli^ered to
his Fathers hands, he ^ent one of his Squire^ the next morning away therewith
in post, who made no less speed then the Prince had commanded him.
Afterward he called Bruquell his Dwarffe aside, commanding him not to stir
out of Const^ntinople, because he was to depart about some matters of
importanc^, and if the Emperor in mean while asked for him, to make him that
answer, or any other that enquired after him. Moreover, that he should from
time to time confer with the Princess Philocrista, a^uring her of his
zealous affection to her service, which that he might the better execute, he
was rydden abroad to take the air of the fields: the Dwarff very willingly
performed every thing he had in charge, not daringe to break the least
article he was commanded.

The time being come of the Tourney, rare Chivalry was there delivered on all
sides, but Arnedes, Recinde and Rifarano had the cheifest honor, attending
when the strange Knight should show himself again: and when they saw he
came not, they immediately determined the execution of their enterprise,
without returning into the City, or knowing which way each other rode, but
even took their chance as Fortune directed t^em. The Emperor was glad that
his Knights had wunne the day, yet could be not but marvel that the stranger
was seen no more: then coming to the Palace, and se^ing none of these five
which were departed in the search of Palmendos, he could not tell what to
imagine. Of every one he desired to (...), yet could he not be (...) to his
conten^. (...) Bruq^ell made answer for (...) h^ (...) commanded: which made
his (...) t^n to ^ceiue the truth in^, whereof he wa^ not a little glad,
hoping now to h^are more of the strange ^night. When the sollemne Fea^ for y^
marriage was ended, the Knights returned to their ow^ Countries, so ^id
Ditreus and Esquinela towar^ H^arie, with an ^nourable train sent by the
Emperor. Philocrista was sorre for the departure of Esquinela, whom she loved
as she had been her sister, because from their young years ^ey were edurated
together: nor could Abenunco her Brother go with the^ so far (...) happily
he would, because the league of amity between him and Primaleon enforced
him to stay. King Frysoll received his Son Ditreus and his fair Daughter
Esquiuela with incredible joy, humbly (by Letters) thanking the Emperor for the
honor he had done him, returning his Knights with rich and (...) gifts. But
come we now to the ^ue Knights, that were departed in search after Palmendos.

CHAP. XVII.
How Arnedes met with Palmendos, who left him half dead, and had afterward
been slain by Lecefin if Pernedin had not happily arrived: and what followed.

Already you have heard, how Arnedes secretly departed from Constantinople,
in search of the Knight that ^oyled him in the Tourney, demanding of every
one he met by the way, if they saw not a Knight in redd^ Armor, having a
little Silver Flower for his devise in his (...): but no one could (...) him to
his expectati^n. whereupon, the night being hard at hand, he came to an
Hermitage at the foot of a Mountain, where with the old Father he lodged
that night, cont^ted with his poor and homely refection. On the morrow,
bidding his Host courteously farewell, he had not ridden an arrowe shot
from the Hermitage, but he espied two Knights come ^ding together, and staying
to see what they were, at length he knew the one to be Palmendos, which good
hap pleasing him not a little, he intended by fair means or force to cause
him return again, wherefore he came to him with these words.

Sir Knight. I think my self favored of Fortune b^ meeting you here, in that
I left the Emperors Court for nothing else but to seek you, because his
Majesty desires to see and know you, in respect of your brave behavior at
the Touney: therefore I entreat ye for the love ye bear his highness, to
return back with me, that I may discharge my promise herein to his Majesty.
You did not well Sir, answered Palmendos, to promise any thing depending on an
other man's will, and for at this time I have urgent occasions else where, I
cannot satis-fie his highness desire, albeit I am ready in any thing else to d^
him service, and so I beseech you answer on my behalf. Knight, quoth
Arnedes, I pray you consider heereon a little better, and think that such
speeches cannot discharge me of my duty: therefore determine right soon to
go with me willingly, otherwise I must compel ye to return perforce.
Perforce? no, said Palmendos well may I go with my will if so be I please. I
wish it for your good answered Arnedes, and the remembrance of your valor in
the Tourney, causes me to bear with you very much: but seeing you will not
willingly yield heereto, provide for y^ Combat, and think not that your
bravery at the Tryumphe, shall any thing avail ye now in this place. If ye
will needs enforce me to it, quoth Palmendos, let yours then (...) the (...):
as for my self, in respect of my love to the Emperor, I would be lot^e to
Combat with y^. H^vpon they ^o (...) encountered together, that both of them
were sent to the ground, and afterward they ^ought a cruel Co^bat at the
Sword, till Arnedes with y^ great expense of his bloo^e, ^ing recei^ed many a
grievous wound, fell down at the Prince (...) T^arsus feet, who having made
cleene hi^ Sword that was very bloody, and put it into the ^heath, said.

I think ye will not seek hereafter to enforce any Knight, remembering how
dearly you have pa^e for this bolones: so mounting on horseback, (albeit he
(...) likewise wounded) he rode on his ^ey (...) Oz^o. The (...) where A^edes
lodged all night, having behel^ this Combat, ^ed with charity and compassion
came down the Mountain, to succor Arnedes wh^ lay bleeding in the grass,
and vnclasping his Helmet to give him ^yre, in short time he recouer^ his
s^nces again: when seeing none but the Hermitte, and y^ the Knight was gone,
he reputed it for an act of great humamtie, in not kylling him out*right, his
life standing at his merry, ^erwarde, he thus spoke to himself. What shall I
now do, if not complain on the instabilitie of Fortune? was not my coming
into these Countries unhappy, where I thought to win honor and renown,
when all things ^rne to my shame and reproof? since my strength is not
correspondent to the val^re of my mind, I m^ give over the exercise of Arms,
which Fortune (I see) ^ies I should follow. Longer would he have continued in
these pensive mones, but the Hermit interrupted him in this manner.

My So^e, give thanks to him that delivered thee out of the Knights hands, and
has not suffered both body and soul to perrish: let idle and indecent
thoughts be now abandoned, and ^ft thy mind to the place of eternal
comfort. With these words he bound up his wounds ^o well as he could, minding
to lead him to his Hermitage, but as one mischaunce happen^th not alone, so
^ell it out at this instant, for he was no sooner gotten ^n foot, but Lecefin
his mortal enemy arrived, and knowing him to be his riual in love, drawing
his Sword, thus spoke. Now shall I teach thee my capital (...), what it is to
loo^ her whom the a^t ^t w^thy to serve, and that shall I make thee presently
(...), or, b^y thy (...) with the price of thy blood: for a Lady of so rare
perfections, stands too far out of a Frenclomans rea^e. Here with he
violently struck at Arnedes* whom the good old Hermit seeing in ^ch
dangerous case, took (...) in his Arms, desiring Lece^n not to seek his
death, that had of late escaped it so near. But Lecefin being a Moore, and
therefore the more inexorable, would give no ear to his words. but cruelly gave
the old man such a stroke on the head, as therewith he fell down dead to the
ground. Ah dogged and distoyall Traitor, said Arnedes, when he beheld this
tragical act, why have thou (...) this religious Father that never offended
thee? the heavens I hope will not let thee pass unpunished, but plague thee as
such a damnable deed requires.

So taking his Sword, as well as he might, by reason of his former hurtes, he
seeks to defend himself and revenge the Hermits death: but all was in vain,
(for with out a marvelous chance) Arnedes death was now ordained. In a happy
hour arrived there Pernedin, son to the Duke of Pera, one of them that
departed in y^ search of Palmendos, who knowing both the Combatants, stepped
between them, saying. Why how now Gentlemen? are courtly friends become
enemies in Field? Arnedes who was no longer able to hold out, falling down to
the earth, said.

Ah Pernedin, revenge my wrong on this inhumaine wretch, who seeing me
cruelly wounded before, by the Knight that bare away the honor of the
Tourney, without any cause set violently upon me: and this villainous Moore,
not content to wrong me alone, has ^layne this holy Hermit, because he
dissuaded him from dealing with me, that had been so hardly entreated before.
What tyranny is thi^ in a ^night? answered Pernedin, by my Sword, did not my
(...) to Rifarano ouer-tule mce, the gentle Prince that brought thee to y^
Court, here I wol^ make thee to breathe thy last: but I shall declare thi^
treason before the Emperor and his Barons. what manhood thou have used to a
wounded man, whom y^ durst not deal with had he been^ in health: wherefore
get thee gone I ^duise thee, or I shall send thine accursed soul to hell. At
these wor^, Lecefin was so ashame^ of himself, as moun ting presently on
Arnedes Horse, he rode away not speaking to either of them, knowing he ha^
notoriously blemished his honor: wherefore he went to a Monastery of Nuns
near at hand, to have his wounds bound up that he had receined by Arnedes.

When the Sis^ers knew that he was of the Emperors Court, they entertained
him very courteously, an^ one of them being a cunning Surgeon, undertook
in short time to heal his wounds. Now was Pernedin both offended and
grieved, to see the old Hermitte slain and Arnedes in such danger, wherefore
calling the No^ice that always attended on the old Father, they lead^ the
wounded Prince into the Hermitage, and after ward ^etching the dead body,
buried it as they could conveniently, applying sovereign salues (whereof the
good old man was never unprovided) to Arnedes wounds. But Pernedin seeing
there was no more help, and they likewise ignorant in those kind of unguents,
thought it more meet they should go strait to the City of Constantinople.

There may ye, quoth he, sooner recover your health, because men of skill and
knowledge shall take special care of you: and for my part I will willingly
accompany you thither, albeit I have not sped in y^ cause of my departure. It
will be to my shame, answered Arnedes, that the ^perour should se^ me in this
dangerous plight: notwithstanding, I will at this present be councelled by
you, be^ing never able to recompense this honorable kindness.

CHAP. XVIII.
How Pernedin brought Arnedes to Constantinople, where the Emperor, the
Empress, with their Daughters Philocrista and Melicia came to visit him: and
what talk the two Dwarffes had together.

P^esently after that Arnedes was brought (by the means of Pernedin) to
Constantinople in a Litter, because he could not endure to sit on horseback:
news of this mischance was brought to the Emperor, who growing into extreme
anger against the Moore, said. Well may Lecefin resemble the Sol^ane his
Father, a man full of treacherous and ignoble practices, but he must not thus
think to wrong a Prince of France. So stepping frowninglie from his Chair,
he went to the Princes Chamber to see him, charging his Phis^tions and
Chirurgions to tend him so well, as if they had his own person in cure.

Then Arnedes revealed the whole discourse of that which happened between
Palmendos and him, at the end whereof the Emperor thus answered. I wonder
that the ^night should be so desirous to do me service, and yet does fly in
this sort from me, doubtless he is gone to prove the adventure of
Francelina, if he rode that way you say he did, and it may be his fortune to
end it I hop^, except our Nephewe Belcar exceed him in valor, and that I can
(...) beleene he will. When the Emperor departed, h^ commanded that the
Empress and her Daughters should go visit the Prince, which she
accordingly did, taking Philocrista and Melicia with her, she being greatly
offended at the injury done to Arnedes. And Philocrista very much bemoned his
mishappe, yet wisely and discreetlie as became a sober ^irgin, for the love
she bare him was derived from gentleness and virtue, which she noted him to
prefer in all his actions, and nothing had (...) in (...) re especial
account, then to conferue her chastity pure and vnsp^tted. Arnedes was joyful
to see her he loved so dearly, how she sorowed his hard fortune, and blamed
Lecefin as a di^oyall Traitor: which gentle speeches did more comfort his heart,
then all the phis^ck or cunning in the world could do.

While the Empress and her Daughters beguiled the time with him, Amenada a
woman Dwarffe that attended on Philocrista, and Risdeno her Nephewe, came to
Bruquell Arnedes Dwarffe, who used sundry lamentations, for the great mishappe
had befallen his Master. Ameneda comforted him in the best sort she could,
saying, that in respect his wounds were not mortal, there was no doubt but he
would soon recover them, and the rather, because the Emperor had given such
charge of him, as his own person could not be better attended. Ah, quoth
Bruquell, would God it were no worse: then breaking forth a renting sigth, be
proceeded in this manner.

Ah my noble Lord Arnedes, how dear does her beauty cost thee, for whom thou
left'st thy Country? where the only reputation of thine estate, being
extracted from such an high and illustrious lineage, was sufficient to have
obtained her, without hazarding thy life in so man^e perrils and dangers.
Amenada meruailing at these words, was immediately wrapped with a curious desire,
to know which was the Knight he named, and therefore she labored Bruquell with
entreaties: for her Lady Philocista knew his Mai^er to be a Knight o^ France,
yet none but y^ Emperor could tell that he wa^ the Kings Son. All things
that I can possible (quoth the Dwarffe) will I do for ye, this only excepted,
which without his command I bare not attempt, because my liberty stretches
not so far, yet will I promise ye to ask him the question, and if he be
pleased I will satis^e your desire.

Melicia, who was earnest in affection to know more as concerning her lover
Recinde, seeing these Myrmedons thus conferring together, and ouer-hearing some
of their speeches: after they were departed to their Chambers, she demanded of
Amenada, what talk she had with Arnedes Dwarffe? whereupon she repeated the
whole dyscourse, to the no little content of Philocrista, because thy^ way she
might attain to more knowledge of the French Prince. And as she heard her say
that he left his Country for the leave of a Lady, she presumed immediately her
self to be the same, for commonly it falls out, that L^uers will favor
themselves in scmblable judgments and conjectures: wherefore she commanded
Amenada, to awaite Bruquel for performaunce of his promise. The Dwarffe when
he saw convenient time to talk with his Master, he ga^ him to understand
what had past between him and Amenada, which pleased him so well as nothing
could do more, and commended to him the purfute of this practice. On the
morrow, the Emperor and Primaleon dyned together, wherefore Amenada went to
find out Bruquell at his lodging, and he meeting her by the way, first of all
told her, that he would perform the promise he made the day before: but
(quoth he) before I satis^fie you herein, I must request one thing of you.

Demand hardly what thou will, quoth Amenada, for thy suit being honest,
thou can not be denied. You must promise me then, said Bruquell, that to no
living creature except Madame Philocrista, you disclose what I shall reveal
unto you. So is it Amenada, that for the love of her only, Arnedes my
honorable Lord and Master, ^ldest Son to the King of France, has for
saken his natyue Country, in that the renown of her excellent beauty,
spredde by Fame through all those parts, caused him to cut through the
dangerous Seas, to credit with his eyes what his ears were cloyed withal.
And having at full contemplated her sweet face, he finds, that Nature willing
industriouslye to embellishe this chief piece of work, has taken all
ability from humane report, how curious or eloquent so ^uer it be, thoroughly
to acc^mplyshe the praise of her merit: wherefore he has sent a Co^rrier to
the King his Father, that his Majesty should s^nd Ambassadors hither, to
confer with the Emperor on a marriage between my Master and your Lady,
and til they come to dispatche this occasion, he will not be known hereof to
any one, except it be to her gracious self only. Humbly then desire her,
with some benign clemency to entreat the heart, which her di^ine figure has
secretli^ r^uished and made her thrall, so shall she give cure to his wounds,
and make him the most fortunate Champion that ever entr^d the field for his
Lady: otherwise he can not long enjoy his vital motion, and by his death
shall occasion diverse other beside, especially his Cousin Recinde, Sonn^ to the
King of Castile, who looueth him as his proper life, and as hec bare him
company in this voyage, so will he take part of the hardest fortune, for the
love and near alliance that is between them.

So well could this tall Pigmey use his language, to gain success for his
Masters intent, as he made no more difference between the two Princes, in
respect of their loyal unanimity together: then was between the two
Pithagorick compani^ns, Orestes and Pyllades, or Nisus and Eurialus, that
would one dye for an other. Greatly d^d Amenada marvel, hearing that a
Prince of so high and great birth, would adventure through such dangerous
tra^ailes, only tor t^ (...) of a marriage, and ^ight have gained (...) with
much l^sse labor, wherefore she thus answered.

In sooth, if I had not promised to acquaint my L^die heerewith, I durst not
for my life discover such weighty matters, because I cannot tell her the whole
discourse, in that her Sister Melicia i^ never from her, and then shall she
know as much as my Mistre^e. That hurts not, replied Bruquell, never conceal
it through fear of her presence, for ^ee is such a wise and well governed
Princess, as she will rather modestly hide it, then any way seek to spread
it abroad, and will (beside) nothing at all mislik^ thereof. This he spoke,
for that she had her part in y^ play, nam^ly by her love to the Prince Recmde,
and if perhaps Philocrista should be slow or opinitiue in her love, Melicia
happily would council her not to refuse so good an offer: in brief, that
they might reciprocally advise one another, as sick folks who had surfeited
both of one disease, and so oftentimes it comes to pass, that two thoughts
afflicted with one kind of martyrdom, receive together more consolation, then
they could by any other that feel not the like torment.

Bruquell having done his endeavor, for the conciliation of Philocrista with
his Master, returned immediately to him, whom he found attending in silent
devotion, to understand the issue of this amorous stratageme, and after that
the Dwarffe had word by word recounted all his negotiation, Arnedes was
rapt into such vnspeakeble joy, as he imagined the hour happy when he met
with such an ingenious Truch^man. Amenada on the other side, when she espied
time for the purpose, interpreted so well and fai^hfullie the mtent of the
Prince to her Mistress Philocrista, as she therewith was carried into a
thousand imaginations. And albeit the Knight dispayred not in his suit, but
rather imagined so sweet a countenance would be inclined to mercy: yet she had
so lost her liberty in this ca^se, by seeing her b^loued so daungerously
wounded, as now she feared to send him any severe or rigorous answer,
wherefore she thus spoke to her Dwarffe. I am offended that thou did promise
Bruquell to acquaint me with th^se news, ^ut seeing what has happened cannot
be prevented: thou shall then go to Arnedes, and tell him from me, that I
marvel he would thrust himself into so many perrils, for which I account my
self beholding to him, and promise in requital of his hard sufferings, to
accept of him as my loyal Husband, if my gracious parents will so permit it:
with this condition, that he adventure not the least speeches hereof to me,
but hold himself suffised by knowing my will herein. And that I may be
assured of the vehement affection he bears me, desire him to feed on this
answer, as on the most sovereign Balm or perfect Cataplasme, that may
soonest of all consolidate his wounds: so hastening his cure and
conualescence, that (if it may be) he honor me with his presence to morrow.

After Philocrista had instructed Amenada in her Embassade, she took Melicia
aside, to whom (because they loved each other with sincere (...)) Philocrista
discovered this amorous intent, and Uerbatim reported what the Dwarffe had
told to her: which discourse well contented Melicia, cheefely when she heard
that her Knight Recinde was of the royal blood of Castile. By this time is
Amenada come to the French Prince, and has delivered the message from
Philocrista, wherewith he was so cheerfully animated, as soon after he
determined to forsake his bed, but before the Dwarffe returned again he
desired her to convey a French dittie to her Mistress, which for her sake he
devised that morning, and withal to entreat the Master of the Emperors
Chapel, to order it in parts after the art of Mu^que: the dittie was thus.

The finest Gold is by the touch discernd,
The Adamant the sturdie iron draws:
The proof hereof in love may well be learn^
For by these twain I shape a lovers cause.
You Madame framed of the finest Gold,
Upon the touchstone of my heart is tryde:
And I composed of the iron molde,
Follow the virtues that in you abide.
Then since the touch tells if the Gold be pure,
And rugged iron shows the virtuous stone:
Take touch and iron both into your cure,
For (Madame) they belong to you alone.
After that Amenada had received this Dittie, she said to the Prince, that
she could not tell how her Mistress would like of her, bringing her such a
presumptuous message: yet if she were displeased therewith, she would disguise
every thing so well, as each of them in the end should receive contentment.
So returning to y^ Princess Philocrista, she told in what e^treamitie the
Prince was for her love, and to mittigate his passions, had framed that dittie:
which when she had read and well noted, she accounted her conquest greater,
then if she were possessed of all Asia. Sundry times did the Empress and her
D^ghters visit the French Prince, to the unspeakable contentment of the
secret Lovers, who awaited nothing but the coming of the French Ambassadors,
for the confirmation of their long desired hope: but let us leave them a while,
and come to Rifarano, who is all this while in the search of Palmendos.

CHAP. XIX.
Ho^. ^ifarano being in the search of Palmendos, ^ette ^th a Dwarffe
tra^ailing toward the Emperor, to complain on the ^rong a Knight had done
him, and how^ to revenge the Dwarffe, and gratifye the Emperor herein,
Rifarano went to combat with the Knight before his Castle.

Six days together rode Rifarano, after his departure from Constantinople,
without hearing any tidings of the Knight he sought for, and now in the
evening, he met a Dwarffe on horseback, accompanied with four Squires, o^
whom he enquired likewise as concerning the Knight. In sooth, quoth the
Dwarffe I saw not any such, but tell me I pray ye from whence you now come.
From the Court of the Emperor Palmerin, ^unswered Rifarano. How happy then am
I, said the Dwar^fe, to meet you here, because I have evermore heard, that
thence comes many good and virtuous Knights: wherefore I shall pray (in
respect of the good I wish to so benign a Prince) that you may soon find
the man you look for, and likewise that his Majesty may pity my cause, in
(...) me on a Knight that has shamefullie o^t-raged me, I giving him no
ca^se of offense in the world. With these words he gave a marvelous sigth:
whereupon Rifarano desiring (...) vn^stande the cause, the Dwarsfe thus began*
Kn^we gentl^ Knight, that albeit God has fashioned me as ye see, yet did he
be^tow on me riches and possessions, and among other things, I have a strong
Castle not far hence, there fell* I in lou^ with a beautiful Damsel,
Daughter to a Gentleman my near neighbor, with whom I dealt in such sort,
a^ soon after I enjoyed her in marriage. Living afterward in all prosperous
felicity, we walked abroad to recreat^ our selves, in a pleasant field near
adjoining to my housewhere this proud and discourteous Knight, (who long
labored to have my Wife in marriage, and by reason of his evil conditions
could not obtain her) came accompanied with two of his Kinsemen, (as badde
disposed men as him self) and there took my Wife perforce from me, carrying
her to a Castle of his two days journey hence, where he ke^peth her under
strong guarde, and has sent me word by one of his Squires, that if I
complain he^re of to ani^ living creature, he will come kill me with his own
(...) in my Castle. Yet being unable to endure this villaino^ oppression, I am
going to tell my cause to the Emperor Palmerin, who I hope will speedily do
me justice herein, bee^ng a Prince thereto greatly addicted as I have heard
report.

Rifarano meruailing at this horrible injury, said to the Dwarffe. Show me
the Castle where the Knight abides, for I doubt not but to do so much in the
right of thy cause, as he shall yield recompense for this fault, and fear
hereafter to offer any one the like, without any further troubling the
Emperor herein. The Dwarffe accepting this fr^ndlie offer, that night lodged
Rifarano at his Castle, where he was exceeding well entertained, and ^n the
morrow, taking six Squires with them, r^de to the Knights Castel^, where
espying one upon the walls, Rifarano demanded if his Lord were within. Mary
is he, answered ^he Squire on the walls, he is n^we sporting himself with
that tall ^llowes love: but I am sorry that you would be so badlie councelled,
quoth he to Rifarano, as to come end your life in this place. Be not thou so
careful ^or me, answered Rifarano, but go let thy Mai^ter vn^erstand that I
would speak two or three words with hi^, ^n matters that greatly concern
his honor. The Squire went presently to his Master, who hearing that the
Dwar^e had brought a Knight with him, took the Gentle woman by the hand, and
brought her with him to a window, where opening the Casements y^ they might
see her, said.

Knight that did call me hither, say boldly what thou can, for I well
percei^e thou co^nest to seek thine own ruin. And there did thou find thy
dishonor, answered Rifarano, when by force and treason thou abusedst this
Gentleman, who never gave thee any cause of offense: wherefore restore his Wife
whom thou unjustly detaynest, or if reason may not thereto persuade thee,
come down and enter the Combat with me, and I shall let thee know the price of
thy villainie. I had not thought, replied the Knight of the Castle, that thy
indiscretion had been so great, as to think I would win a thing so hardly,
and deliver it from me so lightly, nor shall the paragon of my heart, be in
the custody again of so base an excrement of nature: then spoke he to the
Dwarffe in this manner.

Thou wretched and ridiculous creature, come thou likewise to make one in
the Tragedy? begin with thine own hand thou were best, or I shall plague thee
with extreme torments. So took he the Gentlewoman in his arms, and
oftentimes laciuiously kissed her, she stryuing in tears to hinder his
embracings, wherefore he said. Good Madame, seek no occasion whereby to
offend your self, for ye shall see me pluck down the bravery of this
Knight, and make ye Monster your husband safe from troubling you any more.
Tush, these are but words, quoth Rifarano, let me see thee come Armed into the
field, then shall I live in hope of some deeds. And if you wilt have me imagine
thee courageous, bring down the Lady with thee, that the Conqueror may carry
her whether him pleases. I am content, answered the Knight, because thou shall
see how little I esteem thy threatening, and soon shall all controversies be
ended between thee and me, that hereafter may arise on this occasion. Quickly
had he Armed himself and came forth leading the Lady in his hand: which when
the Dwarffe saw, he durst not tarry, but got him a bow shoot further off. So
fell the Knight and Rifarano to the Combat, which continued long time doubtful
on either side, but at length Rifarano had the vpperhand of his enemy, because
he had given him many cruel wounds on his body. When the Squires of the
Castle saw their Master overcome, they would forcibly have carried the Lady
into the Castle again: but Rifarano advertised thereof by her cry, made them
forsake her and run hastily into the Castle, then taking her by the hand,
said. Come with me Lady, and I shall deliver ye to your Husband that loves
ye loyally, as you may be persuaded by this I have done at his earnest
entreaty. Many humble thanks she requited him withal, seeing her self free
from her injurious enemy, and the Dwarffe seeing this fortunate success, came
and humbled himself at the Conquerers feet, embracing his Wife in abundance
of joy, being neither of them able to express their contentation, for that
tears and inward motions of comfort had deprived them of speech. Afterward the
Knight had recovered himself again, and came stealing on Rifarano thinking to
murder him, but the Dwarffe espying him, cried out, whereup^n the Prince
returned, and getting him once more into subjection, with his Sword smote his
head from his Shoulders. The Dwarffe not a little joyful for this victory,
desired the Prince that he would accompany him to his Castle, because that
traiterous Knight had a Brother and two Cozins, who hearing of his death, would
presently pursue them. Whereto Rifarano courteously condiscended, and mounting
the Gentlewoman behind her Husband, they iourneyed thence with all speed
possible. But ere they could recover the place where they would be, they were
pursued by the Knights Brother and his two Cozins. When the Dwarffe and his
Wife now verily thought to die: notwithstanding, such was the brave behavior
of Rifarano, that one after another they syedde as the Knight of the Castle
had done, and so without any more* ^nterruption they got h^me to their
Castle, where they feasted the Prince very sumptuously. On (...) mor^w he
departed thence, continuing his travail after Palmendos, and by the way he
succored a distressed Countess, against a cruel Brother in Law of hers,
nam^d Diole, who sought forcibly to depryue her of her possessions: but by the
rare Chivalry of Rifarano, he lost hi^ life in that bad attempt. And here
with the Countess we will leave Risarano, because we have too long forgotten
our chief Knight Palmendos.

CHAP. XX.
How Palmendos arrived in the Isle of Carderia, where first he vanquished
Tyrendos in the Ioust, and next the Knight that guarded the passage of the
Bridge, and also diverse other that assailed him at the third Tower, and how
he came to the Gardengate where Francelina was.

NOt long since you understood, how after Palmendos had vanquished Arnedes,
he followed his way with long desire to see Carderia, wherefore omitting all
occasions that might hinder his voyage, he determined to make no stay till he
came to the Isle: and very soon after it was his chance to arrive there, when
he implored the help of heaven in fynishing this adventure, and as a sacrifice
after victory, he promised to offer his soul to the holy caracter of
Christianity, and to be baptized so soon as he could. At this time Belcar
kept not the passage of the Bridge, because he was departed certain dates
before, to visit the King and Queen at Macedon: for they hearing of his
wonderful deeds of Arms, in defending that Bridge, fent for him to the
Court by an express messenger. And truly he would not have gone (so
resolute was he in his enterprise) but that the Princess Alderina secreatly
commanded him, by a Letter written with her own hand: she having discovered
the truth of all to the Queen Griana, entreating her by some means to
continue the Duke her Father there, till that Belcar came from the Isle of
Carderia.

The Queen liked hereof exceeding well, and knowing her Nephewe could not
join in more honorable marriage, then with the chaste and virtuous Lady
Alderina: she conferred with the Duke and Duchess of Pontus, who likewise were
glad of so noble alliance. For this cause the Queen sent one of her Gentlemen
to Belcar, accompanied with Alderinaes Page, who closely delivered y^ Prin^ the
Letter, the substance whereof follows thus. the beholders were greatly
amazed, for that since the departure of Belcar, he had p^uailed against many a
Knight. Among the rest, the Queen^ of Thessalie Mother to Francelina, who was
come thither ^lue or ^xe days before, because the la^t of the three Fayr^es
that caused y^ enchauntment in the Fortress, foreseeing she could not live
long, ha^tened the commin^ of Pal^dos, as you have hear^ (...), and (...) word*
to the Queen, that soon^ ^ter her (...) she (...) her de^res (...).

The death of the (Enchauntresse was no sooner known to the good Queen, (who
had an extreme affection to (...) her Daughter free from the Magical
coniurations, that (...) the King her Husband (...) be delivered, from (...)
y^ (...)) but she departed from Thess^ie, and (...) the (...) Carderia, where
she, nor (...) of hers co^ld (...) ^urther then the Bridge: wherefore they
ere^ed Tents and Pau^llions in the Field, atten^ there the en^ of the (...),
when she ^eing that Tyrendos was (...)* wished such success* to y^ new^
(...), as he might happily finish the ^chauntment.

Palinendos perceiving how his first adversary would trouble him no further,
approached to the Gates of the first Tower, where he beheld the great Knight
ready to offer him batt^e, wherefore he alighted from his Horse, and drawing
hi^ Sword, (...). If the preuide^e of the* heau^ns have desteni^me to c^nquer
this enterprise, f^r (...) all (...) and cowardice from me, till I have
delivered the gentle Princess here enclosed: forbear then mine eyes as yet
to covet the sight of Francelina, albeit ye burn in desire to behold her,
and I will keep promise with ^ee so soon as Fortune pleases.

After these words, he closely buckled with the Knight of the Bridge,
continuing a l^ng, dangerous and ^full combatte with him, the Dwar^fe in the
Lauthorne sundry times with his Horn renewing his (...) forces: yet by the man
of (...) courage, who ^dained to be his Conqueror, he was confounded mauget
all his deuillish helps. So forward he marched to the second Tower, and as
the Gates were clapping together, according as they did to the Prince Belcar,
he thruste his Sword between the Gates, when immediately the thunder ceased,
and they fell back wide open as they were before.

At this good hap the beholders greatly rejoiced, especially the Queen of
Thessalie, who followed on still accompanied with Ozalio, and to him she highly
(...) ded the worthy behavior of this Knight: Ozalio an^wering her, that she
had good cause to applaude her stars, having sent thither a Knight of such
royal descent, as his (...) was not to be found through all Christian
kingdoms. Tirendos in this while was carried into his Tent by his Squires,
where he so grieved for his disgrace, as he was ready to die in despite
thereof. Now is Palmendos come to the last Tower, which was defended by three
Knights armed cap a pe, and they with three sharp L^ces stood ready to
receive him at the point, wherewith he being somewhat amazed, said to
himself. Whereon think thou Palmendos? what? beginuest thou now to dismay?
tushe man be of good cheer, thou labourest for her, with whose beauty none in
the world may compare: if by coming so far theu have done more, then any
Knight before thee could perform, commit thy self to God and Fortune for the
rest, and follow thine intent though thou die therein. Now begins he
courageously to adventure on them, who joining altogether against him,
ouerthrewe him that he could hardly arise (...), notwithstanding reccuering
his feet, he pursu^d with such unconquerable hope, as at length he drove them
before him over the Bridge, when both they and the first Knight of the Tower
vanished away together, and in like manner did the Dwarffe that sat in the
Lantern, with a horri^le shaking of the earth and the whole Fortress. The
Queen, Ozalio and the rest, fell down and honored heaven for this victory,
persuading themselves that the worst of the adventure was past: as for the
Prince himself, he followed the matter with such alacrity, considering fair
Francelina was the reward of his travail, as nothing seemed to him now
impossible. So pa^ing on, he found the posterne that guided the way to the
Garden, which was guarded by two furious enchau^ted dogs, there through the
wickette he beheld a Fountainc, with sundry gootly Da^oselles about it, and in
the midst, in a carious Chair of clothe of Gold, sat Francelina the sweet
Goddess of beauty, so wonderful gor^ decked in rich ornaments, as it would
have made any heart enamoured to behold her. Palmendos ravished with the sight
of her, stepped in at the door not dreading any perrill, when presently the
enchaunted dogs ran upon him, as though they would have rent him in pieces,
and long time very daungerously they did assail him, tearing his Armor
cruelly in pieces, that he was now driven to despair of his life: yet in the
end with much a do he pre^ailed against them, albeit they brought him into
exceeding great perplexity, as ^ee never felt the like in all his life before.

CHAP. XXI.
What gentle speeches and gracious devises, Palmendos had with fair
Francelina in the Garden, where they supped together: and how after he had
told her what he was, he gave her the Ring, which he received of the Queen
his mother at his departure from Tharsus.

FRancelina already had felt the flames of loou^, in as vehement manner as
the Prince Palmendos, because the Fairies (knowing the end of y^ enchauntment
was at hand) told her that ere long she should be conquered, and delivered
from that Castle by one of y^ best Knights in the world, she being at her
birth appointed his Wife, in recompense of his avuenturous trauayles.

And this discoruse she sealed with so many rare commendations of the Knight,
as her heart was surprised with love in such sort, y^ she longed every hour to
see the man appointed for her Husband. And as the Pilot long perplexed with
outrageous tempests, mounts to the top to see if any Hau^n for reske we is at
hand: so this Lady tossed to and fro in the roughe ^illowes of love,
oftentimes left her Dungion and came upon the walls, erpe^ting the coming of
this promised Knight. By good hap she espied when Palmendos came to the Bridge,
beside, the trembling of the Castle at the departure of the Knights, touched
her heart with a sign of present comfort, wher^upon in this brau^y she^ went
with her Damoselles into the Garden, expecting the issue of the Knights fortune
that presaged so much before hand. In brief, he being entered the Garden* as
you have ^eard already, she being dir^ted by ^he Fair^es what she should do,
when she perceived the dog^es overcome: arose with her Damoselles and went
toward the Knight, showing many gracious (...) for his welcome* but Palmendos
seeing her approach so (...), ^el on his knee offering to ki^e her hand, whereat
Francelina (...) ^shing, offered him the like, saying.

It is my duty, Sir Knight, to use such humility, albeit your courte^e has
prevented me, for this wonderful adventure finished by you, declares your rare
(...) in Chivalry, ^eeing second to none that at this day bears Arms. Yet
ere you take me hence, I would request one favor at your hands, not any
thing to make you doubt the loss of her, who freely gives herself as your
own, ^ut for you have delivered me from the enchauntment, my request granted,
you may dis^ose of me as your loyal spouse and Wife. Madame answered,
Palmendos, I now think my self no l^sse belooued of heaven, then fauour^d by
fortune, hearing you say that I am yours, and you are mine, which makes me
think all my labors nothing in respect of you: therefore demaun^ what you
please, for I being your professed serua^nt, mu^ with all reverence obey your
command. A thousand thanks good Knight, quoth she, albeit such speeches
agree not with your calling, I being only in your subjection, and ready to
attend as your ^and-mayden: but me thinks it were necessary you should take a
little rest, being good to regard the end and periode of all things, let me
therefore humbly intreat^ ye, to come refreshe your self for the better
conservation of your health. So went they both together to the Fountain, where
Palmendos was unarmed by y^ Princess Francelina and her Damoselles, and a
costly Mantle was brought to wrap about him, then sat he down by his Lady, in
another Chair covered all over with Gold, and as if Her^bus had sent his
Daughter to hide the day light, spreading dark night all over the Hemisphere,
so were great store of Torches and Tapers alighted. There was ^elt the
odori^ferous smell of Roses, Uiolets, and all the sweet flowers of the Garden,
be^de the incomparable beauty of Francelina, her Maidens beguiled the time with
(...) sorts of In^umentes, and thereto sung many dainty canz^nets, as if
Apollo, Orpheus, Arion, and all the other fathers of heavenly Musiqu^ had been
present, which so attracted the senses of the Prince, as his memory began to
wexe drow^e and forgetful, imagining himself in a very beatitude, where he
seemed to see, not only y^ perfect beauty of a Goddess, but a divine shadow,
which carried (...) both his heart and eyes in contemplation.

Of like opinion was the young Princess, meruailing at the brave constitution
of her Knight, and esteeming her self beyond all other in happiness, that
Fortune had sorted her out such a Husband: and in sooth these Lovers were the
fairest couple that ever were joined in m^riage together, not vn^tly compared
^s Leander and Hero, the two goodliest stars that were in their times. In
this surpas^ng contentation they continued, till a Damsel (understanding that
supper was prepared) there set before them a Table ready covered, the wood
whereof was very precious, delivering a savor much like to Balm, and thereon
was set all sorts of costly viands: hard by stood a Cupboorde richly adorned
with Basins and Cups of Gold, which were embellished with such precious
stones, as the value of them was reputed inestimable. But these louer^ could
eat very little, because they had work enough to regard each other: for
there is nothing in the world more agreeable to one enamoured, then to
contemplate the object of his thoughts, because love making a breach into the
body, and planting his siege against y^ very soul, ^nders the passage of
nourishing m^ates, and makes them ^eed on his lovely devises, which are such,
as every one of you that have tasted thereof, can distinguish whether they be
bitter or sweet* Hence proceeds the pleasure conceived by behol ding, when
the eye takes his course to the heart, carrying with it the lively draught and
effigies of the thing seen, making so sound impression thereof in the spirit,
as nothing else may be represented thereto: in y^ end, this Idea passing through
the penetrailes and secret r^yons of the stomach, engraues on the heart the
perfect portrait of y^ thing beloved. And what morsel more delicious, what wine
more pleasant, or licquor more ambrosius can one find, where with to satisfy the
soul esprised with the brandon of Venus, then the exact contemplation and
secret discourse, which the spirit makes to his only choice, when he
beholds himself riciprocally beloved of her whom he loves? doubtless none
at al: happily some other might be spoken of, which seem to yield more
content, but then they are transitory and of no continuance. In this sort
supped Palmendos and Francelina, when the Damsels withdrawing the Table, went
to take their own refection, leaving these twain to devise together: then
approaching the Knight to the Mistres of his heart, said. Madame, how happy may I
name the hour of my nativity, seeing the celestial bodies appointed me such a
planet, as made me gain y^ honor of your love: now find I that for truth which
you told me in the Temple at Delphos, y^ in short time I should see you at mine
own pleasure. Com^aund then I beseech you what you would heue niee d^, and ^ew
me the way to gather some fruit, by the perpetual sernice I have vowed to your
divine beauty, that I ^ay give some cooling to the unquenchable flame, where in
^y heart is more and more tormented. And if the artificial ^re which we receive
from between two stones for our use, is less then nothing in respect of the
natural, as na^clie the most noble of the four elements lodged near the
celestial region: I dare, and by experience can affirm, that the violence of
the divine, surpasses the action of y^ other two, because if they light on any
body, they may quickly be extinguished: but much more contrary is the other,
the vehemence whereof every way increases pain, without lymitting the life of
the sufferer, as the very least of y^ other does. My Lord, answered Francelina,
in regard of the fire which happily you now feel, esteem the same to
proceed from the spark, that equally has taken hold on me, whereof I make no
such admiration (considering the disposition of the destentes) as to hear you
say y^ you have seen me in an other, place: in sooth at y^ age of three
years I was fatally enclosed in this Castle, where never sn^e entered Knight
or any other stranger, but only you. As for my request whereto you have
promised, thus it is, that you attempt not against my chastity, until our
marriage be sollemnly performed, which may not be, til you first have rescued
the king of Thessalie my father, from the long imprysonment wherein the Turk
has kept him. This adventure you must needs undertake, which doubtless ye
shall worthily effect, and so be Lord of me and the Realm of Thessalie,
whereto I am lawful heir after my Fathers decease: for performaunce whereof, I
commit my self into ^ your custody, provided you keep your former promise.
Pal* mendos attentively noted her words, and afterward remained a while
silent, imagining whether he should send^ or acco^panie his Lady to the
Emperor, or in mean space keep himself unknown to any, till he had ended
the adventure in, Turkey, bringing at his return the King of Thessalie with
him, if the heavens favored him in his deliverance, at length breaking off
this silent determination, he answered in this sort. Madame, so fervent and in
expuisable is the love I ^eare ye, as to gain the Monarchy of the whole
world, I would not offend the very least of your virtuous thoughts: and
albeit I had not promis^d what you required, mine own regard should have
taught me better government. For I account my self the happiest Knight under
heaven, not by any honor or praise gotten in this adventure, but only to
see my self subject to such incomp^rable beauty, which hence forth shall make
me so forward in Chivalry, as the race from whence I am descended, shall
thereby atchiue eternal commendation. And heerof Madame resolve your self,
that pain or travail shall not with-both me, from r^storing the King your
Father to his pri^inate liberty, if my w^nted fortunate star shine on me in
the action. In mean whyl^ I will leave you to the Emperors charge, the Prince
whom* I love and desire to serve, ^earing patiently y^ ^urden of my grief in
your absence, till time allow us a gracious meeting. Be here of assured my
noble L^rde, quoth she, that never shall I love anic but you, to wh^m the
fatal destenies have only appointed me, and no less will my torments be in
your absence, then yours, being now deprived of my former liberty, and the
same trans-ferred to your dispo^ng.

Spending the time thus in amorous confer^ce, at length he told her all that
happened to him in the Temple at Delphos, where if he saw her not in person,
yet did he behold her lively representation, and had a great deal of talk
with her: whereat Francelina could net but marvel, yet commending the
wisdom of the Fayrics in appointing her so noble a husband. Now she desires to
understand his name and birth, where with at large he truly acq^ainted her,
yet willing her she should not (...) it to ani^, till he returned with the King
of Th^ssalie her father. Then did he give her the King, which he received of
the Queen his Mother when he came from Tharsus, requesting her to keep it
carefully, because he must show it to the Emperor his Father, as the token
whereby he s^old (...) him to be his Son.

CHAP. XXII.
How Palmendos and Francelina going to the Queen of Thessalle, m^tte without
the Castle diverse Knights and Ladies of the Isle, which attended their
coming: what reverence the Lord of the Isle did him, and how he brought the
Queen to see the Castle.

Highly pleased was the Princess Francelina, when she knew her spouse to be
Son to the Emperor Palmerin, and all this night they beguiled y^ time with
sundry discourses pleasing to them both. The next morning, the Princess
brought her love to behold her stately lodging, where she caused him to put
on a costly black Armor, left there by the Fairi^s purposelie for him, as
also a goodly Sword, by virtue whereof he might bring such as him pleased into
a sound sleep, so causing two Damsels to bear his Helmet and Lance, they
intended to walk forth of the Castle. Now s^ined fair Francelina brighter
then the morning star, her head attire adorned all over with Carbuncles,
Diamendes, Rubies, Emeraldes and Oriental Saphires, and her upper garment
being a long Robe of cloth of Gold, curiou^ie figured with pearls and
precious stones, as the valewe thereof was imagined inestimable. In this, and
far greater pomp then I can set down, they left the Castle, meeting by the
way sundry Knights and Ladies of the Isle, and among them all was an ancient
grave Gentleman, Father to the three Fairies, whom they invested in the
government of this Isle after their death, he falling on his knee before
Palmendos and Francelina, delivered these speeches. Aduenturous and most
fortunate Knight, happy was the Planet that ruled at thy birth, seeing that by
thy virtue and wonderful prowess, thou have made this place accessable, which
so long time has continued full of trouble. Reverend Sir, answered Palmendos,
the sovereign bounty has made me the instrument of your good, and therefore
I rejoice a great deal the more: if you be either Father, Uncle, or allied to
those noble Dames, that by their knowledge have done so much for me, I give
ye all the right here to be had by the conques^ of Francelina. I humbly
thank ye Sir, answered the Knight of the Isle, for offering me such a courteous
gift, whereof I am altogether unworthy, albeit my Daughters by their secret
Philosophy, in this action still directed your course: but leave we these
speeches till better opportunity, and go we to comfort the Queen of
Thessalie, who on the Bridge attends your coming, for till you have brought
her Daughter over the Bri^ge, the enchauntments are not ended, and then shall
the Castle be in the former state, as it was when Francelina came first
hither. And is my gracious Queen and Mother here? said the Princess, then I
see my joys will meet altogether. So walked they lovingly over the Bridge,
attended on by many Lords, Barons and Ladies, when the Queen seeing her
Daughter come toward her, hardly could she refrain from swouning in the
arms of Ozalio, who was likewise ready to do as much at the joyful sight of
his Freende Palmendos, yet at length she embraced her Daughter, saying.

What abundance of tears have issued from mine eyes, since the time I saw
my beloved Daughter? How many bitter anguishes of heart have I endured, and
breathed innumerable ^ghes and clamours into the air, for the absence of thee
and the King thy Father, every hour expecting the release of you both from
unprisomnent? how yrksome is the remembrance (O perfect substance of mine
entrayles) that I was a Mother so cruel ^d seu^ r^ to banish thee so long ti^e
from me? but herein I consented to the persuasion of the Fairies, who promised
that by thine imprysonment, I should recover the King my Husband out of
thraldom, it now remains whether their words will sort to effect or no.
Wherefore ^r Knight, seeing you have exalted the soul the lay dispayring in the
floods of extreamitie, by delivering my ^ughter from these Magical charms:
let me entreat thee to follow thy fortune, and accomplish all my joys
together, in restoring him for whom this sorcerie was invented, that y^
remainder of our life may be more happy, then it has been sinc^ the time we
met first together. Palmendos sorrowing to see the Queen thus lament,
encouraged her in this sort. Good Madame torment not your self with any
further grief, seeing I have determined to loose my life, or else to bring with
me y^ King of Thessalie, in mean^ space asswag^ your sorrows by the presence of
your daughter, whom the ^auens have allotted to be my Wife, and there by
confirmed you my gracious Mother. By this time the Knig^t of the Isle had made
such provision in the Castle, as they might there lodge according to their
content, because more co^enient place there was not near at (...), and there
three ^aies they sported themselves in pleasure, mer^ailing at the ingenious
devises there fra^ed by the Fayries, so that the Castle seemed as a (...)
Paradise. Which Palmendos perceiving, and that it was seated in a sweet and
fertile clymat, he intended to send for people of his own nat^ Conntrey,
where by it ^ight (...) the better inhabited, and because some inc^ory of hi^
and Francelina, might be referued to f^wing (...).

The Knight of the Isle feasted them ^ery royally, and nothing was wanting
that any way mi^ht delight them, when Palmendos falling in conference with the
Queen, dest^ed that she would acc^mpany her Daughter to Constantinople, there
to stay with her in the Emperors Court (...) s^nt (...) him: and that she
should ^oreouer (...) hi^ (...), that he having (...) his voyage into (...),
would no longer conceal himsel^e as he had done. My ^oble Soon, quoth the
Queen, I shall wyllingly perform what ye have appointed, but I would know if
you mean to take a^ strength wit^ you against the Turk, beca^se I would s^nde
for (...) to Thess^lie, and beside crave (...) of the Emperor, who I am sure
will succor (...) with all his legion^. Gracious Madame and mother, answered
Palmendos, I will take no other company with (...) then I brought het^er, for
such business must be done rather by (...) hazard, then by bringing forces
into the (...): so that were yours an^ all the Emperor^ (...) together, yet
should we never compa^e our inten^ that way. But you shall understand that I
being on the ^ea not long since, met with the King of Culaquin, ^onne in law
to the great Turk, as he coasted along Thr^ce with hi^ Rouers and Pirates,
only to (...) the Empire ^o far^e (...) he might: yet by go^d hap I (...)
hi^ prisoner, and sent him to his Majesty at Constantinople. I^ ^appilie by
secret subtlety I cannot prevail, I shall move an exchange of these two
Kings, cullouring the ^atter with many plausible reasons: in brief, I will
(...) as the occurences shall best advise me, wherein I hope the divine bounty
will direct me the best course, that I may compass the issue of mine
affectionate desire. The Queen rejoiced ^erie much, when she heard that y^
King of Cu^aquin was likewise prisoner, and hoping to have her ^usband in
exchange for him, she more dilligentlie haste^ed the departure of Palmendos,
the like (though loathe to leave his company so soon) did fair Francelina,
not doubtting but her Lord and Husband would soon return, and ^nit up all
their ioye^ with the presence of the King her Father.

CHAP. XXIII.
How the Quee^e of Thessalie and Francelina h^ D^ughter, departing from the
Isle of Carderi^, were accompanied on the way by Palmendos and Ozalio, when
taking their le^ue e^ch of other* the Queen and her Daughter r^de to the
Emperors Court, where they were very (...) entert^ined.

Loathe are (...) Lovers to part a sunder, but the causes ^ing ^rgent, ^hey are
con^rained to make a virtue of nece^itie: wher^ore ta^ing their leave of the
Knight of the I^e, as also of all the Lord and Baron^ that so friendly bare
them company all this while, after many amorous and ceremonial cour^esses,
^companied with sighs, tears and (...) looks, and they had brought them
h^lfe a days io^ney on the way. Palmendos and Ozalio rode toward the seaside,
where they had lest order that their Ship should^ meet them. The Queen and
her Daughter, without any trouble to hinder their journey, arrived at the
City of Constantinople, send^ng one of her Knights to the Emperor to let
him understand the cause o^ her coming, a^ also the discourse of all that had
happene^. The Knight discharging his duty as he was commanded, his M^iestie
requested to know his name, who had so fortunatly delivered Francelina. Dre^d
Lord, answered the Me^senger, he is called Palmendos, the most valiant and
courteous ^ight in all these parts of the world. M^h good have I heard of the
man, said the Emperor, but comm^th he now in company with the Queen? No my
Lord, replied the Knight, because the future deliverance of our King, has
procured his journey into Turkey. Then the Emperor commanded Primaleon and his
Sarons, to go accumpanie the Queen and her Daughter to the Court, which they
with all diligence performed, for that the fame and renown spread of her through
all those regions, enereased their de^re to behold her. Arnedes like wise would
have gone with them, but that as yet he was not perfectly recovered, and
beside he wexed daily very melancholy, seeing the Ambassadors of France
stayed so long, nor could he hear any tyding of his Cousin Recind^ The Queen
of Thessalie, and her Ladies came attired in mourning black, expressing her
sorrow for the King her Husband: but Francelina like glorious Cynthia in her
cheifest pride, clothed (as you have heard) in most stately ornaments, drew
every eye to admire her beauty. Primaleon having saluted y^ Nueene, gave her
place and rode with the Princess her Daughter, when carried away in conceit
with her surpassing feature, he entered into these speeches. M^ thinks (Madame)
the Fairies were overmuch injurious, to lock up in prison such admirable
beauty, in that any gentle heart beholding you, would the sooner adventure for
the King your father, having such a gracious reward set down for his travail:
wherefore Palmendos has good occasion to boast, if Fortune permit him to
deliver the King of Thessalie. And I, quoth Francelina, account my happiness
nothing inferior, gaining thereby the most valiant and debenaire Knight, that
ever enterprised actions of Chivalry, which makes me esteem the Fairies wise
and discreet, by enclosing me in the enchaunted Castle: for very few would
have thrust their lives in perrill having once seen me, where contrariwise to
get honor by the adventure, they made proof of that which was only destenied
sor Palmendos, he being the man that ius^ly may be called the flower of
Knigh^es. In this matter I will not co^tende with ye, answered Primaleon, for
the virtues and graces of your beloved is such, as no man may woorthilie be
compared with him, wherefore you have good reason to affect him: and he
likewise is bound to constant permanencie, if your divine looks have peirced
his heart as they ought. The Emperor and the Empress, with Philocrista and
their other daughters, came to the Palace gate to welcome y^ Queen, when thee
and her Daughter alighting from their Palfraies, with humble reverence saluted
his Majesty, who with his Empress honorably entertained them, conducting
them into the great Hall, where the Queen began in this manner.

Most mighty and invincible Monarche, Palmendos the only Jewel of
knight-hoode, by us kisseth the hand of your imperial Majesty, having sent
ye this young Princess, to be kept under your protection, till he return
from Turkey, with my espoused Lord the King of Thessalie, if Fortune grant his
deliverance from the cruel Inf^dels, for which I continue in hourly
devotion, as well for the great desire I have to see the King my Husband, as
also to see the Knights speedy return, who only dedicateth his travails to
your highness service. With these words she delivered her Daughter to his
Majesty, and the Emperor receiving her very graciously, showed himself
exceeding joyful for their arrival, desiring them to use his Court as their
own and to be as frollike there as if they were in Thessalie. Beside, he
prayed God so to direct Palmendos in his at^pt, as he might deliver the King
her Husband from captivity: withal, that i^ he had requested assistaunce in
the cause, he should have had his Majesty's power at command, then taking
Francelina by the hand, he said. To you Daughter Philocrista, I commit the
henourable charge of this young Prin^sse, until such time her Knight be
returned. My Lord, answered Philocrista, I shall right willinglic fulfill your
commandment, be, ing no less glad of such a companion, then to have y^
Lady present with me, for whom such rare deeds of Chiu^lrie have been
performed. The Empress fooke the Queen by the hand, and Philocrista her
charge Francelina, they all sitting down under a sumptuous Canapie, where the
Knights regarding them, especially the Emprcsse and the two Princesses,
imagined a second iudg^ment for the Apple of beauty. And admit we Arnedes for
y^ gentle sheepeheard Paris, yet he imagined his Philocrista to be most
perfect, although Francelina was very far beyond her, all the Knights
concluding, that the had never seen more choice beauty, exc^pt the Empres^
when she was in the flower of her youth. But Philocrista never attained her
Mothers perfections, albeit she had two Sisters named Flcrida and Bazilia,
(which by the Author of Palmerin are named Belisa and Melicia,) that came very
near her in resemblaunce, especially Flerida, of whcm we shall have occasion
to speak hereafter, when we come to the noble Prince Edward of England.

The Emperor intrcated Francelina, to tell him (if she could) of whence
Palmendos was, where to the Princess modestly thus answered. Dread Lord, I
can reveal no further of him, then that he is commander of a Kingdom, and
diverse other Signories of great estate: what else I know of him, I am to be
excused till his coming, when himself will manifest his Country and
original, not his valor and courtesy sor that is blazed through most parts
of the world For this discre^t aunsw^re, she was greatly commended by the
Emperor, who noting her comelic gestures and behavior, este^med her discreet
and well advised: and seeing the Ring on her finger that Palme^dos gave her, he
thought it very much resembled his own Ring, which the Queen of Tharsus gave
him at his beyarture. Now could he not contain himself, but demands of
her, of whom she had that costly Jewel, so like one that he held in great
estimation. She answered that Palmendos gave it her, after her deliuera^nce
from the Isle of Carderia, whereat his Majesty greatly meruailing, imagined
this Knight to be the Queen of Tharsus Son. Now was he much more desirous to
see him, then before, remembering what kindness she showed him in the Realm of
Pasmeria: then causing his own Ring to be brought, and compared with that the
Princess wore, they were found in every point so like and conformable, as
hardly could the one be known from the other. Indeed they were made both by
one workman, and magicallie charmed like in resemblaunce, as the perfect
signal to discover the original of Palmendos: which made the Emperor
conceive some suspicion, that this unknown Knight should be his Son,
especially when he called the Queens dark speeches to memory, which she
used after her acquaintance with him. Yet would he not reveal this doubt to
any one, but past it over with fresh welcomming the Queen and her daughter,
and delivering in speeches, that he was glad Belcar kept not the Bridge, when
it was Pa^lmendos fortune to arrive there, yet was he sorry for Tirendos
mishap: albeit he commended the courtesy of the Conqueror, in exacting no
further on the Prince of Mec^na.

But leave we Palmendos and Ozalio travailing toward Turkey, and speak a
little of Recinde the Castilian Prince, being one of them that followed in his
search.

CHAP. XXIIII.
How Recinde pursuing the search of Palmendos, reskewed a Merchaunt from five
Thieves, whom he dyscomfited on the mountain. And how by the means of an
Archer that bent his bow against him, he came to the mouth of a deep Cave,
where he killed a Lion that kept it, and delivered thence a Lady, which was
enchaunted into the shape of a Serpen^.

REcinde leaving Constantinople, for the same cause as the other Knights did,
happened to the same place where Palmendos lodged the night before, demanding
of his Host, (...) he had seen any such man, who made this answer. Uerilie
the same man that had the honor of y^ Tourney, was my gueste this last night,
and never did I see a more courteous Gentleman, which makes me hope he will end
the adventure of Francelina, whether he is gone as he told me he would. With
these words the Spanyard wa^ well contented, minding to follow him to the Isle
of Carderia, and ryding by the way, he heard a very lamentable cry, which
caused him to look about* when he espied one hanging on a Tree by ye arms,
and five villains hard by making a fire, to dress some food they had killed
on the Mountain. Coming to the man that hunge in this w^full plight, he cut
him down, and vnderst^nding that these villains had r^bd and so misused him:
caused the Merchaunt to take his weapon, and so they setting upon the Th^ues,
s^ew three of them, dryuing the other to flight, by which means the Merchaunt
had most of his treasure again, for which he thanked the Prince, and mounting
on horseback acc^mpanied him on the way. Not far had they gone, but they
met a Knight unarmed, of huge constitution and evil favored, having a (...)
Bow in his hand. and a Quiver hanging by his ^e full of Arrows, of wh^m they
desir^d to know which way they should get forth of the Forest. The
discourteous Knight (without making any answer) let fly an Arrow (...) them,
wherewith he killed the Prince Recindes horse, ^e being not a little moved
at this mishap, grew into great choler against him, who made no longer stay,
but ran from them so fast as he could. Recinde and the Merchaunt still
pursued, till having lost the sight of him, and meruailing where he should be
hidden, at length they found the mouth of a very dark Cau^, which they
suspected the Knight had taken for refuge: whereupp^n the Prince entreated the
Merchaunt to stay there without, because he intended to sear^h the Cave, and
be revenged on the Knight that had so wronged him. Not far had he gone under
the earth, but he heard a pitiful voice crying for help, which caused him
to return back again, when at the entrance of the Uaute he b^helde a
mighty Lion, which came forth with the Knight, and ran ^ppon the Prince (...)
furiou^e: but he who could not ^ee frighted with matters of greater moment, so
valiantly defended himself against the Beast, as in short time he laid him
dead at his foot^. New ran the Knight back agame into the Cave, and the
Prince after him so fast as ^e could, till at length he came into a goodly
Hall, which was hanged round about with gorgious Tapistrie, and ^herein might
one behold all such as passed by the mouth of the Cave, as if they had
discernd the same in a Class. While he stood beholding this beautiful
prospect, he saw the Knight coming toward him Armed, and drawing his Sword,
thus spoke ^o the Prince.

(...) ^ight, (...) foolish (...) brought thee to this place, for I shall let
thee (...) the d^unger (...) by thy presumption. More (...), (quod the Prince,
have thou behaved thy self, in killing my hors^ without (...) of offense.
H^erewith they (...) a long while together, till the Knight seeing himself
unable to resist the Prince, (...) have (...) him^lfe in the Chamber he came
from, offering to keep the door against him as his defense: but Recinde
thrusting after him into the Chamber, beheld a great and (...) Dragon lying
there, the ^ght whereof made him somewhat a^azed, ye^ seeing the beast stirred
not against him, (...) his ^ormer quarrel with the Knight, bringing him at
length into such subjection, as with his Sword he (...) his hea^ from his
shoulders. The Serpent terre^ed with extreme fear, began to shrink back,
when Recinde ^ting ^p his Sword ^o strike, the S^pent spoke in this (...).

Sir Knight, ^or (...) sake p^ttie me, and seek not to ^hed my bloo^, having
(...) ye: so shall I be^ perpetually (...) at your commandment, for
delivering me from ^his cruel Knight, who has (...) me (...) ^he space of
(...). The Princ^ (...) these words, hel^e do^ his Sword, whe^the Serp^ thus
proceed^d. I am no Serpent Sir, as happily I (...) in your ey^, but a most
unfortunate and abuse^ Da^osell, having s^fered the most miserable (...) that
ever (...), living (aga^t my will) in the (...) of this (...). If the a^t a
(...) creature, (...) Recinde, I mer^le thou (...) have the (...) of such a
deformed beast. I know said the (...), what representation I have in your
^dgement, but I (...) assure y^ on my life, that I am (...) S^rpent or any
thing else but a most (...) Woman. Which well she might af^me, because the
Knight now (...), ((...) her the more cunningly) (...) to (...) ^by Art
^gicke, as you shall (...) the (...) at large.

He loved this Damsel so extremely, she bee^ng the Daughter of an ancient
Widdowe dwelling not far ^ff, as seeing he could not obtain her in marriage, by
reason of his badde manners and evil favored body: so labored with a
Magi^ian a freende of his, to cause her resemble a Serpent to any but himself.
Her Mother (...) ignorant of this treachery: seeing ^uch an ougly Serpent
among them: aff^ghted at this strange (...), presently fled forth of their
(...). The Maiden fo^wing to understand the cause of their fear, wandered
sorowfully after them through the ^ldes, where she was (...) by her Lover, and
brought to the (...) prepar^ (...) the Sorce^, (...) should (...) that
apperaunce, till one of the ^est ^nights in the (...) arrive there, and
valiantly (...) her cut of his (...), only by his death to be delivered, and
^ixe years she had abode in that place, seeming a beautiful (...) to her
^uer only, and to all (...) ^er a (...) Serpent. (...) driu^n into (...)
a^miration, (...), (...) spoke.

In sooth, this is the most strange accident that ever (...) heard of, but
seeing your Lover ^s dead, boldly may ye depart this Chamber, and return
home to your (...) again: for in time (perhaps) this hidious shape will
forsake ye. My Lord. quoth she, I have many times ^ryuen to get forth of
this prison, but all my labor has been in vain: for by like sortiledge has
the Knight bound me here, as he got me from my Mothers Castle. So am I
persuaded, answered the Prince* wherefore seeing of your self ye cannot
depart, I will try if my strength will release y^e of this servitude. Then
taking his Arming gyrdle from about him, he made it fast about the Scrp^nts
m^ddle, and forciblie thought to pull her out of the Chamber, but the strength
of the enchauntm^nt ouer-maistring him, when he had gotten her to the veri^
door, would violently pluck her back again. Yet Rec^nde being all heart and
courage, gave not over for all these resistaunces, but at length by exceeding
labor and travail, he got her into the open Hall, and then she seemed a
very beautiful Woman, who falling down at his feet, entreated him not to
forsake her, till he had brought her to her Moth^rs Cast^ll. So going forth of
the Cave, she told the M^rchaunt all that had happened, which made him answer
her in this sort.

Madame, both you and I are highly beholding to this Knight, for he has
miraculously r^called you from a lam^table sufferaunce, and not only has he
saved my life, but help me to my goods again which were utterly lost,
wherefore we have good cause to think that he is the only Paragon of
Chivalry. So breaking off these speeches, they took the Knights horse,
because he had slain the Princes, and mounting the Damsel behind him,
brought her home to her Mothers Castle, the ancient Lady, being not a
little joyful to see her Daughter, who^ she reputed utterly lost: likewise
her Brethren were very glad to see their Sister restored h^me again. As for
their friendly entertainment, you may judge it by the cause, which being of
nature, must needs surpass all other whatsoever.

CHAP. XXV.
How Recinde arrived at the Isle of Carderia, where understanding that
Palmendos had ended the adventure, he went to seek Belcar at Macedon: and of
the Combat he had with him, by the false perswafion of the Damsel, that
followed the revenge of her bretherens death.

FOur^ days stayed Recinde and the Merchant at y^ old Ladies Castle, and
then taking their l^aue, the Prince committed the Merchaunt to his own
occasions, and he rode strait toward the Isle of Carderia, desirous to try
his fortune in the adventure, as also to find the Knight he sought for: but
being there arrived, he understood how Francelina was delivered, Palmendos
gone toward Turkey, and Tirendos abode at the Castle with Lypes and his
Sisters, from whence he sent a Squire to Macedon, to certify Belcar what had
happened, as also to entreat him stay th^re for his coming.

As for the Prince Belcar, he being now with Alderina his chosen Mistress, to
speak of all circumstaunces entercoursing between them, would be more
labor to me then pleasure to you. She accuses him with a great many
articles of ungentleness, that he would travail for Francelina, being before
her vowed Knight, and he excuses al under this point, that what he did in a
place of such tri^ll, was only to eternize the name of Alderina, and nothing
to the advantage of Francelina, nor could y^ greatest Monarch on the earth have
commanded him from that service, but only the gracious Letter sent by her,
whcrfore he desired to return thither again, to make her more famous til the
adventure were ended. To stay her answer, and appease his hot desire, at that
very instant the Courrire arrived sent from Tirendos, whose message being
heard, highly was the Princess contented, but Belcar overcome with exceeding
grief, because feign he would have tried his fortune against Palmendos.

Now come we to the Damsel again, that pursued Belcar for the death of her
Brethren, according as you su^ficientlie heard before, she understanding that
hc^ was in the Court of Macedon, so highly loved of y^ King, Queen, and the
whole nobility, she was out of hope to work him injury there: wherefore she
intended to return h^me again, and by the way she happened to meet with y^
Prince Recinde, when beginning her accustomed complaints, she delivered the
same discourse which she had done to Cardino and Tirendos, saying that the
Knight who had so traitorously slain her brethren, soiourned in the Court of
Macedon. Recinde desirous to win honor by succouring the distressed, and hoping
he might find the Knight he sought for at Macedon, answered her in this manner.
If it be Damosel as you say, that the Knight in such traiterous sortc sic we
your brethren, I pro^se ye, by the faith I bear to Chivalry, that to my
power I will revenge your wrong, because all (...) receiving this ordcr, are
bound by duty to assist Damsels, injuriously wrong^d by d^storall varlets.
The crafty deceiuer fell at the Princ^s seete, affirming what she had said with
many oaths. G^e th^n with me (quod Recinde) to show me the Knight, and either I
will loose my life, or m^ke him co^fcsse his villainy. The ^nted palliard
mounted on her Palfray, and such spe^de thcy made in travail, as at length
they arrived at Maccdon, when entering the great Hall, they ^ounde there the
King, Belcar, and diverse noble Barons, whereupon the D^inoscl thus spoke to
Recinde. See here my Lord, the Knight that slew my Brethren, I beseech ye make
him know before the King, the teason he committed against harmeles men: for
his Majesty not knowing the enormitie of the case, reputeth this offendour one
of the most courteous Knights in his Court, as my self perceived at my last
being here. Recinde having with humble reverence saluted the King Florendos,
turned to Belcar with these speeches. Sir Knight, this Damsel has sworn to
me that yeu have trayterouslie slain her two brethren, after you had been
friendly entertained at her fathers house: if ye did so, surely it was an
act far unbeseeming you, and by force of Arms I shall make ye so to confess
it, if you have the hardines to enter the field with me. Belcar greatly
offended to hear himself so charged, and evermore by one that sought to bring
his life in danger, in anger thus replied.

In sooth Knight, I cannot but think thy discretion very simple, in saying if I
have the hardines to enter y^ field with thee, and thy presumption is as
insolent, as this D^mosell is trothlesse and disloyal, in accusing me without
any cause: notwithstanding, I hope to recompense ye ^or light belief, and
that false woman likewise the instrument of thy folly. After these speeches,
he went and Armed him self for the Combat, which the King many ways labored
to hinder, but Recinde continued so resolutely against Belcar, as the King
could not diswade the matter, wherefore he thus spoke to Recinde. Seeing you will
not at my intrea tie give over this rashness, let me understand the name of him
that will not grant so small a matter, specially to one that is able to yield
thanks therefore. I amm quod Recinde, a Knight of a strange Country, who came to
the Emperors Court at Constantinople, mean while the nuptiall^s of the
Hungarian Prince were soll^mnized, whether likewise came a Knight unknown,
bearing a silver flower in his Sheeld: he having wun the honor of the Tourney,
departed secretly from the assembly, which made me follow in search of him:
and in respect I am but a poor Knight errant, I desire no wrong may be offered
me in the battle. Be th^rof assured, answered the King, that none shall meddle
with you but your adversary only: and trust me it greeueth me to the very
heart, that coming from the Court of the Emperor Palmerin my Son, you should
here enter the field against Belcar, who is one of his Majesty's cheifest
favorites. When Recinde heard Belcar named, on the one side it displeased him,
y^ he was to deal with a Knight so famous and renowned: on the other side it
grieved him as much, when he considered the near alliance between him and
Melicia, whom he loved as his very soul, so that willingly he would have
forborne the Combat, but that he could not with honor gain say it.

Now the King desires the Duke of Pontus, and another of his cheifest Barons,
to judge the fight according to conscience, and without any exception of
person. Soon after the Champions enter the Listes, where breaking their
Lances bravely in the carrire, they were both dismounted, notwithstanding
they quickly recovered themselves, and drawing their Swords fell to the
Combatte. Long while they continued a most furious fight, sharp and cruel
wounds being delivered on either side, that judgment could not be given who
was in greatest danger: but his Majesty seeing Belcar were very feeble, and
that it was like this ^ght would end both their lives, as one loath to see the
death of either, he threw his staff of peace between them: then coming down
from the window where he stood into the ^eld, he desired them at his request
to giu^ over the fight. My gracious Lord, answered Recinde, that may we not
consent unto, unless the Damsel that complained of Belcar, will first remit
the injury he has done her. My self will thereto persuade her, said the
King, in mean while do you travail no further in this controuers^e, seeing
you have both shown sufficient and haughty Chivalry. So went the King to
the Damsel, who was wonderful glad to see Belcar in such dangerous estate,
as no Knight before had brought him in the like. Damosel quod he, seek not the
death of two so good Champions as these are, but (for my sake) pardon Belcar if
he have in ought offended, and I shall cause him to make such amends, as your
self shall like well thereof: beside, such courtesy shall ye find at my hand,
as happily shall yield occasion of thanks while ye live. Heereto will I never
consent though I die, quoth she, and more would the present death of Belcar
content me, then if the whole Monarchy of y^ world were under my puissaunce:
considering the enorme and dete^table treason, wherewith he villainously
wronged my Father and Brethren, which makes me I cannot discharge my Knight
of his promise. The King with great instance entreated her again, and so did
all the Lords attending on him: but all was in vain, she was so resolutly
grounded in her wickedness, as she accounted it pleasure to be selfewilled
therein. Whereupon, the Queen (heartily sorry to see Belcar so sore wounded)
understanding the obstinate refusal of the Damsel: she accompanied with the
Duchess of Pontus, and the Princess Alderina her Daughter, came altogether
and desired her, to discharge her Knight of his promise, and the Qu^ene would
entertain her among the Ladies of honor in her Court. But these prayers and
requests nothing auailed, to move any pity in this inexorable Damsel,
which the Queen perceiving, and that she continned so obstinate in cruelty:
she made a sollemne oath, that if she did not presently pardon the two Knights,
(hearing a murmuring among the people, how her accusations against Belcar, were
false and flaunderous) that her self should die a most shameful death. The
Damosel seeing the Queen so displeased, was afraid of her cause, and beside
she grieved to behold the tears of fair Alderina, wherefore she alighted from
her Palfray, and falling at the Queens feet, desired her not to regard her
great error of ingratitude, which she had showed to y^ King her husband, in
denying a matter consisting in her power: but for her Majesty's sake, she was
content to pardon both y^ Knights. The Queen embraced her in sign of thank^s,
s^nding word to Recinde, that he should proceed no further in battle, so
the Damsel went with the Queen and her Ladies to the Palace, and both the
Champi^ns acccmpanied the King, who bringing them to their Chambers, commanded
that his che^fe Physicians and Chirurgions should give dilligent attendaunce to
see their wounds healed.

Daily would the Queen, accompanied with the Duchess of Pontus, and the
fair Princess Alderina her Daughter, come to visit them, so that at length
they reconciled the two Princes to amity, and shortly after, the Queen (in
regard of her promise) caused the Damsel to be very honorably married,
when Belcar made her openly confess, that her accusations were m^st false and
untrue, in respect that he never saw any of her Brethren, before that night
wherein he was entreated by her Father to lodge at his Castle. But leave we
these, and let us now return again to our noble Knight Palmendos, whom we
left preparing his voyage toward Turkey.

CHAP. XXVI.
How after Palmendos and Ozalio were embarked for Turkey, they landed at a
port near the Cast ell of Albayzo, where the King of Thessalie was kept
prisoner: and how Palmendos intended to be at the Tourney, which was prepared
for the marriage of the Captains son, and what was his success.

AFter that Palmendos and Ozalio, had left the Queen of Thessalie and her
daughter Francelina, they posted with all speed to their Ship: the Mariners
having in the time of their abode there, happened on a Turk left therein the
Haven by reason of extreme s^cknes, wherefore they of Tharsus, knowing him to
be a Moore, took him into their ship, and by the time of the Princes
arrival, he had very w^ll recovered his health. He understanding that
Palmendos would sail into Turkey, desired to grant him passage thither, and
in recompense of that gentleness, he would direct him whether he pleased,
because he knew all the ports and creekes of the (...), and most of the
Cities and Towns on the land. Palmendos joyful of this good hap, accepted
him for his patron, and without concluding to what place they would first
sail, he wylled them to make toward the nearest port to the City of Tubant:
demanding of the Turk, if he knew any harbor of surety near that place. My
Lord (quoth the Turk) I will conduct ye if you please, into a straight of the
Sea, which is very secret, where oftentimes ride diverse great vessels, and no
other place of lodging is near at hand, but my fathers house only, which
stands a days journey from Tubant, and the like from the Castle of Albayzo,
where the great Turk at this present keepe^ the king of Thessa^e and all his
treasure, under the charge of a good ^night who is the Captain of the Castle,
and this pl^ce he reputeth a^ the strongest hold in all the Country.
Moreover this I ^are (...) Sir, that there is no part so little in all that
Co^ntrey, but I know it as well by night as by day, ^uen as perfectly as the
port* whereof I tell ye: there may you abide in (...), and d^e what best your
self shall please, uncontrolled by any, this will I make good for ^e great
(...) I (...) found. Palmendos seeing how Fortune fa^oured him, committed his
conducting to the Turk, who was named Orycano, when at length they came to the
port near Tu^ant: then Oricano went on shore with the Knights, to take some
order for their good entertainment, but ^nding not his father at home,
entreated his mother (...) two breethren, who were not a little glad of his
^afe return, to use those Gentlemen so curteou^y as might be, expressing what
kindness he had found at their hands. Palmendos rejoiced that they were in a
place so sore and secret, and ^eere Albayzo Castle, where the King of
Th^ssalie was detained in captivity, yet kept he on his rich black Armor,
which the Fairies left for him at the Castle of Carderia, his good sword
likewise he had by his side, wherewith he could enchaunt and bring asleep
any one by drawing it forth. It was large and short as a woodknife or
Fauchion, most arti^cially damasqued and garnished with three sorts of
Diamonds, the who^ sheath being compos^d of one, the mosse-barre and pomell of
an other, and the handle of the crossed ra^e and precious Calamite that ever was
seen, the blade of the finest tempered steel that could be in any sword,
in brief, the like weapon was hardly to be found through the world. By this
time Orycanos father was come home, who rejoicing to behold his Son, showed
very loving (...) to the prince^ for his sake: when among* other talk,
Palmendos requested to know of the old man whence he came ^o late, whereto
the poor man humbly (...) answer^d. I come Sir, from a Town not far hence,
whether I went in the morning to sell fish, because great^ number of Knights
are assembled there, again^ the marriage of the Lords daughter, with the son to
the Captain of Albayzo Castle: and I stayed the longer, ^o see the
Bridegroom and his Sister, who is reported to be the fairest woman in the
world. By many great Princes she has been requ^sted in m^riage, but ^he
has refused every one, saying she will never be marri^d, but with him that can
winn^ her by Martial pr^wcsse: for which canse many brave and gallant Knights
are come thither, and on the third day of the feast, have appointed a Tourney
for her love, the resort being so great to see this Lady, as i^ the great
Turk with all his Bassaes and (...) kept Court there. Palmendos attentively
noting this tale, con^idered with him self, that if he could by subtle
traine^ entice this Lady to lou^, he^ might easily get into Albayzo Castle,
where he should the better compass the stratageme, to set the King of
Thessalie at liberty: for this cause he determined to be present at the
Tourney* and in bed acquainted Ozalio with hi^ whole intent, who thought it
the only way to work their enterprise. On the morrow Palmendos told the
Fisher, that he would make one in the Ioust: so giving him good store of money,
prayed him to regard his Ship and Mariners till he returned, and so he set
forward with Ozalio and Orycano, who served them faithfullye during all this
busine^. Not far had they rid, but they met with a Page that attended on
Iffida, for so was the beautiful virgin named, the Captains Daughter and
occas^ of this triumph: Palmendos asks him, if the Tourney held the day
following. It does Sir, answered the Page, by general agreement, and ^o please
ye to be there, you shall see many valiant Knights enter the (...), where I
hope the pertakers of Ripole, for so was the Bridegroom called, shall bear
away the honor of the day: and sundry brave champions will adventure for the
love of Iffida my Mistres, whereby they may gain the better mean to offer her
their service, intending therefore to be on her brothers side, who is the
chief man in this enterprise.

The Prince calling to mind the perfections of Francelina, breathed forth a
^gh that came from his very soul, on the other si^e, ^e, was marvelous glad,
that he had so fortunately met with the Ladies Page: and desirous to gain some
acquaintance with her, he speaks to the youth in this manner. Gentleman, I
think the graces of your Mistress to be so amiable, as in one ^nstant they
are sufficient to captiuate al such as behold (...), and therefore I can ass^re
ye, that with the better wi^ and more sincere affection, is ^e provided to her
service that neu^r saw ^er: which I speak on mine own behalf, wh^ abandoning
^he place of my original, have with insuppo^table travels crossed many Countries,
only to come let her understand my extreme devotion, to be her perpetual
and faithful servant, whereto the renown of her beauty induced me, which I
think is spread over the face of the whole earth. And seeing my hap wa^ so
good to m^ete with you, albeit yo^ know me not, nor have I yet deserved any
thing at your hand: yet let me entreat ye to do one favor for me, the issue
whereof, beside your a^hieuement of notable reputation in ^ebonaire courtes^e,
which all of your young ye^res ought to have in singular (...)* I hope shall
let ye sufficiently perceive, that you deal not for an ingrate^ull person, nor
will ye mis^ike your travail in the cause. What would you have me do? answered
the Page, in respect you seem a man of virtue and quality: if it be a thing
possible f^r me and honorable, I will with all my ^eart acc^mplish it. A
thousand thanks for your ^iendlinesse, answered Palmendos, and for nothing else
is my suit, but that you would say to your Lady Mistress, how a strange
Gentleman, which came into this country only to see her graces and virtues,
most humbly commends him self to her favorable opinion, earnestlye desiring
that she would accept him as her Knight in the Tourney, where to morrow he
intends to show him self, as one that will over balance her most favored in
weight of affection, and will be accounted second to none in exploits of arms,
having no better mean, whereby to acquaint her with the insupportable burden
of his heart: and that she may well perceive it, I will not be on her brothers
side, but against them that take his part, h^ping to send them ^anquished out
of the field, or make them glad to take their beels, by the strength and
hardines her divine beauty shall give me, so please her to grant me the
aforesaid favor, and which will cause me to account my self the happiest
Knight, on w^om the planets have breathed their cel^stiall influence. The Page
seeing Palmendos fair and so richly armed, imagined him to be some great
personage, wherefore he modestly thus replied. My Lord this dare I not do for
any man living, without I knew the party to have some familiarity with my
Mistress: nevertheless, being a matter of so small consequence, and that you
deserve much more then this on my behalf, I shall deliver ^er this message,
for your sake who have so import^natly requested it. Palmendos requited the
Page with many thanks, and to make him more forward in the matter, he took a
bracelet of gold from his arm and gave it him: so beg^ling the time with
other sp^eches, at length they arrived at Prissa, for so was the Town called
where the Triumphs were appointed, the field being covered all over with
costly Pauilions, wherefore Palmendos made choice of a conucnient place, and
there commanded his rich Tent to be presently erected. Mean while the Page
courteously took his leave, and entering the town, went straight to his
Mistress lodging, where having ^rst disnatched the answer sent from her
Sister, and seeing her so conveniently apart from her Damsels, he rehearsed
all that Palmendos had said unto him. I wonder, (quoth she) what the Knight
should be, that durst send me such a presumptuous message, seeing he says
he is a stranger, and for my love has forsaken his Country. Believe me
Madame, answered the page, nor do I know him, but he seems to be descended
of great parentage, and is one of the goodliest personages that ever I saw: as
for his courtes^e and liberality, behold Mistres, what a costly Bracelet he
has given me, that never did any thing for him in all my life.

Me thinks this is very strange, replied Iffida, that this Knight should come
from far Countries to see me, and very ungrateful might I be reputed, if I
should not thank him for so great pains: therefore fail not but show me
him to morrow, so soon as he does enter the Listes, that I may give good
heed to his behavior. Herein, (quoth the Page) will I accomplish your
command, because right well I know him by his rich Armor, as also the lusty
Courser he rode on yester day. Thus made the Page a train for love, which
afterward reached to the heart of his Mistress, where having kindled the fire
her self, she felt the sparks so to leap about her imaginations, as all
this night she could enjoy no rest, for thinking on the Knight that came from
far Countries.

CHAP. XXVII.
How Palmendos came to the Tourney appointed for Iffida, where he won her by
his Knightly chiualry, and by that occasion obtained her love. And how they
spoke together by the means of their Ambassador, so that Palmendos and Ozalio
easily entered the Castle of Albayzo.

ON the morrow, which was the appointed day of the Tri^mph: Iffida decked her
self in most sumptuous ornaments, and after dinner came with the Bride and
diverse other Ladies, to the Scaffoldes and Pauilions prepared for them in the
field. The^ assembled the Knights on all sides, and entered the Lists each one
to show his prowess, but because the greater part were on the Bridegroomes
side, therefore the contrary went apace to wrack, and the other were verily
judged to bear the Prize out of the field, if Palmendos and Ozalio had not
suddenly arrived. For they knew better how to handle their weapons, then the
Knights of this Country did, and that they made them very well perceive,
thieflie Palmendos who did marvelous exployts, as Iffida (without any
instruction of her Page) knew well enough the man that sent her the message,
whereat both she and all the beholders were amazed, to see him so play the Devil
among the Knights, as no one dealt with him but was vnhorssed. When they saw
there was no more work to do, they with-drewe themselves into their Tent, and
would not unarm them selves, least some treachery should be practiced
against them, as oftentimes at such occasions it happens, when the vanquished
attempt vnhonourablie against the Conquerours. When Ripole saw his Knights so
discomfited, he was exceedingly agreeued therewith, because he entirely loved
his Sister Iffida, and doubted she would now convict him of great dishonor:
but she whose mind was no where el^, then on the Knight to whom the victory
was due, extolled his admirable magnanimity to the heavens, as the rest of her
History will plainly discover, and knowing no better mean to work by, she
called the Page aside, whom the Prince had employed as his Amba^adour, and
thus she spoke to him. Unspeakable (in mine own opinion) is the generositie
of the Gentleman stra^nger, who has right well performed the resolution,
whereof by thee he assured me yester-day: very necessary is it therefore,
that thou go thank him on my behalf, for his long journey and great pains
taken for my sake: beside, as he has sufficiently shown me his fortune in
deeds of arms, so do I desire secretly to see his person, in which request
to satisfy me, if he will this night come to my brothers banquet, which is
provided for the new married couple, I shall not fail to esteem him among my
cheifest favorites.

While every one was busily censuring on the conqueror, the messenger from
Iffida came to Palmendos Tent, where breeflie discharging what he was
commanded, and the Prince marvelous glad of this good fortune, thus answered.

^entleman, I desire ye to tell your Lady, that nothing shall make me disapoint
her pleasure, because the only occasion of my long travail, was extreme
desire to offer her my service, and right happy shall I account my self, if
she will employ me in any thing to her content. To be at the Bridegroomes
banquet, me thinks should argue over much boldness, in respect of the slender
acquaintance and habitude, which as yet I have with him or any of his company:
Notwithstanding, I would willingly be there after the banquet, to guide mine
eyes to the place, where they might feed on the celestial and graciou^
countenance of your Mistress, yet with this entreatie before hand, that I
would not be known to any what I am. And if it happen I may confer a little
with her in secret, I will tell her suc^ things, as all the rest of her
lifetime shall yield her contentation, wher^in likewise if you will be
loyal and fa^ourable to me, to compass both her good and your own: your
guerdon happily will be such, as you will a hundred and a hundred times think
the hour fortunate, when by so good chance you met me on the way, for though
you see me here but in simpl^ equipage, and as a Knight errant, I am the Lord
of many Provinces, great estates and wonderful riches. My Lord answered the
Page, right willingly will I adventure my person, in doing you all the
faithf^ll service can be devised, the actions no way stretching to the
dish^nour of me and my Lady: and such good order will I likewise take, as you
shall not be known to any, but only her that longs to see you.

Hereupon Palmendos unarmed him self, and putting on a T^rkish ma^tle, taking
his good sword under his arm, he and Ozalio went with the Pag^ into the great
Hall where the banquet was; afterward they closely got to a con^enient place,
where both Iffida and he might behold each other, which he did but with faint
and deluding looks, only to add some grace to his subtle determination,
which he had practiced for the King of Thessalies deliverance. And while in
this counterfeit contem^lation he busi^d his eyes, the Page cunninglye went to
Iffida, and wispering in her ear, said. See Madame the conquering Knight of
the Tourney, who desires you very instantly, to conceal him only to your
self, in that his travail hither was to no other end, but to see if your
gracious gifts and beauty, were aunswerable to the renown blazed thereof so
far hence in his Country, hoping to compass the matter so, (for to me he has
opened the very secrets of his heart) that when you have f^rther ^nowledge of
him: you shall not only (...) occasion to love him, but account your self
likewise b^holding to him, in respect of the voluntary pain he has suff^red
for your sake. The rest of his speeches I shall tell you ^t better leisure, in
place more convenient for such discourse.

Iffida who was prudent and well advised, forbear to confer longer with her
new solicitour, least her love should be lightly espied by any: then secretly
she glaun^th on Palmendos, whose thoughts were busy to compass his intent,
and seeing him so pensive, she immediately interpreted this Saturnine
taciturnitie to her own advantage, thinking it proceeded from the rauishment of
her beauty, as her Ambassador had before persuaded her: herewith she judged
in him, more elegancie of form and sweetness of complexion, then in any other
knight whatsoever, which made her so esprized with his attracting regard, as to
allay the extreamitie of this heat, she desired nothing more then to speak
with him, that she might be resolved of whenc^ and what he was. Palmendos
stirred not from his place, nor thought be long of ^is stay there, because be
hoped to gather some frnite thereby: but warily marks the amorous looks of
Iffida, and how her e^e was the messenger of her inward desire, all which he
couettly imparted to Ozalio, who moved not one foot from his dear friend.

They fearing least their long stay would canse suspicion, went their way,
which made Iffida likewise repair to her Chamber, and calling the minister of
her loo^e aside, began in this manner.

Ah Page, how (...) ^idst thou discover the perfecti^us of the (...) Knight,
whose behavior and discre^t (...), joined with his rare and martial prowess,
makes me repute himfor the cheifest man, that ever came into this Country.
Madame answered the young Co^celler, if you would see innumerable virtues
conjoined in ^ne body, I beseech ye hasten your speaking with him, and let not
the happy hour miscarrie through your default, which the fatal destinies
have so graciously appointed: his loouely speeches shall acquaint ye with his
endowments, which you may behold so correspondent in every point, as you can
wish for nothing but is to be found in him. Now should I speak with him, said
Iffida, without impeach to mine ^onor, which hithertoo I have
carefullyregarded, unless it be by thy means in some secret place, free from
the hurt of suspected persons, wherewith the world is now mightily stored? I
shall tell ye how Madame, replied the Page, you know my Lord your father willed
ye the other ^ay, that ye should return home to him with all possible speed,
which will serve as a fit occasion, to take your honest sure well of this
company: if then you will depart hence to morrow toward evening, you may
lodge by the way at my mothers house: whether I will go before with the two
Knights, and cause her to say they be both her Nephews, who now are friendly
come to visit her, so may ye confer together at your pleasure. The invention
is good answered Iffida, yet must ye be very circumspect herein, that the
drift of our intent be not discovered.

The complot thus concluded, the Page went in the morning to Palmendos, and
making him not a little glad with these newe^, caused both the friends to mount
on horsbacke, and set forward with him to his mothers house, seated in a
pleasant place between Tubant and the Castle of Albayzo. When the Gentlewoman
saw the two knights, she was much abashed, but her Son soon resolved her in
every point: and that she might boldlye call them her Nephews, her self
being a stranger borne far from that Country. The mother being thoroughly
enstructed by her Son, desired their intent might take good success,
whereupon the Page returned to his Mistress, who had in this while so well
ordered her departure, as the new married nor any other could gather suspicion:
then forward she sets, for her journey had have, so surely had Love seized ^n
^er heart, having no other company with her, then her four waiting Damsels and
two Squiers of her fathers.

Now is she come to the long desired place, where being very graciously
entertained, both by Palmendos and Ozalio, as also the Pages mother. Iffida
being not to learn her lesson, desires to know what Knights they were that so
friendly saluted her. They are quoth the Pages mother, my two Nephews, who
having not seen me of long time, are come to know if they may stand me in
any steed: as also to offer their service to my Lord your father, if in any
thing it shall please him to employ them. Right heartily welcome are they,
answered Iffida. and of duty I must needs thank them, for the good will they
bear my Lord and Father: for which cause, as also their near alliance to
you, I love them as they were my proper Brethren.

Palmendos coming to her with great reverence, gave her humble thanks for her
honorable kindness, and while they spent the time about other familiar
conferences, s^pper was set on the table in a pleasant Arbor, where Iffida
cold digest no meat, her eyes were so busted in beholding her Champion,
afterward they walked up and down the Garden, and she seeing the Pages
mother was deep^ in talk with Ozalio, as one loath to loose so good an
eportunity, she begins with Palmendos in this manner.

I cannot but mar^aile at my self, (Sir Knight) that being nothing touched
with the love of sundry gentlemen, which heretofore have diverse times offered
me their service: my heart should by you (whcme I never saw before these two
days past) so vehcmently be provoked to love, so that I cannot hear or think
on any thing, but it is broken or r^ted by the remembrance of you: let me
then entreat ye, not to repute me as careless of my chastitye, or forgetful
of the modesty beseeming a Uirgin. For the worthy behauior. I see couched in
your incomparable personage, has fatally deprived me of my former liberty,
and yeeld^d me wholly your Captive: not doubting but you will so esteem of your
conquest, as not to impeach the same by any vnhonorable att^mpt, considering my
noble birth and parcntage. And to satisfy my earnest longing desire, only
adicted* to have further knowledge of your estate, acquaint me with the secret
consideration of your heart, and what you will command me, in g^erdon of the
pains you have taken for my sake: wherein (mine honor defended) I will yield
that willingly to you, which none else but you can have of me.

Madame answered Palmendos, I cannot express my high good fortune, finding
such grace and courtes^e at your hands, being on my part no way as yet
deserved, but time may yield the due to every gentle mind, and make me able
to requite such extraordinary favor. And think not sweet Goddess of my
heart, that in pitying the insupportable burden of mine oppressions, you
shall any way encurre the detection of lightness, but rather of honorable and
well governed care. when you shall behold the place whereto I ^ope safely to
bring you: for Madam, setting aside my simple out ward appearance, I am a King
borne, and Gouerner of sundry famous Provinces, and this attempt proceeded
only of religious zeal, to make you Lady of me and mine, as your woonderful
fame at first took the sovereignty of my heart.

How can I worthy Lord, quoth Iffida, but stand am^zed, that you being a King,
and a man of so rare fortune in mannaging arms, should come hither for so simple
a Damosel as my self, not woor^hy to cast mine eyes to such preferment? yet
not to dissemble with ye as concerning my resolution, without my fathers
consent, I neither may or will go hence with ye, because it were both
disobedience and injury to nature.

Not withstanding, one thing I will do for ye, which never heretosore I
offered to any Knight, I will bring you to my Father, and tell him you are one
of this Gentle woman's Neph^wes, she being my nursse in the time of mine
in^nice: to him must ye offer your service, and no sooner shall he behold
your Knightly chivalry, but he will gladly accept ye as his Son.

So with my Parents consent you may conuaie me hence, and in mean while I
shall keep secret your estate, al^eit it were good you told him the truth.
Palmendos, who desired nothing but to get into the Castle, and to compass the
same by any way he could, thus replied.

Madame, such is the extreamitie of my vehement passions, as no one can recure
them, but she from whom they took their original, nor do my vital
spirits receive ani^ force to execute their office, but from your gracious and
gentle disposition: therefore I will go with you when you please to your
Father, and say what you can best imagine, for the peaceable assurance and
fruition of the good pretended. These words he uttered with very cheerful
countenance, by reason of the hope wherewith his heart was encouraged, seeing
the practice of his neg^tiation stand now on the terms himself desired: the
Labie on the other side was so ravished with his love, as she could not be
satisfied with beholding him, or consent to forsake his company, till time of
constraint came that they must to their lodgings, where Iffida could not sleep
thorough the whole night, her slumbers were so broken by the abundance and
plurality of amorous discourse, which chased all other imaginations from her
spirit.

In these extremes poor Iffida was tormented, a disease clean contrary to
that which troubled Palmendos, who only sought by dissimulation to recover the
good king of Thessalie, whereof he conferred in bed with Ozalio, what
stratagems and subtilties he must compass in the action: entreating him most
affectionatlie, they having once gotten ^nteraunce into the Castle, to she we
him self hardy and valiant, putting every one to the sword when the
watchword should be given. When the morning was come, Isfida decked her self in
her brave accoustrements, and c^mming into the Garden, found there the two
Knights armed except their helmets, she praying them to go with her to the
Cast^ll of Albayzo, that she might have the honor of presenting them to the
Captain her Father.

This matter being soon concluded, they all mounted on horseback, and about
noone arrived at the fortress, the foundation and structure whereof caused
Palmendos to wonder, in that it was placed on a high and mighty rock, and
storred with such munition for war as it was thought impregnable. Being come
to the gate, Iffida lighted from her haqueney, and entered taking the Knights by
the hand, the Arches permitting them quietly to pass, without any fear or
further enq^irie what they were, seeing them so well acquainted with fair
Iffida, whom the Castilian loved so well, as none might gainsay what she
commanded.

Afterward the Bridges were drawn, and the gates strongly barred according as
they were wont to be, so the Princes entering the great Hall, Palmendos
diligently looked about him, thinking each hour a year till the skirmishe
were fought in this strong hold, thanking the heanens that had so well guided
them thither.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How Palmendos and Ozalio slew the Captain of Albayzo Castle, and all the
Guard that then kept it, taking the King of Thessalie forth of the Tower, where
he had remained captive twenty years: and what happened to them in the mean
while.

WHen the Captain of Albayzo Castle, (who was an honorable old man, and put
in chief trust with the great Turks treasure) saw his Daughter accompanied
with ^wo such ^rane Knights, he was thereat exccedingly amazed: as if this
occurrence had alr^adye presaged the conflicte and cr^ell slaughter, which was
immediately to follow in the Castle, wherefore he said. Why Daughter? how
chances it that (...) are come without your Brother? My Lord, quoth ^ee,
(...) desire I had yester-night to see ye, hastened my (...) in company of
your two Squires, my sour waiting Damsels, and these two knights, who are
both Nephews to my nursse, where I found them as I passed by that way: and
hereof be assured good father, that this Knight (peinting to Palmendos) is
one of the most hardy and courteous Gentlemen that ever ye knew. Whereof his
victory in the Tourney at my Brothers marriage, has given me evident example,
as also the honest speeches he has used to me this morning, declaring his
earnest desire to offer you his service: under hope whereof I have been his
guide ^ither, esteeming the acq^isition of such a man rare and of great
consequence, and will chiefly help the strength of your charge.

He is the better welcome, answered the Captain, and in recompense of his good
will, he shall command any courtesy at my hand. For all these words, he
had other matters in his mind, and because his Daughter praised him so much,
so much the more willinglye could he have spared his company^ in the Castle,
for that his presence made him mis^ont and fear some what: yet to dissembl^
the matter, and take away all occaston of contrary mistrust, with a counterfeit
merry countenance he said.

Go Daughter and salute thy motber, mean while these Knights shall be unarmed:
which he spak^ to be assured of their Armor and weapons, intending they should
not have them again till they were forth of the Castle. But Palmendos
hearing these words, began to misdoubt their interpretation: and therefore
thought best not to use any more speeches, but going with Iffidaes Page into a
fair Chamber: in steed of vnarming them selves, they clasped on their
Helmets, and taking their Shields with resolved courage, came forth having
their good swords ready drawn, Palmendos intending to try y^ virtue of his
enchanted sword, or else to put both their lives in danger. The Page seeing
this sudden alteration, driven into as great a quandarie as if he had been new
metamorphised, began to cry out very pitifully, terming this act abominable
and s^elerous distoyaltie: where with he ran down to advertise the Guard
thereof, but they themselves were not far behind him, because Palmendos knew
this enterprise was not to be deferred, therefore ^ee and Ozalio came into the
Castle C^urt, where they found the Captain threatening the Guarde, that they
had so lightly suffered the Knights to enter: but they ercused them selue^ on
Iffida who brought them with her, wherewith the Captain turning about* and
seeing them come in such fury, he cried to the (...), saying. Take Arms my
loyal and faithful Knights, an^ let us mnrther these false villatnes, w^o
have beguiled us s^ (...).

Palmendos having instruct^d Ozalio, to keep sure the Gate that none might
issue forth, or more reske we ^ome in, remembering his sweet Lady Francelina,
determined to die or deliver her father frem imprisonment.

Now makes he proof of his Sword charmed by the Fairies, which as he lifted
about his head, caused every one that came against them sleepel^ to stagger,
and when they offered to strike with their weapons, they fell down as though
they had been in a sound sleep, being all in that case depri^ed of their
lives, both the Captain, the Guard, and the rest that could be found, except
the Turk who guided them by Sea, and the Page that came with these news to
Iffida* saying. Alas Madame, we are all betrayed, by the false Knights that
e^tred the Castle with us: right worthy am I of a thousand deaths, in that your
Father and all the Guarde have lost their lives by my means.

When Iffida and her mother heard these uncouth news, they came down as women
dis^raged of their wits, and seeing this lamentable massacre, she fell down on
her fathers dead body, saying. Ah my good Lord and Father, pardon me that
was the cause of this thy death and seeing innocently I have been so
circum^nted by a false Traitor: my life shall presently follow thee at the
heels* to accomplish thy obsequies with more selemne po mpe and ceremonies.
Herewi^h she offered to r^n her he ad against a marble pillar, but Palmendos
came and stayed her, when she being greatly offended there at, raging against
him, thus spoke.

Thou cruel, false an^ disloyal Knight, seeing thou ^ast slain my Father and
his chiefest friends, why do thou not send me to bear them company? Tell
me thou blooddie Barbarian, what moved thee to repaye my saythfull love with
such extreme rigor? How durst thou decei^e me so trecherously, considering
what favor I showed thee on so small acquaintance? with gu^lefull and
dissembling speeches, thou secretly say^st thou wast a King: but if tho^ be
one, it is of robbers and thee^es, and art come hither to steal the great
Emperors treasure. Miserable and unhappy that I was, in giving credit to
such false perswas^ons, the end whereof sorteth to such monstrous effect.

If such as heretofore have known me, imagined m^ wise and discreetlye
inclined, hencef^rth they (...) well term me a disloyal Daughter, being the
only cause of my fathers death: but though unwittingly I have been deceived,
yet will I complain o^* Fortunes instabilitie that by the report of I know not
wha^, (...) and vain ostentation should so easily change my heart* (...) what
will the mighty Emperor of Turkey say, ^en (...) shall understand the truth
of this slaughter, wrought only for the stealing hence of his treasure?
Foolish and ^iserable (...)* that I am, why did I not remember the sundry
iniuri^s, his Majesty's brother ^ustained by the E^perour Palmerin of
Constantinople, when he tra^ailed the worl^ a^ a Knight er^ant? had I but
remembr^ th^se (...), they would have for warned me from affecting this
stranger: yet if the fatal decree made me so soon s^biect to him, why could he
not favor me with my fathers life? Palmendos little reg^ding her (...)
speeches, de^red (...) to be better (...), promising if she (...) d^part (...)
with him, to set the Crown of Th^rsus upon (...)* which he wo^ld give to
his Cousin Ozal^o, an^ join her i^ marriage with him if she pleased.

Moreover ^e assured her, that he would not take (...) thing out of the Castle
(...) the King of Thessalie, (...) deliverance could not be compassed by any
intrea^y, (...) therefore he ransommed him with the lives of so many. O
Mahomet, cried Iffida at these words, why suffer thou Christians to make
such incursions on thy people and Countries? Why did thou creat and appoint
women so near to men, seeing that for them they pass thorough innumerable
^orments? The brother to our great Emperor the (...), was cruelle murdered by
the mea^ of a woman, and now by me is his Captain my father brought to the
(...), his prisoner likewise the King of Thessa^ (...) ^liuered* how can I but
loath and despise my life. ^ing hemmed in on euere side with such monstrous
(...)?

(...) is it now to remember mortal incombrances, or to think on the wars
which Hesione and Helena caused between the Greeks and Troyans: Lauinia
between Ae^eas and Turnus, or Deianira between Hercules and Acheolus, (...)
the Centaures: for those which will spring by these new occa^ous er^ long ti^s
be spent, I ^eare will be so horrible and infamous, as they will ^face the
memory of them done so long ago. Afterward the mother and her daughter ran
furiously on Palmendos, laboring to do him what injury they ^ld, but he
(unwilling to hurt them) suffered their violence, til Ozalioes Squi^ ^ing their
impacience, and fearing with their knives they would in the end murder him:
(...) up one of the Guardes hatchets, and therewith deprived thd mother of her
life.

Iffida extremely r^ging at this grievous spectacle, ^nt her hair^ from her
head, and with her nails cruelly ^tyred her ^ire face, then ^ing suddenly
supprized ^th a raging ap^plexie, pre^ died without (...) more (...). The Page
gr^uing to behold this wo^ul accident, determined not to live any longer after
her: but first upon the wall he wrote certain dolorous vers^s, which afterward
we^ (...) to a (...) all (...), in this (...).

DEad is the bud of Beauties chief delight,
The fairest flower wher^n the Sun did shine:
The choice beloved of many a famous Knight,
The pride of honor, precious and divine.
The lovely Maid, of whom the Nymphs did sing:
That Nature never fram'de so rare a thing.
Had Paris seen this wondrous piece of art,
Proud Venus had not carried beauties prize:
Pallas and Juno would have stood apart,
To see their gifts one Uirgin royallize.
In every point surpassing curious:
Had Fate and Fortune been as gracious.
Ungentle star that domineerd the day,
When first my Lady Mistres breathed this (...)
What angry object stood the^ in the way,
To cross the course that was begun so fair?
You lowering heavens, why did ye oppress^:
The Saint wh^e you so many ways did bless?
But wretch, why stand'st thou charging these with guilt,
And art thy self the Author of this ill?
Thou hapless Boy thy Ladies blood have spilt,
Thy Master and his servants thou did kill.
When first thou trauaild for this trothlesse (...):
Even in that how^r these miseries beg^.
But Sovereign Love, immortal and divine,
Whose gracious name did shadow this abuse:
Can thou permit before thy holy eien,
This heinous deed exempt from all excuse?
O mighty Love, what will thy Subjects say:
If foul offense go unrevenged away?
Stand I expostulating this or that,
When on my back the weighty burthenlies?
Waste no more time with vain and idle chat,
But for this fault be thou a sacrifice.
Fair Iffida, thy Page does follow thee:
The only engine of this tragedy.
These verses fixed on the wall by the Squire, he ran hastily and caught up a
Sword from one of the slain Knights, and setting the point thereof against
his heart, said. If you (Madame) by my means have received this hard fortune,
reason requires that for your sake I should endure as much: and with these
words he fell upon the Sword.

This was the second act of the tragical comedy begun at Prissa, and thus
after continued in the Theater of Albayzo, where all they of the Castle
miserably ended their lives, except three or four Damoseiles, and their
waiting women: who likewise were so amazed at this lamentable spectacle, as
they thought them selves half deprived of life. Palmendos being stricken in a
dump by these accidents, stood a good while not able to speak a word: which
his Cousin Ozalio perceiving, and marueiling at his alteration, he came and
comforted him in this sort. My Lord, you must now abandon all dumpish musing,
and rejoice for your good success in this attempt: never trouble your thoughts
with other imaginations, but let us determine our departure hence, before the
matter be further manifested, otherwise we may fall in danger a hundred times
more to be feared, then were we enclosed in the inextricable Labyrinth.

Your reason is good, Cousin, ^aunswered Palmendos, wherefore presently we will
go seek for the prison: wherein my Lord the King has been kept so long: After
they had searched a good while in vain, at length they found him in a stong
Tower, bound with huge bars of iron, he being so lean, wrinckled, pale and
w^n, as they marueiled to see him so withered away.

Palmendos beholding him in this grievous plight, remembering this was the
father to his best beloved Francelina, compassion caused the tears to trickle
down his cheeks: but the King not perceiving this humanity, rather amazed to
see their Swords so bloody, thought they were come to end his miserable and
distressed life, wherefore he willingly prepared himself thereto, saying.
Soueraign redeemer of humain nature, to thee I commend my soul, which must now
leave this loathsome prison, be thou then my intercessour to thy merciful
Father, having so patiently for my sins suffered punishment in this wretched
place. And seeing hee^ has reputed my body unworthy longer being in this
life, be thou my gracious mediator for my soul, that in his judgment it be
not bannished from eternal felicity promised to the good.

This prayer having stopped the passage of Palmendos speech, Ozalio used these
words to the King. My Lord, be not dismayed, we come not hither to offer ye
any outrage, but to deliver you from this thraldom, and carry ye with us to
Constantinople: where you shall find your Queen and fair Daughter
Francelina, by whose means your troubles have now taken end, and there they
stay^ only for your coming.

Afterward he declared the whole success of the action, and breaking the
bars of the little wicket, took him forth of that dark prison, wherein he
had remained twenty years, such marvelous hatred did the great Turk bear
him. Yet could he not be certainelye resolved of his liberty, till he saw
the Captain and the rest that were slain, when embracing the Knights, he
thanked GOD and them for his happy deliverance.

Palmendos thought it necessary to make no longer stay there, wherefore
commanding on^ of their Squires to fetch a good horse out of the Captains
^able, they caused the king to mount thereon: then remembering the former
speeches of Iffida, he would not suffer any thing else to be carried from the
Ca^ell.

CHAP. XXIX.
How the King of Thessalie departing with Palmendos from the Castle of Albayzo,
they met the great Turks Daughter by the way, whom the Prince carried thence
by the virtue of his Sword. And how Ripole having taken order for the b^riall
of the^ that were slain, he went to complain thereof to the great Turk.

PAlmendos remembering his return to Constantinople, and deuis^ng how he might
safeli^ get away from the Castle of Albayzo, he caused all the gentlewomen
that were left alive to be locked in one Chamber: and so soon as it wa^ed
dark, leaving the great Oats wide open, and the Bridges down, they all rode
away: Orycano being their guide as he was before. About midnight they came to
the Pages mothers house, where among the trees in the Garden, they espi^ di^ers
lighted Torches, and a sumptuo^ bed in the midde^t of the Arbor, at which
^ight not marueiling a little, they ^aied there awhile: but Palmendos destrous
to be further sati^ed herein, gave his horse to Orycano, and drawing his
vertucus Sword, charmed all that were in the Garden fa^t a^leepe, by which
meane^ he came to the rich beds ^de, wherein he saw a very beautiful Lady.
Her name was Marencida, eldest daughter to ye great Turk, and wife to the King
Ocurites of Culaquin, whom Palmendos found near the Gulf of Tanais and
Meotides: she now iournying to recreate herself with her Mother, at a fair
Castle not far from this place, whether she went three days before in great
anger from the Court, because the great Turk loved another of his concubines
better then her. Marencida mourning for the taking of the King her Husband,
craved leave of the great Turk her father, that she might go visit her
Mother for seven or eight days, where with her she might bear a share of her
grief and heaviness: so parting from the Court honorably accompanied, and
alighting at this pleasant bower to refeshe her self, because the night
suddenly prevented her, she commanded the Grooms to prepare her bed for
that night in the Arbor, her Ladies, Gentlewomen and Guard, being all there
about her. Palmendos having charmed with his Sword all her attendants a sleep,
approached near the beds side, when the Princess thinking on her Husbands
imprisonment, gave many grievous sighs from the depth of her heart, cursing the
Knight that took^ him, as also Constantinople for unjustly detayning him, and
to these mournful regrets added these speeches.

My noble Lord, Oh that I had some sure and loyal person, that might conduct
me to the place where thou art, to the end my longing mind might be satis-^ed
with sight of thee, and these two sources of tears stayed from further
streaming over: for living here, my greefes grow intolerable, and I abide ye
most desolate Lady in all Asia, Other lamentable speeches she uttered, till
nature no longer able to outstand the charges of drowsines, caused her to fall
fast a sleep: and Palmendos having heard what had passed, imagined her to be
the great Turks Daughter, Wife to the King Ocurites, who^ he sent to
Constantinople. Wherefore seeing all her Guarde soundly sleeping, he folded down
the bed clothes, and because the precious Calamite in his Sword, by nature
draws the body of man or woman to it, as the Adamant does the iron: the
Lady presently arose into his Arms, so being kept a sleep by his enchanted
Sword, lay as quiet in his arms, as fair Daphne did with Phoebus, when
Iupi^er converted her into a Baye tree. Wrapping her costly Mantle about her,
he departed safely from the Guarde, and coming where Oricano stayed with his
horse, made such shift as he mounted into the sa^le, and so galloped to the
rest of his company, who meruailed not a little that he had got so good a
booty. Great have they made till they got on ship-boord, when Palmendos laying
her upon his bed, and using her reverently because she was of such honor: he
put up his virtuous sword into the sheathe, when very soon after Marencida
awaked, and seeing herself in the company of strangers, crying out with
fear, she said. Alas where am I? what? have I no one about me that I know? how
came I so strangely into this place? why Fortune? have thou not yet afflicted
me enough? are my stars grown into such hatred toward me, as in my sleep
to seek my destruction? And what are you y^ have been so bold as to take me
out of my bed? this audacious behavior will return you no other gu^rdon, then
the very sharpest death that can be de^ised. Madame, answered Palmendos, from
that we shall keep our selves so well as we may, as for my self, I am a
Knight of a Country far hence, and hearing by chance what moan ye made, for
the captivity of the King your Husband, as also how desirous you se^med to
see him in Constantinople, I wa^ greatly moved to pity your affliction, and
as one willing to pleasure you heerin, as also what other thing you shall
command me, I took ye forth of your bed, promising ye by my religiou^
vows to Chivalry, not only to show you the King Ocurites: but also to
guarde your chastity incontaminate, as free from the least s^ot of dishonor,
as when ye happened into my custody.

False and disl^yall Knight, quoth she, how can I but receive shame and
infamy by this treachery, having in such sort been taken from among my
Guarde? If I desired to see the King my husband, it was only to content my
mind, which is theret^ moved with vehement ^ffection: yet might my meaning be
far enough from my words, because I could not do it without my Fathers
license, and more willingly would I end my life in this place, then go with
thee of whom I can imagine no good thought, but as thou have felloniously
stolen me from my bed, so will thou hereafter traitorously murder me. I am
neither Thief or Traitor, answered Palmendos, but ^ Knight ready at your
commandment, if so you take my service in good worth: and seeing you are now
in my puissaunce, determine to go with me willingly or perforce, and think
not I intend your death, for it is far from my thought I promise you.

Then began Marencida to tear her hair, which seemed as the Golden wire, and
beat her fair hands so white as the Alablaster, with out-crye^ as a Woman
deprived of her senses: when y^ Prince pitying these feminine importunities,
drew his Sword, and to ease these extremes charmed her a sleep again. During
this time, Ozalio had told the King of Thessalie the whole news of his
Daughter Francelina, whereto he gave good attention, because since the time of
his imprisonment, he had not he^rd any thing as concerning the aff^ires of hi^
Realm, or that y^ Queen his wife had any such Daughter, wherefore the tears
trickling down his face, he came and embraced Palmendos, saying. In sooth my
Son, all the grievous torments I have heertofore endured, se^me nothing in
respect of the comfort I now feel, that my unknown C^ild shall enjoy a man
so virtuous: and for this Ladies ta^ing I am likewise glad, because by this
mean I shall be revenged sufficiently on the Turk. Thus does God, answered
Palmendos, show himselse a just Judge, and the true directour of all humane
actions, limitting ^uerie occasion according as best him pleases: but we were
best to make what speed we can hence, else may we repent our coming among these
inexorable Tyrants. Marencida awaking again, and not persuaded with all the
court^ous entreaties the Prince could devise, she still continued her former
acclama tions, not unlike Ariadne at the coming of Bacchus, when she was found
forsaken by Theseus at the seaside: in like sort did she renew her
mal^dictions, inuocating on Neptune and Thetis, as also y^ Tritons their
Herralds, Monsters, Nymphs and Sirens, that she might suffer shypwracke in
the Sea, and the Fishes feed on her unhappy carcass. But Ozalio pitying her
dollorous complaints, and finding his heart somewhat espryzed with her love,
entreated Palmendos to grant him one request, which above al things else he
required at his hands, when the Prince yielding to any thing his Cousin would^
demand, Ozalio proceeded in this manner.

My suit is worthy Lord and Cousin, to enjoy this Lady as my Wife, to whom I
know the destenies have fatallie reserved me, considering the sudden change
and inexplicable controversy my heart endures: whereas the continual
accompanying of beautiful Ladies heertofore, could never moo^e my frozen
affections, and now I feel them not warm but boiling. Easily may ye (quoth
Palmendos) obtain this demand of me, if nothing else stand in the way to
hinder it, and as much do I desire your advancement, as any way I can be
covetous of mine own, hoping while I live to see no divorce between us, but
that our estates shall continue equally together, and in witness of my word, I
deliver ye the charge of this Princess, hereafter to dispose of her
according to your desires. Ozalio now uses all decent courte^ies to Marencida,
whereby to gain favor in her conceit: yet all was in vain, for she would not
affoorde him any good countenance, but remained in her w^nted obstinacy.

When the poor Fisherman understood by his So^ Orycano, how his guests had
delivered y^ King of Thessalie out of Albayzo Castle, he thought it no longer
tarrying for him in Turkey, wherefore he came and entreated the Prince
Palmendos, y^ he might sail with him into Christendom, which suit was very
soon obtained, so he, his wife and family did all come aboard the Ship, the
Prince promising to reward their gentleness liberally.

Now let us come to the Guarde and them that attended on Marencida, who waking
and not finding their Lady in her bed, began to chafe and rage in most
extreme manner: some renting their hair and beardes violently. others running
mad among the Trees, thinking she had been^ metamorphized in the Garden, nor
could they imagi^e how to escape the danger when the great Turk should
hear of this mishap. These comfortles creatures thus amazed, not daring any
one of them to go tell the Emperor heerof, they determined to fly the
Country, and return no more to the Court, leaving Marencidaes Ladies and
Gentlewomen mourning in that unhappy place, where (about noone) Ripole Brother
to Iffida arrived, returning from the wedding with his wife and diverse brave
Knights: but when he understood the cause of their sorrow, he was strooken
into such a quandarie, as he would pass no further before he enquired ^ore
of this ^uent. In mean while he sent a Squire to Albayzo Castle, to advertise
his Father of his coming, and the Squire prauncing up to the Fortress,
meruailed to see the Gates wide open, but much more when he saw the slaughter
of the Knights, and the Captain himself lie ^laine among them: now was he
surprised with such fear, as he had not the heart to tarry there any longer,
but trusting to the speedy succor of his horse legs, galloped with all
speed to his Master, where standing awhile as a man beside himself, at
l^ngth he thus spoke. Pardon me, my Lord, in declaring a bloody and tragical
report, your worthy Father and all the Guard o^ the Castle, lie cruelly
murdered in the base Court, and because I found^ the great Gates open, I
doubt the Treasure and riches in the Castle, has occasioned thy^ massacre by
some robbers and thieves. Ripole hearing these unlooked for news, terrified in
such sort as he could not tell what to say, mounted on a lusty Courser and
rod^ to the Castle, the Gentlemen bringing his wife fair and softly after*
but when he beheld this woeful spectacle, and what a butcherie Palmendos Sword
had made, his Ser^aunts seared he would have followed in this hard fortune.
Nor can I hear set down the rufull mones, which Ripole made over his Father,
Mother and Sister, no doubt they were a^ strange and yrkesome as this accident:
but when they had searched through the Castle, and found^ nothing wanting but
the King of Thessalie, they judged the Authors of this tiranni^ to be
Christians, and that they likewise had carried away the Queen Marencida. After
he had taken order for interring the dead, he rode immediately toward the
great Turk, having heard of Iffida^s Nursse, all that had past between her
and the two Knights, and being come before the Emperor, he fell at his feet,
delivering the signs of an afflicted spirit, which only sought for grace
and mercy. At length he declared the subs^aunce of this wreakfull occurrence,
as well that of Marencida his Majesty's Daughter, as the other of his Fathers
death, and deliverance of the King of Thessalie, af^rming his Sister Iffida as
only cause thereof, and by what traynes she had been beguiled, himself
being altogether innocent of the treason: notwithstanding, he freely offered
himself at his gracious disposition, to abide whatsoe^er he would assign him.
These words so wounded the Turk to the heart, as he remained silent a great
while, anger had so locked up the passage of his speech: yet furiously at
length starting from his Chair, he rayled on the Gods, stars, devils and
all the infernal powers. A^ Mahomet, quoth he, doubtless thou art angry with
me, or else do take but little care of thy servant, that evermore have
extolled thee a^oue all other Gods and Prophets: but much I wonder thou would
thus forget me, vnle^se thou will have me think thee extremely offended, or
that the hope is vain and frustrate which is reposed in thee. You stars, not
inclined to favor me, but rather affecting my tot^ll ruin, wherein have I so
haynou^y ^ffended, that you should take so sharp and rigorous vengeance on
me? what may this presage to me hereafter, but some great misfortune and
sudden mutation in Asia? yet will I so carefully foresee these affairs, as
the sedicious performers of this villainie, shall not carry it away so lightly.
Like sorrows made this Infidel for his mishap, when many of his Knights,
without attending other commandment, got ready Foystes, Gallyes and other
vessels for war, to pursue the causers of this tragical accident, but their
labor was spent in vain, albeit not long after they heard the truth of all:
which procured such hatred between the Turks and the Grecians, as they ceased
not till with hostility they had invaded Greece. But it was not during the
reign of the Emperor Palmerin, or any of his race or next posterity, for
while they lived y^ Turks durst not stir against them: yet long time after,
when Ottoman a fierce and proud Prince governed* in^nite ^uilles happened in
Europe, where he took and sacked many good Cities, Towns and Castles. Now
would the great Turk not suffer Ripole to be further tormented, because he
was found altogether innocent in y^ action, but sent him back to the Castle of
Albayzo, making him Captain thereof as his father was before. And long time
continued he sad and mellanchollie, thinking he had reciued wonderful
dishonor by the loss of his Daughter Marencida: nor should he ever recover the
same, til Greece were beaten flat to the ground, and the Emperor Palmerin
with all his kindred utterly destroyed: where in these ragings we will leave
him, and return to our purpose.

CHAP. XXX.
How Palmendos with his company arrived at Constantinople, where the Emperor
came and received them at the Port. VV hat speeches he had with the Queen
Marencida, after they were come to the Palace, how joyfully likewise the
Queen of Thessalie and Francelina her daughter, welcomed home the King her
father.

THe Mariners cheerfully hoysing their sails, left the coaste of Turkey and
launched into the maine Sea, having the wind and weather so favorable, as
without any impeachme^t they attained y^ Bosphor of Thrace, where Palmendos
sent his Cousin Ozalio before to the Emperor, that the King of Thessali^ might
be entertained with honor beseeming so great a Prince. Ozalio making speed
in a swift little Pinnesse, being landed went directly to the Palace, and
finding the Emperor in the great Hall, conferring with his Lords about the
enchaunted Bird, which that morning had delivered many pleasant notes,
wherefore he expected some comfortable news, when Ozalio falling on his knee,
began in this manner.

Dread Lord, I am the servant and friend to the noble Palmendos, whose renown
has heretofore been blazed in this Court, and he humbly entreats your
highness by me, that you would entertain the King of Thessalie, whom he has
brought from Turkey, with such grace and honor as beseems his dignity. By
this time I think they are entered the Haven, in that they were not far off
when I left them, I being sent before to acquaint your Majesty heerewith. The
Emperor exceeding joyful at these news, rose and embraced Ozalio very
graciou^i, and causing all his Knights and Barons to prepare themselves, said,
he would go to the Port in person to welcome them. Right soon were these
tidings bruted through the Court, wherewith the Empress and her Ladies were
highly pleased, especially the mourning Queen of Thessalie for her Husbands
return, and fair Francelina for her loouelie freende, whose absence made her
imagine every hour a year: wherefore in haste they got them before to y^
Port, attended on by their Ladies and Gentlewomen, where Palmendos being new
come on shore with the King, thus spoke to him. Behold my good Lord, your
Queen and Daughter, who are joyfully come to salute your arrival: but when
he looked on Francelina, the whole quire of heaven was present in his thoughts.
The Queen ver^arnestlie beheld the King her husband, when seeing his hair and
beard so strangely ouer-growne, beside, his skyn and complexion so wonderfully
altered, as doubtful in mind, she came to him with these words. Are ye (my
Lord) the king of Thessalie, for whom my heart has suffered exceeding grief? I
pray ye resolve me presently, without holding me in longer suspense, in that
your deformed estate has greatly perverted my remembrance.

Madame, answered the King, it is no meruel though you know me not,
considering the long time since ye saw me last, which the integrity of our
love has made us imagine of greater compass, although the accustomed
revolution of years, neither deminish or increase one moment in their natural
course: notwithstanding, I am the same King your Husband, who have felt more
passions for your absence, then anguish or torment in my miserable captivity.
But seeing the immortal bounty has suffered me once again to see you,
before my foul forsake this passible body, which was my continual desire
during my tribulation, now^ c^re I not though Death presently do his duty,
for seeing the circle of your arms have embraced me, I am the read^er for my
mother Earth to receive me. Now are Ioy^ull tears plentifully powered forth
on all sides, and embracings so vehement, as though they should never unfold
again the liberty of speech being ^ all this while, for Palmendos and
Francelina were transported into a second heaven, where the outward ceremonies
served to confirm the inward contentation, at length the Queen taking
Francelina by the hand, thus spoke to the King. See here my Lord your
Daughter, of whom I was but newly conceived when you went from Thessalie,
(...) and fortu^ate may she justly be termed, in that her destenie has
delivered you from prison, restored me my former joy, and given her the most
perfect Knight that ever ^are Arms. When the King beheld his Daughter so f^re
and gracious, he took her in his arms, expressin^ with silent favors his
hearty joy: and in this while the Emperor came with his train, alighting from
his horse to welcome the King of Thessalie, whom when he beheld so spent and
dis-figured, the tears fell from his eyes, and embracing him in his arms,
said.

My noble Brother, heaven have the honor for delivering ye from our common
enemy, where albeit I was heretofore glad of your reskewe, yet was I agreeued
at your imprisonment, being then my self (as you know) in the Turks power,
although he gave me more liberty then you, in hope I would have aided him
with my uttermost ability: my desire then to get from his service, constrained
me to deal somewhat hardly against you, an error too notable, and I confess
worthy reprehension: but God pardoning the offenses of the repentaunt, has in
pity regarded us both, and by his inexpuisable goodness, directed all things
to a happy end. My Lord, reply^d the King, the whole discourse thereof have I
heard by Palme^dos, which gives me reason not to think any fault in you, when
ye could not otherwise help the same ^ but let us leave occasions past,
seeing heaven has so miraculously delivered me, that I should come my selfs to
present the entire affection, wherewith I am bound to your highness service. Nor
could any thing in the world, said the Emperor, more d^light me, then your
coming with the Knight I have so long desired to see: with whom I cannot but
be offended, (these words h^ merrily uttered) in that he has tarried so long
time from me: then Palmendos falling on his knee, modestly answered in this
manner. Dread Lord, if heertofore I have provoked your displeasure, I confess
such punishment is due to me as you shall ordain, and willingly will I endure
it, to fashion me the better to your service, wherein I would employ my self
according to your appointment, although it were to fight against the Gates of
death: whereof I gladly could afford some proof so please your highness to
enjoin me such a task, as may express my zeal and forwardnes. And that you
may know the name of your voluntary Servant, I am that Palmendos, who was
since the hour of my birthe destenyed to follow your virtues, humbly
entreating to discharge your remembrance of any coffeehouse I have
heretofore occasioned: in that mine own mind still persuaded me, I wanted
worthiness to come before your excellenci^.

The Emperor beholding him of such gallant stature, did not a little marvel
at his rare persections, wherefore taking him graciously in his arms, desired
he would command any thing wherein he might stand him in sted, for he was not
able to requite his high deseruings. Afterward ^ame Primaleon and courteously
entertained him, the like did Abenunco, signifying how much he was bound to him
for his happy deliverance: then came. Arnedes with the other Lords and
Knights, all of them embracing the hardi^ Champion that went away with the
honor of the Tourney.

By this time had Ozalio brought Marencida on shore, she^ (...) to ^old such
stat^ an^ roy^ltie, wherefore she desired to know the place of her landing.
Madame, ans^ered O^alio, this City is calle^ Constantinople, and among thi^
^orishing troop of Princes, who have vouchsafed their coming hither ^o this
Port, there may ye behold the (...) Emperor Palm^rin, who i^ here in person
to receive the King of Thess^, and the worthy Knight that deli^ered him from
prison: your self like wis^ will esteem him a vertuo^s Prince, by the good
ent^rtainment you s^all enjoy, when once he understands your state and
calling, so that I hope you will not r^pent this voyage, were it but to have
kn^wledge of him alone.

New miserable* and unfortunate am I, quoth she, to fall into the mercy of my
Fa^hers capital eneme? how can my greef^s but grow into ^n exceeding
surplusage? If I see the King Ocurites my hus^and, the meeting will be wi^h
marvelous heart break on either side, be^ing both of us captive t^ the very
worst enemy we have. The Emperor and his Lords kindly saluted her: but s^ee
wou^d not ^nce bow herself or make any answer, whereat y^ stan^ by very much
wondered, tearming her a W^man of rough and unseemly behavior, saying nature
might much better have made her a man. Mounting all on horseback, in most
comeli^ order they rode to the Palace, where the Empress and her Ladies met
them in the Court: and to tell the courte^es, gratulations and welcome there
(...), would ask a world of time, yet little to the purpose, ^t it suffice
th^n, they are so well entertained as you can any way imagin^.

Palmendos taking Marencida by the hand, brought her to the Princess
Philocrista with these speeches. I (...) you Madame, to accept this Lady into
your c^mpany, and give her such* good counsel as you can best devise, for she
is descended of royal blood I tell ye. Sir Palmendos, replied the Princess, I
must ^bey what you commaund^ me, ^or the love I bear to you and your sweet
Fre^nde, and I imagine my self fortunate, having such a precious gage from a
Knight so perfect, nor shall she be worse entreated then mine own self.

Marencida hearing these gracious speeches, and what courtesy Palmendos used
to the Princess, perceived that she was the Emperors Daughter, wherefore she
gave her many thanks, sh^wing better countenance then before she did to any:
which Philocrista took very kindly, and mounting up the steps with her
into the Hall, she came to Francelina with these words. This Lady, Madame,
does now supply* your place, seeing Lord Palmendos is returned, for now your
company with me must discontinue, because reason and your fatal love does so
command, notwitt^anding, I hope our amity shall continue.

Fair Princess, answered Francelina, we are both so far yours, and so
good part have y^ in my Lord, as you shall find your self no le^e (...) then
abashed when ye know all: therefore fear not that I will forget your freendly
familiarity, rather will I continue your loving Sister, as our further
assurance of our mutual agreement. Sundry other speeches passed between the
two young Ladies, in mean while Marencida looking about her, and remembering
the great pomp, state and riches of her Father, she made but slender account
of the Emperors Court, which was not at this time so well-stored with Knights
as it was wont to b^e, whereupon she gy^ing a great sigth, thus uttered her
mind.

You know, Emperor of Constantinople, that the sumptuous royalty of my
Fathers Court, does exce^de the greatest Princes in the whole world, as also
how many mighty Lord^s serve him with homage and fidelity, because
heretofore you have seen the same, where if ye were so aduenturous and
hardy, to kill without fear of them (as the whole world knows) the mighty
Emperor mine Uncle, think I pray you, what miserable case the Lady is in,
so trait^rously brought from her own n^tiue Country, and now delivered
captive into your custody, wherein me thinks, in respect of the renown
spread abroad of you, you should take example by my adversity, and rather
grieve then glory therein, as I see you do, considering that inconstant
Fortune is still variable, and does not always allow men felicity. This I
speak not, whereby to gain y^ more favor or honor in your Court, because
death would be much more welcome to me, then to live in the vexation of mind I
d^o: wherefore I entreat ye again (if entreaty may bes^eme an adversary)
hereafter to conserve your reputation in such sort, as I may receive no
impeach to mine honor, and you shall comfort me better therein, then all the
commendation o^ your fame can do.

To these words she added many rufull complaynts, as the Emperor being
therewith moved to compassion, replied in this manner. I ^derstande, Madame,
full well what ye have said, and know beside, that the feminine choler which
governs your spyrite, makes you use such kind of language, as is clean
ex^mpt from all the rules of womanly modesty: nor a^ I now to learn, that
the strength of earthly Kings and Potentates is less then nothing, when God
is bent repugnaunt against them, whereby we are all to resolve, that we can do
no good act without his assistaunce. According to his di^ection came I to your
Unckles Court, before whom I protest, and crave no mercy in the day of
vengeance, if I ^we him, or ever thought to do it, being too far carried
away from minding any such intent, by the honor I had before received at his
highness hands. Yet was I privy to his forcible detayning of the Lady, and
labored to restore her to her Lord and Husband, she being Daughter to the
renowned King of England, and Wife to the now famous Emperor Trineus of
Allemaigne: herein (me thinks) I committed no osfence, he keeping her most
unjustly, profaning thereby the sacred Laws of royal equity.

And because the wise have evermore patiently endured their fortune, being
either good or badde, I verily persuade my self Madame, that you will
forbear to complain and lament in this unseemly manner, knowing your self
to be conquered by the most courteous and debonaire Knight that this day
lives in Europe, even he that in Hellespont ouer-came the King Ocurites your
Husband.

These news so grieved Marencida to the heart, when she heard the Emperor
say, that the King her husband and she herself were taken both captive by
one Knight, as frantick-like she could have eaten her flesh with anger, but
the young Princess Philocrista conducting her to her Chamber, appeased her
fury with diverse freendly speeches and courteous behavior. But let us now
return again to the Prince Palmendos, who in this time unarmed himself, that
the Emperor might at more pleasure behold him.

CHAP. XXXI.
What courteous conference Palmendos had with the Emperor, the Empress and
Primaleon: And how being afterward baptized, he was affianced to his Lady.

AFter that Palmendos had put off his Armor, he thr^we a rich Turkish robe
about him, imbrodered all over with oriental pearls, which he brought from
Tharsus with him, according to the modern custom^ used among the most
magnificent Kings of Asia, intending to were it when he should come in the
Emperors presence. Being returned into the great Hall, and each one covetous
to understand his original, Primaleon took him by the hand and sat down,
when the Emperor began in this manner. My noble friend Palmendos, longer must
ye not conceal your self, your renown being so lanishly brut^d through all
Countries: tell me then I pray y^, of what parents ye are issued, as also what
ye think else convenient to acquaint us withal.

Gracious Lord, answered Palmendos, with you whom I so reverence by honor, I
may not dissemble in any point, for that I were unworthy your presence, if I
should deal double with so great a state. Know then mighty Emperor, that I
am Son to the Queen of Tharsus, the affectionate servant and vowed friend to
your Majesty, forsaking my Country by a strange occasion, so soon as I
understood where my father remained, which long before was concealed from me.
The cause of my coming into your highness Court, was the same and praises I
heard of Francelina, to whose service the fatal ^ ^ned me at my very essence,
in that I never affected any other Lady, yet reputing my self, unworthy her
grace and favor, or to be seen in this honorable Court. To this he added the
discourse of the old woman, that appeared to him in the Palace at Tharsus,
and how she blamed (...) for his idle and slot^full life: yet hiding how she
^red him to be his Son, because further opinion should pass till that were
discovered. But quoth he, as hithertoo I have lived according to the law of
Mahomet, so now would I willingly receive Christian Baptism, which I
faithfully promised for my good success, when heaven made me able to deliver
this worthy Prince^e. When the Emperor heard these things, he presently
judged Palmendos to be his Son, by the sudden and summarie supputation he
made of his age, and of the time he was in Pasmeria, where the Queen his
mother came subtly acquainted with him* Bashful her of he was when he looked
on the Empress, as his vermilion color plainly discovered, yet did he
discreetly shadow the same: notwithstanding, the Empress misdoubted somewhat,
remembering her dream of the Queen of Tharsus, and what the Emperor himself
had told her before, yet made she no show of any such matter, wisely governing
her thoughts from outward suspicion, whereupon the Emperor thus began again.

In sooth my especial good friend Palmendos, I now love and esteem ye much
better then before, understanding that you are Son to the Queen of Tharsus,
who did me so great honor in her Countries, her very nam^ makes me remember
my travails in those parts: so that I know not how to express my joy,
hearing your self so well resolved, to forsake the Ethnicke paganism of your
blasphemous God^. Wherefore I am thus advised, no^ to prolong so good an
occa^on, but to morrow you shall rec^iue the holy charracter of Christianity,
and be likewise a^iaunced to your Lady Francelina: for reason requires herein
to hasten your right, seeing for her you have endured such dangerous
travails, and forsaken a Realm of so great estate, the riches and fertility
whereof I am well acquainted withal. The King and Queen of Thessalie were not
a little glad, when they heard that Palmendos was heir to a kingdom, but much
more was their (...)* understanding his original, whereof the Emperor would not
as yet make further inquiry, till he were better assured of the certainty:
and good occasion falling out so well, as the Empress, her Ladies and every
one departing to their Chambers, leaving the Emperor and Palmendos secretly
conferring together, of matters concerning the I Will Delph^s and such like, but
at length his Majesty opened his mind, saying that he imagined him to be his
Son, wherefore he was desirous to be therein resolved. In respect, my good
Lord, answered Palmendos, that truth must and will come forth at length, know
then mighty Prince and my gracious father, that in the Realm of Pasmeria, you
begot me your Son, the night before you departed from the Queen my mother,
for she being advertised of ^our rare perfections, became impacient in her
amorous affections, and compassed the mean of your acquaintance, by a charmed
drink provided for that purpose. And here behold the effect of this action,
my self your humble son and obedient servant, yet did my mother give me a
further testimony hereof, having her self given you the like at your
departure: but Franc^lina has the same now in possession, for to her I took
it after her deliverance. And ^uermore she concealed this matter from me, till
miraculou^ly I was enfourmed both thereof, and as concerning Francelina,
because she feared I would forsake my Country, to come and s^rue in your
highness Court. As concer^ing my behavior since that time, some what I am sure
has happened to your hearing, yet of such small and slender (...), as they
neither beseemed this place or your person. The Emperor ravished with conceit
of this report, knew not which way best to signify his joy, for considering
the strange course of the action pa^, and what the success thereof now
proved, his spirits were carried away with wonderful imaginations.

Ah my noble Son Palmendos, quoth he, full well (...) I assured of what thou
have said, although nature has shaped thee not much unlike me, and given thee
such ^eroycall courage as I had in my younger days: and albeit the Empress
may well be offended with me, when she shall be thus thoroughly resolved, yet is
her wisedoome and modesty such, as she will not mislike what I allow. With
these words the Emperor took him by the hand, going with him presently to
the Empress Chamber, and after his Majesty had kindly kissed her, he entered
into these speeches.

I know well Madame, that heertofore you have held good opinion of my loyalty,
and that I ever loved you entirely, as your self could desire no better proof
thereof: but the cause why I use these words at this instant, is a little
scruple that long since entered my mind, and I fear will offend ye when the
same is known. Yet least further doubts should trouble your thoughts, I
protest before him who is the only searcher of hearts, and I swear by all the
divine assistaunts about his tribunal, that never with my will and knowledge
did I contaminate our wedlocke-bedde, much less have I infringed the laws of
marriage, or polluted the inviolable faith I solemnly gave ye.

Notwithstanding such has been my former fortune, that another woman beside
your self, by charms obtained what was your right, then must you not (Madame)
be so severe and rigorous, as not to pardon me, seeing I have voluntarily
confessed mine offense, beside, the fault not proceeding from me, delivers my
cause to be more innocent.

Remember then Madame, what sometime you told me concerning the Queen of
Tharsus, your dream I perceive was (...) altogether in vain: in that she had
such knowledge of me, by means o* an enchaunted drink I received unawares,
as engendered Palmendos this gentle Knight. My Lord, answered the Empress,
with a smyling countenance, at the first time I beheld Palmendos I was
persuaded what you have told me, so lively does he resemble ye, in countenance
and personage: wherefore I not only pardon ye, being ignorant of begetting
such an excellent and perfect creature, but thank heaven that you ^ere the
father to a Son so famous. As for Palmendos, be shall now accept me as his
mother, and I will love him no less then mine own Son Primaleon. With
sundry other speeches were these joys confirmed, and Palmendos right lovingly
embraced by the Empress, at length Primalcon came, and he being thoroughly
acquainted with the matter, took the Prince in his arms thus speaking.

Has the mighty governor of the heavens appointed, that the only flower of
chivalry should be my brother? wherein can I more honor that supercxcelling
bountye, then confirming my thanks to him by kindness to the worthy copartner of
my vital blood, drawn from the self same source where I received my
original? Assure your self the refore my most noble brother, that Primaleon
is vowed to imitate your rare fortun^s, and tr^ding the self same (...) you
have done, to (...) the name of our renowned father: continuing in the mean
time so ready at your command, as he that honoreth you with most zealous
affection. Might I enter the boldness, answered Palmendos, as to title you by
the name of my brother, the second step of my desires were attained, and though
I dare not str^e to coequall my self with you in kindn^s, yet will I over pace
ye in duty and affection: continuing the servant of Primaleons welfare, while
the star* of my birthday vouchsafes me breathing.

Here is occasion offered me of large discourse, concerning the several
salutations of the courtly personages, so soon as these news happened in their
ears, how the Lords and knights came to gratulate this newcome son, and the
Ladies likewise striving to excel them in courtesy: but it were needless
labor, considering the King and Queen of Thessalie concern this present
occasion, and with their daughters joy unite them altogether, preparing for
the religious observations, to be used on the morrow at the christning of
Palmendos.

On the morrow, the Emperor and all his Barrons, mounted on horseback, the
like does the Empress withal her Ladies, and in most honorable manner they
ride to this solemnity: so passing in this pomp through the City, they
allighted at the Church of S. Sophie, where Palmendos was religiously baptized,
and afterward affianced to Francelina by the reverend Archbishop, she being
attired in as sumptuous ornaments, as when Andromachye was espoused to the
valiant Hector of Troy, or Cleopatra Queen of Aegipt, when she contended in
magnificence with Mark Anthony the Triu^uirate her husband, drinking one of
the pearls that hung at her ears, esteemed worth two hundred and fifty
thousand crowns. For even as the Carbuncle, the most rich and precious of all
the Oriental stones, does in the dark give such a clear and illustrious
splendor, as not only illuminateth all the place, but also sets the
regarders eyes ^o wonder thereat: of no less virtue seemed Francelina in the
Temple, as the only and perfect Phoenix of her time. In like pomp and royalty
they returned to the Palace, there being such a sumptuous feast prepared, as
beseemed the time of so general rejoicing, where wanted no honorable d^uises to
accompany the same. And during the time of this is their honorable whole
pleasure, here think I good to pause a little, while you consider on the
discourses passed, and I have moreleasure to perfect the rest of this History.

NExt (Gentlemen) follows the history of (...), wherein (what you see wanting
here) is perfectly finished, both Palmendos marriage, Ozalios love to Marencida,
Rifaranoes fortunes, and Recinde his return to Con^tantinople. But this I must
tell you with all, that now Primaleon begins his chivalry, and the famous
Prince Edward of England the course of his ^duentures, which are briefly
touched in my book of Palmerin of Egnland, who was his Son: what wonderful
stratagems both he and Primaleon performed together, attend till the next
term and you shall be resolved. And to accompany this discourse, I hope to send
ye the first book of Amadis of France, that when ye are weary of the one, you
may delight your self with the other: so wishin^ ye no wo^se then to my self,
I end.

Your^ to his poor power: Anthony Monday.

Honos alit Arts.

