A MAP OF MAN'S MORTALITY.

Clearly manifesting the original of DEATH, with the Nature, Fruits, and
Effects thereof, both to the Unregenerate, and Elect Children of GOD.

Divided into three Books; and published for the furtherance of the wise in
practice, the humbling of the strong in conceit, and for the comfort and
confirmation of weak Christians, against the combat of DEATH, that they may
wisely and seasonably be prepared against the same.

Whereunto are annexed two Consolatory SERMONS, for afflicted Christians, in
their greatest Conflicts.

BY JOHN MOORE, Minister of the Word of God, at Shearsbie in LEICHESTERSHIRE.

HEBR. 9.27. Book 1. It is appointed unto men, that they shall once dye, and
after that comes the Judgment.

REVEL. 4.13. 2. Then I heard a voice from heaven, saying unto me; Write, the
dead which dye in the Lord are fully blessed: even so says the Spirit; for
they rest from their labors, and their works follow them.

ECCLES 9.10. 3 All that thy hand shall find to do, do it with all thy
power; for there is neither work, nor invention, nor knowledge, nor wisdom
in the grave, whither thou go.

LONDON: Printed by T.S. for GEORGE EDWARD'S, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, Sr. FOVLKE GREVILL Knight, Chancellor of his Highness
Court of Exchequer, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable Privy Council:
the assurance of Gods love in all outward blesings of this life, with the
undoubted evidence of Gods Spirit, for the fruition of Heaven and happiness in
the life to come, be daily more and more increased and confirmed, through Jesus
Christ, etc.
Right Honorable:
SVch is the force of Virtue, and of the very shadow of Godliness, that (as it
were) naturally it draws men's love and affection, and after a special manner
unites minds together, far distant, and different in calling and condition.
The very Heathen having experience hereof, both by their writing confessed, and
also practiced the same one toward another; who for the love of moral virtues
embraced those whom they never saw. How much more then should Gods Children,
rightly informed by Gods Word, and reformed by his Spirit, most highly value
the incomparable worth of sincere Religion, and the holy profession thereof, by
the means and ministry whereof, men are (as it were) newly created, and
restored to the Image of the eternal God, which makes them most amiable in
the sight of God, and honorable in the account of his children, 1 John 3.14.
who do know that they are translated from death to life, by loving the
brethren? For as God, in himself the very fountain of all goodness, 1 John
4.16.
is love, and properly to be loved of all, being the very object and subject of
all Christian affection, as having in himself all the causes both motive and
attractiue to draw them unto him: So they whosoever of Gods elect, which most
resemble him in grace and goodness, do next deserve our love; not that we
should divide the same from God (the very Ocean of goodness) but rather to
make it known that we truly love the Lord our God in them, who cannot possibly
love God whom we have not seen, 1 John 4.20.
except we love his Children which represent his person, and in whom he will
prove our love toward himself. Hence arise so many good occasions to make
Gods children acquainted, which (otherwise) would be strangers; and many poor
Christians and despised Ministers in the world, to write and speak, seek and
sue, for the countenance and acquaintance of eminent personages, sincerely
professing and patronizing Gods truth; Luke 1.3.
and with Luke, to look for some noble Theophilus; 2 John 1.
and with S. John, some honorable and Elect Lady, unto whom they may
consecrate their labors.

The consideration of which premises (Honorable Sir) may somewhat qualify my
present boldness, in this my seeming rash attempt. Neither is it strange
(indeed) that poor men in the valley, look to the Beacon on the hill, and
that such spreading fruitful trees should be in view, Dan. 4.17.18.19
and known for shelter and relief against a storm. He which seeks fonsuch
friends, seeks to God his assigns: for are they not his Deputies, to do
good to his Church and Children? Job 29.13.15.16
Are they not eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame? Are they not fathers to
the poor, and in so being, procure their blessing? I mind not here to blaze
out your justly deserved praises, but rather in duty be earnest in my prayers
to God, for the increase and continuance of Gods graces bestowed upon your
Honor, for the good of our Church and Commonwealth: And (I hope) you have
learned, that continuance in well-doing, gets the greatest praise and prize
with God, and all good men: And my particular prayer shall be, that still you
may exceed your self, in the performance of all Christian duties, to God, our
Prince, and Country; ever tending to that perfection which leads to eternal
life. Moreover, let your Honor be thoroughly persuaded, that God will have all
his children humbled here, before they can aspire to the top of the highest
glory (which they hope for) hereafter; and that the way hereunto is rightly to
know our selves by our frail condition and mortal estate. May it please you
therefore (with other sorts and rancks of Gods people) to take some view
thereof in this Discourse: Fear not (Honorable Sir) to read some lines
thereof at your leisure, the receipt whereof (I doubt not) will prove more
wholesome then toothsome to the flesh, which still would make us play the Giants
against our God; yet mortified it must be in some measure: For as raw flesh is
not fit for the stomach; no more are unmortified men for God. Even Nichodemus
himself must be borne again, John 3.3.
if he will come to an assured hope of that heavenly inheritance.

I prescribe here no Laws nor Rules to be observed, with the Franciscans,
Dominicks, and other Friars, to this or that sect or sort of men; Heb. 9.27.
I say (with the Apostle) There is one Law for all men* enacted in heaven,
without repeal, that they must dye: And for as much as God has sanctified
this Physic for the salvation of our souls, let the wholesomnesse thereof
qualify the bitterness: And since the death of the faithful has lost her
sting in Christ his death, let us never fear the humbing of this Be, nor
being able to hurt us. But for these Cordials of Comfort, with many more
sovereign Antidotes against Deaths poison and dangerous Symptoms, I leave
your Honor to a larger discourse thereof in the proper place.

Now for offering to your Honor such mournful matter of humiliation, and as
it may seem distasteful to Courtly senses; let these few words suffice. That
as there is a community of flesh and blood, and a general infection of sin in
all Adams heirs, that so likewise Death (which is the wages thereof) is, and
must needs be common unto all, without exception of any: And so long as the
godly and wicked live together in this world, even so long there is between
them a certain equality in the flesh, though always an evident distinction
in the spirit: So that until this mortal body has put on immortality, 1
Cor. 15.53.
and the spirit of Christ, Romans 8.9.
which dwells in Gods children, has brought them to God in heaven, all
discommodities and casualties, with Death it self, must needs be incident to
all men alike. Besides that, our earthly prosperity so dulleth our spiritual
senses, and our great employments in the world, so carry away our affections,
and so hinder the remembrance of our latter end, that the greatest men (many
times) both for place and gifts, do mightily forget themselves herein: and
knowing it to be so, have had their special Memorandums. I omit to speak of
the preparing of their Sepulchers in their life time, and the purposed placing
of them in their common walks, with their set salutations of some servant to
that purpose.

Thus most humbly supplicating your Honor to be well pleased with this my
honest purpose, and christian endeavor, in the favorable acceptance thereof; I
commend your Honor to the gracious protection and direction of the eternal
and ever living God, who ever guide you with his spirit, in all your weighty
employments, to his glory, and the good of his Church, etc.

From my poor Study at Shearsbie, in Leicestershire. February 21. 1616.

Your Honors in all Christian duties, wholly devoted in the Lord Jesus, JOHN
MOORE.

AN ABRIDGEMENT OF THE WHOLE Books substance: OR A GENERAL TABLE of the
principal points thereof, according to the CHAPTERS and SECTIONS.
The first BOOK.
CHAP. I.
GOD in his incomprehensible Wisdom, Goodness, and Love, created man at the
first, as a Crystal glass of his glory, and a lively resemblance (in a sort)
of his Majesty. Section 1. Man's body a brief map and abridgement of the whole
worlds perfection. 2. Man's excellency and majesty in his first Creation. ibid.
Man in his body resembled his Maker, and in his several members expressed the
variety of his perfections. 4. The very Pagans admired the portraiture of man's
body, and preferred it before the worlds curious creation. ibid. Man especially
in his soul resembled God: with the manner how. 5. Gods Image in man appeared
especially in the regiment of the creatures. 6. It consists principally in
righteousness, holiness and knowledge. ibid. The Image of God in man, is to
have the same Will, Knowledge, Judgment, and Reason, with God, in humane and
heavenly things in a measure: with the reason thereof. 7. The difference
betwixt the Image and Similitude of a thing. 8. Christ is the very engraven
form of God, and the true pattern and type of our first created image. ibid.
Reason and Will (as two wings to the Soul) did at the first guide it aright to
God, that so it might soar aloft with her affections, to heaven and heavenly
things. 9. The excellent harmony in all the faculties of the Soul before Adams
fall, with the exquisite reason and knowledge thereof. 10.
CHAP. II.
GOD alone is unchangeable, and all creatures have their being, standing, and
upholding by him who only is. Sect. 1. Gods name and nature. ibid. Adam was
mortal by creation, yet had he not sinned, he never had dyed. 2. Man was made
of a mutable nature, in power of standing, and possibility of falling. 3. The
reason why God alone is unchangeably good, and all other creatures subject to
decline. ibid. Three things requisite for Adam, and the Angels, to persevere in
goodness. 4. Why the good Angels fell not, but keep still their standing.
ibid. Adam (if he would) had grace sufficient to have kept himself from sin
and death, illustrated by examples. 5 and 6. Adam could fall of himself, but
he could not stand or rise again: with the use thereof. 7. Why man was made
of a changeable nature. 8. Man was subject to death by nature, but not of
necessity: with the reason. 9.
CHAP. III.
Satan envying at man's glorious estate, labored by temptations to supplant
him, and so prevailed. Sect. 1. The manner and degrees of Satan's proceeding.
2. Adam by yielding procured his fall, and so sold himself to Sin and
Satan, to the just destruction of himself, and all his seed. ibid. The
greatness of Adams sin, and the equity of Gods Justice in the manner of
punishment. 3. See the further enlargement of Adams rebellion, by the degrees
thereof. 5. God not only commanded his obedience, but threatened his rebellion.
6. Adam by his fall lost Gods Image, and contemning life, he found out death.
ibid. The cursed fruits and effects of his fall. 7. Adam procured the practice
of evil, before he could attain to the knowledge thereof. 8. In searching for
knowledge, he met with error and blindness, both of soul and body. ibid.
Original sin (as a pestilent poison) infected every part of man. 9. It is
derived from Adam by propagation, and by imitation confirmed, and multiplied in
all mankind. ibid. The fruits and effects of original sin. ibid. It makes
man more degenerate then all the rest of the creatures. 10. Mighty is the
power, and raging is the strength of original sin. ibid. Though sin be the
greatest bondage, yet we are willingly led to the practice and obedience
thereof. 11. Sin breeds in our hearts, as worms in the wood. ibid.
Concupiscence (the fruit of Adams transgression) is the Tyrant of the flesh,
the Law of the members, the nourishment of Sin, the feebleness of Nature,
and food of Death. 12. Before we can sin we are lincked to sin, and before
we offend we are bound with offense. ibid.
CHAP. IIII.
THough the cause of death be just, yet the original thereof seems
doubtful. Sect. 1. God is not the author of Death: with the reasons why. 2.
The Devil is the author of Death, proved at large. 3. Satan was created an
Angelical Spirit, by sin he made himself a Devil, and falling from God,
he fell from goodness. 4. Causa causae est causa causali: Satan being the
cause of Sin, caused Death. ibid. Man and Devil are partners in Sin, and
so in Death. 5. Satan tempted, and man consented. ibid. The Devil is not the
absolute cause of Sin and Death* with the reasons why. 6. Solicit he may to
sin, but force he cannot. ibid. Man by nature might have declined, and should
in himself have had the cause of sin, and so of death. 7. Death has no
proper efficient cause, but rather deficient. 8. It is a privation of life,
only having a name, and no nature and substance: with the use thereof. ibid.
and Sect, 9. Adams sin was hereditary to his posterity, and so the
punishment proved at large, from 10. to 13. The natural condition of man's
soul by original sin. 13. Though in the just judgment of God, men's souls
be defiled with sin, being joined to their bodies, yet it is not of
compulsion. 14. God does incline the wills of men either to good or evil,
according to his mercy and their just deserts. 16. The children of the
regenerate are as corrupt by nature, as the rest, until they be reformed by
the santified means ordained of God. 15. Man's sin makes his life a due debt
to death. 17. The Devil is the father of Sin, and Sin the mother of Death.
ibid. The corruption of our flesh did not make our souls sinful, but the
sin of our soul did make the flesh corruptible. ibid.
CHAP. V.
DEath is threefold, corporal, spiritual, and that which is common both to
body and soul. Sect. 2. The description of Death, according to the several
parts. 3. The soul cannot properly dye, being life it self, illustrated by
examples. 4. How the soul is said to dye. 5. The separation from God is the
death of the soul, as the departing of the soul is the death of the body.
ibid. The nature of Death. 6. Gods Spirit is the soul of our souls. ibid. Man
by sin lost his life, and found out death. 7. It is agreeable to Gods
justice, that a spiritual death should beget a corporal. ibid. So soon as
man had sinned, so soon did the armies of death besiege his life. 8. The very
life of sinners is a death. 9. Gods spirit must quicken and revive the soul,
or else it must needs dye and be damned. 10. The degrees of the spirit in Gods
elect. 11. The wicked in this life do live in death, and conuersing in earth,
they are bondslaues of hell. 12. An effectual faith in Christ is the life of
the soul. 13. What it is to be dead in sin. 14. Death is diversely derived,
with the reasons thereof. 15.
CHAP. VI.
IT is enacted in heaven, that all men must dye. Sect. 1. The Registers of the
death and burial of men, from the beginning, witness the execution of Gods
decree herein. 2. Death is the way of all the world, and the house of all men
living. ibid. Death is the Lady and Empress of all the world. 3. Balthasers
Emblem is written upon every man's wall. 4. Death respects no man's person,
place, or qualities. 3. Days, and years, and times, no plea against the
grave, but a fitter prey for Death. ibid. Death (as Dan, the gathering host)
sweepes all away. 4. Merciless Death does exercise her cruelty upon all alike.
5. Nothing can prevail against Death, or ransom our life. 6. Gods hand a man
may escape, but Deaths dart no man can shun. 7. No force can resist it, nor
means prevent it. ibid. Death is the common road-way of all the world. 8. We
must needs yield our selves to the law of Death. ibid. Men may be
distinguished by times, but all are equal in the issue. 9. As we grow our life
decreaseth: This whole life is but a death. ibid. Man cannot be ignorant of his
death, since all creatures and actions proclaim his mortality. 10.
Experiments of death on every side most apparent. 11. The law of Nature
conuinceth it amongst all nations. 12. Our lives (as our garments) wear of
themselves: they are eaten with the Moaths, we with the Time. ibid. The course
of our life runs without pause, to the period and end. 13. An exclamation
against Death, most hideous and pitiful. 14. and 15. The Christian use of our
mortality, with a reproof of the careless Christian. 16. and 17. Death to
the faithful, is as an hackney to carry and hasten them from earth to heaven.
ibid.
CHAP. VII.
Sin brought in a sea of miseries. Sect. 1. Life and misery are two twins,
which were borne together, and must dye together. 2. A description of infancy
and old age: with their miseries. 3. The misery of all estates. Here death is
living, and life dying. 4. There is no contentment in this wretched life. 5. A
description of man's sinful mortal body. 6. The frailty and brittlenesse of
man's body: with the reason thereof. 7. See the manifold dangers of our life,
and how easily it is lost. 8. The mutabilitie and inconstancy of man's life. 9.
This life is little better then hell, were it not for the hope of heaven. 10.
This world is an Ocean sea of troubles: See how fitly it resembles it, having
a merciless maw to swallow up all. 11. It is a dungeon of ill savors, and a
puddle of vices. 12. Man's life is short and swift, like a post, a ship, and a
shadow. ibid. Our days pass swiftly as the Eagle to her prey, and all mortal
men are a prey to death. 14. We are as flowers and grass, and Death (in the
hand of God) as a sithe to cut us down. ibid. All things dye but our sins,
which revive and grow young again in despite of nature. ibid. The cares of
this life, are like the Flies of Egypt, which give men no rest neither day nor
night. 15. They are like merciless Tyrants which take away our peace. ibid.
Man and his labor are fitly resembled to the Spider and her web. 16. All
things are as snares to sinners, to draw them to destruction. 17. The means
for Christians to avoid the snares of this life. 18. It is as natural for
corrupt man to sin, as for water to run down the channel, or a Coach down
a hill. 19. The best men living amongst the wicked, are aptly resembled to
Colliers and Millers. ibid. The manifold engines of Satan to enthrall us. 20.
No man can live peaceably in this world, among so many enemies of peace. ibid.
The warfare of Christians, both outward and intestine, with the occasions
thereof. 21. and 22. Our life is as a tempestuos sea, and death the only port
of tranquillity and rest. 23.
CHAP. VIII.
MEN by dying prove they had sinned, and sin conuinceth there is a Law. Sect.
1. The Law conuinceth man of sin, who without it knew not sin. 2. Sin by
the Law grew out of measure sinful: with the reason thereof. 3. The Law
detecteth sin as a hidden sickness, that so we may seek to Christ the
Physician. 4. It is holy and righteous in it self, though an occasion of evil
to those that are corrupt. ibid. How sin is said to be dead without the Law.
5. The Law anatomiseth sinful man, and sets him out in his colors. 6. The
Law slays the sinner, before Gods Spirit quicken him. 7. Sin and the Law
are the strength and sting of Death. 8. The Law not only conuinceth man of
sin, but justifies God in the punishment thereof. 9. The horror of death,
with the reason thereof. 10.
CHAP. IX.
GReat and heavy was the tribute which God imposed upon man for sin. Sect. 1.
The death of the body is nothing to the damnation of body and soul in hell. 2.
As diseases are the maladies of the body, so death is the malady of diseases.
ibid. The death of the reprobate, is a living death, and a dying life. 3. The
life of the damned is an immortality of torments and evil. 4. The torments of
hell are unspeakable. 5. They are everlasting and endless. 6. Death to the
unregenerate is the very gate of hell. 7. Death cannot be so feared, as it
ought, of wicked men. 8.
CHAP. X.
THE ungodly as captives, are haled to deaths prison, and Iayle of hell. Sect.
1. The joy of the wicked ends in heaviness. 2. Their whole life is a
miserable bondage of fear. 3. The wicked once awakened out of the sleep of
sin, do end their days like barking dogs. 4. Who can put to silence the
voice of Desperation? 5. Sin is a makebate between God and man, and betwixt
a man and himself. 6. A wicked man's heart bleedeth when his countenance
smileth. 7. The Conscience cannot be pacified, when sin is within to vex it.
8. The wicked are in hell, yet living upon earth. 9. Death is the Lords
Serieant to apprehend a wicked man, and to hale him to hell. 11. The
unrepentant with as great violence are pulled from the earth, at Ioab from the
horns of the Altar. 12. The trembling estate of the reprobate. 13. Hell is as
fit for the reprobate, as heaven for the righteous. 14.
The second BOOK.
CHAP. I.
WIcked men, without Christ, have hell for their prison, and are locked from
God and his Saints in the dungeon of death. Sect. 1. No creature could possibly
redeem us from death: with the reason why. 2. Take hold of Christ, and take
hold of life: In the flesh of Christ there it rests; Death has reigned in
all the world beside. 3. God became man, that he might be a Redeemer, as before
he was a Creator. 4. The dignity of Christ's person gave such worth to his
satisfaction, that what he suffered in short time, might satisfy beyond all
times. 5. None can purchase our salvation, but he only that has paid the
price of our redemption. ibid. None but Christ saves, and he will be alone in
all his courses, without mixture, without medley. 6. There is no God without
Christ, he created alone, and he will redeem alone. 7. If our case were not
desperate and past hope of recovery, our redemption should not be so precious.
8. Christ is Lord-Treasurer of heaven, and Steward of all Gods graces. 9. The
Church in it self most unclean, and in Christ most beautiful. 10. Christ's
humiliation in the work of our Redemption. 11. It was the fire of Love to
mankind, and the sharp knife of Gods Justice, that put the Son of God to
death. 12. Excellent types and allusions of Christ our Redeemer. 13.
CHAP. II.
THe complete work of our redemption, performed by Christ alone, and his only
means. Sect. 1. Why Christ our Redeemer must needs be God and man. 2. Christ
his manner of proceeding in the work of our redemption. 3. The wonderful
wisdom of God, in making the death of Christ as an Antidote against the death
of man: and so to bring life out of death. 4. Christ suffered in soul as well
as in body, for our redemption. 5. and 6. The use of Christ's suffering in soul
as well as in body. 7. Death lost his sting in Christ's death. 8. Death tasted
of Christ, but it could not devour him. 9. The death of Christ is the death of
Death. 10. Christ's gall was our honey, and his bitter death the sweet life of
all believers. 11. The ready way to go to heaven, is to swim through the sea
of Christ's sufferings. 12. Christ his death is the secret den of our
deliverance from Death and Hell. 13. Christians only overcome by the blood of
the Lamb. 14. The grace of Christ must be our only clothing before Gods
Tribunal. 15. God will be known by his mercy, and we by our deserts; that so
all glory may return to him alone. 16. Christ's power is made perfect through
our weakness: he is all things to us, which are nothing in our selves. 17.
Christ is a mutual help to God the Father, and to us, without whom we cannot
possess any good thing, either in grace or glory. 18. The Law and Christ are
as the Physician and Surgeon to a sick man. 19. It is absurd to seek for
justification by the Law. 20. To trust to our own merits, is the rejoicing of
Satan. 21. Christ conquered death and devil, being nailed to the cross. 22.
CHAP. III.
AS there is no life in the body, but as it is united to the head, so in Christ
our head, consists our life, being united to him by his holy Spirit. Sect. 1.
By our spiritual union we are interessed in all that either God has promised,
or Christ has performed. 2. Gods Spirit shows us our nakedness, and the
wardrobe of Christ's righteousness to clothe us. 3. There is no salvation nor
sanctification for us, but as our nature is united to the person of Christ. 4.
This spiritual conjunction we can never comprehend, till we know God as he
is. 5. Christ is not only God with his Elect in nature, but in person; the
reprobate are of the same nature with him, yet he is not God with them, but
against them. 6. God punishing Christ in our person, and justifying us in his,
he neither punishes the innocent, nor justifies the offenders. 7. Christ
washes his children from their sins, whom he joins to himself. 8. Whole
Christ is his Godhead, and humanity, is our head, and Savior. 9. Whole
Christ is coupled with whole man, a mystery unspeakable. ibid. Every Christian
man has a portion of flesh in the body of Christ: and where my flesh is, there
I hope to be. 10. The Godhead of Christ is the fountain of all good things,
and his flesh is the Conduit-pipe, by which they are derived unto us. 11. We
must go by Jesus Christ that is God, to Jesus Christ that is man. 12. In our
flesh he has dyed, risen, and ascended, that faithful man may be crowned with
glory. ibid. God does communicate nothing with us, but by the flesh of Christ*
in it he wrought our Redemption. 13. Our soul is joined to the soul of
Christ, and our flesh with the flesh of Christ, which quickneth both, by the
unity of his person. 14. Christ unites himself to us by the communication of
his Spirit and we by faith are joined to him. 15. The singular use of our
spiritual union with Christ. 16. In the person of Christ all our blemishes are
covered, and his righteousness and sanctification imputed. 17. The sins of
the faithful are not imputed to them, but unto Christ. 18. The punishment of
them are forgiven to them, but not to Christ. ibid. If we be ingrafted into the
body of Christ, we are his, and he lives in us, and his victory over all is
ours. 19. By this spiritual union Christ is our brother, which are borne of
God, by the same spirit. 20. The uncleanness of our birth is washed away in
the sanctification of Christ's nature. 21. Death can make no divorce betwixt
Christ and the faithful, though their bodies rot in the grave, yet still they
remain true members of his body. 22. Christ our head, is able to restore that
which nature has destroyed. 23. Christ and Christians are made one indivisible
body by the bond of Gods spirit, and he being the head, will raise up his
members. 24.
CHAP. IIII.
THE life of Christians is a continual warfare, nothing but death can end the
combat. Sect. 1. and 2. Satan especially assaulteth Christ, and his members,
with the reasons why. 3. The Devil as a cunning fisher fitteth his baits, as
he finds men affected. 4. Out of the nature of men's qualities, he works his
malignities. 5. Satan most eagerly assayleth the faithful at the hour of
death, and why. 6. Satan's arguments from the Law of God against the faithful.
7. and 8. The answer of Satan's objections. 9. All the breaches of the Law are
made up in Christ, who perfectly fulfilled the same for all believers. 10. The
Law being fulfilled, Satan, Sin, and Death must needs be vanquished. 11. The
particular conflicts of Satan with the faithful, with their comfortable
conquest. 13. and 14. Sovereign Antidotes of comfort against afflictions. 15.
Such we are by imputation with God, as we are in purpose and affection. 16. An
excellent course to silence Satan, in his variety of temptations. 18. We must
send him to Christ our advocate, who both pleads and defends our cause. 19.
We must show him our general acquittance, sealed by God himself, and
proclaimed from heaven. 20. Men cannot be more sinful then God is merciful.
21. As Death entered by Sin: so it extinguisheth Sin, and ends our
warfare. 22.
CHAP. V.
DEath must give us our last purgation, and end our corruption. Sect. 1. The
dearest Saints of God are here subject to all afflictions, and Death it self,
as the vilest sinners, with the reason thereof. 2. The nature of Death is
altered, through Christ, to the faithful. 3. Sin brought in Death, and Death
must drive out Sin. 4. There is no prescription against Death, earth cannot
redress that which is enacted in heaven. 5. Pain, sickness, etc. with Death
it self, are as Gods Soldiers, to come and go at his pleasure. 6.
Afflictions are preuentions of sin to the godly, and plasters to cure the
sores thereof. ibid. God does diet his children in this world, that they surfeit
not upon pleasures and profits. ibid. We (as children) cannot order our
selves, Gods wisdom and will are our best guides. 7. Our worldly desires and
lusts are inordinate and endless, except the Lord restrain them. 8. The
excellent fruits of afflictions, when they are sanctified to Gods elect, 9.
Afflictions are necessary trials of our Christian estate. 10. Afflictions in
this life, are both punishers and purgers of Gods elect. 11. They are both
sufferings and instructions. 12. Christ is the true pattern of Christians, to
whom they are conformable by their sufferings. 13. Crosses and calamities are
the Harbingers and Purueyers of Death. 14. Whom God most loves, those he most
proves. 15. The fire tryes the gold, and misery men of courage. ibid. The
troubles of Gods children shall never cease, till the world be without hatred,
the Devil without malice, and our nature without corruption. 16. Afflictions
may tire the flesh, but never be able to extinguish the hope of a Christian.
17. Sin and Death have lost their sting in Christ's death. 18. They cannot
separate us from God, though they be fearful to the flesh. ibid. Death
through Christ is the key of Gods Kingdom, and gate of glory. 19.
CHAP. VI.
CHristians are strangers in the world, the bread of adversity, and water of
affliction is commonly their diet. Sect. 1. Being strangers, they must be
content with their usage, and prepare for their journey. 2. This world is
restless, there is no contentment in it. 3. The world deals with men (as the
Raven with the Sheep) picking out the eye, that it may not see her tyranny. 4.
See the Anatomy of the World. 5. The world is no proper element to Christians,
it rather feeds then slaketh their appetites, as oil does the fire. 6. All
Creatures have their rest from God: he is the center of the faithful. 7. God
has set the earth under our feet, that it should not be too much esteemed. 8.
Every Christian with his cross, must be content to accompany Christ to his
kingdom. 9. Whilst we set our affections on earthly things, we seek for no
better, for we look no higher. 10. God gives his children here but an assay of
his goodness, the maine sea of his bounty and store is hourded up in heaven.
11.
CHAP. VII.
AS man rebelled against his maker: so all things (while he lives) rebel
against him, even man against himself, the flesh against the spirit. Sect. 1.
Our manifold infirmities are as gyues and fetters about our legs, to show our
guilty condition. 2. The flesh as a subject, should obey the soul, as her
sovereign. 3. Though it be infused into the body, it must not be confounded
therewith. ibid. Worldly and fleshly employments dull the souls edge. 4. Death
to the faithful is the funeral of their vices, and the resurrection of their
virtues. 5. How we may discern the state of our souls. 6. Death ends the
combat of Christians, when the flesh shall be dead, and the spirit fully live,
our passions buried, and our reason freed in perfection. 7. The body is but the
bark and shell of the soul, which must needs be broken if we will truly live
and see the light. 8. The nature of the earth and earthly men. 9. Sin in the
regenerate has a deadly wound, but in the wicked it has a full and violent
course. 10. The Lord cures our gross sins by our infirmities. ibid. Great
are the troubles of the faithful, but salvation will one day make ameds for
all. 11. The glorified body shall obey the soul with admirable facility. 12.
The difference between a mortal man living, and the faithful delivered by
death. 13. Sin with all misery, affliction, and Death it self, shall
hereafter be shut up in hell, as in their proper place. 14. This world to all
Gods Israel, is an Egypt of slavery. 15. See the royal exchange of the
faithful, who for a mortal and miserable life, shall enjoy a blessed and
immortal. 16. As the sufferings of Christ do abound, so do the consolations
increase to Gods elect. 17.
CHAP. VIII.
THE faithful redeemed by Christ, grow every day to be spiritual and
heavenly. Sect. 1. Prayer and holy devotion, (as precious perfumes) take away
the evil savor of sin and uncleanness. 2. There is no Justification
without the unfeigned sanctification of Gods spirit. 3. The way to become
spiritual and divine. 4. The nearer we approach to death, the more we should
be inflamed with the love of God, and all good works. 5. If we will dye the
death, we must live the life of the righteous. 6. Our devotion must not be
like the morning dew, and leaves of Autumn. 7. The soul without grace is as
the ground without moisture. 8. Christians should not fear death, but
accustom themselves to hope for it. 9. Death to the godly, is no end of their
lives, but an end of their sins and miseries. 10. The grave of the faithful
is sweetened by Christ's funeral. 11. When we draw near to death, we approach
to the very gate of life. 12. The faithful departing, see their Savior (with
Simeon) either in soul or spirit. 13. The hope of eternity is the revenge of
iniquity. ibid.
CHAP. IX.
THe joys of heaven are unspeakable, and far beyond our thoughts. Sect. 1.
They far exceed our prison-ioyes on earth. 2. There is neither end, number,
nor measure of them, being infinite and endless. 3. The glorious estate of
Gods Saints, with their happiness, what it is. 4. Gods Saints shall have
fullness of joy, which they shall still affect, and in affecting shall be
satisfied, and yet never be cloyed with fullness, or feeling of want. 5. The
sight of God is the full beatitude, and total glory of the Saints. 6. The
soul is made capable of God, and therefore whatsoever is less then God,
cannot suffice it. 7. The joys of heaven are joys above all joys, besides
which there is no joy. 8. We may sooner tell what there is not in that blessed
life, then what there is. 9. If the joys of heaven be so great, let us lift up
our eyes to heaven, our ears to God, and our hearts to Paradise. ibid. He
which is in love with heaven, is neither proud with prosperity, nor cast down
with adversity: for as he has nothing in this world that he loves, so is
there no loss of any thing in this life, that he fears. 10.
CHAP. X.
IT is not the bare knowledge of heaven and happy estate, but the assured
evidence thereof, that brings comfort to the conscience. Sect. 1. So sure as
there is a God, so sure there is another life, in which he will reward the
good, and punish the wicked. 2. As our Faith rejoices in Gods favor, so our
Hope rejoices in Gods glory. 3. God gives his children the plaster of
Patience, to support their Hope: for he is sure that has promised. 4. The
ground of Faith and Hope is Gods word and promise. 5. A faithful heart is
furnished like a ship of war, against all hellish Pirots and worldly force.
ibid. We can have no certain knowledge of heavenly things but by Faith. 6. God
alone is to be believed touching himself, as we credit a mortal man with his
own secrets. ibid. We can desire nothing which we know not, and this knowledge
of heavenly things is only by faith, grounded upon the word of God. 7. Our
salvation in Christ is always fresh and new, sure and certain. 8. Our Faith
is not extinguished, our Love cannot be quenched, nor our Hope fail us, nor
the holy Spirit taken from us, which seals our salvation. ibid. The wicked
shall be as well able to save themselves without God, as to hurt us having God,
and the worst they can do is but to send us to God. 9. God does not choose the
worthy, but in choosing them makes them worthy. 10. The head will have his
members, God his elect, and Christ his redeemed, and where will he have them
but in heaven where he is? ibid.
The third BOOK.
CHAP. I.
THE crown of glory will not be got without conquest. Sect. 1. We must strive
to enter in at the narrow gate; we must so run that we may obtain. 2. We
ought to live in such sort as at the day of death we wish we had: for look
how death leaves a man, so shall the last day find him. 3. It is too late
then to begin to live well, when we must leave the world. 4. With this
penalty a sinner is punished, that when he dies, he forgets himself, who
in his life time never thought upon God. 5 Many men are ready to take their
farewell of the world, before they know of their condition in the world. 6. As
our whole life is a passage to death: so should we make it a preparation to
death. 7. We ought still to be prepared and watchful, not knowing the time of
death. 8. Satan labors by his subtilty, to make us to forget our latter
end. 9. Some count it death to meditate of death. ibid. Wicked men cannot abide
to hear of death, because they live a sinful life. 10. Remembrance of death
to Christians, must serve as a sounding bell, to awaken them from the sleep of
sin. 11. Christians must take the time and good opportunity to provide
against death. 12. We then best know our selves, when we have thoroughly
learned our mortal estate. 13. There is nothing so glorious, as to order
aright the vpshot of our time. 14. Who fears God fears not death: for what
can he fear whose death is his hope? 15. Since death watches for us on every
side, let us watch for him, that he take us not tardy. 16. Death to Christians
should serve as a key to open the day, and shut the night. ibid. Christians
must be as birds on a bough, to remove at Gods pleasure. 17. It is absurd to
fear that which we cannot shun. 18. Christians must have temporal things in
use, but eternal in desire. ibid. Man's life is a small thing, but the contempt
of life is a great thing. 19. The manifold commodities of death to the
faithful. ibid. See the folly and absurdity of men, so to hate death, and to
love this sinful life. 20 and 21. The presumption of long life, causes the
greater negligence of our death. 22. Self-love causes men to hate and abhor
Death. ibid. Death brings an equal law over all, for the chiefest point of
equity, is equality. 23.
CHAP. II.
CHristians knowing Death with his forces, ought thoroughly to be prepared
against it. Sect. 1. Death is so far from the destruction of a Christian,
that it brings him to perfection. 2. No man knows in what place Death
attends, therefore in all places we must be provided. 3. If we provide not
before death, there is no provision after. 4. When we seem to stand in
greatest security, we then do dwell in greatest danger, and when we least
fear, we soonest fall. 5. It is a dangerous course, never to begin to live
well, till we be a dying. 6. He that repents when he can sin no longer,
leaves not sin, till his sin leave him. 7. Many never think of death, nor
their sins, till they cannot live: Sick they are, but their repentance is
sicker. 8.
CHAP. III.
Satan has an host, and army of enemies, to hinder us in our Christian
voyage toward Death. Sect. 1. Through Christ alone, we get the conquest over
him, and his forces. 2. The felicity of the world is fained, his love
counterfeit, and his promises deceitful to Gods children. 3. There are no
worldly comforts, but may be kept and desired, so that God (being above all
things) be not lost. 4. Comforts against loss of friends, and kinsfolks. 5.
Our life is very short for all good things, but too long (we may think) in
regard of our miseries. 6. All worldly delights finish their course in the salt
brine sea of sorrows. 7. How much better is it to want a little honey, then to
be swollen up with a venomous sting? 8. Comforts of riches fly from us in our
crosses, as vermin from a house on fire. 9. When men forsake their own wills,
and submit themselves to Gods, what can be hard? 10. Worldly favors, honors,
etc. (as snowbals against the beams of the sun) dissolve and come quickly to
nothing. 11. He that is great with God, shall have quietness in earth, and
blessedness in heaven. 12. The pomp of the world is like a blazing star,
presaging ruin. ibid. He is unworthy of Gods favor, that thinks it not
happiness enough, without the world. 13. The Trinity which the wicked
worship, is the devil, the world and the flesh. ibid.
CHAP. IIII.
THis wicked world is Satan's kingdom, a very Edome and Egypt to the Israel of
God. Sect. 1. It is a sea of sorrows, and our lives as new sailing ships,
unacquainted with the water. 2. It is Satan, forge and stythie, wherein he
frames a thousand chains of impieties. ibid. A description of covetousness,
(the worlds factour) and the covetous. 3. God makes this world loathsome to
his children, that they should not love it. 4. This barren land wherein we live
(after all our drudgerie) yields nothing else but a crop of cares, troubles,
fears, etc. 5. Our Christian love must be as a just balance, our worldly
lusts are unequal in valuing earthly things. 6. If our life be no more then
the dream of a shadow, what must we think of the glory of this world, which
is of shorter continuance then man's life. 7. All worldly glory is no more
certain, then calmness in the sea, still subject to a storm. 8. Worldly men
are better sighted then the children of the light: but Jeremy wondreth how he
should be a wise man, that is not a godly man. ibid. We must put our trust in
God, not in our goods, on whose pleasure they depend. 9. He is the richest that
coueteth the least, and is content with the least. 10. Contentment consists
not in much, yet he has much which has it. ibid.
CHAP. V.
GOd made all things, and gave them unto man, who sinning, forfeited all again
into his hands, and so sent him out of the world, with as much as he brought at
first. Sect. 1. We have our goods to live, the end ceasing, the means also
cease. 2. All worldly goods are ebbing and flowing, neither possess we them
(as we should) unless at all times we be ready to forgo them, when God
pleases. 3. We must not make a rentcharge of these outward blessings, which
God gives of his free liberality, they are but lent and borrowed. 4. Vain
confidence in wealth be-commeth not only poison to humility, modesty, and
faith, but transformeth them into pride, arrogancy, and infidelity. 5. We
must use our riches as our raiment, such as are fit: for covetousness grows
with riches, as the Iuye with the Oak. 6. God is to be loved above all things,
and all things for him. ibid. Good men use the world and the things thereof,
that they may enjoy God, and wicked men so use God, as that they may enjoy the
world. 7. If we love our friends, too much, and not God above all things, then
has our sorrow no measure as it ought. 8. Carnal parents and friends are to
be loved, but the creator of all is to be embraced and preferred. 9. Love him
that thou can not loose, even Christ thy redeemer. ibid.
CHAP. VI.
IT is natural to all men to fear death: and how it may lawfully be feared of
the faithful. Sect. 1. Faith and a religious fear, are always friends in a
Christian man. 2. Affections of nature are not simply evil, but lawful, and
tolerable, when they are rightly ordered by Gods spirit. 3. Christians have
greater cause to embrace Death, then to fear it. 4. None are simply to be
censured for their manner of Death. 6. Gods dearest children are subject to
most fearful deaths, yet an evil Death can never follow a constant good
life. 7. Death cannot properly be called sudden, which every day manifests it
self to all our senses. ibid. We must not be curious either to know the time,
or to choose the manner of our death. 8. It is madness to desire to know our
end, of such as are ignorant of their own. 9. We must seek to mortify the
flesh in us, and to cast the world out of us, but to cast ourselves out of the
world, is in no sort permitted us. 10. Gods children always wait in their
trials, until Death open the door for their deliverance. 11. We must neither
hate our life, for the toils, nor love it for the delights. 12.
CHAP. VII.
THe dearest children of God are subject to the agony of death, by means of
the weakness of nature, and guiltiness sin. Sect. 1 and 2. Christian
means to mittigate the horror of death. 3 and 4. We run away by committing
evil, and we must return again by suffering evil. 5. It is God that knows
the perils of our death, and can only deliver us by his power. ibid. The sweet
spices of Christ's burial, expel the strong scent of our rotten graves. 6. It
is the remainder of life, not of death, that tormenteth a man. 7. Such a death
is never to be deplored which is seconded with immortality, and a blessed
life. 8. Death and the grave are a fould to the faithful, and a shambles to
the wicked. 9. Death does prune (as it were) the feathers of the soul to fly
more swiftly to heaven. ibid. By death and the grave, the faithful are fitted,
and by Gods spirit renewed, for his kingdom and glory. ibid.
CHAP. VIII.
IT is most convenient for Christians to dispose of their goods, and make their
testament in time of their health. Sect. 1. and 2. The best furniture against
death, are faith, hope, and a conscience undefiled. 3. Men without hope, are as
a ship without a sail, and anchor, tossed with every tempest, and in danger of
ship-wracke. 4. A saving faith, and an immovable hope, are always accompanied
with a Christian life, and conscience undefiled. 5. As there is no salvation
without faith: so there is no true faith without repentance. 6. Faith is ever
alone in justifying, but never alone in the person justified. 7. God justifies
none, whom he does not also sanctify. ibid. The conscience of Christians is
bathed and rinsed in the blood of Christ, from the guiltiness and corruption
of sin. 8. The comforts and commodities of a good conscience. 9. Thou can
not be friends with thy self, till thou be with God: if thy conscience accuse
thee, it will kill thee. 10. He that has a hope to live when he is dead, must
dye while he is a live to sin and wickedness, 11. If the day of our death
find us a sleep in sin, we shall hardly awake. 12. Many by deferring their
amendment, shut themselves out of all time, and send themselves to pain
eternal, without time. 13. He that will live without repentance, must look to
die without repentance. 14. The world had not perished with the flood, if the
floods of tears for sin, had flowed from men's eyes. 15. Hope is the pillar
sustaining the building of our faith, which fainting, our faith falls into
the gulf of despair. 16. All things are possible to him which believes.
ibid. Hope to a Christian, is as a staff to a traveler, who rests upon it
shall hardly fall. 17. Despair is a bottomless gulf, out of which none
returns that fall into it. ibid.
CHAP. IX.
WIthout the undoubted hope of the resurrection, Christ died in vain, our
faith, hope, and all religion is in vain. Sect. 1. Infallible proofs of the
resurrection by scriptures, which are of God, and cannot lie. 2. Reasons drawn
from the Scripture to confirm the same. 3. Natural reason, and experience of
the creatures, convince the truth hereof. 4. Why should not our bodies rise
again from the dust, as well as the seed sown, harrowed, and hidden in the
ground? 5. Excellent resemblances, and allusions of the resurrection of our
bodies. 6. Christ has carried our flesh into heaven, to put us in possession,
and given us his spirit (as an earnest) to seal his promises, that we shall
reign with him in glory. 7. Our bodies in the grave shall again be quickened
in Christ, and rise again to life, carrying with them the warmenesse of Gods
spirit, which cannot die. 8. Though our flesh do rot, yet shall the spirit of
God deliver it from corruption, by the virtue of him that raised up Christ from
the dead. 9.
CHAP. X.
THe godly groan that this mortality may be swallowed up of life. Sect. 2.
They loath this wretched life, to be vnloden of their sins. 3. Our life is like
a stage, on which men play their parts, and pass away. ibid. A Christian
needs not fear the violence of death, whose force is broken in Christ. 4.
Death as a Tailor puts off our ouer-worne rags, to apparel us with the
royal roabes of immortality, incorruption, and endless glory. 5. A
description of this sinful, wretched, and miserable life. 6. and 7. Every man's
life is like a rock in the Sea, beaten upon with waves on every side, and like
unto a Butt or mark, at which sorrow, etc. shootes; and at last, Death (that
most sure Archer) shootes, and strikes it dead. 8. The state and condition of
all flesh is to be miserable and mortal. 9. All kind of miseries hunt after
sinful man, and Death at length does greedily devour him. 10. Very fit
resemblances of this wretched life. 11. While we reside in the world, death
every where lies in ambush for us, but when we are in heaven it shall have no
place. ibid. The comfortable death of Christians through Christ. 12. and 13. It
is better to dye, always to live; then to live, to dye ever. 14. If we look
for our felicity here, we are deceived: Eliah must go to heaven in a
whirle-winde. 15. When we are borne we are mortal, but when we are once dead,
we become immortal. 16. Death is (as it were) the birth of a blessed soul,
after a great travel. 17. Death and life are two twins inseparable, until
the division of soul and body. ibid. It is a deliverance from all sin, and
the accomplishment of sanctification. ibid. All the inhabitants of heaven wear
crowns of glory, sit in thrones of majesty, and possess a Paradise of
infinite pleasures. 18. All glorified bodies shall shine (as so many Suns and
lamps) in Gods kingdom. 19. The incomparable joys of the kingdom of heaven
shadowed out. ibid. What heavenly society and company of Saints are in Gods
Kingdom. 20. If we will make our death joyful and easy, we must think of
the glorious life that follows it. 21. If we would despise this world, we
must think of heaven. ibid. Christ himself dyed, that we might dye with more
patience and pleasure. ibid. It is a token of little love to God, to be so
loath to go unto him. 22. God reaches out his hand to conduct us, but we draw
back our own, and run away. ibid. If God be our guide, we must follow him,
to arrive in his house. 23.
FINIS.
THE FIRST BOOK. What DEATH is in it self.
CHAP. I. Of man's Creation, and excellent estate before his Fall.
Our most gracious God, infinite in Genesis 1.26.
after a most exquisite manner consulted with himself for the shape of man,
and finding no creature fit enough for a pattern of his portraiture, concluded
with himself to make mankind, as a Crystal glass of his glory, and a most
lively resemblance, after a sort, of his Majesty.

Psalm. 8.4.
Lord, what is man that thou art so mindful of him? etc.

Romans 12.1.2. 2 Cor. 7.1.
who is not only sanctified in the one alone, but in the other.

Genesis 49.24. Exodus 6.6. Psalm. 31.3. and 34.16. and 114.7. Job 19.21. Esaias 66.2.
Psalm. 8.6. etc.
to show Gods omnipotency and power; his eyes and ears, his piercing
providence and sight, etc. I omit man's face and comely countenance (in which
principally does shine a certain imperious majesty and grace most
conspicuous) causing all living creatures to stoop unto him; and besides the
goodly order of all his outward parts (set and disposed in admirable sort) a
glorious beauty spreading it self throughout, with wonderful strength,
agillitie, and nimblenesse of all his members, made him most famous: that very
Naturalists and Pagans anatomizing his very body, not only preferred the frame
thereof before the worlds whole curious creation but (ravished in their senses
with the consideration of the same) deified and preferred it above all measure.

clay: so the soul, being a Spirit, comes nearest to Gods nature. For first,
the very substance of Adams soul did most lively shadow out the divine
Essence, not only in the simplicity, inuisiblenesse and immortality thereof,
but also in that power which it enjoyed, to know and will. And as God is but
one in the world, quickening, sustaining, and governing the same; so there is
but one soul in the body, which (being whole in every part thereof without
augmentation or diminution) gives unto it both life, sense, and motion.
Further, the soul is like unto God in the faculties of the same: For as there
is but one only divine Essence in the Godhead, and yet three distinct persons
in respect of their external actions: so the soul is but one, howsoever it
consists of sundry essential qualities.

This Image of God in man consisted especially in the Genesis 1.26.
Let us make man (says God) in our own image, that he may rule the fowls of
the air, fish of the sea, beasts of the earth. Now to rule well, is required
Knowledge, Memory, Will, Understanding and Judgment; which are essential in
God, and proper to our souls. Man had not only given unto him of God power
and ability to understand divine and humane things, but was endued with other
heavenly qualities, as Justice, Wisdom, Temperance, Mercy, Love, etc. Gods
Image in man is righteousness, holiness and knowledge. Be renewed (says the
Apostle) in the spirit of your mind, Ephe. 4.23.24.
and put on the new man, which after the Image of God is created unto
righteousness and true holiness. Whose qualities are necessarily inferred by
the contrary, attributed to the old man: where truth is opposed against lying,
Christian anger against sinful rage, just dealing against falsehood and wrong,
holy and gracious speech against corrupt and filthy communication. And he
says, that this Image or new man is renewed in knowledge after the image of him
that created it; because the true knowledge of God transformeth man to the
image of God his Maker, Col. 3.10. 2 Cor. 3.18.
that is to say, to the true sincerity and pureness of the soul* Therefore
presently following he expresses the qualities of this Image; Col. 3.12.13.
to wit, tender affection, or bowels of compassion, kindness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering, forbearing, and forgiving one another, Love,
Peace: and these be the fruits of Gods Spirit, which renueth our hearts, (as
they are mustred by S. Paul) against which virtues (he says) there is no Law:
Gal. 5.22.23.
Romans 8.29.
which Image also is called, a conformity to Gods Son.

Iraeneus) man is made spiritual, Irenaeus lib. 5.
as at the first he was created. And Tertullian says, that the Image of God
in man, is to have the same sense and motion with God, Tertul. contra Marcion.
the same Will, Knowledge, Affection, Judgment, and Reason, in all humane and
heavenly things, according to the measure of a creature. The reason thus to
persuade us, is, that man was made first according to Gods Image, that he
might rule all his creatures below as his President and Substitute over all.
And it is no question, but God would have all his creatures (which he had
made) well and orderly to be ouer-heeded and ruled, (who always and every
where in his Word) forbids the abuse of any, or the least: and we are
straightly bound to refer all of them to the glory and praise of their author
and owner. Now this good use and excellent administration of all the creatures,
which God requires, cannot stand without all those former conditions and
qualities of the soul of man, whereof this Image of God consists. So that
when the mind is endued with the sound knowledge of God, and adorned with
Justice; then it most truly represents Gods Image and likeness* because
that Justice and knowledge of divine and heavenly things are nothing else but a
certain influence from the divine nature into our minds and souls.

a thing, by which it is shadowed. Now man in his Image, not only resembled
his Maker in knowledge and understanding, but was also created in other
celestial conditions, as Justice, Wisdom, Mercy, Love, etc. (as before was
declared) yet so, Hebr. 1.3. Coll. 2.9. and 1.15.
as that Christ alone is the very engraven form of his person, according to
his Deity, and in his Humanity, so far as it is capable of the same. And to
this end has God predestined and elected us, that we should be conformable
to the Image of his Son. Romans 8.29.
Therefore God made us of an understanding nature, and capable of divine
perfection, when with these heavenly properties our souls were first endued,
which now cannot be again recovered but through the help of Christ, the true
pattern and type of our first created Image. To conclude, how like we were
made to God, appears by our proposed end of that selfsame happiness and
bliss which we fear to loose, and wait (through hope) to enjoy with God
himself, both in loving and knowing of him as he is.

Man's soul by creation, had Reason and Will, (as it

Such a heavenly harmony and consent was in all the faculties of the soul,
that always and altogether they aspired with joy to holy and heavenly things.
All excellent learning and skill was engraven in man's soul: his Reason was
more sharp and clear then the Eagles eye, which can behold the Sun: his
Knowledge surpassed all Arts and Sciences, so that by nature he could approach
unto the eternal light, and understanding of God himself, and heavenly
things, as the Angels and holy Spirits themselves.

CHAP. II. Man in his first and best estate was mutable by nature, and subject
to fall, and so righteously made of God, without any cause of just complaint.
Ioh. 3.2. Exodus 3.14. Esaias 44.24. Romans 11.36. Acts 17.28.
so between man made like to God, made like (I say) to himself, but not
himself, who only has this name and nature (I am,) to show his being of
himself, and unchangeable nature; and to teach us that all creatures have not
only their being, but their standing and upholding by him that only is:
Therefore he is called the living God, not only because he has life in
himself, but because he is the fountain and original of life: he does not
only live, but has life of himself, and is the cause of life, because there
is no life besides or without him.

Augustine) was upright and sound, Aug. in lib. de peccat. merit. and remiss.
and nothing sinful, yet was it capable of sin, and apt to receive
infection: Though man in his nature was mortal (standing in his state) yet was
it not of necessity that he should die; and as our flesh is apt to receive a
wound, yet every one is not wounded; and as the body of man is subject to
sickness, yet many often die, not touched with sickness: So the state of
Adams body was such, that although it was subject to death, yet except sin
had come between, he might and should have lived for ever: Deuteronomy. 8.4.
even as the hose and shoes of the Hebrews in the desert, by Gods mighty
providence and power, never waxed old by wearing or consumption.

Neither was this unreasonable in God, nor vnagreeable Aug.
Because the Lord created man of nothing, therefore he left possibility in man
to return to nothing. Basil.
If God had given Adam an immutable nature, he had created a God and not a man,
being only proper to God to be unchangeably good. In the very Angels in heaven
(in respect of God) is found imperfection: Job 15.15. Esaias 6.2.
the Cherubs hide their faces with their wings, for the brightness of his
glory. Thus God does humble all his creatures to exalt himself, even to teach
them this; not to go from him of whom they had and have their goodness, nor
to trust unto themselves, though by creation good, yet subject to decline.

Adam then, although he was created in goodness, without this power the
creature of it self cease to be good: the second is, an act or deed, and
that is the will to persevere, or perseverance itself: This also is requisite
with the former; Phil. 2.13.
for God gives not only the power, but also the will and deed: and the
creature does not the good which it can do, unless God cause it to do the
said good; both which helps the good Angels have, and therefore keep them
standing: now Adam received the first of God, but not the second; for besides
the goodness of his will, he received of God a power constantly to persevere
in goodness, if he would: yet the act of perseverance was left to the choice
and liberty of his own will.



Adam received not sufficient grace, having not the will to will that good he
could and might: Objection.
the answer is, Answer.
that he received sufficient for the perfection of his nature: that is, for the
full obedience of the will of God, and for the attaining of everlasting
happiness, if he would not have bin wanting to himself, but he received not
sufficient grace, which might cause the immutability of his nature; neither was
it of necessity to be given (as I have already showed) to a creature. A
Goldsmith intends to make a Jewel of singular price and value, he compounds it
of gold, pearls and precious stones; when he has brought it to perfection,
he does not put this property to it, that if it fall, it shall not be bruised
or broken. Now God created Adam in all perfection, and gave him power and
ability to continue in the same, if he would: yet did he not put unto his
nature this condition, that it should be unchangeable, when it should be
assailed by the force of outward temptation.

By this we see the weakness of the excellentest creature Adam could fall of
himself, but he could not stand or rise again: he could not avoid the least
assault of evil, no further then he was helped by the grace of God. We are to
God as the sick man to his keeper, who says, Take me up and I will rise, hold
me and I will stand, help me and I will go, etc. Which must make us to
renounce our selves, and cleave to God, wholly depending upon his gracious
providence and protection in all our actions and attempts. God (I confess)
could have made our first parents of such an unchangeable nature, that they
could not possibly have fallen away, but it was not expedient that they should
be so made, because then the obedience of man should seem to have been forced
(as it were) and so not so acceptable unto God. Genesis 2.7.
And albeit the body of man being made of dust and earth, and himself in
respect of his substance and beginning was mortal: yet if he had preserved the
holy spirit of God within him, and given him the upper hand, this spirit of
God, which by sin he vanquished, had far surmounted all that was mortal in
him.

And to end this point. As Satan tempted Adam, to Genesis 3.1.4.5.6.
and so became the instrument of man's damnation. So also Adam tempted himself
to taste the fruit, which (as he thought) would make himself as God. Now God
most justly suffered him to be tried by this means, to make a way for his
justice, in the condemnation of the reprobate, and an entrance for his mercy in
the salvation of his elect; for if there had been no fall of man, God should
have manifested himself neither just in condemning some, nor merciful in
saving others, which very much would have obscured his glory, and altogether
deprived him of his praises amongst the sons of men, etc.

Romans 2.15.
Gods law was written in his heart, agreeable to his nature, he thought it no
yoke or burden to observe it, his shoulders or back being big enough to
sustain it: Sin therefore, we may see, has diminished our strength, and
altered our nature, that now we are forced to be slaves to those, who before
were our subjects. Gods law (now written) is the same which before was engraven
in our nature; yet now it is such a huge weight and heavy yoke, Acts 15.10.
Mat. 23.4.
which neither we, nor our fathers were ever able to bear.

CHAP. III. Of the greatness of Adams sin, and his grievous fall: with the
fearful effects and fruits thereof.
Enah by his wiles to hear her God accused of unkindness, Genesis 3.1.
and from hearing to suspicion, and from suspicion to plain rebellion against
his law; and so Satan not contented, she was made his snare to catch her
husband also.

But mark (I pray you) this devils proceeding, and see Genesis 3.6. v. 3.4.
then he assaileth her with infidelity, and doubtfulnesse of Gods word: namely,
that they should die the death: thirdly, he opposes himself against the
undoubted truth of Gods word, setting down the contrary, Ye shall not die:
lastly, verse 4.5.
he pricketh them forward to pride, and self-love, Ye shall be as Gods, even
as cunning as the highest in good and evil: So they poor creatures not
resting upon God, nor asking counsel at his word, but trusting to themselves
(deceived by his strange delusions) yielded, and in yielding were seduced, and
so shackled with the wards of their own sin, Pro. 5.22.
and fetters of their own finding out: and as he sold himself to sin and
Satan by this his fall; so justly did God ordain the means to hamper him, to
wit, Death and Destruction.

Neither was this action contrary to his justice (except Genesis 1.26.
he enjoyed Gods presence; his protection and providence ruled over him, he
wanted nothing that was needful for him, all the creatures were his servants,
they came at his call, and bowed at his beck; Genesis 2.19.
he wanted nothing that heart could wish; he was placed in Paradise amidst all
passing pleasures, the ground of it self yielded forth her increase, without
toil, or travel: he was made subject to no creature, verse 9.
but was Lord over all (him only excepted that had thus preferred him.) Now
this his gracious God and bountiful Lord, for all these his graces and
blessings unspeakable, required no great service or homage at his hands, he
exacted no great rent, he did not ouercharge him; but only this (to show his
sovereign power) he gave him a Commandment, no weighty thing to be observed,
but a small matter, and easy to be performed, to wit, that he (having such
choice and abundance of all things besides) should abstain (for his pleasure)
from tasting of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil, Gen 2.17.
and all this he did to try his obedience.



not so much as obey him in this one?

Again, God did not only bind him to obedience, but if thou eat thereof,
Genesis 2.17.
thou shall die the death: Notwithstanding Gods commanding and his threatening,
he is most careless, and swiftly runs headlong to sin and wickedness, and
so entered into such a maze of miseries, from whence neither himself, nor his
posterity, were ever able to unwind themselves: for so abusing his own free
will, he lost it, and was made a slave to Satan and himself. Gods image being
by his fall defaced, he became like the devil, and contemning life, he found
out death, even death eternal. This was the wages of his sin, this was the
hire of his labor, Romans 6.23.
this profit reaped he for his pains.

God thrust him out of Paradise, and being expelled, he was kept out by the
Cherubins, so presently he saw Genesis 3.24.
but God accursed him and his seed; he plagued the earth with barrenness, and
caused all the creatures to feel the smart of this his fall: and as he
disobeyed God, so procured he the disobedience of all the creatures toward
himself. Hereof comes the fierceness of Lions, Bears, Tigers, Wolves, and
all wild beasts: hence arises all rebellions, and vprores, wars, seditions,
scarcity, dearth, and hunger, cold, and nakedness; murder, plagues, and all
kind of calamities that are in the world, all which are forerunners of this
eternal death, and ringleaders to damnation.

Thus Satan suggesting a want of knowledge, because he knew not evil, and so
corrupting his heart with a curious desire thereof (not able of himself to
effect the ill error. So Reason it self (the lamp of man's soul) which like
the Sun in the firmament, spreading her beams thorough man's little center,
is now become so dim and dark, in his cloudy and ecclipsed sky, that the
eye of the soul is as void of light in things divine, as the little sparks
of fire raked up close in the ashes: which blindness and ignorance of God and
heavenly things, were not personal in Adam himself, but by possession entered
into all his posterity and offspring.

Adam dug for himself and his brood, in this we were left, in this we were
lost, in this we were condemned, in this convicted: This sin is derived by
propagation, and laid upon us; and by imitation confirmed, and multiplied in
all mankind; whose very bones by the same are corrupted, sinews tainted,
veins infected, arteries poisoned, flesh polluted, wit confounded, mind
captiuated, knowledge turned into ignorance, wisdom to error, will to
wilfulness, memory to forgetfulness, the whole soul to sinfulness, reason
to rebellion, innocence to impudency, and immortality to death it self, both
of soul and body: So that man now of his own nature is no less the bondslaue
of sin, then the slaves which are bought, Romans 7.14.15.
whose Masters use their service, as that of their Oxen and Asses, at their
pleasure. So are we wholly led under the government of sin, being wholly
addicted to the service thereof.

after death, as the only medicine to heal these deadly maladies of our
souls. Many Beasts and Fowls (says one) far exceed mankind in some virtue
and good qualities, as the Dove in simplicity, the Storke in kindness, the
Dog in fidelity, Esaias 1.3.
the Ox and Ass in memory of benefits, etc. but in vice and evil man
surpasses them all; being more cruel then the Wolf, more crafty then the
Fox, more proud then the Peacocke, etc. yea, all vices and wickedness (which
are but several in beasts) are mustered and troop together in sinful man.
And as many members united, make but one body; so does the Spirit of God term
this heaping of vices in man, a body of sin, every vice being (as it were) a
member. It is said, Romans 6.6. Col. 3.5.
that in a Sheep every thing turns to profit; the flesh for food, the wool
for cloathihg, etc. but every thing that is in man, is either evil, or tends
to evil; as the reason to beguile and deceive, the liberty to licentiousness,
the eyes to wantonness, the heart to covetousness, etc. All the members (I
say with S. Paul) are weapons, instruments, Romans 6.19. Romans 3.12. Genesis 6.5.
Psalm. 14.3.
and servants to sin. All his actions and affections are out of order. As a
man that has a Palsy, has still a motion left of head and hands, (as he had
before his sickness) but yet his mouings are now altogether irregular and out
of order; so all those affections of the mind, as Love, Desire, Joy, etc. and
all natural functions of the body, as eating, drinking, sleeping, etc. (which
should have been performed without any sin) are now mixed in man with many
blemishes and corruptions: so that this corruption of our flesh (so long as we
live) sends out the filthy scum of all uncleanness, which continually
broyleth and walloppeth in our nature, foaming out such filthy froath and
stinking savor to our minds, that it is not only detestable to the soul of
the regenerate, but also abasheth the very natural man to look into such a
loathsome stye of sin, and sincke-hole of iniquities; for mighty is the
power, and raging is the strength of original sin in all Adams sons,
breaking out into action.

man (says Job) drinks iniquity like water, but we may truly say, Job
15.16.
like wine, with pleasure and delight; with great facility, custom, and ease,
passes he down any kind of sin that is offered, as a man drinks water
when he is a thirst. Romans 7.17.
We know that in us, (says Paul) that is, in our flesh, dwells no
goodness: but whatsoever the corruption of our nature is, be it never so
great, yet our fault is never the less; no more then if we had had an Angels
nature, which willingly and wittingly we would pervert. For unto our corrupt
nature we bring of our selves a froward and crooked Will, which did corrupt
the Angels nature, and made them fall from God. Therefore let us not so much
find fault with our nature, as condemn our wicked wills, so set to work
sin, and with delight affecting and effecting evil. The corruption which we
have, our pleasure is in it; and all the goodness which we want, we care not
for it: but our Will is after our work, and as we are, so we like our selves
best. James 1.14.15.
Sin springs up, and is nourished in our hearts, and whatsoever is evil in
us, there it has the fountain, in which we know first that sin is our
own, and in our hearts it breeds as worms in the wood.

Genesis 6.5. and 8.21.
if thy heart accuse thee, thy sins must needs bite thee. To conclude,
Concupiscence (which was the fruit of Adams eating the forbidden fruit)
cleaves now to the nature of all his sons: Mat. 15.19.
1 John 3.20.
which is the tyrant of the flesh, Romans 7.23.
the law of the members, the nourishment of sin, James 1.15.
the feebleness of nature, and the food of death. Oh grievous necessity, and
fearful state of man! before we can sin, we are lincked to sin, and
before we offend, we are bound with offense. By one man sin entered into the
world, Romans 5.12. Ierem. 31.29. and Ezech. 18.2.
and through sin death has gone over all. Did not our Fathers eat the sour
grapes, and are not the teeth of their children set on edge?

CHAP. IIII. Of the original and entrance of Death: and how justly it was
imposed upon Adam and all his brood, by the propagation of Sin, derived unto
them.
THE Nature of man being thus wholly Adams sin, Death presently followed him
at the heels, to pay him his hyre. As Death at first was threatened, so
speedily upon his fall was it executed, both upon him and his: Yet touching the
original of Death (though the cause thereof be just) it seems doubtful,
from whence it came, and what author it had.

For although the issues thereof be in the hand of God, Psalm. 68.20.
who can do nothing without him,) yet all the creatures that God did make,
were very good; and as he is the very goodness it self, so nothing but good
proceeds from God. Since therefore Death and the Devil be enemies to God and
goodness, destroyers, and corrupters of Nature, which he has made; they are
none of his creatures; he is neither their author, nor they of his offspring.
All things which were made, were made by the word, Ioh 1.2.3.
and all things which were made by the word were exceeding good: Genesis 1.31.
Evil then in general, and Death in particular, which is evil in it self,
were not made of God; and nothing can be good, without the sovereign
goodness, which is God himself. And whereas good is not, there is evil;
which in effect is nothing else, but the privation of good, as death is the
want of life, and blindness the want of sight. Lord (says Augustine) thou
have not made death, Aug. in Soliloq.
neither have thou pleasure in the destruction of the living, therefore suffer
not that which thou have not made, to have dominion over me, whom thou have
made. God made not Death, but man after he fell to sin, received the
sentence of his disloyalty and revolt, that he should return to dust, of
which he was framed.

Revel. 9.11.
and therefore his name is rightly given him, Abaddon, that is, a destroyer.
And as death is of him, so for this cause also he is said to have the power of
it, because through his manifold temptations he makes men sin, Mr. Dearing
on Heb 2. Romans 5.12.14.
by which Death reigns. For so says S. Paul of Adam seduced by the Devil.
Christ then vanquished him that had the power of Death; that is, he abolished
sin, and the condemnation of sin, which was the Kingdom of the Devil, and
thereby triumphed over him. For this cause (says S. John) the Son of God
appeared, 1 John. 3.8.
that he might loose the works of the Devil, that is, Sin and Death, which
are both of the Devil: for Sin God condemns, and of Death he says, Hos.
13.14.
I will be thy destruction; protesting thereby that he is author of neither.
If God had made Death, why did Christ weep for Lazarus his death, John 11.35.
for he ought not to mourn for that himself had made? Aug. contra Pellagian.
but by this sorrow he showed that those that God had made to live, the Devil
by sin had made to dye, and therefore he raised him from the grave, that
Satan might know he should little gain by man's death. Ezech. 18.
I will not the death of a sinner, (says the Lord.) If God were the author of
Death, how could he but be the willer of the same? Not God then, but the
Devil is the author of Death.

Adam without corruption, and created him after his own Image, yet through envy
of the Devil came Death, and they that hold of his side prove it: so that the
Father of Death is the Devil; and as he is evil by nature, so likewise is
Death in it self, issuing and proceeding from such a fountain. Romans 5.12. and
6.23.
The Devil is the author of Sin, and consequently of Death: for by Sin
Death entered, and Death is the wages thereof. 1 John 3.8.
He that commits sin is of the Devil, for the Devil sins from the
beginning; he is a murderer from the beginning; he is both a liar, John 8.44.
and the father thereof, not by creation, but by corruption. God made him an
Angel, he made himself a Devil; so falling from God, he fell from
goodness, and became the father of sin and wickedness. Non stetit in
veritate; John 8.44.
he stood not in the truth. He that caused Sin, caused Death for sin: The
third part of the waters became Wormwood, Apoc. 8.10.11.
and many men dyed of the waters, because they were made bitter. Bitterness
caused death; but whence came the bitterness? from the Star that fell into
the waters, called by the name of Wormwood.

And albeit that Death proceeded of the Devil (as we Paul his comparison
between Christ and Adam. Romans 5.17.18.
As by the offense of one man (says he) death reigned over all, and sin
came over all, to condemnation: so by Christ, which is one, the benefit of
grace abounded toward all men, to Justification of life. In which Antithesis
we may see Death seazing upon all men through Adam, and that very justly: so
that Man and Devil are partners in sin, and so in death. Here two things
concur together, the tempter and the obeyer. Satan tempted, and man
consented: He tempted and persuaded of envy, intermingling the matter with
belying and slandering of the truth, to have man break Gods commandment:
notwithstanding all this, Satan had nothing prevailed, had man resisted, and
not consented to his temptation. Therefore we may conclude, that in respect of
Satan's envy, lying, and other evil attempts, tending all to man's destruction,
he may be called (as he is indeed) the author of death: yet in regard of
man's consent, in transgressing Gods Law, Death may duly be imputed to
himself, although there were none other cause: for that he was created to the
likeness of God himself; Genesis 1.27.
and flourished with Free Will, which as then he possessed.

1 Pet. 5.9. James 4.7. Mat. 4.6.
being armed with Faith, which weapon he flies. The Devil used no violence
to Christ, but only said; Cast thy self down head long; that we may know,
that Satan seduceth none, but such as obey him: assault he may to evil, but
compel us he cannot, if we resist him; Chrisost. on Mat. 4.6. Jerome.
so says Chrysostom. They are to be reproved (says Jerome) who think our
thoughts and cogitations to to be sent of Satan, and not to proceed from man's
free will, seeing the Devil may be an inuenter of evil thoughts, but not the
author. Seneca.
The eye never offends if the mind govern the eye: Job. 31.7.
Job therefore says, My heart has not walked after my eyes. The Devil not by
compulsion, but by persuasion, may move man to sin: solicit he may, but
force he cannot. Neither triumphs he ever more greatly, then when man
confesses that he has made him sin; Augustine.
so says Augustine.

Pet. Mart. loc. com. class. 1. cap. 14. sect. 12.
and man as yet to have stood in his Creation; yet man by nature might have
declined, and should in himself have had the cause of sin. The reason is
this, God gave him Free Will, and so left him to himself: and free it cannot
be, except he had choice of good and evil: yet not so unarmed and naked was
he left, but that his Creator gave him power and strength sufficient to
continue, if he would, in his upright estate, wherein he left him: howbeit
he trusting too much to himself, and leaving Gods Law, and not using, but
rather abusing, the means that God had given him, he might have fallen from
his Creation, and so entangled himself in the snare of death and condemnation.
So that in this supposition, the suggestion of the Devil is not simply the
cause of sin and death; the Devil (as yet) not falling from God, but
remaining in his nature an Angel of light. Neither has he such power (as I
have proved) over the will of man, to bow it as he lists, to his purpose.
Therefore once again to conclude this point, not only the Devil, but even
our first Parents themselves, were the first causes of Sin, and so of Death.

Although indeed (to speak properly) an evil thing Aug. de ciuit. dei. lib.
12. cap. 7.
And if any man will go about ouer-curiously to search out the efficient cause
of Death, it is all one as if a man should labor with his eyes to see
darkness; and bend the sense of his ears to hear silence: which (since they
be of themselves mere priuations) have no essence in nature, though existent
in some subject, and known unto us. The sight sees nothing but bright things,
and the ear hears nothing but a noise of loud things: these things are
known to our senses, not by use, but by privation only. Death is a privation
of life, only having a name, and no nature or substance; God therefore made it
not: for whatsoever he made, had an essence, and a kind of substance; Death
therefore being nothing but the absence of life (as hunger the want of meat,
thirst of drink, darkness of light, barrenness of fruit, poverty lack of
riches, etc.) is nothing but in name, and so no creature of God. The deficient
cause therefore of Sin and Death, is the Devil and Man: the Devil by
suggesting, Man by obeying, both their actions not urged of God, but voluntary
of themselves.

Whosoever commits sin is of the Devil; 1 John 3.4.
whosoever sins is the servant of death: neither yet let us so rage against
the devil, as that we altogether exempt our selves from guilt; but rather
knowing the readiness of the devil in assailing, and our own willingness in
obeying, we ought both to renounce the devil, and forsake our selves, and
cleave only in this extremity to the Lord.

Adam to all his heirs, will better appear, by the succeeding inheritance of
sin, to all his posterity and race. For God bestowed his gifts and graces
upon Adam, upon condition, that he should convey them to his seed, if he
himself by obedience would have kept them, but God meant not to give them to
his posterity, if he by his rebellion and unthankfulness should rashly loose
them, as he did. Adam therefore falling from God, was justly deprived of these
his graces and gifts, and as a just punishment inflicted upon his sin, did in
equity also deprive his whole posterity of the same. God could (I confess)
have preserved Adams seed from his pollutions: but it made more for his glory,
that it might be known what we are by nature, and what by Grace.

Adams sin extends it self to whole mankind, though all succeeding natures
are but part of him. For as a River poisoned in the Wellspring or fountain,
so was the nature of man altogether corrupted in our first Parents: corrupt
Parents, corrupt Children. He was no private but a public person, and
general head of all mankind, and therefore his sin was not proper only to
his individual subject, but real and hereditary to all his Sons: the evil
and punishment, whereof (by reason of Nature and Law) succeeded by right to all
his brood. For as the Law of God was given to Adam and his heirs, even first
and last: so was the first breach thereof universal, and all in him did pluck
and taste the forbidden fruit, to their endless woe. And as we see many
thousand men in a City do make but one Corporation and Society, who all
participate in gain and loss of their Liberties and Freedoms: so Adam and
all his heirs, though in number they pass the Stars of the Sky and in
multitude should surmount the very sands of the Sea, are still but one, Grave
illud delictum, quod non solum persona^ inficit sed and naturam. Bernard.
and in forfeiture of their privileges and freedoms must needs remain
alike: Great indeed was that sin, which not only infected the person, but
nature it self, and the whole stock.

And as it is most just with men to disinherit the stained Adam and all his
sinful race, and to deprive him and his seed of all his native virtues which
were given to him in trust: Leprous fathers beget leprous children, which are
infected by theirs and their own Leprosy. As every man dies of his own
disease, and yet it may be he had the contagion from another, so for Adams
sin, as it was imputed unto us, we die, and yet not for Adams sin alone,
but for our own; for in us there is the very matter of corruption.

It is all one as if a man upon easy conditions should gain an high estate to
him and his for ever, and yet should wittingly and wilfully forfeite it again
to the owner; who would either moan the heir, or blame the giver? Even so,
God having made the soul of man good, righteous, and fair, as from himself,
yet knitting it to the body, to make the man (which man is Adams heir) he may
justly withdraw his graces from it, as his own, being forfeited and lost by
traitorous man. Thus Gods grace most justly failing the soul, it falls to
sin and declineth to naught; which pronenesse of evil is our natural
sickness, which we call Original sin.

So that the soul of man is not now created with that evil, and other
excellent graces which it should have had, if Adam had not sinned: and albeit
it be pure and unspotted as it proceeds from God; yet is it no sooner joined
to the body, but it is presently polluted* even as the purest wine and best
quintessence, when it is powered into a filthy pot, poisoned and unsavory, does
in a moment loose their natural taste and tallage: so does the sweet soul
loose her fragrant smell of grace and goodness, so soon as it is sent into
this filthy vessel, the body of sin. Neither is the soul of man subject
only to weaknesses and infirmities in resisting of corruptions, but has many
other defects, both of mind and will, being destitute of spiritual life and
light, blind by nature, and not so much as inclinable to holy desires and
sanctified works, as God (her Creator) by his law requires.

And although in the just judgment of God (as we have already heard) men's
souls be now made in such

Adam at the first, touching the propagation of original sin; they can
convey no more unto their posterity, but that which by nature they are
possessed of; for grace comes from heaven, and our new birth is not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, John 1.13.
nor of the will of man, but of God. If we winnow any Wheat or grain never so
perfectly, and purge it never so thoroughly by the fan, from the chafe and
dust; yet when it is sown again, it will not bring forth cleansed corn, but
with the grain yield husks and hawnes; which also must it self be threshed
with the flayle, and cleansed with the fan upon the floor: As this cleansed
Corn (I say) can give no more but what it had by nature; and look what it had
by the art and industry of man, the same means must be used to it again,
before it be clean and fit for our use: Even so, the faithful, though they be
washed, 1. Cor. 8.11.
justified, and sanctified by Gods spirit, and the blood of Christ; yet can
they give no more to their children then what themselves have had by nature,
being the children of wrath: and as for any grace or goodness, Ephesians. 2.3.
it must come from the same Author, and by the same means which their parents
had, to work it in them, or else it can never be effected.

God does work in the hearts of men to incline their Aug. de gra. and lib.
arbit. cap. 21.
sometime manifest, sometime secret, but always just. A workehouse must needs
decline and also fall, when the vnder-proppes are removed: Darkness must
needs ensue, when the Sun and light is departed away. Those bright beams of
all light and happy life, which were given to our first parents, are removed,
and other excellent gifts and graces of God are (in his just judgment) so long
withholden from our souls, until by his holy spirit (as the worker) and by
his holy word (as the instrument) God in his good time do again enlighten our
minds, and purify our hearts by faith, Acts 15.9. 2. These. 2.17.
and confirm and strengthen us in every good word and work.

Sin to mankind will always be a Iebusite, a false borderer, yea a rank
traitor, rebelling against the spirit, which makes the life of man to be
(says Chrysostom) a debt, as it were own, and due to death: for the devil
is the father of sin, and sin is the mother of death: Iam. 1.15.
Hereupon says S. James, that Sin being finished, trauaileth in childe-birth
(like a mother) to bring forth Death; Psalm. 9.13.
and David calls sin the gate of death, because as a man comes into a
house by the door or gate, so death came into the world by sin. The
corruption of our flesh did not make our soul sinful, Lactantius. Pabulum
mortis
but the sin of our soul did make the flesh corruptible. Whereupon
Lactantius calls sin the relief or food of death: and as a fire goes out
when all the fuel is spent, but burns as long as it lasts; so death dies
when sin cease, but where sin abounds, there death reigns.

CHAP. V. Of the Nature of Death, what it is, and how manifold, and whence
Deuines have derived it.
Adam, as the stock, to all and every one of us, his line and race, as to the
boughs and branches (the leprosy of his sin cleaving fast to all his seed,)
we are further to consider the nature thereof for our better humbling, which
cannot more plainly appear, then by the true describing and dividing of the
same, by and into his several parts, properties, and effects, as they are laid
out unto us, and gathered from the Scriptures.

As man therefore in his nature consists of two principal is not only a
killing of the body, but also a slaying (as it were) of the soul; Mat. 10.28.
not only a separation of the soul from the body, but a division and cutting
off both of body and soul from God. Hence it appears that Death is
threefold: first corporal, secondly spiritual, and thirdly a death common
both to body and soul; and all these kinds due to all men (without exception)
for all have sinned, and are destitute of the grace of God. Romans 3 23.


This corporal Death (which I said to be a separation Apoc. 2.11.
who is the life thereof) is also called the second Death: Both corporal and
spiritual, or the Death that is common both to body and soul (which is an
everlasting divorce both of body and soul from the union and fellowship of
God) is also called eternal death, which is inchoatiue in this life (for they
that believe not are condemned already) and complete in the life to come, Ioh.
3.18.
when (after the resurrection of the body) both body and soul shall
everlastingly be separated from the Lord of life, Acts 3.15.
which is also common to all, by reason of sin, yet not prevailing over Gods
elect, justified and freed from it by faith in Christ.

Death therefore in a word, is nothing else, but a departing in his brightness
can receive no obscurity, but dissipates and dispels all darkness by his
clear and crystal beams: and as the coldest and hardest Ice (at the
approach of the fire) is turned into water; so the soul (which is the
fountain of life, and author of moving) is not capable properly of death, nor
can possibly die. Therefore the soul of man being immortal ought to be well
ordered, and heeded, least the Immortality to joy, should turn to Immortality
of sorrow. The death of the body is not the death of the soul, but only a
seuering or parting of the same from the body: As in taking of a Candle out of
a Lantern, we may take the light out, and not put out the Candle, and the
Lantern is full of darkness, by reason of the light removed, yet the Candle
casts her light more clear and bright: even so, the soul departing from
this body of clay, lives and moves afterward more freshly and blessedly.

The soul then dies not because it is utterly abolished, Gregory. In Ezech.
ohm. 17.
As the body dies when it sends out the soul, so does the soul die when it
loses God. The separation from God is the death of the soul* De verbis dom.
in Math. sermon. 6.
even as the departing of the soul is the death of the body; so says
Augustine. Sin begat the last, and the punishment of sin brought forth the
first; In quibusdam dict.
so says Bernard.

The nature then of death in effect, is the absence or deprivation Romans 6.23.
Heb. 2.14.
an enemy to nature, the dissolution of Gods work, the power of the devil,
the strength of Gods wrath, and the very kingdom of hell. The death of the
soul is to cease from righteousness, and quite to be sequestered from the life
of God. This is called the first death, in respect of time, going (as I said)
before the second, which is the complete death indeed: for as the soul (as
we have heard) is the life of the body: so God is the life of the soul, and
his spirit is (as it were) the soul of our souls: the want of which communion
brings nothing else but endless and eternal death.

Without God there is no life, therefore Adam and Euah departing from God,
departed from their life, and Sin (says Bernard) went before, and Death
followed at the heels: which if Man had prevented, death had not entered: He
would not be ruled by God, and so was made unable to rule his body. Thus by
sin he lost his life, and found out death. As his soul could not be divided
from God his life, but by sinning; Bernard de laud nouae militiae. Cap. 11.
no more could his body be separated from his soul but by dying: and nothing
was more agreeable to Gods justice then that a spiritual death should beget a
corporal, a guilty death that which is penal, and a voluntary death an
inevitable and fatal.

So soon as man through sin had turned himself from God, so soon and as
suddenly was he destitute of Chrysostom) even so soon did the Lord pronounce
sentence of death against them: In Genesis suse tractat hanc rem.
and even as those that are condemned of an earthly Judge, although for a while
perhaps they may be reserved a live in prison, and be repriued; yet in effect
they are but dead men: Even so our first parents, though (through the exceeding
great mercy of God) after sentence pronounced, they did long enjoy their lives,
yet forthwith (in effect) they were as good as dead; for no day, hour, or
moment did afterward ensue, in which they had assurance of their life.

Ephesians. 2.12.19.
but a death, being estranged from the life of God; and none have life in God,
which want belief in Christ, 1. Ioh. 5.20.
for only Christ (who is eternal life through faith) does quicken us: So that
truly to acknowledge Christ, and thorough faith to possess him, is to be
freed from death, Ioh. 17.3.
and to have eternal life. Only in name to profess him is the part of dead
men; for as whosoever believes not remains in death, Ioh. 3.18.36.
and has the wrath of God still staying upon him; John 14.15. 1 John 2.3.4.
so none believes in Christ that loves him not, and none loves him that
keeps not his commandments. Hereof (says Saint John to the Angel of
Sardis) thou have a name that thou live, Revel. 3.1.
but thou art dead: so Christ called the Scribes and Pharisees painted
sepulchers, whose souls were dead in their bodies for want of faith. Math.
23.27.
Hence it was that he said to the young man, Mat. 8.22.
let the dead bury their dead; and Paul of the wanton Widow, that being
alive, she was but dead. 1. Tim. 5.6. Ephesians. 5.14. Ephesians. 2.1.
Awake thou that sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give
thee light; you has he quickened that were dead in your trespasses and sins.

shall be called a spiritual body, not in substance, but in quality; because
in the resurrection it shall be quickened by the spiritual power of Christ: So
a man that has but simply a soul (if he have not the true soul of the
soul, which is the Spirit of God, to quicken and revive it) he is but a mere
natural man, and must needs be damned.

Furthermore, as a body raised up and quickened by

So likewise the reprobate in this life, and in the life to Genesis 4.14.
(as Cain that runnagate and vagabond) not only fearing their lives, but being
frighted at their shadows. And they have the Devil, 2 Cor. 4.4.
(who is the God of this world) possessing them, 2 Timothy 2.26.
and still leading them captives (by the cords and chains of all manner of
wickedness) toward hell and damnation; Prou. 5.22.
and in the life to come they are not only deprived of the presence of God,
but suffer and endure all endless and unspeakable torments with the Devil and
his Angels. Gal. 2.20. and 6.14.
As Gods Children therefore being crucified to the world and the flesh, have
the life of God living in them, which will most perfectly appear and show it
self at Christ's coming: Col. 3.3.4.
so all fleshly and wicked men, who have given themselves to the Flesh, World,
and Devil, do presently live the life of hell, which (they carrying about in
their bodies) will clearly show it self to their shame and confusion, at the
latter day. So that the wicked in this life, do live in death, and conuersing
in earth, they are the bond-slaues of hell.

Gal. 5.6.
which works not by love, which flourishes not with fruits; James 2.26.
for Faith without good works is dead. And therefore to the end we may be
revived (being dead and buried in our sins) we must first believe in Christ,
John 11.25.
(which is our life) and if our belief be lively, we must show it forth by
our fruits; Reu. 3.1.
otherwise we may have a name to live, and yet be dead.

Ephesians. 4.15.
such as are strangers from the life or God, that have neither sense nor
feeling of their sins, nor any motion to godliness, 2 Timothy 2.26.
to whom all goodness is unsavory; whose bodies and souls are holden captive
of the Devil, whom they serve as slaves: such as are void of Gods Spirit,
wedded to their own wicked wills; whom the God of this world has blinded, 2
Cor. 4.4.
that they can neither see nor believe the truth; whose conversion is as hard,
as to raise up Sons of Stones unto Abraham. Mat. 3.9.
Who is more dead then he that carries fire in his bosom, sin in his
Conscience, and does neither feel it nor shake it out, nor tremble at it? for
Satan has gotten quiet possession, and he is careless in assaulting of
such, in whom he has gotten a quiet dwelling. Hence we may learn to loath our
selves for our sins, which bring us into such thraldom to Death and Devil,
which cut us off from God, shut us out of heaven, rob us of salvation, and
bring the everlasting wrath of God upon us, which is unmeasurable, infinite,
and vnportable, never able to be sustained of any, but of Christ our infinite
God and Savior, who in majesty and power is equal with his Father.

Thus we have heard the nature of death, common unto Greg. lib. 14. moral.
not only for that it makes division where it comes, but that without
exception it equally diuides to all alike. Some think that it proceeds from
bitterness, for that the sweetness of the forbidden fruit proved bitter to
Adam and his brood. August. contra Pellag. lib. 1. Ero morsus tuus infern^.
And Augustine not vnwittily deriueth Mors, a morsu, for that our first parents
in biting the Apple, were bitten of death. Whence he also alludeth to that of
Osea 15. O death, I will be thy sting, O hell, I will be thy biting. The
Grecians also derive it from a word importing to look upwards, because it
brings us to God: and they term it, Initiation or Perfection, because in
ending this life, it enters us, or rather perfecteth our life in heaven. And
the Latins take the name thereof from mora, which signfieth delay, Mors, a
mora.
or tarrying for a thing, because it waits and expects for all men, of all
sorts and conditions. And this may suffice for the dedescription of Death, and
declaration of the nature thereof.

CHAP. VI. At Death is due to all mankind by the means of Sin: so all
creatures, actions, and experience it self preach and proclaim the same.
AS the wages of Sin is Death: so all Adams Romans 6.23.
As in Adam (says the Apostle) all men dye, so in Christ shall all believers
be made alive. It is Gods Statute enacted in heaven, 1 Cor. 15.
that all must dye; (even this were enough to cast a cloud over all our fairest
delights) but there is more behind; Heb. 9.27.
and after that comes the judgment. The persuasion whereof possessing our
hearts, should (one would think) more then all penal Laws, deter us from
impiety. Ashes (says one) are wont to keep the fire, the remembrance whereof
we bear about in our bodies: But I would to God that the knowledge of these
ashes (I mean our frail estate) would keep in our hearts the fire of Gods
grace, that we might never forget our grave.

Adam lived (says the holy Ghost by Moses) nine hundred and thirty years,
Genesis 5.3.4.5. etc.
and so he dyed. Seth lived nine hundred and twelve years, and after dyed,
etc. And is not this a true table, most lively representing our mortality and
death? Of some others it is said, that they were gathered to their fathers;
Genesis 47.30. and 49.29. and 25.8.
of others, to their people, etc. but of none, that he ever escaped. For what
man lives and shall not see death? shall be deliver his soul from the hand
of the grave? Psalm. 89.48.
Therefore Iosuah calls Death, The way of all the world. David, Josh. 23.14.
The way of all the earth. Job, The house of all men living. 1 Kings 2.2.
He calls it also The heap, Job 30.23. and 21.32. and 3.19.
whereupon the lives of all men shall be powered: where Kings and Counselors
are, great and small, Captains and Soldiers, bond and free.

We see how the best and happiest days of man slide Shilo, which run
softly, Esaias 8.6.
we must pass the rough waters of Jorden, that run most swiftly. Death is
the Lady and Empress of all the world: her seizure is without surrender, and
from her sentence there is no appeal. It is not the Majesty of the Prince,
nor the holiness of the Prophet, nor gravity of the Prelate, that she
respects. Strength of body, feature or comeliness of face, or other parts,
learning, riches, or any such secular regard, can plead against Death, or
privilege any person against the grave: be thy days never so few, or thy
years never so full, be they many, or be they few, all is one: Days, and
years, and time, are no plea against the grave, but a fitter pray for Death.

The Decree is out, All must dye. Balthasars embleame is written upon every
man's wall, Heb. 9.27.
God has numbered thy; Dan. 5.25.
though not thy Kingdom (which thou have not) yet thy life (which thou
possessest) is divided, and given to death. All Princes, and the basest
Peasants; yea, all persons whatsoever, may say with Job; Corruption, Job
17.13.14.
thou art my father, Rottenness, thou art my mother, Worms and Vermin ye
are my sisters, ye are my brethren. All men may truly say, Grave thou art my
bed, Sheet thou art my shrine, Earth thou art my cover, Grass thou art my
carpet. Numb. 2.31. Josh 6.9. Numb. 10.25.
Oh Death therefore demand thy due, and thou gathering host Dan, come last,
and sweep all clean away.

Death is not partial, but deals uprightly with all, making the state and
condition of all men alike; that none can repine; Genesis 4.8.
for as well died righteous Abell, whose sacrifice God accepted, as envious
Cain, whose service he rejected; as well Abraham (the father of the faithful,)
as Abimelech the infidel; as well Isaac as Ismael; as well Jacob (whom God
loved) as Esau whom God hated; as well chaste Joseph, as incestuous Ammon; as
well meek Moses, as railing Rabsheka; as well David (a man after Gods own
heart) as Saul, from whom God took his spirit; as well tenderhearted Josiah,
as hard-hearted Pharaoh; as well Solomon the wise, as Nabal the fool; as well
poor Lazarus, as the rich Glutton; as well John the beloved Disciple, as Judas
the Traitor; as well Simon Peter, as Simon the Sorcerer: merciless Death does
exercise her cruelty upon all alike.

Agesilaus to diverse Captains counselling him to walk to the hill Olimpus,
where he should see such store of wealthy Merchants, uttering a world of
riches, An excellent saying of Agesilaus.
and precious Jewels. If I could (says he) buy and sell, or exchange there,
sorrow for mirth, sickness for health, death for life, I would then go
thither, and spend all that I have; but I see that the buyers and sellers (yea
and the very things themselves) are condemned to dye and to perish: Wherefore
neither the sight of any thing there can better my estate, or help me at the
hour of death, when I must creep into my grave. For although honor, wealth
and riches bear here a great sway amongst men, yet can they nothing at all
prevail against the grave, and Death it self. Men by wisdom have found out
how the hardest stones may be broken and softened, how wild beasts may be
tamed, etc. but nothing could be invented, whereby Death might be avoided.

Gods hand (says one) may a man escape, but for Deaths dart no man can shun
it. Against bodily enemies there may Fortresses be made, Castles and Bulwarks
builded; but to Death and his forces all men lie open, as unfenced Cities. In
other dangers, power, money, flight, counsel, and policy, may serve our
turn; but as for Death, it can neither be banished with power, bought with
money, nor escaped with flying away, nor prevented with counsel, nor turned
back with policy. All (I say) without redress, must hasten unto Deaths home.
He therefore that thinks it strange to dye, forgets himself and his own
nature, complains of the God of heaven, that suffered him to be borne a man,
and not an Angel.

Death is the common road-way of all the world, there

Death equally drags away all men which have been, Youth, but the death of
Infancy? the entrance of Manhood but the end of Youth? and what is the
beginning of to morrow but the death of to day? We are no sooner entered into
the earth, but we are constrained to return to the earth again, as it were
from one sepulcher to another; even from the womb to a beginning to live and
die together: so as the most part of the time Death gives us no warning, but by
the blow it self. Many think they never dye, but when they yield up the last
gasp of Death, but if we mark it, we dye every day and moment: for our very
living (as I said) is a continual dying; we no sooner set a step into life,
but we enter a step into death. Of our life all the time past is dead, the
present lives and dies at once, and the future likewise shall perish. The time
past is no more, the future is not yet, the present only is and no more. This
whole life (I say) is but a death. It is like a candle lighted in our bodies;
in one the wind makes it melt away, in another blows it clean out, ere
half it be burned; in others it endures unto the end: but look how much
soever it shines, so much it burns; her shining is her burning, her light a
vanishing smoke, her last fire her last wyke, and her last drop of moisture:
So is it in the life of man; his life and death are all one.

Job 14.1.
the days of our lives are dated, how long we have to live: so that the first
lesson that we have to learn, is to think of our end. We see that the longest
day passes, and the night succeeds; how Summer follows Winter, and Winter
Summer: the Sun has both his rising and his setting, his shining and his
shading: the Spring couers and clothes the ground with fruits; Summer ripeneth
them* Harvest gathers them, and Winter spends them. Thus one thing follows
another, and both one and another pass swiftly to their end. The generation of
one thing is the destruction of another; and the death of one thing is the life
of another. First is our generation, then our conception, after comes our birth
in wonderful weakness. The cradle at the first is our castle; when we are
crept out of that, we come to a little strength, yet long is the time ere we
come to our ripeness. And here, behold, we never continue in one state; for as
our strength increased at the first, so by little and little it diminishes at
the last: as Youth succeeds childehood, and age youth, so childehood, youth,
and age have all their end.

We see by observation that the freshest and sweetest Genesis 3.19.
So shall Adam (being dust) to dust again return with all his brood.

The law of Nature (established amongst all nations and I knew (says
Anaxagoras, having intelligence of the death of his son) that he was mortal
and subject to die: For as it is impossible for any man to die that lived not
before; so none can possibly live that shall not die hereafter. Our life is as
a garment that wears of it self, and by it self; for we wear out our life
in living; the more we live, the less we have to live, and still approach
nearer death: whatsoever we are clothed with, is a mortal and perishing
merchandise: our garments wear upon our backs, and we in our garments; they
are eaten with mothes, and we with time. So in our meats (as in a
looking-glass) we may learn our own mortality: for let us put our hand into
the dish, and what do we take, but the food of a dead thing, which is either
the flesh of beasts, or of birds, or of fishes, with which food we so long
fill our bodies, until they themselves be meat for worms? All this we see by
experience, we feel it and we taste it daily: we see death (as it were) before
our eyes: we feel it betwixt our teeth, and yet can we not cast our account,
that we must die.



thou upon us? how secret are thy paths and ways? how doubtful is thy hour?
how universal is thy kingdom? The mighty cannot escape thy hands, the wise
cannot hide themselves from thee, and the strong are weakened before thy face:
Thou accountest no man rich, for that no man is able to pay the ransom for his
life: Thou go every where, thou searchest every where, and thou art every
where. Thou witherest the herbs, thou wastest the winds, thou corruptest the
air, thou dryest the waters, thou changest the ages, thou alterest the water,
and suppest up the sea. All things do decrease and diminish, but thou still
remainest and raignest in the world. Thou art the hammer that always strikes,
the sword that never blunteth, the snare that always catches: Thou art the
prison whereinto every man enters, thou art the sea wherein every one
drowneth, thou art the pain that every one suffers.

O cruel Death thou snatchest us away in our ripest age, Aug tract. 13. in
Iohannen^.
but thy coming was by the Devils envy and malice.

Now that we may profit by this experience of our us so secure and careless,
as that we desire no other heaven but earth. Esaias 28.15.
Many make a covenant with Death, and clap hands with the grave, hoping thereby
to escape, or for a time to solace themselves in the forgetfulness of their
latter end, and so bathe themselves in their fleshly pleasures, and wallow
(like fatted Swine in the filthy stie) of all uncleanness, still following
things apparent to their eyes, and never regarding the time to come, till death
prevent them on a sudden, and summon them to appear before their Judge: So it
comes to pass that as they lived wickedly, Job 8.14.
they die most fearfully; their hope is as the wind, and their confidence
like the cobwebbe: Death is a terror and a torment both to their soul and
body: and this is the reason they have not learned to die; Death is strange
unto them, he seems an ugly monster, they dare not once behold him.



CHAP. VII. Of the miserable life, and wretched state of man, by the means of
Sin and Death.
INfinite are the miseries of mortal men: their sin brought in a sea of
evils; and just is Jobs Job 14.1.
that man borne of a woman is full of wretchedness: from the day of his birth,
till the day of his death, a whole army of evils besiege him. Tormented he is
in his soul, and afflicted in his body: Esaias 1.9.
in every part (from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot) he is
full of infirmities, sores, and maladies, no place is free: The first day of
the life of man is a beginning of conflicts: Our ingresse and egresse, and
whole progress of life, is set about with several signs of sorrow.

The tender babe newborn, and not yet able to speak Augustine) does by his
tears prophecy and foretell the manifold sorrows that are incident to this
miserable life of man. We enter this life with tears, August. hom. 10.
we pass it in toil, and end it in sorrow and torment. Great and little, rich
and poor, not one in the whole world that can plead immunitie from this
condition. Life and misery (says one) are as two twins which were borne
together, and must die together. From the womb to our winding-sheete our life
is a warfare upon earth; no age, no condition of life, no day, no night but
brings his enemy with him, as well against the man of an hundred years old,
as against the babe newborn.

How full of ignorance is the time of our infancy? how light and wanton are
we, growing to be striplings? how man, but even a sack and fardell stuffed
with griefs and diseases? He is forsaken of the world, his kinsfolk, friends,
and acquaintance; his own members and senses fail him; yea, he forsakes (as
it were) himself, in that the very use of reason forsakes him. He is
accompanied with painful aches, griefs, and diseases: his company and
conversation is combersome in the Family where he dwells. This is the mark
(for sooth) at which every one shoots, upon which the eyes of all are fixed.
This is the happy estate, so greatly desired; this I say, is the end of the
greedy ambition of long life.

Take thy Counters into thy hands, see what reckoning just day) sueth out an
execution against her debtor, Plato in dialogo contra mortem.
taking from one his sight, from another his hearing, and both from some; and
he that tarrieth longest in the world, she foundreth, maymeth, and utterly
disableth in his limbs.

Is not this a goodly place, where tears and cares make Senec. Epist. 121.
One while we complain of our bellies, another time of our breasts, and then
of our throats; sometimes our sinews, and then our feet, torment us: Now we
have too much blood, anon too little. Thus are we haled and harried hither and
thither; for so it ordinarily falls out with him that dwells in another
man's house: here tears sooner fail us, then just cause of complaint: with
tears and cries we entered, Seneca de breuitate vite.
and with the same we must pass over and end our days.

What other thing is the body of mortal man, but a corrupt Isidoras.
One fell a weeping that he was here a feeding upon corruptible meat, being
created to live in the company of Angels, to feed on heavenly food.

What glass is so brittle and subject to knockes and breaking as is this body
of ours? Sometimes the very air take it away, for the very air and look of
an infected man is able to do it. Consider the strength of this Castle,
(wherein the treasure of our life is kept) seeing the beholding of it a far
off is able to batter the walls thereof to the ground. Neither is it to be
wondered that Man is so frail and brittle of himself, considering the moulde
whereof he is made, being dust: but rather we may admire, that being of such
frail metal and making (as he is) yet can endure so long. Why is a Clock
so often disordered, and out of frame? the reason is, because it has so many
wheels and points of curious work, that though it be made of Iron, yet every
little thing is able to distemper it; but how much more nice is the artificial
composition of our body, and how much more frail is the matter of our flesh,
then is the metal of a Clock? Why then should we wonder if some one point or
other (among so many pieces) have some impediment, by means of which defect
this clock of our life is stopped and course ended? for what firmness can be
in the matter of flesh? or what strength consists in such a weak subject?

Augustine) because we are mortal; Aug. de verbis Dom ser. 1.
nearer because we live among so many dangers. If we were of a glassie matter,
our fear were the less, for being kept from knockes, there were hope of
continuance; but keep we our selves as charily as we can, we shall away. Do
we overcome enemies without? diseases within will also surprise us? Can we
avoid the stroke of weapons, the dart of Death we cannot shun. Mortal man
is like a snow-ball in the Sun, his life is soon dissolved: He is like an
apple hanging on a tree, corrupted inwardly by worms, though outwardly
beautiful to the eye. Man is the bondslaue of Death, as a guest in his
dwelling, as a wayfaring man in his Inn, for a night, but quickly gone and
forgotten: Wheresoever he dwells, or whatsoever he does, Death continually
waits for him, as a sergeant at his gates. Oh miserable life how many
deceiuest thou? which when thou art known and learned, art nothing; when thou
art exalted, art but as smoke? bitter to the wise, sweet to the foolish: who
so seeks thee, knows thee not; who so knows thee, flies from thee.

It is reported that the Chamelion changes himself in Euripus, for the often
changing is accounted famous: the Moon has likewise for every day a several
form and shape: But what Proteus was ever changed into so many forms as man
alters every hour? sometime he is sick, sometime sound; sometime angry,
sometime pleased, sometime in hope, anon in despair; he wills, and he
wills not, etc. yea, many times he knows not himself what he would have.
He alters and changes every hour; he tosseth and tumbleth, he rages, and
is as restless as the troubled sea. If he be poor, he lives in travel; if
rich, he is proud and licentions, etc. The Sea changes not but when the
winds turn contrary unto it; but man's life, whatsoever the weather and
seasons are, either calm or windy, is continually troubled with alterations
and storms.

No man is contented with his own estate, but desires to exchange it with
another. The King feels the Bernard was not afraid to say, Bernard.
that he thought this life little better then the life of hell, were it not for
the hope to attain and come to the Kingdom of heaven.

Aug. Tom. 2. in Psalm. 39.
so there be in this world men of all natures and affections. We can name no
creatures, of inclination never so cruel, filthy, and abominable, but here
will be a copesmate of like quality and condition amongst the crowd and
company of men.

to sugared Hypocrisy; where smooth hatred, hidden ambition, smiling envy, and
wicked tyranny, shroud themselves. Our life is encountered with capital
enemies, Pain, Care, and Sorrow: Pain bids the body battle, Care continues
the skirmish, and Sorrow gives the victory. This life is but a borrowed dream
of pleasure, a vision of joy, a pageant of transitory delights.

What should I speak of the shortness and swiftness Job 9.25.
It is like a Post (says Job) swiftly galloping away: yet sometime he that
rides so fast, rests and breaths: but our days pass away still without
ceasing, till we come to our graves. Our days pass away as the Bark of
hasty messengers. A ship is not made to rest,

When the Sun is at the highest, the shadows are the Job 9.26.
So the days of all men pass away as a shadow at night, which appears the
longest when it is nearest to an end. Our days go as an Eagle to her prey:
and what are men but the prey of Death, Esaias 40.6.
which soareth after us with an open mouth to devour us? We are as flowers
and grass; and why do we not think (when we walk in the fields) that
Death in the hand of God, is like unto a Sithe in the hand of a labourer,
attending to cut us down every hour? We gather flowers in our garden, and
they fade presently, and though we leave them there, they wither before the
evening: and do we think to flourish always, and to have our Springtime
continual in this world? Our days slide away like the wind, and fail
without hope; our bodies ebb and turn back like the course of waters; all
the time which thou see, flies away with the time it self. Nothing remains
of all that we see. Ieronimus.
Even I, while I am now writing (that all things are changed) am changed my
self: See therefore our folly that we should so dearly love a thing that so
quickly leaves us, Seneca epist. 57.
for every moment of this life is the death of the other. There is nothing in
us that will not by and by be dead: only our sins live; yea, revive and grow
young again in despite of Nature. Our Spring is fading, our Lamp is wasting,
and the tide of our life is drawing by degrees to a very low ebb. Whatsoever
we do, our wheel whirles about apace; and we must learn to know that every
one of us has a poor soul to save.

And not to forget the cares of this life: How do they Egypt? Of all the
plagues this was most loathsome: Exodus 8.21.24.
for they never suffered men to rest, but the more they were beaten off, the
more they came upon them: so of all miseries and vexations of mortal men, this
is one of the greatest, to be tormented with the cares of this life, which (as
Flies) by no device can be expelled. They rush upon them in the morning as
soon as they awake, they accompany them in the day, they follow them in the
night, they forsake them not to bed, they let them from their sleep, they
afflict them in their rest, they trouble them in their dreams; and they are
like to those fierce and merciless tyrants (threatened to the wicked) which
shall give them no rest, neither by day, nor night: Ier. 16.15.16.
For I have taken away my peace from this kind of people (says the Lord) I
have taken away my mercy and compassion from them.

The very brute beasts are fed and provided for without

As our life is full of care, so it is fraught and set with many snares: Psalm.
11.6.
God (says David) shall rain snares upon sinners;

Now to avoid these snares, that we be not caught, Pro. 1.17.
for the net is laid in vain before the eyes of such as have wings and can
fly. The Spies of Jericho, Psalm. 121.1.
though many snares were laid for them, yet they escaped them all, for that
they walked by hills, and hid them in mountains. Josh. 2.22.
If we lift up our eyes to the hills (with David) whence all our aid and
assistance comes, to avoid the dangers of this life: Psalm. 124.7.
then likewise may we say with him; Our soul is delivered, as a bird, from
the snare of the Fowler: If we can truly say, Phil. 3.20.
with S. Paul, Our conversation is in heaven, then shall we little fear all
these deceits and dangers upon earth: for as the Fowler has no hope to catch
the birds, except he can allure them to his pitch, and to come down to his
lure: so has the Devil no way to entangle us, Mat. 4.6.
but to say (as he did to Christ) Throw thy self down; come to the baits
which I have laid, eat and devour them, tie thy affections to earthly things,
etc. But King David was past them all, Psalm. 73.25.
when he said to God; Whom have I in heaven, but thee? and there is none in
earth which I desire before thee, Phil. 3.8.
etc. And so was Paul when he accounted all things dung; 2 Cor. 10.3.
for though he lived in the flesh, yet he walked not after the flesh.

I have a whole army of traitors within me (says Augustine) who under color
of friendship are mine enemies: Lib. Med. cap. 4.
and yet behold, with them have I lived from my youth up, them have I pleased,
them have I believed, as the friends whom I loved, as the Masters whom I
obeyed, the Lords whom I served, the Counselors whom I trusted, etc. That the
Adamant draws Iron unto it, is a secret in Nature: but for the World and
Flesh to draw us, is a matter as natural as for the water of a river to run
down the channel, and as for a Coach to run down a hill: for being
naturally given to the corruptions of the flesh, we need no soliciting; the
only sight of the thing we love is sufficient to hale us forward. As the
wanton harlot allures her lovers, the bait upon the hook the fishes, the call
of the Fowler the foolish Birds; so is this World and Flesh with their baits
and allurements. They are like a violent stream that carries away the highest
and tallest trees not sufficiently rooted: yea, the best men are rightly
resembled to those that live among Colliers and Millers, who hardly can shun
defiling and deforming of coal and meal.

he tempts our ears with the sweetness of Music* that he may weaken our
Christian strength; he moves our tongues by bitter words, and by injurious
deeds provoke our hands to fight and slay; he offers unrighteous gain to
induce us to fraud, Cipr. tract. 10. de Zel^.
and pernicious profits to kindle covetousness in our souls; he promises
temporal honors whereby to defeat us of celestial joys; he shows falsehood
that he may seduce us from the truth; he practices cunning in time of peace,
and violence in persecution. In this wicked world who can live peaceably among
so many enemies of peace, where the mother is against the daughter, and the
daughter against the mother; yea, manifold are our foes in our own families;
yea, in our own selves and souls: Reason against the Will, and Will against
the Reason; yea, (which is more) every man is two men, the Flesh against the
Spirit, and the Spirit against the Flesh; the Law of the members against the
Law of the mind? And this conflict is not for a time, but so long as we
continue in this body of sin.

Perfect peace here we cannot possibly have, seeing the 1 Cor. 15.53.
yet we must endeavor that though it be inhabitant, yet that it be not regnant.
The Flesh is strong, yet Grace is stronger in Gods Children, to subdue the
rigor thereof: the Flesh is as the elder, Genesis 25.23. Romans 9.12.
Grace as the younger; but in this Gods Children have a promise also that the
elder shall obey the younger. We may not think our selves safest, when we
seem to be freest from the buffettings of Satan: for, bearing in our bodies a
divided Kingdom, Romans 7.
between the Flesh and the Spirit (represented unto us in the wrestling of
Rebeccaes twins in her womb) if we have peace with God we shall have war
with the Dragon; and having forsaken Egypt, Genesis 25.22.
Reu. 12.47.
yet in the way to our heavenly Canaan, we shall have a spiritual Pharaoh,
with his Captains, like Grassehoppers, Exodus 14.9.10.
to feed upon us: yea, the liberty which we have in Christ, the corruption of
our heart will labor to inuert to voluptuousness; the sweetness which we
taste in his word, the vanity of our minds will endeavor to ouer-cast with
drowsinesse; the Faith which we ground on his promises, the subtlety of the
Serpent will seek to undermine with doubtfulnesse; the conscience we make to
offend, the lusts of our flesh will contend for to cover with hypocrisy; the
detestation we have of sin, the concupiscence of our eyes will strive to
ouer-reach with profaneness; and the interest we have to heaven, the pride
of our lives will persuade us to change for trifles.

Genesis 8.9.
Here is no sure peace, nor secure quietness; but wars on every side, and in
all places contention and deadly foes.

the heart, and desirous to vomit and to be discharged thereof; we remove out
of one ship to another; from a greater to a less: we promise unto our selves
rest in vain, they being always the same winds that blow, the same waves
that swell, the same humors that are stirred, to all there is no other port,
no other means of tranquillity, but only death. See the foolishness of the
world, and the infirmity of our flesh. Ioh. 16.20.22.
When God says trouble shall come; they say, we would have ease: when God
says, be merry and rejoice in trouble, we lament and mourn, as though we
were cast-awayes. But this flesh (which is never merry with virtue, nor sorry
with vice, which never laugheth with grace, nor weepeth with sin) holds
fast with the world, and gives God the slip. Thus we may see our wretched
estate in the flesh, still crossing God and the salvation of our souls. All
our affections and wills, (with the whole force of Nature) helps forward our
destruction, fightings without, and terrors within, World* Flesh, and Devil,
2. Cor. 7.5.
join together with Death, for our damnation.

CHAP. VIII. Of the power, strength, and sting of Death, by means of the Law,
whose nature is here unfolded.
THe original of Death we have heard, as renounce man (although he created
him) and cast him off by means of sin, whom first he had made like unto
himself. In that men die, it proves they had sinned; and sin proves there is
a law, which law being broken, brings Death: Romans 6.23.
for the wages of sin is Death.

Exodus 31.18.
but blotted out by his fall) in Tables of Stone, to show the hardness of his
heart, that so as in a glass he might see his fearful fall. Iam. 1.23.
For (amiddest the heaps of all other sins) pride so possessed his heart, that
although he was nothing else but sin, yet still he deemed himself as innocent
and righteous: He was so blinded in his corruption, that he knew not sin in
his colors, until the law descried it. And this is the common error of all
his lynage, that without the publishing of the law, we had not known our
sin. Romans 7.7.
I knew not sin (says Paul) but by the Law: I had not known lust, except
the law had said thou shall not lust: but sin took occasion by the Law, Romans
3.20.
and wrought in me all manner of lust: so sin by the Law grew out of measure
sinful.

Such is the corruption of man's nature that it most eagerly Romans 7.8.
sin abounded three ways: first, seeing the law of God given unto him as an
help, sin labors to turn it to his hurt, whom it securely before
possessing, less assaulted: secondly, Man naturally desires liberty and
freedom, and flies servitude and bondage; by nature man's mind is cross and
peevish, and is swayed to contraries. Stolen waters are the sweetest, Pro. 9.17.
and hid bread is pleasant: So that by the prohibitions of the law (charity in
man being decayed) the desire of evil increased; which once increased, made the
things forbidden by the law more sweet and pleasant: Thirdly, for that the
inhibition of evil things puts them more in remembrance of the things
forbidden, which very remembrance to nature corrupted, is a prouoker and
stirrer up of filthy lust and desire.

Again, in that sin abounded, when the law entered, Romans 7.12. 1. Tim. 1.8.
though it be abused as an occasion of evil to corrupt and wicked men.

Without the law sin is dead, not as though there was Romans 7.8.
for even the Gentiles themselves which had not the law written, showed the
effect of the law in their hearts (the conscience also bearing witness, and
their thoughts accusing one another, or excusing*) and therefore being
convinced in their souls of sin without the Law written, Romans 2.15.
are a law unto themselves; and sinning without law, shall perish without the
law written, by the law of nature, that was grafted in their hearts. This is
confirmed by many Moral virtues, which they naturally followed, and by many
vices which they naturally hated. This knowledge of the light of Nature (though
imperfect) yet is sufficient to confound them; albeit sin (indeed) was then
hidden in respect (which is the meaning of the Apostle) and their best
knowledge of the Law ouer-shadowed, and well-nigh blotted out, that sin could
not appear in his nature.

Genesis 3.7.
it opened the inward man with all his concupiscence; it showed us our shame
and confusion, our vglesome shape, most monstrous to behold, how we were
transformed from the image of God, to the similitude of the Devil: It put us
in remembrance of our divine nature which we had lost; it showed us hell, and
the wrath of God, nothing but condemnation appeared by it: It let us understand
how far we were led from God; how all things within us and without us, were
corrupted and out of course: It painted our God in his nature, according to his
most pure holiness and justice; how he requires all our hearts, all our
souls, all our minds, all our strength, that is to say, the whole man and
every part of him in his service. Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37.39.
The least sin could not so shroude it self, but the law, discover it, not
condemning only all our outward acts, Exodus 20.17. Romans 7.7.
but giving sentence against all our wicked thoughts; yea, all our idle motions
without consent.

Genesis 6.5.
since all men by the law are convinced of sin, all included under sin, and
subject unto the same guilt of condemnation; Gal. 3.16.
since by the Law comes the knowledge of sin, which leaves every man
without excuse; since it was added because of transgression, and that our sins
might more appear and abound, therefore it is called to the unregenerate man,
Act. 15.10.
an importable yoke, the occasion of sin, the law of sin and of wrath, Romans
7.8.
the administration of condemnation, the oldnesse of the letter, Romans 8.2. and
4 15
which cannot give life, but pronounce all our works accursed. The law is a
hammer, 2. Cor. 3.7.9.
not only to bruise the conscience, but to break it into powder, which if it
be not done, we shall never have the spirit of adoption to seize upon us; The
law commands, but gives no power to obey; Romans 7.6. Romans 8.15.
It is but a dead letter, 2. Cor. 3.6. Romans 7.6.
and has but a doleful and dreadful sound, until the spirit come and arm
us with power to perform what the law requires.

And now behold the strength and sting of Death. How Deuteronomy. 11.26.27.28.
opening unto us his very will, which is goodness it self, setting a blessing
before our eyes, as well as a curse. It was not contrary to our nature before
it was corrupted, but agreeable to the image of man, in which he was first
created; it shows the very perfect pattern of true obedience, what is
agreeable to God and his nature, how much he hates sin, and delights in
goodness; it offers both life and death, life to the obayers; death to the
breakers: Therefore let us all glorify God in this behalf, let every man's
mouth be stopped from accusing God or his law; let us confess against our selves
our manifold sins, and say unto him: Shame and confusion appertains unto
us: Dan. 9.7.
Death and condemnation are our due: Thy heavy anger, wrath and hell be our
deserts, and thou (O blessed God) art just, righteous, good and gracious in all
thy doings for ever. Let us thus (I say) give sentence against our selves, that
God may be justified and praised, even before the most wickedest men when he is
judged.

Well then let us bear in mind, that God is not rigorous in punishing sinful
man with everlasting Death, by reason of his innumerable sins convinced by
his Law, and that Gods infinite justice thus broken and disobeyed, could not
otherwise be answered of man, but by the infinite sustaining of eternal Death.
And now I pray you mark the whole power of Satan, and kingdom of the Devil:
first he fights and warreth with temptations (which are as darts to wound
our souls to Death) which if we resist not, being so tempted, but yield to
sin, then comes the Law against us with his force, and by virtue of the Law
Death enters and triumphs; for the sting of Death is sin, and the strength
of sin is the Law: for it shows us hell, 1. Cor. 15.56.
(which is the palace of Death) and leaves us in perdition. See (I say) what
Prince Death has, and what strong soldiers to keep his kingdom, to wit, the
Devil himself, sin, law, wrath of God, and all to uphold it.

Luke 2.40.44.
to sweat drops of blood for the agony of it, and to cry out to his father (as
a man forlorn) why have thou forsaken me? Mat. 27.46.
Neither was this so strange a wonder to see the son of God so amassed at
Death; for it set both Devil, law, sin, hell, grave, and wrath of God
against him: All these were armed to overthrow him, and any or the least of
these without this our Captain Christ, will quite destroy us.

CHAP. IX. Of everlasting Death in particular, and of the horror thereof.
GReat and heavy was the tribute that the eternal when the body that a
fleshly man makes so much of, his belly which he esteems for his God, his
mouth for whose delight the sea and land sufficed not, his flesh that was wont
to be clothed with costly garments of silk and gold, curiously wrought, shall
now suddenly be haled into a filthy hole and pit, where it shall be trod upon,
yea, and eaten with worms; where in stead of gorgeous apparel, he must now
only enjoy his winding sheet, and instead of his perfumes and maskes, filthy
favors and rottenness and in lieu of his variety of delicate dishes, and
serving men to attend him, to have a company and infinite number of crawling
vermin, to feed upon him: What man I say now living and enjoying sense and
reason, but will marvel to think of the base condition that so noble a
creature comes unto? who in his life time had no fellow nor equal? Is it not a
wonder that so excellent a myrrour of nature should come to such a
dishonorable, base, and loathsome estate?

The everlasting Judge knew well enough what penance thou art dust, and to dust
thou shall return: but what is this death and disgrace of the body, to the
death and deformity of body and soul in hell? it is but as the biting of a
flea to the stinging of a Scorpion; a shadow to the substance. If diseases
(which do but make the way to death) be so dreadful, what must the end and
perfection of diseases be? since as the diseases are the malidies of the body,
so Death it self the malady of disease? for there are that fear not so much
to die, as to be dead. If the pang be bitter, yet it is but short, but the
comfortless state of the dead, strikes some far deeper, that could well be
resolved otherwise for the act of their passage. The very not being is
sufficiently abhorred of nature: if Death had no more to make it fearful, but
those that have lived under such shining beams of light, to show them the
dark dungeon of hell (after their straight passage thorough the gates of
Death) and such as have learned that Death is not only horrible for their not
being here, but for their abode and being infinitely and eternally miserable in
the world to come, not so much for the dissolution of life, as the beginning of
torment: such I say, cannot but extremely fear to die, and hellishly tremble
to be dead indeed.



It is the second Death far exceeding the first beyond all conceits of man;
for what life have the damned where there is nothing but immortality of
torments and evil? where there is nothing but the fellowship of Devils and the
damned? where there is fire unquenchable, to which ours is but Ice? Continual
burning there is the least: yet this is not all, for though the evils be most
great and continual, yet here hope brings some ease (as a little Star in
the night,) but in hell with those greatest torments, and horror of evils, is
the greatest despair, without hope of any ease or recovery. This horror is
most horrible, far exceeding all worldly sorrow and fear; better it were never
to have been, then not to be delivered from that dying life, which is indeed
an immortal death.

In this life all the pains which fall upon man are but

Now therefore if a man would endure a great deal of labor, rather then abide
the one in this life, how careful and diligent should we be to hate our
sins, and serve the Lord while we live, rather then to incur the other
tortures and torments in the life to come? The wicked shall be tormented for
ever; so long as God is God, so long shall they burn in hell, neither shall
the tormenter nor the tormented dye, but both live for ever and together
eternally. Oh (says a godly Father) if a sinner damned in hell* did know that
he had to suffer those torments there, no more thousands of years then there
be sands of the sea, and piles of grass on the ground, or no more thousand
millions of ages, then there be creatures in heaven and in earth; he would
greatly rejoice thereof, and comfort himself with this poor cogitation, that
once yet his torments would have an end: but now (says he) this word ( Never)
breaks his heart when he thinks on it, and that after a hundred thousand
millions of worlds there suffered, he has as far to his end as he had at the
entrance: for no water can quench this fire, no time can end these torments.



power of Gods wrath (which now in death the wicked and ungodly men presently
expect to feel) cannot be feared as it ought; For who knows the power of thy
wrath? Psalm. 90.11.
There is no fear, no suspicion, no thought, which may sufficiently express
the terror of it. Horrendum est, Hebr. 10.31.
it is a horrible thing, (so says the Author to the Hebrews) but how
fearful no creature can tell, but they that feel it, and lie under it in the
flames of hell as Dives did. Luke 16.23.
Ask no question (says one) concerning them that perish, concerning the death
of the ungodly: seek not, neither enquire, there is no comfort to be given
unto it.

CHAP. X. The fearful condition of the reprobate and all wicked men, without
Christ.
WHen the wicked and ungodly men shall ponder Balthazar once read upon the
wall, caused his very heart to shake, Dan. 5.6.
and his knees knock together (when he heard that God had numbered his days,
and weighed him in the Balance,) how fearfully shall the ungodly be affected
with the continual expectation of the wrath and vengeance of God, assuredly
decreed, suddenly and in a moment, to fall upon them?

And albeit they strive to put away the evil day from and fevers of fear,
even in the midst of their delights. When Pharaoh the proud Tyrant, Exodus
12.30.31.
had hardened his heart, and boasted exceedingly against the people of God; yet
he no sooner saw the death of the first borne, but he feared and trembled as
the leaves in the Wilderness. There is indeed a way (as Solomon says) that a
man thinks straight and pleasant, Prou. 14.12.
when yet the issues thereof lead to death: but what pleasure is that, and what
delight? Surely in that laughter the heart is sorrowful, Verse 15.
and that mirth does end in heaviness. True it is that such men strengthen
themselves, and strive to vanquish fear, sometimes with one pleasure, and
sometimes with another; but if they would violently cast it out (as the Cannon
does her shot) yet would it evermore return again, and vex their heart.

Prou. 7.22.
not knowing (being so fat) that then he is the fittest for the slaughter. All
their life is a miserable bondage in fear and terror of their just
condemnation to ensue. They have the spirit of slavery and fear (being the
children of the handmaid Hagar) borne in the bondage of her womb, Gal. 4.24.25.
they dwell in the Desert of Ambia, and are in mount Sinai, where is the
burning of fire, and blackness, and darkness, and tempest, Exodus 19.16. and
20.19. Heb. 12.18. etc.
and sound of Trumpet, at which they tremble, for they are without Christ, and
therefore must needs be in the horror and fear of death all their days.

And though through the custom of sin they come when the Lord shall let
loose the cord of their consciences, and shall set their sins before their
face, some of them depart this life like brutish Swine, and others of them
surcharged with sin, do end their days like barking dogs. Esaias 66.24. 1 Timothy 4.2. Esaias 57.20. Heb. 10.27.
The sting of an ill conscience is called a worm that never dies, a searing
with an hot iron, a sea that always rages, a violent fire to devour the
adversary.

An evil conscience is a heavy burden, it will make the Tully, de natura
deorum.
If a man languish in sickness, (so his heart be whole) his sickness does not
so much grieve him: if he be reproached (so he be precious in the sight of God
and his Angels) what loss has he? but if his soul be disquieted, who dares
meet with the wrath of the Lord of hoasts? Who can put to silence the voice of
desperation? Who can make agreement with Hell and Devils? In all other
afflictions a man may have some comfort against sin, but this is ever
accompanied with the accusation of sin; then a man suspecteth all his ways,
fears all his sins, he knows not what sin to begin with: And where
all other evils pursue men but to death, an ill conscience not cured, ends
not in death, but becomes eternal.

It is the profession of sin (although fair spoken at his bedchamber, and
remove his place, but not his pains; his furies ever attend him, are ever
within him, and as parts of himself. And what auayles it to seek outward
relief when thou have thy executioner within thee? If thou could shift from
thy self, thou might have hope of ease, for thou shall never want frettings
so long as thou have thy self; yea, what if thou would run from thy self,
thy soul may fly from thy body, thy conscience, will not fly from thy soul,
nor sin from thy conscience, the conscience leaves not where the Fiends
begin, but both join together in torture.



greater resistance. Hope not to stop the mouth of the conscience from
exclaiming, whiles thy sin continues: that endeavor is both vain and
hurtful, which is as one should stop the nosthrill, in hope to stay the issue,
when the blood hindered of the former course, breaks out of the mouth, or
finds a way down into the stomach, far more dangerous. The conscience
cannot be pacified when sin is within to vex it, no more then an angry
swelling can cease throbbing, whiles the thorn of corrupt matter lies rotting
underneath. Time that remedies all other evils of the mind increases this,
which like to bodily diseases proves worse with continuance, and grows upon
us with our age.

Thus we see that the wicked are in hell living yet upon Ier. 25.15.16. Esaias
51.17. Psalm. 75.8.
the dregs of Gods wrath they shall drink hereafter. All their anguish here
is but as the porch of hell; after comes the maine sea of all their sorrows:
for though they have in this life wallowed in their delights, which sometimes
through a hardness of heart has delayed their sorrows, yet then they must be
turned off, as Princes Mules are wont to be at their iourneyes end, their
treasure taken from them, and their galled backs left unto them.

For as we see those Princely Mules go day by day Man, Bern. in sermon. de
primordijs.
(says Bernard) though thou have lost all shame, if thou feel no sorrow, (as
carnal men do not) yet loose not fear also, which is found in very beasts.
We use to load an Ass, and to weary him out with labor, yet he cares not
for it, because he is an Ass, but if thou would thrust him into the fire,
or fling him into a ditch, he would avoid it as much as he could, for that
he loves his life, and fears death. Fear thou then, and be not more
senseless then a beast: fear Death, fear Judgment, fear the endless pain
of Hell.

Bernard.
and his continuance in the world worse; so his taking away by Death, is the
worst of all. Balaams wish is used by many, Let me dye the death of the
righteous, Numb. 23.10.
yet they will not live a righteous life: but few of these obtain their
desire. Such are taken from the practice of sin to the punishment of sin,
from ease to torments, from men to Devils, from death to hell.

Gibeonites, Josh. 9.27.
content with any condition to enjoy their lives, to be bondmen and slaves,
hewers of wood, and drawers of water. They are pulled from the earth with as
great violence as Ioab from the horns of the altar, 1 Kings 2.28.
whither he fled for a refuge to save his life.

What will the wicked do in the extremity of Gods Anselme.
Above them shall be their Judge offended with their sins; beneath, hell
gaping to devour them; on their right hand shall be their sins, accusing
them, on the left hand the Devils as tormentours ready to receive them; within
them their conscience grieuing: without them infinite damned souls wailing,
weeping, and gnashing their teeth; Good Lord* what will wretched sinners do,
environed with all these miseries? how will their hearts sustain these
anguishes? what way will they take? to go back is impossible, to go forward
is intolerable. What then shall they do, but as Christ foretold, desperately
seek for Death and shall not find it, cry to the Mountains to cover them,
who yet shall not stir to hide them? they shall stand forlorn, as miserable
caitifes to their dreadful and deadly doom; Mat. 25.41.
Go ye cursed into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

For in that man offends the Lord and creator of Judas to sit in Hell, 2.
Tim. 2.20.
as for Saint Peter to sit in Heaven. And vessels of dishonor are as
necessary for the glory of Gods house, as precious vessels of gold for the
honor of his service. Yet this is the height of their horror, when the wicked
had rather be tormented in hell, Esaias 2.19. Hose. 10.8. Luke 23.3. Revel. 6.16.
and 9.6.
then to see the face of Christ their fearful Judge, wishing the very
Mountains to hide them, and the Hills and Rocks to cover them from the glory
of his presence.

Hitherto what Death is in it self: Now it follows to show what it is
through Christ to the faithful.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK. What DEATH is in Christ.
CHAP. I. Christ alone, and none other, can and does redeem us from death and
damnation.
WHat our fearful estate is without

Now in this distress, Christ came to visit us in his due time, even God and
man (a right redeemer for us) he took our cause upon him, and wrestled with
the Devil that held us by our sins in Death. Heb. 2.14.16; 17. etc.
This mighty Savior took flesh and blood to take our part, none could be our
Mediator but he alone, none amongst the Angels (for they are no men) not any
amongst the Saints, for they were all sinners; neither any amongst the other
creatures, for they were all corruptible: so that we can neither give gold nor
silver for the redemption of our souls, neither can we trust in the merits of
Angels and Saints, who all want virtue for this work; but only in Christ the
Son of God and man, a meet redeemer for us, who is our Priest alone, Heb.
7.24.25.26.27.
abiding for ever, because he lives for ever; neither can his Priesthood be
translated to another: and as the sacrifice is his own, so he is Priest
alone, to offer it to his Father; which he did once for all upon the Cross for
all belieuers.

Ioh. 6.68.35.
who is alone the bread of life, the water of life, the author of life, yea,
life it self: he that believes in him has everlasting life, Ioh. 5.
and he that dwells not in him shall never see life, but abides still in
death. Take hold of Christ, and take hold of life; if thou reach out thy hand
to any other thing, thou catchest for the wind; Ioh. 6.53.54.
Look not for life but where it dwells, in the flesh of Christ alone there
it rests. Death has reigned in all the world beside, and led every
creature into bondage. Esa. 63.16.
If thou look to the heavens, there is but clouds and darkness, if to the
earth there is but sorrow and sadness. If thou call to Abraham, he knows
thee not; if thou cry to Angels, they cannot comfort thee: if thou look into
thy works, they are unclean; if thou trust in thy prayers, the Lord has no
pleasure in them; call for the help of all creatures, they are subject to
vanity, there is no life nor rest, Apoc. 7.10.11.12.
but in Christ alone. The elders and Angels, the beasts and all creatures, they
give this honor unto Christ alone. Salvation is to him that sits upon the
throne, and of the Lamb, and they all shoute together and say, Amen. He that
would not wander and go astray, should know both whither and which way to go.
Now both of those we have in Christ alone, very God, and very man: for in that
he is God, and consequently life, to him we must go; and in that he is man,
by him we must come unto God, and be united with him, that we may obtain
everlasting life, and be freed from death. If he be the life, Aug. de ciu. dei
lib. 11. cap. 12. Ioh. 14.6.
then is he the place to whom we must go; if he be the way, by him we must
travel to attain eternal life: and if he be the truth (that is) the
accomplishment of the law and Prophets, concerning both the shadows and
substance of Gods promises, then also is he the only means of our redemption.

God was so gracious and merciful unto mankind 2 Ioh. 3.14.
and so abides in death. God became man for man's sake, that he might be a
redeemer, as he was before a creator, that men not only might be ransomed
thorough his riches, but also love him the more for his goodness. God appeared
in the similitude of sinful flesh, that each sense of man might be made
blessed in him, and as well the eye of the heart renewed in his divinity, as
the eye of the body in his humanity; that whether it go in, or out, man's
nature which he has created, might in it find comfort and refreshing.

No man or any creature else is able to satisfy God for himself of his glory,
Phil. 2.7. 2 Cor. 8.9.
that he might put on our shame and misery, not ceasing to be God (which he
was) he became man, which before he was not; Man to be a perfect mediator
betwixt God and man, which were both in one person: God that he might satisfy;
Man that he might suffer: 1. Tim. 2.5.
that since man had sinned, and God was offended; he which was both God and man
might satisfy God for man: None therefore (but he) can bear our sins, and
none but he can pay the wages of our sins, which is the sustaining of
everlasting Death. None but he can plead our cause, Math. 3.15. and 5.27.18.
which only has fulfilled all righteousness for us. None can purchase our
salvation but he only that has paid the price of our redemption.

Esaias. 63.3.
the drops of blood (which in his agony distilled from his face) for no
entreaty with his father could pass from him to any other. Luke 22.41.42.44.
None but he saves us, and he is but one, and will be alone in all his
courses, without mixture, Act. 4.12.
without medley. First, last, and midst, and all filling all, yet fined from
all, in the glorious work of our redemption. John 3.13.
No man can ascend, but by him that did descend, and that is Christ: the ladder
which Jacob saw at Peniel, Genesis 28.12. Exodus 13.21. 1 Cor. 10.1.
the Cloud by day, and the Pillar by night, which guides thee Israel of God
in the desert of this world, the Kings highway to heaven and happy rest.

Genesis 2.9. 1 Pet. 2.6. Esaias 20.16. Romans 9.33. 1 Pet. 1.19.
no building sure without this cornerstone; no sacrifice to please without
this unspotted Lamb. I say there is no God without Christ in this wicked
world. As the light of the day is conveyed unto us by the Sun in the
firmament: so is the brightness of heaven by that Son of righteousness: A
Planet in the midst of Planets, to lighten all above, and all below, whom
blessed Angels desire to behold, and godly men are earnest to adore. Christ is
sufficient of himself only, and so perfect is his glory that all height must
be abased before him; he created alone, and he will redeem alone; he made
alone and he will save alone: nothing else in earth, nothing in heaven, nor in
the heaven of heavens: no virtue, no power, no strength, no name, Acts 4.12.
no means of salvation, but by this our Savior Jesus Christ, and him alone;
win him and enjoy ail good things: loose him and though thou should get
the whole world thy gain is but damnation. Jonah 2.7. Mat. 12.40. Daniel 6.16.
Christ is our true Jonah that was allotted to die, to deliver his companions
from Death and Devil. He is our true Daniel, cast between the jaws of these
devouring beast (even the Devil and Death) and yet was not consumed: he was
sunk and swallowed down into the bottom of the sea of our sins, and yet
was not drowned, but enjoyed still the breath of life.

Many despair of salvation, because of their own unworthiness,

Our righteousness consists in Christ alone, who therefore is called our
righteousness, as Jeremy says. Ierem. 23.6. 1 Cor. 1.30.
He Paul) is our righteousness and sanctification and redemption, by his
obedience many were made righteous; he has paid our debts, Romans 5.19. Esaias
35.4. Col. 1.20.
by him alone we are reconciled unto God: he has obtained remission for our
sins by his death; he has pacified the wrath of God his father; he has
washed us in his blood, which cleanses us from all sin. 2 Cor. 5.19. 1 Timothy
2.5.6. Esaias 53.5.
All things (says Christ) are given to me, of God. If we then will have all
that is necessary for our happiness, as Gods favor, righteousness, life, pardon
of our sins, sanctification of the spirit, 1 Ioh. 1.7. Mat. 11.17.
redemption, etc. We must address our selves to Jesus Christ alone, whom the
Father has chosen to be the Lord-treasurer of heaven, John 6.27.
and steward of all his graces. As in the cold winter we can be no sooner from
the fire but we are cold, nor out of the light but we are in darkness; so we
are no sooner gone from Christ who is our true righteousness, light and life;
but straight way we are in sin and death, for as much as he is the life that
quickneth us; the Sun that gives us light, the fire that warmeth, comfort
and refreshes all his members. As the Moon has her light from the Sun, so
the Church has her light, life, and righteousness from Christ her head: Christ
is the sheep that has borne the wool and fleece to make us garments of
righteousness to cover our sin and wickedness. He as a glorious King has
adorned the Queen his spouse. He has prepared for her all rich and sumptuous
robes, Psalm. 45.13.14. Ezech. 16.10.
he has washed her from her blood and pollutions throughout.

Augustine says) he is a sponge which wipeth and cleanses us from all our
filthiness, Augustine.
which he takes in exchange for his beauty and righteousness. Christ is said
to keep the key of life and Death, the one to make fast and shut to the gates
of Hell, Revel. 1.18.
which always stood open to swallow us up, and the other to unlock the
kingdom of heaven, which always was shut and barred against us: By means
whereof at the time of his death, the veil rent asunder, Math. 27.51.
that kept the entrance into the most holy place.

What is more filthy then a man conceived and borne Cant. 5.10.
My well-beloved is white and ruddy, the choysest of ten thousand. This sweet
and loving Lord, that was so fair and clean, was content to bear the
blemishes of our sins, and filthiness of our souls, to make us beautiful
in Gods sight. It was a work of great patience and humility (says Cyprian)
that so high and excellent a Majesty would vouchsafe to come down from heaven
to earth, Cyprianus.
and all to cloth himself with this our house of clay and dirt, and that he
would so hide the glory of his immortality, to become mortal for sinful man:
that being himself innocent and faultlesse, yet should be so punished for us
that are guilty, that he that came to pardon sins, would be content to be
washed with the water of sinners: that he that feeds all creatures, should
fast himself, and be hungry, that he might fill sinners with his grace, and
satisfy hungry souls with his righteousness, etc. How was he spoiled of his
earthly garments, that apparelleth the Saints with the royal roabes of
immortality and glory? How was he proffered most bitter gall, that offers
to us the heavenly Manna and food of our souls? Math. 27.34.
How did his enemies give him vinegar to drink, that reaches out unto us the
wine and Nectar of life and salvation? He that was just and innocent, or
rather Justice and Innocence it self, was judged and executed among thieves
and murderers: Luke 23.33.
the everlasting Truth was accused of falsehood, the righteous Judge of the
world was condemned himself, and that Word of God (the very fountain of
eternal life) received the sentence and doom of death with silence, etc. John
1.4.
Innocence was tied with bands, Virtue apprehended, Wisdom flouted, Honor
contemned, Glory defaced, the wellspring of all virtue troubled.

Christ (as the true Isaac and son of promise) bare Genesis 22.6.
this carriage was divided between two, the son carried the wood and the
body that should be sacrificed, and the father carried the fire and the knife
wherewith the sacrifice should be accomplished. It was the fire of Love which
God bare to mankind, and the sharp knife of divine Justice, that put the
Son of God to death. These two virtues in God our heavenly Father contended
together: Love requested him to pardon mankind, and his Justice required that
sinners might be punished. Wherefore that man might be pardoned, and sin
punished, a means was found, that Christ an innocent man, might dye, and by
his death redeem all sinful men that do believe. Christ is our true Sampson,
that for the love of his Spouse the Church, suffered himself to be bound hand
and foot, Judge. 15.13. and 16.19.25.
to be shaued of his locks, and spoiled of his force, and so to be mocked and
scorned of all his enemies for our sakes.

Exodus 25.17. Heb. 9.12.13. Genesis 9.13.
placed among the clouds of heaven, with the sight whereof Almighty God is
pacified: with this were his eyes fed, his justice satisfied, and his favor
restored. Esaias 55.1.
Ye that be a thirst, come ye to the waters. 1 Cor. 10.1.
Christ is the mystical Rock that Moses stroke with the rod, Exodus 17.6.
whence springs the abundance of water, to satisfy the thirst of poor
afflicted souls. He is that cluster of grapes, Numb. 13.24.
brought out of the Land of Promise, out of the which was pressed that joyful
wine to fill the cup of our salvation. 2 King. 4.4.5.
He is the oil of grace, wherewith we must repay our debts. We must not
look so much to the quantity, as to the virtue thereof, which is so great and
good, that so long as there be faithful souls (as vessels to be filled
therewith) so long will the vein of this sacred liquour run and never cease.
Heb. 12.24. Gen 4.10.
The blood of Christ cries better things then that of Abel: for his blood
cried for vengeance against the murderer, but this his precious blood cries
and craves for pardon of our sins. Ezech. 33.11. and 18.23. Aug. in soliloq.
O Lord (says Augustine) thou will not the death of a sinner, nor reioycest in
the destruction of the damned; but that the dead might live thou dyedst, and
thy death has killed the death of sinners. And if they through thy death were
again brought to life, Oh grant (I beseech thee) that I may not dye now thou
art alive.

CHAP. II. That Christ by his death and merits, alone, without any means of
man, or other creature, redeemeth us from death and damnation.
NO Creature but Jesus Christ alone (as that so he might destroy (through
death) him that had the power of death, that is to say, the Diuill: Heb. 2.14.
and that he might deliver all them which for fear of death were all their
life time subject to bondage. He suffered for our sins, 1 Pet. 3.18.
the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, and was put to death
concerning the flesh, but was quickened in the spirit, that he might be our
ransom.

God is just, and we having smitten his Majesty by our sin, must be smitten
again by his punishment: for he for it is his own, even the work of his
hands; for infinite sins, there must be infinite sufferings, and infinite
satisfaction, and therefore he that must redeem us, must be an infinite
Savior, even God himself (as we have heard,) yet man also he must be, even a
true Immanuel, God with man. Esaias 7.14.
For how can there be satisfaction for our apostacy, but by our humility? or
procurement of life, but by suffering of death? Now when God comes to obey,
he must needs be humbled; and when he comes to deserve, he must needs
serve; which God alone could not do: and when he comes to dye, he must needs
be mortal, which God could not be: therefore he was man to be bound himself,
and God to free others. Man to suffer, God to vanquish; Man to become mortal,
God to triumph over death.

Genesis 6.5.and 8.21.
secondly, our original corruption; thirdly, our condemnation for this
corruption. The first of these is double, either in breaking the Law, or not
fulfilling it: The second is the original cause of this disobedience, which is
the evil inclination of our heart, and our corrupt affections: The third is
the punishment of this disobedience, hell fire itself. These being as three
running soars, are healed and cured by three running streams in Christ: For
our rebellion to the Law is satisfied in him, who not only paid the penalty
for that we had broken it, but actually fulfilled every point thereof to the
full. For the second, which is our original corruption, we have the holiness
and sanctification of his nature, which was ever separate from all
uncleanness: so that now in Christ our redeemer, our estate is far better,
then ever it was in Adam in his first creation; for though he was made good,
yet was he changeably good (as has been said before) but those that are in
Christ, are absolutely good, and immovable, even as the strongest mountains
that cannot be stirred. Thirdly, we have Christ by his passion to deliver us
from condemnation: Even as in the sacrifice under the Law, the blood of the
innocent beast was shed for him that had sinned, who worthily by sin deserved
to dye himself; so we by the shedding of Christ's blood that immaculate Lamb,
Esaias 53.5. Heb. 10.19.20.
are purged from the guilt of all our sins (for by his stripes we are healed)
and by suffering in his flesh he has prepared a ready way for us to heaven,
having rendered in the same most perfect obedience for us, and by his death
fully satisfied his Father for our sins, and through the remission thereof
obtained righteousness, and by righteousness the grace and favor of God, and
by grace everlasting life, Heb. 4.16.
that we may boldly present our selves before the throne of God.

But here observe the wonderful wisdom of God, in 2 Cor. 4.6. Genesis 1.3.
and admirable wisdom of him alone, who calls all things that are not, as
though they were, bringing light out of darkness, good out of evil, and death
out of life? And surely, if all men and Angels should have conspired together
in study and devise to wish a plague to have fallen upon Devil and Death it
self, they could not have determined such another course, to wit, that their
glory should be their shame, their power should be their plague, and their
kingdom of pride their utter confusion. Psalm. 69.22:
What could the Prophet David in all the hottest zeal he boar to God, wish
more against the wretched reprobates, so traitorous to Christ his son, and to
his Gospel, then to pray that their dainty tables might be as snares to take
themselves withal, and that their great prosperity might be their greatest
ruin. Even thus has Christ overcome the Devil and Death: and albeit they
still do war against the Church, yet their strength is so weakened, and
their power so abated, that they cannot hurt it.

Heb. 2.14.
it is clearly manifest what manner of death our Savior Christ sustained,
even that over which the Devil had his power: the same death which is the
reward of sin, Romans 6.23.
by bearing it he overcame it, and he conquered no more then he submitted
himself unto: for by death he overcame death, If he suffered no more but a
bodily death, he overcame also but a bodily death, and so though we all rise
again, yet should we arise in the condemnation of the sin of our souls: or
if he have overcome death and the power of it, Mr. Dearing.
both in our bodies and souls, then Christ has suffered the pains of it both
in body and soul, that we might rise again from the bands of death, and live
with him for ever: for he has broken the force of it no further then he has
felt the sting of it himself. Therefore let us believe, that Christ, both body
and soul was made a sacrifice for our sins: Mat. 26.38.
for so he said himself, My soul is exceeding sorrowful even unto death.
Mar. 14.33.34.
And Mark says, He began to be astonished with his grief, and was
overwhelmed with his sorrow. Luke 22.43.44
And S. Luke declares that in his Agony, his sweat was as drops of blood,
distilling from his face, and that God sent an Angel from heaven to comfort
him.

Acts 5.41. and 16.25.
which many of Gods children (yea, many wicked men) have desperately despised?
Did the Apostles sing in Prison, and went away rejoicing being whipped and
scourged? 2 Cor. 11.18. etc.
Did Paul glory in so many tribulations which he reckons up, and should our
Savior Christ in the like pain with a fainting heart cry out, My God, Math.
27.
my God, why have thou forsaken me? No, no, if could not be (says a godly man)
but that which has made Christ to tremble, would have torn his Apostles and
dearest Saints a sunder* that which made him to sweat blood so plentifully,
would have made all other creatures to have sunk to the bottom of hell most
suddenly: and that which forced him to cry, would have held both men and Angels
in everlasting woe, and hellish howlings without all end.

Which comfortable point serves to confute the heretical 1 Pet. 2.24. Esaias
53.5.9.
and submitted himself to the death of the Cross, and that by the wounds of
his stripes we are healed? And did our sins deserve only a bodily death,
and not a spiritual also, which is the wrath of God holding body and soul in
the everlasting fire of hell? Ephesians. 3.18.19.
This also makes for the exceeding comfort of Gods elect, to know the
bottomless love of Christ beyond all knowledge indeed; who was accursed for
our sakes, and suffered for us not only the torments of his body, but the
anguish and horror of his soul, and the wrath of his Father, which wounded
his flesh and spirit unto death, and would have held him in that condemnation
for ever, if he had been no stronger then we that had deserved it: But being
also the Son of God (in whom the fullness of the Godhead dwells bodily)
the eternal spirit that was with him, did loose the chains of Satan, Col.
2.9.
Death, and Hell, and so he mightily arose from the power of the Devil, of
which it was impossible he should be holden, and has left those his enemies,
even Devil, Death, and Hell, in ignominy and darkness, and has abolished
them for ever and ever, not to hurt us any more.

As a Be (says one) stinging a dead body takes no sting and life together: in
like manner, Death so long as it stung mortal men only (which were dead in
sin) was never a whit the worse; but when it went about to sting Christ
(which is life it self) by and by it lost both sting and strength. He that
felleth a tree upon which the Sun shines, may well cut the tree, but cannot
hurt the Sun. He that pours water upon iron (which is red hot) may well
quench the heat, but he cannot hurt the iron, but rather makes it harder: so
Christ the Sun of righteousness did drive away the shadow of death, and as
glowing iron he was too hot and hard a morsel for Death to digest.

Adam did eat any other fruit (which God gave him leave to eat,) he was
nourished by it; but when he had tasted of the forbidden tree, he perished:
even so, Death had leave to devour any other man (Christ only excepted,) but
when it went about to destroy Christ, then it was destroyed it self. Death
indeed did taste of Christ, but could not swallow him up nor digest him.
Fulgentius.
Contrariwise Christ as soon as ever he had but a little tasted of death,
eft-soones he did devour it, and swallow it up in victory. Death, as a
ravenous beast devouring all men, snatched at our Savior Christ, but having
caught him, could not hold him in her jaws; but perceiving the worthiness of
the prey (trembling for fear) let him go free: for although Death seemed to
swallow him (when he was dead) yet finding him far from the infection of
sin, she could not retain him in her house.

As the life of Christ is the life of life; so the death of Osee 13.14. 1 Cor.
15.54.
and threatened his death; O Death, I will be thy death: and after his death he
scorned Death as a Drone without a sting. It is reported that the Dragon
kills the Elephant, yet so as the Elephant falling down kills the Dragon
with him. As an Elephant (as the story says) killed Eleazar, yet so as Eleazar
falling down killed the Elephant with him: So the Devil and Death by killing
Christ were killed themselves. The Elephant lived not after he had killed the
Dragon, nor Eleazar after he had slain the Elephant. But Christ lived and does
forever live after the full destruction of the devil and death. Though Christ
in his grave was never like to rise again: yet he died not, but mortality
died in him, and immortality so lived in his person, that (even in his
sepulcher) he did most live when he seemed most to be dead: as the Lawrill it
greenest in the foulest winter; and the Lime is hottest in the coldest water;
and the Glow-worme lightest when the night is darkest. Christ by Death was
wounded, but his enemies and ours, Death and Devil utterly spoiled; his
buckler (which was his godhead) was whole and untouched. So that his death was
no death indeed, but an exaltation unto greater glory. John 12.32.
He was led (says Esaias) as a sheep before the Shearer: Esaias 53.7.
Shorn he was (says one) by Death, but not for ever deprived of life. But as
a Lamb is much more nimble and lively by shearing: so this shearing by Death,
was a kind of quickening to Christ.

Christ is that loving Rahel which dies her self that Adam, Genesis 35.18.
who by the sweat of his brows has earned for us the bread of life: He is
that just Noah which shutting up himself in his Arc (as a Sepulcher) saves
all that come to him alive: Genesis 7.16.
He is that tender Pelican, which wounding his own breast, does with his blood
restore his faithful brood to life. And as honey being found in a dead Lion
was the sustenance of Sampson: So Christ's gall is our honey, Judge. 14.8.9
and his bitter Death, by reason of his righteousness, Mat. 26.15.
is the sweet life of all believers.

Now the remembrance of Christ crucified, must serve August.
and the readiest way and directest path to go to heaven is to swim through
the river of Christ's blood, the drops whereof (rayning from the clouds of his
mercy) commonly quench the fiery flames of Gods burning wrath which cannot be
extinguished by the virtuous water of any man's merit. It is the oil of grace
which must purge our defiled hearts. It is the dew of heaven which will make us
flourish. Christ's death alone therefore is the welspring of our salvation. Oh
love this good thing in which all good things are, and it is enough for thee.
Where is safe and steadfast rest and assuredness for the weak and wounded
soul, but in the wounds of our Savior Christ? and so much the surer I dwell
therein, as he is mightier to save me. The world rages, the body burdeneth,
the Devil (like a devouring Lion) roareth: yet the faithful fall not, because
they are builded upon Christ the rock. Bern. ser. 6. in Canti.


Mat. 23.37.
his death is the secret den for our deliverance from eternal death and hell.
Under the wings of this Hen may the poor and naked chickens hide themselves,
Ioh. 3.14.15:
and be sure and safe from all hellish Kites. There is nothing so sovereign a
remedy against the stinging of that infernal serpent, as to fasten the eye of
our faith upon Jesus Christ heaued up and exalted upon the Cross. The venomous
by tings of those hellish spirits of damnation, cannot once annoy us, if we
fully repose our trust in Christ alone that was crucified. His Cross and
passion is the triumphant ensign of victory to all the true Israelites of
God. He has fought the fight, and got the conquest for us, that being
delivered from our enemies, we may serve him without fear, in holiness and
righteousness all the days of our life. Luke 1.74.75.


the field, as the blood of Grapes and Mulberries (showed to the Elephants in
war) provoke them to fight. For Christians (indeed) overcome through the
blood of the Lamb. Apoc. 12.11.
By the righteousness of Christ alone (apprehended by faith) we are reconciled
unto God; he has paid our debts by suffering Death, and satisfying the Law,
who is the end of the Law and the Prophets. But they that give never so little
to their own deseruings (in the work of their redemption) do wrongfully
keep to themselves the praise of grace, passing by them: Bern. ser. 15. in
Cantit.
as if a wall should say it brings forth light, when it receives it through
a window. We are of our selves, but devils and satan's, even adversaries to
God; enemies to his Laws, August in Ioh.
and foes of all virtues: neither is there any other difference betwixt us and
them, but the only pity and gracious favor of God our Father.

The grace of Christ must be our only clothing before greatness. But God
(which is the sovereign majesty and height it self) consorts himself with
none but those that be poor and meek. It is best therefore before our God to
confess our selves banckrupts, and (as the proverb is) to lay the keys under
the door, forsaking all when it comes to satisfy God. In this we should
resemble the covetous men, who always think themselves poor what riches so
ever they have) because they still more regard what they desire, then what they
have.

Bernar. de delig. deo.
he restored me again to my self: therefore both given and restored, I owe my
self to God for my self, and shall be indebted still. What therefore shall I
render to the Lord for himself? For although I should give my self a thousand
times, what am I to God that redeemed me, and wholly gave himself for my
sins and salvation.

2. Cor. 12.9.
there is no room for the spirit of God, Romans 8.26.
for the spirit only helps those that be infirm, and Christ is a Physician
to those that be sick. As all waters come from the sea (as from the wellhead)
and return thither again, boiling out of the veins of the earth: so God
sending out the streams of his law into our hearts, it must (even from the
very bottom of of our hearts) return to him again: for we have nothing, 1.
Cor. 4.7.
but what we have received. Christ is all things to us that have nothing: he is
our bread being hungry; our drink being thirsty; our light being blind; our
health being sick: the life of our desires, the heaven of our minds: a guide
to our wandering steps; our succor in necessity; all in all things to be
believers. As life is conveyed from the heart through the veins to all the
vital parts: so is salvation from the Father through Christ to all his living
members.

As out of Eden went a river to water the garden, which Genesis 2.10.
compassed the whole world: so out of heaven flowed the stream of Gods mercy,
in and through our Savior Christ, whose graces (derived diuersely) cause all
the earth to be filled with his glory. Christ is a mutual help to the Father
and to us. He is a hand to the Father, by which he reaches us, and a hand to
us by which we reach him. The Fathers mouth by which he speaks to us, and our
mouth to the Father by which we speak to him. Our God is a consuming fire
(without Christ our veil) we cannot endure him. Heb. 12.29. Deuteronomy. 4.24.
For what is our misery but to meet with his majesty, except it be only in
the temple of mercy? which mercies seat and all is Christ. As then our words
are messengers of our minds, Col. 1.15. Heb. 1.3.
and semblance of our souls, to parley with our friends: so is Christ the
Son of God, the image of the Father, and mouth to instruct his dearest
Saints: and not only a mouth to speak by, but an eye to see by, and the
footeway to go by Christ is the life of the world, Ioh. 1.4. Heb 1.2. 2 King.
2.21.
and the heir of all things; without whom I can possess nothing that is good,
either in grace or glory. He is the true Salt Eliza threw in to sweeten the
bitter waters of Jericho. He has healed this water? Death shall no more come
thereof to men, nor barrenness to the ground.

And for the Law, it now leads us out of our tents (as Moses brought the
people to trembling Sinai. Exo. 19.17.18.
) It brings and 20.18.19.
Then we are afraid (with the poor Israelites) and cry, let not the Lord
speak unto us, least we die; but speak thou O Moses as a mediator, Deuteronomy.
34.6.
speak thou O Christ. When we fly to Christ, Moses and his law vanishes
away; so that his Sepulcher can no where be found. So that Sin and Death can
hurt us no more: for Christ is Lord over the Law, Sin, and Death, to all
believers. Moses must give place to Christ: Death and Sin can have no room;
but grace, joy, righteousness, life, faith, and peace must have place with all
true happiness and heavenly rest. The Law now cannot condemn, nor save; it
restrains us from sinning, as the bonds and chains the Lion and Bear from
tearing and devouring. The Law is the Hammer of Death, the thundering of Hell,
and lightning of Gods wrath, that beats to powder the obstinate and
senseless Hypocrites, and hard-harted reprobates. Exodus 19.17. Heb. 12.18.19.
This is the true use of the Law (by fearful tempests, and sound of a
Trumpet, as in Synai) to terrify; and by thunder to beat down and rent in
pieces that cruel monster of man's righteousness. The Schoole-maister
chastises his Scholars; not to hurt them, but to reform them. Gal. 3.24.
The rod is sharp, but correction is necessary; and the heart of the
correctour loving. The Physician gives a bitter potion to his patient to cure
him: the bitterness is not to be imputed to the Physician, but to the medicine
and malady. The Law condemns the faithful to death no more, but teaches
and instructs them in their duty, exhorts and reproves them, and
procures them by all means to go to the School of Christ.

Leper should come to one that had the leprosy to heal him: or as one beggar
to another to enrich them. So that they that seek to be righteous by the Law,
are twice more unrighteous, weak and beggarly. If a man now could fulfill all
the Law of God, yet could he not be saved, because he was borne corrupt, and
could not possibly pay for that was past, and in performing the Law afterward,
he should do nothing but his duty: but this is our comfort, that the Lord
seeing our weakness has (in his love) passed by it, Genesis 6.5.
and seeing our thoughts always to be evil, takes no account, or reckoning
of us; but we (resembling the Image of his Son) the Lord reckons with him,
and strikes off our debts, in setting them on his score; who has paid the
Lord his full due, even to the utmost farthing, being in his birth clean, in
his life holy, and in his death obedient.

We therefore that have no goodness of our own, have just cause highly to
extol the goodness of God, freely August.
the serpent that would sting us. But the fastening of the firm Anchor of our
hope, upon Christ alone, is his overthrow and baine. Romans 8.31.
For as the Apostle exulteth, If God be on our side, who will be against us. 1
Ioh. 5.4.
This is the only victory that overcomes the world, even our faith fixed on
Christ. This is the sling of David to throw that mighty Goliath to the ground;
yea, even the weapon that slays him. Neither the Law then, 1 Samuel 17.49.50.
nor merits of men, nor any other means whatsoever, but only the deserts of
Christ, take place in the work of our redemption. The death and passion of
Jesus Christ is a sovereign medicine against all diseases of soul and body;
the remembrance whereof does much mitigate the fear and horror of death: for
he that believes in this crucified Savior, is already passed from death to
life. By his unjust condemnation (which we only have deserved, we are
delivered and absolved at the judgment seat of God: and by the death which he
suffered, we have life, 1 Pet. 3.2.
and our death is abolished. Christ suffered for our sins, the just for the
unjust: he has borne our sins, and God has laid our sorrows upon him; Esaias
53.4.5.
and by his stripes we are healed. He has died for us, that we might live no
more to our selves, but to him which died for us; which we must do by faith?
Gal. 2.19.20.
For faith presents Christ before our eyes. It seeks him out as a mighty
Sampson, which breaks the gates of his enemies, Judge. 16.3.
and carries them away upon his shoulders, who killed and destroyed more by
his death then by his life. Verse 30.


Col. 2.14.
laid against us; and by dying he slave Death and Sin with their own swords
(as David did Goliath, 1. Sam. 17.51.
) and broke the Serpents head. He opened the Sepulcher, and gave life unto the
dead; yea, he entered into the house of Death, Ose 13.14.
and Hell, and (like a strong armed man) bereaved them of their forces. Math.
12.29.
No sooner was Jonah cast into the Sea, Jonah. 1.15.
but the tempest ceased; no sooner was the paschall Lamb slain, Exodus
12.22.23.
but the Israelites were delivered: no sooner was the Highpriests dead, but
all banished men returned home into their country. Numb. 35.25.
What was this but a figure of Christ? by whose Death we have all return into
our country, and deliverance from all danger and destruction. Who would not lay
his burden upon him, that so desires to give him ease. God would not have the
sinner to die, and be damned, but to live, and be saved. Have we had so many
experiments of his love, and should we now doubt thereof? Is the Judge become
our Advocate, and shall we fear to go forward to the throne of grace? One
deep calls another, Psalm. 42.7.
and what is that (says one;) There is a depth of man's misery, now at the
gates of death, and there is a depth of Gods mercy, which is ready to hear
and help all that call upon him. Now misery calls upon mercy: Pal. 12.1.
we may cry, Help Lord, for besides him there is none to help. It is not the
pieces and patches of our own deserts, that can make us a garment to cover our
nakedness and sin: but it is the Scarlet-roabe that took so deep a double
dye in the blood of Christ, that must now alone stand us all in stead.

CHAP. III. The faithful only, and such as are united to Christ, are redeemed
from death, and restored to everlasting life: with the singular privileges and
effects thereof.
NOW as the benefit of our Redemption Ephesians. 4.15.16.
and his only means; so none but his members are partakers thereof. He is
the head, 1 Cor. 12.27.
the Church is his body, and every faithful man is a member for his part. And
as there is no life in the body, but as it is united to the head, nor any
motion in the members, being separated from the body: So in Christ our head,
consists our life, as we are true members of his body the Church, united to
him by a true and lively Faith, and so quickened by his Spirit, and knit and
joined one to another (in a holy fellowship and communion) by the bond of love.
Christ is the Vine, Ioh. 15.5. Col. 3.14.
and the faithful his branches, without him they can do nothing: as they are
of this tree, they are fruitful; but broken off they are barren, and live no
more, but dye and wither away: By his life alone we live, and without his
death we are but dead and damned for ever.

Therefore we must know and learn our true union Romans 8.1.
but those alone that are in Christ; whom they cannot possibly apprehend but by
a true and lively Faith, which is the spiritual hand to lay hold on Christ's
merits to eternal life. Hereby we are interessed in all that either God has
promised, or Christ has performed: hence have we from God, both forgiveness
of sins, and assurance of his favor. This is the ground of our happiness
and glory: hence of enemies we become more then friends, even the sons of
God, 1 Ioh. 3.1. 1 Ioh 1.12.
that may challenge not only provision and safe protection on earth, but an
everlasting possession and inheritance in heaven. The apprehension of Christ's
all-sufficient satisfaction by a true and a lively Faith, makes it our own,
and upon our satisfaction we have remission, upon remission follows
reconciliation, upon our reconciliation the peace of God which passes all
understanding. Phil. 4.7.
When therefore our conscience (like a stern and sturdy Sergeant) shall catch
us (as it were) by the throat, and arrest us for Gods debt, our Plea must be,
it has been paid, and so bring forth that bloody acquittance sealed us from
heaven, upon our true and assured Faith. So shall the cruel look of our
Conscience be changed into friendly smiles, and that rough and violent hand
(ready to dragge us down to hell) shall even lovingly embrace us, and fight
for our righteous Crown. Oh heavenly peace, and more then peace, whereby alone
we are in league with our selves, and God with us.



Gods Children then must be knit unto Christ the Son Heb. 1.^.
and shall show us his glory and immortality when all these creatures shall
have a change. There is no salvation nor sanctification for us under heaven,
but as our nature is really united to the person of Christ the Son of God,
who has sanctified and sacrificed himself for us. Even as our hands, arms,
and other parts are not nourished but only by the meat received of the head:
so our spiritual meat of life and righteousness, can no where else be
derived to us, but from Christ our head. And as the veins are means by which
nourishment is conveyed to every part: so Faith is the instrument by which we
receive from Christ all that is healthful for our souls. And as by joints and
sinews our members are really knit and made a complete body unto the head: so,
really, truly, and indeed, Col. 2.19.
by one Spirit we be knit unto Christ, and substantially made one with him,
Ephesians. 2.22. and 4.4.
as our natural members are made one with our head.

This though we cannot conceive, yet we are bound

The divine nature united to the manhood of Christ, has given the
participation of his office to him as man, that as God is Mediator, so is man,
as God has deserved salvation, so has man; and that he as man shall judge
the quick and the dead; not that he shall judge by his manhood, but Christ
man, shall judge the world. This Christ is not only God with us in nature, but
in person; for the reprobate are of the same nature with him, and he with them,
yet is he not God with them, but against them. But we (as the Apostle
speaks) are flesh of his flesh, Ephesians. 5.30.
and bone of his bones: even as a man and wife, which are not only one in
nature, but in person, by special covenant; so are we one with Christ by
covenant of grace, and being one with him, we are also one with the Trinity.
I pray thee O Father (says Christ) as I am one with thee, Ioh. 17.21.22.
so these may be one with us both, which brings great comfort to Gods Elect,
that through Christ have the whole Godhead reconciled unto them and dwelling
in them.

John 1.4.
that God gives life, and this life is in the Son, and this Son is in us;
it follows, that we are not saved by his righteousness, but by our own, 2
Pet. 1.4.
his person being made one person with us. By regeneration we are made
partakers of his divine nature, and flesh, that is, our nature is renewed and
sanctified, and is made another flesh, to wit, the flesh of Christ. For as the
Son of God was so made man, Heb. 4.15.
that by nature he was made like unto us in all things (sin only excepted)
so likewise are Christians regenerate by his Spirit, cleansed from sin in his
blood, that they being the body, may not be unlike the head: but as the true
husband and wife, Ephesians. 5.29.30.
may both be but one flesh, and of like nature and condition.

Christ washes his Children (whom he will join and Apoc. 1.5. Heb. 9.14.
having undoubtedly obtained of his Father remission and forgiveness of the
same. Sanctifying them unto himself, by imputing unto them and communicating
with them his own righteousness and holiness. Secondly, by the washing of
the new birth, Ephesians. 5.26. Titus 3.5.
he sanctifies them, with real and true holiness, making them holy indeed.
As for relics of sin remaining, partly he does not impute them, and partly
takes away daily more and more, Ephesians. 5.27.
till at length they be presented (as his glorious Spouse) in the kingdom of
heaven, without spot and wrinckle. And as Adam acknowledged, and took no other
to be his wife, then her that was taken and made of his own ribbe: Genesis 2.23.
no more does Christ receive any other to be of his Church, but those that are
taken out of his side upon the Cross, that is, who are washed from their
sins in his blood, John 3.3.5.6.
who are made new and regenerate by his Spirit. By order of nature,
regeneration and renewing of the heart is first begun in man by the holy
Ghost, before he can have a true and lively faith, which after is more and
more perfected by the increase of the Spirit: for what power has a dead man to
do the works of life? but truly to believe in Christ is a work of life.

The whole person of the Son of God took into the say, the whole faithful
man. And no man is made partaker of salvation, but by the union and conjunction
which he has with Christ. Wherefore in this spiritual union, whole Christ is
coupled with whole man. 1 Timothy 3.16.
A mystery unspeakable, yet (I say) to be believed, that God clothed in the
flesh should come down to man, and become man, that man might be exalted into
the highest heavens, and that our nature might be taken into the fellowship of
the Deity: that he (to whom all Powers in heaven bow, and think it their
honor to be serviceable) should come down to be a servant to his slaves, a
ransom for his enemies; together with our nature taking up our infirmities and
shame, and bearing our sins without sin. God offered peace to man, the holy
seeks to the unjust, the Potter to the clay, the King to the traitor.

Heb. 2.6.
and glorifying it with the roabe of his holy Resurrection and Immortality,
has exalted the same above all Heavens, Angels, and Thrones, and placed it at
Gods right hand. And since every one of the faithful has a portion of flesh
in the body of Jesus Christ, therefore where a piece of my flesh is (says
Augustine) there I trust to reign, Aug in soliloq.
where my flesh is glorified, I know I shall be glorious: and where my flesh
does rule, there I look to have dominion: and although I am yet a sinner, yet
I doubt not of this participation of grace. Although my sins yet do hinder
me, yet my substance does require it: and although my offenses (for a time)
do exclude me, yet the communion of nature will not repel me.

Adam corrupted, Sin and Death spread over all; so by the flesh of Christ
sanctified and united to the eternal Godhead, Righteousness and Life is
communicated unto us. The flesh of Christ is the Arc, wherein dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead corporally; by that, and from that, are all heavenly
good things conveyed unto us: Col. 2.9.
It is the instrument of the Godhead, yet so only, being taken and joined
inseparably into the unity of the person. The Godhead of Christ is as a
fountain whence all good things (as Life and Salvation) do flow: but his
flesh and his humanity is as it were the channel and conduit-pipe, by which
all these good things do come unto us. Which conduit of his flesh unless we
apprehend, and be united thereunto, we cannot possibly partake of the waters
of Gods graces flowing from the fountain. Heb. 10.19.20.
By his flesh he has prepared a way for us to heaven, to attain unto life,
having rendered (in the same) most perfect obedience unto God for us, and by his
death fully satisfied for our sins, and through the remission thereof given
righteousness, and by righteousness the grace and favor of God, and by grace
life, that in assurance we may present our selves before the throne of God.

We must go to Jesus Christ that is God, by Jesus August.
to the Word which was in the beginning with God; John 1.1.
and by the bread which men eat, unto the meat which Angels eat. As Jacob
came in Esaus garment, to get Isaacks blessing; Genesis 27.15.19
and as the high Priest never appeared without his holy garments and Ephod, in
the Sanctuary of God: Exodus 28.43.
so if we will be accepted and received of God, we must not present our selves
but in the royal roabes of Christ's righteousness. Christ in our flesh has
been raised from the dead, and in our nature has ascended into heaven, that
faithful man (in his person) might be crowned with glory and honor. He has
carried our flesh into the presence of God his Father, and it is no more
possible to take this glory from us, (as many as be one with him) then it is
possible to pull away again his personal humanity from the person of his
Godhead.

And as no man ascends unto God, and is united unto because even in his flesh
our Redemption was wrought, Sin destroyed, Col. 1.
the Devil vanquished, Death overcome, and eternal Life obtained. And
although our whole salvation and life do depend on the fullness of the
Godhead, which is in Christ, yet it is not communicated unto us but in the
flesh, and by the flesh of Christ. Therefore (says Christ) Except ye shall
eat the flesh of the Son of man, Ioh. 6.53.56.
you shall have no life in you. Again, He that eats my flesh dwells in
me, and I in him. Now it is all one to say, that Christ is in us, and that he
abides in us, and to say with the Apostle, Ephesians. 3.17.
that Christ dwells in our hearts by faith. He is therefore in us, and
abides in us, and is united to us by a lively Faith. And as we eat the true
and natural flesh of Christ, so we are united to the true flesh of Christ:
but the former is by Faith, therefore the latter also.

Zanchius.
but so far forth as it was taken of the Son of God into the unity of the
person. Our soul is joined to the soul of Christ, and our natural flesh with
the flesh of Christ, and therefore like unto ours in all things (sin only
excepted) which teaches us to fasten the eyes of our minds immediately, Heb.
4.15.
and first of all upon the humane flesh of Christ, as it were upon the veil,
Heb. 10.20.
by which the entrance was into the most holy place, where the glory of God
most clearly shined; and then after that to enter into the Sanctuary it self
to behold his Deity.

1 Ioh. 4.13.
For the first: By this we know (says S. John) that Christ is in us, Romans 8.9.
even by the Spirit which he has given us. He that has not the Spirit of
Christ (says S. Paul) he is none of his. Ephesians. 3.17. Ioh. 6.47.54.
For the second, (says the same Apostle) that Christ dwells in our hearts by
Faith. He that eats my flesh, and drinks my blood (says Christ) abides
in me, and I in him: but he is eaten and drunk by faith, as in the same
place, Christ expounds. He that believes in me shall never thirst. We
therefore are united to Christ by a lively faith.

The knowledge and apprehension of which union with Christ, by a true and
lively faith, not only ministers a Gal. 2.20.
are buried, are raised from death, have ascended into heaven, do sit with him
in the highest heavens, are blessed with Christ with all spiritual blessings,
Ephesians. 1.3.
and that not only in hope, but already in Christ our head, we are reputed
for such in heaven with God the Father.

Again, two things necessarily concur to the justification pleasing and
acceptable to God, all our spots and blemishes being covered in the robes of
Christ's righteousness. And as Adams eating of the forbidden tree was imputed
to all his posterity, though they never tasted of the fruit with their lips:
So the righteousness and obedience of Christ, shall make all faithful men
righteous before God, 2 Cor. 5.21.
though they themselves as yet have tasted no righteousness. For God has made
him sin for us, that knew no sin, that we should be made the
righteousness of God in him. As therefore Christ was made sin for us; not by
infusion of sin into his person, but by imputation of our sins unto him: so
must we be made righteous before God, not by infusion of righteousness into
our own persons; August Contra Iul. pet. Pelag. l. 1. ca. 2.
but by imputation of Christ's righteousness unto us. As the Moon and Stars
borrow all their light from the Sun; so the Church and every member of the
same, borrow all their righteousness from Christ the Son of righteousness.

And as for the sins of the faithful, howsoever they Romans 6.5.
into which they are grafted, and in which there is no spot, but perfection of
righteousness, even before God himself. Their sins by his means are put
under their feet, and they are rulers over them. They are not imputed unto
them, but unto Christ. The punishment of them is forgiven unto the faithful,
but not forgiven to Christ. Righteousness is freely given unto us, but it was
not freely given unto him: Mat. 3.15.
he obeyed the law of his Father, every jot and tittle, that he might fulfill
all righteousness. He bore the condemnation of hell and death, that he might
abolish it. So that in him is life, in him is righteousness, in him is
immortality, Luke 214.
and in him is the reconciled good will of God to man. And that excellent
wisdom which has made us by faith, one with him: the same has made us
partakers of all his honor and blessed immortality.

If we be ingrafted into the body of Christ, we be his, Luke 4.34.
but disclaim his mercies, person, and all his means: Oh what have we to do
with thee? but every good Christian may claim him as his due, with blessed
Paul, 1 Cor. 1.30.
and say that Christ is his righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, and
redemption; and be bold to affirm that though his body be in heaven, yet
shall I there find it mine: his divinity on earth, yet there shall I feel it
mine, etc. All is for me, since Christ is mine. Things present, things to
come, Life, Death, the world it self, all is ours, and we are Christ's. 1 Cor.
3.21.22.


Christ in regard of this our union with him, is not ashamed to call us
Brethren, who yet made heaven and earth, Moses (being so high in favor with
Pharao) that he would vouchsafe to visit his poor brethren (such slaves and
bondmen. Mat. 7.23.
) It was singular love in Joseph (being next to the King in honor and place)
yet not to be ashamed of his Fathers house, being herd-men and sheepe-herds.
Genesis 45.4.
But this is nothing to the kindness of Jesus Christ (the very shining
brightness of that most glorious God, Heb. 1.3. Col. 1.25.
and his only begotten Son before all eternity) who yet was not ashamed of
us miserable wretched sinners, but of his free grace acknowledged us that were
his very enemies; in whose person he should suffer a most shameful and
slanderous Death. And is it not (trow you) a just condemnation, if we wretched
men should be ashamed of him, who being the God of glory, was not ashamed of
us? And as they are natural brethren which are borne of the same Parents: so
all we are brethren with Christ which are borne of God through the same
spirit, by which we cry Abba Father, and exercise our love one toward another
in the unity of Christian faith.

Adam) not renewed only, but a fairer and deeper stamp thereof engraven and
set upon us: we may in a Christian resolution challenge at the gates of Hell
and Death, that nothing can be charged upon us as a debt, and therefore nothing
can light upon us as a punishment. Wherefore though we mingle here our bread
with care, and drink with weeping, and have our lodging in the bed of
darkness and discomfort: it is but to weane us from the fleshpots of Egypt,
till in the heavenly land of Canaan we have our hearts desire.

Romans 7.2.
For though it does break the knot between Man and Wife; yet cannot it
infringe the bond betwixt Christ and the faithful. As Death did not make a
separation betwixt the two natures of Christ, at the time of his suffering,
though his soul and body were then far distant in regard of place (the one
being in heaven, and the other in the grave) yet were they at that time, and in
that case personally united unto his godhead: no more can Death make a
division betwixt Christ and the faithful, though there bodies putrify and rot
in their graves; yet still they remain true members of his body.

And as the Husbandman does make as great reckoning Chrysostom. in Mat. hom. 35.
and in 1 These. 4.
Therefore let not the woeful condition of our bodies discourage us any whit,
or lessen our hope, being ready to die.

For though the grave devour them, worms do eat graves) being members of
their head Jesus Christ, ascended aloft, above the highest heavens; to whom
they are united still, by an inseparable bond of his spirit, which death can
never break.

CHAP. IIII. The combat and conflict of Christians with Sin, Flesh, Death,
Law, and Devil, with their heavenly conquest and triumph over them all,
through Jesus Christ.
Adams seed, that though his head be broken, yet still he will labor to
bruise their heel. Genesis 3.15.
Like a coward overcome, he lags behind for advantage; and not daring to show
his face any more in the field, he dragges in the way, and lies aloof (upon
every occasion) to take them in a trappe. Though he cannot prevail, yet
provoke us still he will to fight, and try our manhood: neither can we
otherwise be conquerours, then was Christ our Captain, and head; who by dying
in the field, recovered life both for himself and his Soldiers; for nothing
but Death can end this combat.

Our life is a warfare, and that most strange; for any Job 7.1.
either by a conclusion of peace with the enemy, or by flying far from him,
or by ouercomming him in fight. But in this spiritual war we cannot lawfully
make any peace with these our enemies, the Devil, World, and Flesh, etc. For
so it would prove our overthrow and destruction; they being unto us so many
traitors, and irreconcilable murderers. It would be worse for us, then for
the silly Sheep to make peace with the Wolves. Neither yet can we flee, and so
get from them: for the Devil will pursue us into every place (with his whole
armies and huge hoasts of his old tried and trained Soldiers to invade us:
within us are our corrupt affections, and covetous lusts, as his hirelings. And
wheresoever we become in this life, these our enemies will find us out;
therefore we must fight or be foiled, we must overcome, or be conquered. This
war resembles the battles of the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 17. and 20* 16.
against the Kings and inhabitants of Canaan, they must destroy them, peace
they might not make, or admit them tributaries: yet Gods people were commanded
not to fear them, nor to retire into Egypt: therefore of necessity they must
fight to overcome them. True it is (considering our own nature) that we have
just cause to fear so strong and mighty enemies: but as God in old time
encouraged Iosuah, that he should not be affraide, in assuring him of his
presence so must we manfully stand in this combat, and in Christ (our true
Iosuah and captain Jesus) we shall be more then conquerours.

And as the Diuill (with his armies) makes war against all mankind: so
especially he fights against Christ the Apoc. 12.15.16
As Satan tempted Christ when he was baptized, and filled with the holy
Ghost: Math. 4.
so will he still pursue the best Christians which have received of God the
greatest graces and gifts. As Thieves rob not beggars, but rich men; Chrisost.
and Pirates pursue those Ships the most that are of dearest prise: so the
Devil would make a prey of such, especially as are furnished with faith, and
other heavenly pearls of greatest value. In any commotion whom do rebels most
endeavor to kill and spoil, but those especially that are faithful to their
Prince, and will fight for their Country? Now the Devil is a rebel in the
Lords kingdom: whom then will he most trouble, but the godly which are Gods
faithful soldiers, to fight his battles against him? He that will reign with
Christ in heaven, must overcome the Devil on earth.

The Devil is a Peripateticke (says one) always walking and going about, 1
Pet. 5.8.
seeking whom he may ensnare, and all is fish that comes to his net. Our hearts
being as deep rivers, and the Devil being no more able to discern the
thoughts thereof, then the Angler can descry what fish is in the water (for the
secrets of all hearts are only known to God,) he baiteth a hook for us, and
by the going down of the line, he knows we are sped. If he see any
couetously given, he sets riches before him; if any be ambitious, he
offers titles and preferments, etc. He has manifold nets of temptations,
sometimes besetting us with vain pleasures and sometimes incirkling us with
inordinate sorrow and care; now fetching us in with fear, and anon pricking
us forward with pride and presumption: As he finds us affected, so he fitteth
his baits, and by our ready and greedy apprehension of his temptations* he
effects our destruction: And as a cunning Fisher (knowing how to hold the
fish he has hooked) he will give them line and liberty, but yet they shall
walk no further then he list, that he may draw them back again at his
pleasure: as the child plays with the bird tied by the leg, not suffering
her to fly but the length of the thread. Therefore the bait that he lays
for us, being our bane, let us not come within the length of his line, or
within the compass of his nets. Let Gods word rather be our bait and hook to
catch us, which being taken, takes us, and happy is he that is taken
therewith, no to his slaughter with the fish, but to the salvation of his soul
with the faithful.

that leans to sin; and that he smites with his iron of temptation, that a
spark of our consent thereunto being added, the flame of sin may sooner be
kindled, to consume the whole man. He sees every ones complexion, and so
accordingly applies his temptation. One man is given to solace, another to
sorrow; one to fear, another to pride, etc. Let us therefore be as wise for
our salvation, as he is wily to work our damnation. Satan by worldly baits
and sleights leads many thousand sinners blindefold to perdition, as a
Faulken or carries his Hawks quietly on his fist, being hooded, which
otherwise he could not so easily do if they had they se and sight of their
eyes.

And as Satan assayleth us all the days of our life; Revel. 12.12.
Thus being acquainted with Satan's wiliness, and watchfulness to do us hurt
(especially at our latter end;) let us now further display his manner of fight
in the field, and his Soldiers and weapons that he imployeth in this war
against us.

Now the Devil in his Plea against us, for our just condemnation God:
Therefore shall every man dye the death. And by the virtue of the Law (says
Satan) I will hold him in death. The Law is according to Gods nature, good,
holy, and righteous, and therefore the death of man ponounced by the Law is
just, and his condemnation righteous. God the Lawgiver is infinite and
eternal, and so his Justice offended; therefore his death (by transgressing)
must be endless and everlasting. God is just, and cannot deny himself: He
has said, that if man break his Law, he should dye the death, and therefore
death shall hold him. God is perfect and pure, and therefore the satisfaction
must be answerable to his nature. His righteous Law binds both soul and body
to obedience, even every man's thoughts, words, and works: and therefore let
every man perform this, and he shall live.



But to hasten the answer: Gods Justice indeed is and man: Man and God were
foes, and therefore being God and man, he reconciled man to God. And as the
first Adam by transgressing brought death upon all men; so Christ the second
Adam by obaying brought life to all believers. Gods purest Justice could not
exact the thing which he fulfilled not: It required the performance of the Law,
this he accomplished, being the end of the Law and the Prophets. He was the
substance of all the old Ceremonies, and the very body of all the shadows of
the Law. He was circumcised and baptized, Luke 2.24.
and so fulfilled all righteousness: he paid tribute, Math. 3.
and was obedient in all things, and was under the Law; so his coming was not
to break the Law, but to fulfill the Law. As it required perfect holiness in
man, so he was a man without sin; conceived by the holy Ghost, therefore he
was not afraid to say to the faces of his foes, Math. 27.24.
Which of you can rebuke me of sin? Yea, the Judge himself that condemned
him washed his hands (as a witness of his cleanness) I find no fault in this
just man. True therefore is the saying of the Apostle, that he was made sin
for us, 2 Cor. 5.
which knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God through
him. He is truly called the Paschall Lamb, most pure and unspotted, which
takes away the sins of the world. 1 Pet. 1.11^. Ioh. 1.36.
To him all the Prophets bear witness, that justly through his name is
preached remission of sin: Acts 4.12.
and that there is no other name under heaven by which we can be saved.

Thus he fulfilled the Law for man which had broke Gal. 3.13.
He therefore became accursed, and sustained death, even the death of the
Cross accursed of God: and so by death overcame death, and by his curse
brought the blessing of God upon us. He cancelled the handwriting that the
Devil had against us: Col. 2.14.
he nailed it to his Cross, and made it void, so that now the faithful may
triumph through Christ, (Death being swallowed up in victory,) they may boldly
exclaim and say, 1 Cor. 15.
O Death, where is thy sting! O Grave, where is thy victory! for the sting of
Death being Sin, and the strength of Sin being the Law, and both Sin and Law
being abolished through Christ, there is now no condemnation that remains:
Romans 8.1.
and therefore thanks be to God who has given us the victory through Jesus
Christ: 1 Cor. 15.
for he has taken our sins upon his back; he has satisfied the Law of
God, not for himself, but for us; he dyed, that we might live; he was
accursed, that we might be blessed; he was buried and rose again, that we
might rise from our graves, and live for ever; he descended into hell, that
we might ascend to heaven: his righteousness is our righteousness, and our
sins are his; this exchange did he make for our sakes. And therefore
(through Faith) by him we are revived, quickened, and strengthened. All his
merits are imputed unto us as though they were our own, and our sins are
truly his, for which he suffered and satisfied to the utmost.

Zach. 13.1. Psalm. 16.5. 1 Cor. 1.30. Col. 2.27. Ioh. 10.9. Romans 3.25.
the fountain of grace and virtue, the portion of our inheritance, our
righteousness, wisdom, sanctification, and redemption; our hope of glory,
our door to heaven; the way, the truth, and the light; our atonement unto
God, our Shepherd, Master, Lord, and King. To be short, he is all in all to
us that are nothing. This our Savior Christ has abrogated the Law, and has
redeemed those that were under the Law, and he himself is the end of the Law,
and that which the Law could not do, he has accomplished in his person. And
therefore O Devil let Gods people go, for the Law cannot hold them: And
therefore O death resign thy power, thy sting and strength is nothing, the Law
being fulfilled, and Sin removed. The seed of the woman has bruised the
Serpents head: Genesis 4.15. Ephesians. 4.8.
Christ has led captivity captive, and given gifts unto men. He has
reconciled (and made as one) all things both in heaven and earth. He has
quite plucked down the partition wall, in abrogating (through his flesh) the
hatred that remained. There is now neither Jew nor Gentile, bond nor free,
Scythian nor Barbarian, man nor woman, all (that believe) are one in Christ.
Esaias 11.6.7.
He has made the Wolf to dwell with the Lamb, and the Leopard to lie with
the Kid; he has made the Calfe, the fat beasts, and the Lion so tame, that a
little child may lead them; the Cow, and the Bear, with their young ones, not
only feed but lie together; the sucking child does play upon the hole of the
Aspe; yea, even the weaned child most safely puts his hand into the hole of
the Cockatrice. Christ has now dissolved the works of the Devil, and broken
his snares asunder, that all believing sinners might be made righteous through
him, waiting for eternal life. He has opened the eyes of the blind, and
brought the prisoners from the dungeon; and him that sat in darkness, has
he placed in light.

To conclude, by his triumph on the Cross he destroyed Zachary) God has
performed the Oath which he swear to deliver us from our enemies, Luke.
1.32.33.
that we might serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness, all
the days of our life. Now then, all we which believe, are freed from the
slavery of Sin, kingdom of the Devil, gulf of Hell, and chains of Death;
so that henceforth Death is no death to Gods Children (through Christ) but
great advantage, and appointed for a passage to a better life. And therefore
though cursed reprobates may tremble at the name of Death and Devil, (to whom
they are in thraldom,) yet Gods Children being conquerours through Christ, may
well triumph: for now through him, we have an entrance made to heaven; and
Death is the very door of life, a passage out of this world to the Father, a
freedom from the prison of this body to go to Christ: It is a returning to
our heavenly Country, from which we were exiled: This is the cause why the
godly sigh and sorrow to be loosed, and to be with Christ.

Bernard.
and that we shall never be without merits, so long as Christ is not without
mercies. But from whence have thou this hope? Because I have a good Lord, an
exorable Judge, and a gracious Advocate. But thou shall be swallowed up of
death? No, my Redeemer lives, and my head is in heaven, who I am sure will
draw me to him: Christ has overcome Death, and opened to me the gate of
Life. O Death thou would have killed him with the sting of sin; but being
of no force, thy strength has failed, and he being my life is become thy
death. And though Death (like a proud Goliath) dares the whole world, 1 Samuel 17.
to match him with an equal Champion; and whilst the whole host of
worldlings show him their backs for fear, yet the true and humble Christian
(with Faith and resolution in Christ) dare show his face and stand to the
fight, till he have foiled him, and wounded him in the forehead, (as David
the great Giant,) even the wonted seat of terror and fear, and trampling him
under foot, can cut off his head with his own sword, victoriously triumphing
over him. A most admirable victory we dye, and are not foiled; yea, we are
conquerours in dying: for we could not overcome Death if we dyed not.

But thou shall be damned, says the Devil? Satan, Heb. 11.1.
but the things (which as yet I see not, yet hope assuredly to enjoy,) are
eternal and pearlesse. Again, he does more then see which firmly believes.
But (alas!) thou go hence laden with evil deeds, and destitute of good?
Yet will I entreat my Christ to unburden me of the evil, and to cloth me
with his good. John 9. Ezech. 18.
But God hears not sinners? I know he hears penitent sinners, and for such
he dyed. But thy repentance is too late? No, it is never too late in this life
to turn to God, as we truly learn by the thief upon the Cross. But thy
Faith is weak and ready to fail thee? Yet I will pray to God for the increase
and strengthening of it, and then it shall never fail me.

Apoc. 14.
and the ready way to eternal life; Blessed are the dead which dye in the
Lord, for (so says the Spirit,) they shall rest from their labors? But the
death of sinners is damnable? Yea, but he is no more a sinner that truly
repents and is pardoned.

Let not Satan tell Gods children what they have been, but what they would
be: for such we are by imputation,

If Satan summon thee therefore to answer for thy Ladder whereby I must
ascend to everlasting happiness and joy.

In our trials and temptations, we must first search out

^. Cor. 1.30.
righteousness, Sanctification and redemption, that who so glories, should
glory in him. Thus we must send Satan to Christ, who is our advocate to
plead and defend our cause, which yet is not so much ours, as his own,
because the question is not of our merits, or satisfactions (which we freely
renounce) but of the merits of his obedience, and of the value of his Death
unto the salvation of the souls of all the faithful. Thus shall we at once
for ever stop the mouth of this our cruel enemy, when refusing to plead our
own cause, we refer our selves unto Christ, whom we know to be the wisdom
of God, 3. Sam. 17.
and sufficient to answer what possibly can or shall be objected against us.
When David comes to fight with Goliath, he casts away Saul's armor; all
confidence in the world or man is laid aside, and he only trusts in God.

there get a Supersede as to stay the course of Law, and so appeal to the
throne of grace: from the Law of fear, to the Law of love (as Augustine
speaks. August.
) Does the adversary urge our debt? our answer is, the obligation is cancelled
and the book is crossed; and the whole sum discharged. Christ has passed his
word, nay, he has paid all that is due for us, to the utmost farthing. Let us
show him our general acquittance under hand and seal, given us by God
himself, with whom it is as proper to show pity, as mercy to help misery.
This is my well beloved Son, Mat. 3.17.
in whom I am well pleased. Here is the creditours own word, his own
handwriting under seal: this is a very good quietus est in Law, it is
proclaimed from heaven, and therefore sufficient to comfort poor distressed
sinners upon earth. Mat. 7.
The house built upon a rock was not moved when the storms beat and the
winds blew. Christ is our sure rock, let us build our faith upon him, and we
shall be safe.

Men cannot be more sinful then God is merciful, if August.
) When the wandering Son had consumed his fathers substance, yet returning
sorrowful, his father received him: and though we sometime loose the nature of
children; yet God does never loose the name and nature of a father. To
conclude, the Devil once overcome, gives a fresh assault again, he will never
give us over, till death end the battle, and then he shall be foiled. As it
comes to pass amongst warriors, if the one die in the field and fight, the
other gets the upper hand. Here is the difference, the faithful at the
last, ever get a final conquest, and then ascend to heaven as triumphers, and
there the Devil can assail them no further; he may compass the earth, Job 1.
but he cannot enter within the lists of heaven; he never came thither to
assail any since he was first cast out: Death therefore is the day of triumph
to the faithful, over all their foes.

1 Cor. 15.
When we see so many fall in the field by fight, we perceive there is no peace
to be looked for with this enemy; but blessed be the dead which die in the
Lord, they rest from their labors: as if the Saints never rested until rest
and blessedness and dying in the Lord meet together. Apoc. 14.13.
Here frail nature is the field wherein we must be ever toyling, and Death as
it entered by Sin, so is it the end of Sin: for for fear lest if life had
been prolonged, sin might have more increased: the Lord suffered Death to
enter into the world, that Sin might cease; and to prevent that nature might
not end in Death, God has set down a day, when all shall rise again; so that
Death in the end does extinguish Sin, ends our warfare, and makes our
nature durable.

CHAP. V. The faithful redeemed by Christ, are still subject to corporal
Death, and all other crosses of this life; yet being sanctified unto them, they
are furtherances and helps to a blessed life.
Heb. 9.27.
that all must go to deaths prison, without bale or maine-prise. No remedy can
begot, no dispensation purchased: Death must give us all our last purgation;
But his strength and sting is gone, there is our comfort: Death now is but a
Physician to cure our maladies, and all Deaths factours (as crosses and
afflictions) shall but further and fit us to a better life.

And why should this point seem so strange, and so Ioh. 16.20. Apoc. 13.10.
Herein is the patience of the Saints, the trial of their faith, and exercise
of their hope seen and approved of God.

Christ indeed has altered the nature of the first Death Jacob (not long
before his death) pronounced this as a curse from the Lord, Exodus 32.28.
upon the tribes of Simeon and Leui, for their cruelty against the
Shichemites, that they should be divided in Jacob, Deuteronomy. 33.8.9.10. etc. Iosuah
21.41. Numb. 18.21.24.
and scattered in Israel: yet when the children of Leui showed their zeal and
obedience, in killing the Idolaters, at ( Moses commandment, the Lord turned
this curse into a blessing. This scattering was a furtherance unto them, to
make them more fit to teach the people in every city, and so to receive the
Tithes of every Tribe. Ioh. 1.5. 2 Cor. 4.6. Genesis 1.3.
So at the first the Lord threatened death, as the punishment of sin, but (by
faith in Christ) it is made the end of sin, and the beginning of glory. He
that could at the first bring light out of darkness, could after bring a
blessing out of a curse. If Physicians (by their art) can extract an Antidote,
or preservative against poison, out of poison it self; why may not God by his
infinite wisdom and power draw good out of evil, mercy out of judgment, and
a blessing out of a curse? Death (says a learned Father) as yet remains for
the righteous, August. de peccatorum meritis and remiss. lib. 2 c. 34.
to exercise their faith withal: for if immediately upon remission of sin,
there should follow immortality of the body, faith should be abolished, which
wayteth in hope, for that which is not yet enjoyed: yea, the Martyrs could not
testify their faith and patience, their courage, constancy, and love to
Christ, in suffering Death for his sake.

Romans 7.24.
but death destroys them all. Sin brought in Death, and Death must drive
out Sin. After death our Sanctification shall be perfect, and not as here in
part. Faithful men shall be like Angels in heaven, readily, willingly* and
chearefully to do the will of God. As herbs and flowers breed worms by
nature, yet worms at length do kill both herbs and flowers: So Sin
breeds Death in it self, and Death at last shall prove the bane of Sin.
Judge. 16.30.
As Sampson could not kill the Philistims but by his own death, no more can
Christians get the conquest of sin, but by the loss of their lives. At the
first (as was said before) Death was ordained as a punishment for sin; now
God does use it as a means to stop the course of sin. Genesis 2.17.
It was said there unto man, If thou sin thou shall dye the death: Aug. de
ciuit. dei lib. 13.4.
but now it is decreed thou must dye, lest thou continue in sin. That which
then was to be feared, that men might not sin; must now of necessity be
suffered, that they may be freed from sin. Sin has taken such a deep
root in our bodies, that it cannot be destroyed without the destruction
thereof. Like the Leprous houses, strongly infected, nothing would serve to
purge them, Leuit. 14.45.
but needs they must be pulled down: Our corrupt flesh and nature must quite
be plucked up by the roots, lest any spur or sprig remaining, the buds of
sin do sprout afresh from the same, our old house must be plucked down,
that so they may be built again, as new Temples to the Lord. Epiphanius contra
here is. lib. 2. sect. 1.
Sin (says one) never cease to be in our bodies, until we come to be
blessed with a shuffle.

If there could any humane receipt be prescribed to avoid all crosses and
afflictions, with death it self, it would

Pain, pleasure, grief, sickness, health, with death it Math. 8.9.
which Christ our Captain has under his government; if he bid them go, they
go; if he bid them come again, they come; if he bid them do this or that,
they perform it. All evil, and consequently death it self, are profitable
and medicinable, to the children of God, whither they be sickness of body,
poverty, worldly losses, deprivation of friends, etc. which (if they be
undergone as the fatherly chastisements of our good God, for our reformation)
then are they wholesome remedies for our souls, for with such easy and short
receipts God does heal the sores of sin, to spare our souls in the world to
come. He sends afflictions as preuentions of sin, as many be let blood before
they be sick, for fear of sickness. The superfluous sprigs of the Vine are
pruned to make it more fruitful; God does diet his children, lest by riches
they should grow proud, by sin become insolent, by liberty wax wanton, etc.
All wicked instruments of our trials are but as Apothecaries, to make drugs to
heal our infirmities; they are as Masons to smooth us (being as rough Stones)
for the building, as furbushers to varnish us from the rust and canker of our
corruption, as Scullions in the Kitchen, to scour us, and make us bright
vessels, for the Lords own Table. Yea, all the crosses of the faithful are
but as unsavory Physic, yet wholesome for the recovery of their sick and
sinful souls. A sound body (says one) many times carries within it a sick
soul. Some labor of the plurisie of pride, some of the dropsy of
covetousness, some of the staggers of inconstancy, some of the fever of
luxury, some of the lethergie of idleness, others of the frenzy of anger,
etc. And it is a rare soul that has not some sickness. Now crosses and
afflictions are ordained of God as his medicinable remedies. What though they
be unpleasant? they are Physic; it is enough if they be wholesome: not
pleasant taste, but secret virtue and operation, commends the medicine. If they
cure thee, they shall please in displeasing, or else thou love thy taste
above thy soul.

that befalls thee had never been. God wills that he does, and if thy will
accord not with his, whether will thou blame of imperfection?

If our affections might always feed upon Mannah, we Numb. 11.4.
if our inheritance did stretch it self to the plains of Iordane, we would
enlarge it; and if our pre-eminence might reach to heaven, yet would we raise
up our hearts higher. These were the itching humors of Euah, who thought not
Paradise spacious enough for her habitation, nor the dainties of Eden sweet
enough for her taste, nor the presence of God good enough for her company. But
where the superscription of holiness to the Lord, Exodus 28.36. 1 Timothy 6.6.
is engraven on the head, and the persuasion of godliness to be gain, is
ingrafted in the heart, there (says a learned man) the lust of the world, and
the dust of the earth shall be shuffled together as payres and pearls of
equal price, account, and continuance. Therefore the Lord has here choked
our fields with thistles, and wrapped up all the treasure of the world in rust,
that seeing the ground whereon we stand to be out of Paradise, and the staff
whereon we lean to be but rotten wood, we might pray to God to have the sword
put up that stops us from the tree of life; Genesis 3.24.
and those boughs cut off that shadow us from beholding our sins, borne and
sustained in the body of Christ.

Therefore the waters of troubles and afflictions are but Psalm. 1.4.
scattered with the wind, and trodden under foot. Such is the state of the
wicked: Mat. 13.38.40.
they are separate as tares from the corn, either to be burnt in his
displeasure, or blown from his presence. God in this life (knowing the
dangerous temptations of his Children) does sift and boult them with
afflictions (the mother of humility, and true nurse of repentance) lest in
time they should loose the experience of their knowledge and faith in Christ,
and so seek some easier kind of life for flesh and blood. Neither can we
truly repent, until by some cross we know this world to be a place of
sorrow: for so long as we make our prosperity a bulwark to beat down all
harms, we are to look for adversity to beat down the high sail of our
proud hearts, whereby we gad after our own lusts, and leave the anchor of
peace, which is our trust in God.

our selves for the using of Gods blessings, who often gives that in
judgment, which he might deny us in mercy; and often waineth us from some
things in his love, which he might give unto us in his anger.

It is best here to be pressed and harrowed with the rake Moses Rod (says one)
striking the hard Rock, brought forth water: Numb. 20.11.
so the Rod of affliction (falling upon our stony hearts) by the working of
Gods Spirit, mollifieth them to contrition, and oftentimes brings forth even
floods of tears to repentance. One compares the crosses of Gods Children to a
Fyle of Iron, that takes away the rust of the soul: to a Purgation cleansing
the body from ill humors: to a Furnace consuming the dross, and purifying the
Gold, etc.

Though the wind blow cold, yet does it cleanse the Genesis 7.17.18.19.
so the Arc rose still higher and higher: In like sort, when the waters of
afflictions rise, down goes the pride of life, and lust of the eyes, with the
vanities of the world, but our souls (as in an Arc) by a true and a lively
Faith, ascend higher and higher, and draw nearer and nearer toward the heaven
of heavens. Neither need Gods children care what crosses they sustain: For as
there is none more shameful then the Cross of Christ; so all the afflictions
of Christians are accounted his. If we be poor, despised, imprisoned, or
whatsoever is the fruit of sin, betide us, God is not as man to turn away
his face, but we are the more dear in his sight; and every cross seals the
love of Christ, who suffers with us, who likewise was made sin for us, 2
Cor. 5.21.
who knew no sin, that we might be made the righteousness of God in him.
Who then can be discouraged with the afflictions of this life, or envy at the
wicked to see their ease and peace? No, no, these be but broken weapons, and
cannot possibly enter to the heart of our souls; only let us take heed of
sin, that it reign not over us, for therein Christ has taken no part, and
by it only we are separated from him.

Esaias 54.8.
The Lord may hide his face for a while, even a moment, as he did from Christ,
but he must needs return unto us with everlasting compassions: for the Image
of his Son is clear within us. A blessed sorrow, and woe full of happiness,
that fashioneth these days of our vanity to the likeness of the age of
Christ, that with him at last we might reign for ever. A precious countenance
it is, in the sight of God, that appears without beauty in the eyes of men,
and an unspeakable treasure of joy and gladness engraven in these vessels that
are but earth and ashes. When Christ is the pattern (whose similitude we
bear) who can be discouraged under the Cross? Unto this he has
predestined us, Romans 8.29.
that we should be like unto his Son, in all afflictions, and so be honored
with him in the day of glory.

Chrysostom says very well, that then we have most Chrisost. in Psalm. 9.
when we are delivered from adversities; and then we have most cause of fear,
when we are freed from dangers. For like as we do much more fear the Lion
or Leopard, when they are let loose, then when they are chained up: so our
untamed affections (when by prosperity they are unbridled) are much more to
be feared, then when by troubles they are curbed and restrained. He that will
be able to bear the cross of all crosses; namely, Death it self, must first
of all learn to undergo smaller crosses, as sickness in body, troubles of
mind, loss of goods, friends, and good name; which may fitly be called little
deaths, and the beginnings of Death it self. For the afflictions and
calamities of this life, are as it were the harbingers and purueyers of Death:
First therefore we must learn to entertayne these messengers, that when Death
(the Lord and Master himself comes) we may in better manner welcome him.

Whom God most loves, those he most proves by afflictions. Why is it that in a
Camp, the most perilous race. And in very deed, that part in any man is the
stronggest, that most is exercised by pains and toil. There is none so firm
and solid a tree, as that which the winds oftnest beat upon: for being thus
beaten and ballasted, it knitteth together and spreads the roots more
firmly in the ground. The fire tryes the gold, and misery men of courage:
Seneca.
There is no peace without war, no rest without toil, no crown without
crosses, no reigning without suffering, no glory without shame and shaking in
this woeful world.

Canaan (with the Israelites) but they loath the wilderness. The running
waters of Shilo they would taste, but the rough stream of Iordane they cannot
tallage. Mark 10.35.
James and John would have the seat of honor, but they would not drink of
the bitter cup. But we must know that the way to heaven is not strewed with
flowers, but set with thorns, yet is it both the straight and the right path to
immortal glory. The persecutions and troubles of Gods Children shall never
cease, till the World be without hatred, the Devil without envy, and our
Nature without corruption. Even the sweetest of all flowers has his thorns,
and who can determine whether the scent be more delectable, or the pricks more
perilous? It is enough for heaven to have absolute pleasures, which if they
could be found here below, certainly that heaven of heavens, (which is now not
enough desired) would then by such means be altogether feared. God here
compoundeth our pleasures to the fashion of our selves, so as the best delights
we have, may still savor of the earth: thus God does weary us in the world, to
weane us from it.

for what can Sin (the sting of Death) prevail against us, being pardoned in
Christ? The abundance thereof causes abundance of grace, Romans 5.15.21.
and the greater remission of sin procures the greater love of God. What
therefore can Satan gain by his assaults, but to multiply the reward, and
make the Crown of Gods Saints far more glorious by their sufferings? Death
may put out our carnal eyes, yet Satan has not whereof to rejoice, so long
as Faith inlighteneth the mind, never removing her eyes from Christ Jesus
crucified: So forcible and effectual is the spiritual contemplation and
insight of Christ crucified, that it turns despair into hope, and hope into
joy most glorious and unspeakable.

The humbing Be having lost her sting in another, Exodus 4.3.
as Moses rod turned into a Serpent, made him fly from it for the present: but
through confidence in God (who has willed us not to fear) we shall find it
a blessed means to divide the waters of many tribulations, to make us a
passage from the Wilderness of this world, Exodus 14.16.
unto the heavenly Land of eternal rest. Neither can Death separate us from
God, though it be fearful to the flesh, to see his prefixed end: nay, nothing
has greater power to join us to God, through the death of him that conquered
Death. And must it not needs be joyful to a Christian, to be freed from this
wicked life, wherein every day is the messenger of fresh sorrows, and wherein
he finds his corruption so burdensome? and therefore he is ready most
chearefully to embrace it, as the Soldier that comes (after his valor
showed in the field) to be made a Knight, or the King that goes to his
Coronation: for then they shall not have Reeds but Palms in their hands, (to
show their triumph) and not to be crowned with thorns (as Christ in this world
with his members are in mocking) but with immortal glory with God and his
Angels, in the highest heavens.



CHAP. VI. Gods Children in this world (as strangers and Pilgrims) have hard
entertainment, their true heaven and happiness comes hereafter.
turn for the tlme. The best lodgings are here taken up for great States; Luke
2.7.
Christ and his Mother must be glad of a Stable. The dainties and delicates are
provided for the Nobles and great men; the bread of adversity, and water of
affliction are commonly the diet of Gods dearest children; Esa. 30.20.
until the time of their refreshing come in a better life. Acts 3.19.
Here for a little they shall weep and mourn, till hereafter God send them
such exceeding joy that none can take away. Ioh. 16.20.


And when Gods children are well used in their hosteries, 1. Cor. 7.29.
that they were at home. And because the time is but short, they weep as they
wept not, and so likewise they square out their mirth, that nothing may long
stay them in their travel, or much either allure or disturb them. As
Travelers therefore that have a long journey to go, prepare for the speedy
and happy expedition thereof: so must Christians (says one) make ready the
chariots of good consciences, the horses of fervent prayer, the oil of
holiness for their Lamps, the sword of the spirit (which is the word of God)
and the shield of faith, that so they may resist and overcome all their
enemies, Ephesians. 6.26.27.
and constantly proceed to their iournyes end.

Inquire and you shall scarce find out one faithful man 1. King. 22.6. 1.
King. 21.10. Judge. 16.
like the false Prophets of Ahab; his oaths manifest periuries of Iesabels
false witnesses: The love of the world, is like Dalilahs to Sampson; his
friendship a Judas kiss; Math. 26.48.
his embracing the deceiptfull murdering of Ioab; his wine is gall, 2. Sam.
10.8.
his meat venomous poison. He that doubts, Apoc. 17.4.
let him stand a far off, and view the world (for they that approach near
can neither see God, nor know themselves) and he shall see with Abraham a
filthy smoke, ascending from the world (as it were from Sodom) ready to
strangle him, if he fly not from it. This deceitful world (says one) is like
to wretched Laban, Genesis 19.28.
which promised poor Jacob fair Rahel for his seven years service, and in
the end deceived him with bleare-eyed Leah. Genesis 29.23. 1. Sam. 18.17. and 19.
Like unto Saul that promised Merab to David, yet must he be pleased with
Micoll, or go without. And what false and fair promises does it daily make of
long life, health, wealth, and promotion, and yet cuts some off in the midst of
their days, and brings others to beggerie and disgrace? Go ye (if it were
possible) over the whole world, behold Countries, and view Provinces, look
into Cities, and harken at the doors and windows of private houses, of
Princes Palaces, secret chambers etc. and you shall hear and see nothing but
lamentable complaints; one for that he has lost; another for that he has not
won; a third for that he is not satisfied; ten thousands for that they are
deceived of the world. Can there be a greater deceit then to promise renown,
and memorial (as the world does to her followers) and yet to forget them as
soon as they are dead? Who does remember now one of many thousands that have
been famous Captains, Soldiers, Counselors, Dukes, Earls, Lords, Ladies,
Kings, Queens, and mighty monarchs in the world? Psalm. 9.6. Job 13.12.
has not their memory perished with their sound? and is not their remembrance
as ashes under foot?

afflicts them that serve it, it forgets them most that travel for it,
and damneth them that follow it. It will requite us as Nabal did David: 1 Samuel
25.10.
Who is the Son of Ishai that I should know him? etc. This whole world is
nothing else but a maine Ocean Sea of infinite troubles, and calamities, and
scarsely cansts thou find any house (in all this land of Egypt) free from
sighing, mourning, grief and sorrows. Exodus 12.30.


Wherefore seeing this world is such a thing as it is, so vain, so deceitful,
so troublesome, and so dangerous; seeing August. Epist. 39
Seeing (as S. Augustine speaks) the joy of this world has nothing else but
false delights, true asperitie, certain sorrow, uncertain pleasure,
trauelsome labor, fearful rest, grievous misery, vain hope of felicity.
Since it has nothing in it (says Chrysostom) but tears, Chrisost. hom. ad
Pop. Antioc.
shame, repentance, reproach, sadness, negligence, labors, terrors,
sickness, sin and death it self. Since the worlds repose is full of anguish;
his security without foundation, his fears without cause, his travels without
fruit, his sorrows without profit, his desires without success, his hope
without reward, his mirth without continuance, his miseries without remedies:
Seeing these and a thousand thousand evils more are in it, and no one good
thing can be had from it, who would be deceived with this vizard, or allured
with this vanity hereafter? who would be stayed from the noble service of God,
by the love of so fond a trifle as this world is?

If the world were our proper Element (as the water for ye are not of the
world; Ioh. 17.14.
for the love of Christ we must forsake the world, Math. 9.9.
as Matthew his gainefull receipt of custom, when he was called away. It is
commodious to the life of the Fish to live wholly in the water, but it is
hurtful to the soul of man to be given wholly to the world. For to get
worldly gain, the body would feign live: but the desire of heavenly glory must
make it glad to die. Worldly cares make a man very vnresty with himself, but
the comforts of Gods spirit are a Supersede as to them all, Acts 2.2.
and give him his absolute quietus est. So that as the holy Ghost fills the
house; so grace, peace and joy in the holy Ghost, fulfilleth the heart. And as
he that walks in the warm Sun, never desires the light of the Moon: so he
that walks in the way to heaven, will never so much respect his affairs upon
earth. The world rather feeds then slacketh our appetites, as Oil does the
fire. Man labors to labor, Herodot. lib. 4. Phil.
and cares to take care, plowing upon the rocks, and rolling every stone for
his gain, and is never at rest; likened (by one) to a people in Africa, that
are at wars with the wind.

Bernard) not that all things are of his nature. Bern. in Cant. sermon. 4.
but because of him, by him, and in him, all things consist. A Stone cast out
of a sling never rests until it come to his center: Romans 11.36.
so God (whose center is every where, and circumference nowhere) is our only
rest, and without him (who is only infinite) our desires are never
replenished, which are infinite and endless. We must therefore pass through
this world (as the Israelites passed through Edome) who only desired to go
through, Number. 20.17.
and to make no stay at all: what should we set our delights in this Edome of
the world? our passage through it is all we should require; we spend our
goulden days of prosperity (as ill husbands waste their substance) we know
not how, and are in a manner so careless, as if God were bound to bring us to

God has set the earth under our feet that it should not be too much
esteemed. The world it self is of a round figure (says one) but the heart of
man is triangular, and so comprehends more then the world. Our bodies walk on
earth, but our souls should be in heaven, by heavenly desires; and we should
frame our affections in form of a Ship (that is, closed downward, and open
upward) in a hearty desire of happy state. Let my mind (says Augustine) muse
of it, let my tongue talk of it, let my heart love it, and my whole soul
never cease to hunger and thirst after it.

Gods children in this world (with their trials and troubles) are tilled and
manured as the ground, to be made Mat. 27.32.
and are here proved (with Simon of Syrene,) every one with his cross, and
must thus be contented to accompany Christ to his Kingdom. Manifold troubles
are incident to all who are departing from the mire and dirt of Egypt, to do
sacrifice to God, Exodus 8.25.
who yet will bring them into a good land, that flows with milk and honey.
Here we are a flying before many Iesabels, Psalm. 137.4.
here we sit in darkness, and see not the true light which shines in glory.
Luke 15.13.14.23.25.
Here we are poor captains (as in Babylon) how should we sing and rejoice in
this vale of tears, in so low and marshie a soil, naturally so subject unto
moisture? This far Country is full of penury and sorrow, no plenty, no
music until we return unto our fathers house; August. de verbis dom. sermon.
70.
while we are on this side Iordane we are amidst many troubles and trials, we
must look for no other, until we come into the heavenly land of rest; Genesis
8.9.
and what is it to live long, but to be troubled long? Noah's Dove, at her first
flight from the Arc, fetched many retyres, but could find no resting place,
till Noah opened the window to take her in again: So may our poor souls
soar a time (by lifting up many a sigh and supplication to God) who at last
will open the window of his heavenly Arc, Psalm. 126.5.
and then (and not before) they shall find safe footing after these worldly
floods, for sure repose and rest. Here we do but sow with tears, 2 Cor. 5.1.
there we shall reap in joy. Here our earthly houses are like the Tabernacles
that were moveable, Psalm. 84.5.
there they shall be like the glorious Temple sure fixed. Psalm. 84.5.
Blessed are they indeed that dwell in thy house, O Lord of Hosts.

Those that at midday desire to see the superior planets Zacheus abode in the
preasse among the other people, Luk.19.3.4.
he was upon to low a ground to look on Christ, till he climbed higher.
Seafaring men, that have long been weather beaten (in the surging Seas) are
wont to showt for joy when they discern the shore: So should Christians
rejoice (after so manifold storms of this raging world) to draw so near by
death, and by faith, to see a far off their heavenly harbor, and place of
endless rest. Worldlings are like the Reubenites, content to stay on this side
Jorden, Numb. 32.4.5.
because it was a place fit for their Droues and cattle, and nothing regarded
the promised land: so many desire to stay here and go no further, esteeming
the profits and pleasures of this temporal life, more then of the
incomprehensible joys of life eternal. They are so satisfied with earthly
things, that they savor not heavenly, etc. men led captive into a foreign
Country from their infancy, do not only forget their natural language, but
even the desire of returning home: but to the truer Israelites, all is
weariness, until they come into the land of rest.

Augustine writes of certain beasts (that are so patient of thirst) that
seeing many puddles, and other waters, will yet never drink, till they come to
a fountain that is very clear and clean: so should the faithful stay their
desire till they come indeed to the true waters of comfort, so fresh and
clear: Here we must but recreate our selves, retaining still our thirst,
until we come to drink our fill at the true fountain of bliss and
happiness. The worlds manner (says one) is the Jews manner, who were wont to
bring the best wine first; Ioh. 2.10.
but Christ observes his old manner, and keeps the best wine last. The
Israelites many and often times murmured in the wilderness, thinking that
after their deliverance out of Egypt, they should presently have all sweetness
and abundance: Genesis 42.25
But they were deceived, God kept that until they came into the land of
promise: we must not look for our happiness here, God reserueth that till
hereafter. Here every day we must be gathering Mannah, but when the high
Sabbath comes, then we shall cease. Joseph gave his brethren provision for
the way, Mat. 6.32. Psalm. 92.5.
but the full sackes were kept in store until they came home to their fathers
house. God gives us here a taste and assay of his goodness, but the maine sea
of his bounty and store, is horded up in the kingdom of heaven. In this life
Adam shall eat his bread in the sweat of his brows, in labor and sorrow
shall he eat thereof, until he return unto the earth, out of which he came:
as if the days of man (by reason of sin) were nothing else but the days of
sorrow, because every day has her grief, and every night his terror. The
Christian soul shall never sing her sweetest song, until she come to bear
her part with the Saints in the joyful quire of heaven. Wherefore if our
inheritance be that we shall reign as kings, why put we our selves in such
slavery of creatures? If our birth allow us to feed of bread in our fathers
house? Luke 15.16.
why delight we to eat husks provided for the swine? If a golden prize be
propounded to such as win the race, and win the goal; why step we aside
to follow flies and feathers in the air?

CHAP. VII. The faithful in this life are subject to manifold infirmities,
their bodies and souls are under the thraldom of Sin, and corruption, but
Death breaks their bonds, and sets them at liberty.
Paul's complaint (in the person of the faithful) that he is carnal and sold
under sin, doing those things which he hates, Romans 7.14.15.18.24.
and omitting the good things he wills: that in his flesh dwells no good
thing, and therefore cries out (as a miserable caitiue) to be delivered from
the body of this death. For as man at the first by sin rebelled against his
maker: so all things (while he lives) shall rebel against him; even man
against himself, the flesh against the spirit: yea, both of them do what we
can are liable to the tyranny of sin, which (as a soul and an unclean spirit
having entered) will not again (without much renting and torment be driven out
a doors? And were it not that our strong man armed (far greater then sin)
had dispossessed him with violence; Luke 11.22.
desperate and forlorn had been our estate: yet here in this life the battle
is but begun, and must continue all our term (as we have heard,) only death
must end the wars, and make our conquest pleasant. God here will have us
humbled all our days, before he will fully exalt us, when all times and days
shall cease. Apoc. 10.6.


Romans 8.22.
Shall the brute beasts and senceles creatures (being subject to vanity)
groan in their kind for the redemption of Gods Sons, when they shall be
freed from the bondage of sin; and shall we that are Christians, endued with
reason, yea, and above reason, enlightened with Gods holy Spirit, (especially
when it stands upon our joyful being, and everlasting dwelling with God in
heaven) shall we not (I say) lift up our minds, beyond this rottenness of
earth? Surely the very creatures shall condemn our backwardness herein, that
we are worse then beasts bereaved of sense and reason.

We may say of our unruly flesh (as one said once of a troublesome neighbor)
Neither can I live with thee, Here our nature (like Hagar the bondwoman) is
very disdainful toward Sarah the freewoman, Genesis 16.4.5.
Gal. 4.29.
where the rebellious appetites strive against the regiment of Reason; where
our wit (like another Heuah) still provoke us to reach of the forbidden
fruit; where Sin, like Tarquinius the proud, would tyrannize, and challenge
so a perpetual Dictatorship. We must not therefore commit the guard of our
selves to this body of sin, nor mingle our souls with the corruption thereof.
Join with thy friends, not with thine enemies: the flesh is thine enemy,
because it contradicts the understanding, and contends after nothing but to
sow enimities and troubles. Mingle not thy soul therewith, for fear thou
confound and defile it together: for making this commixtion, thy flesh (which
should be a subject) comes to contemn the soul, which ought to command as a
Sovereign, seeing she gives life to the body, and the flesh (on the contrary)
effects the death of the soul. Though the soul be infused into the body, yet
we may not think that she is confounded with the body. Consider the light,
for an example, though it pierce into every place, yet is it not mixed
therewith: we must not therefore confound the office and effects of so
different substances, but let it reside in the body to quicken, lighten, and
govern the same.

Job; Job 10.9.
Thou have made me of the clay and slime. Our souls are (as it were) plastered
with the flesh, but they dissolve not into it: Verse 11.
Thou have apparelled me with skin (says he) and flesh, thou have
enterlaced me with bones and sinews: so that our soul is confined and
extended through the sinews, that many times she is made stiff (as it were)
thereby, and sometimes crooked by the heavy affections thereof.

we heed lest our souls (groueling on the earth) be ensnared with Satan's
gyns and worldly baits.

Now the better to discern the state of our souls, let

As the Be does fall among the weeds (which seem Noah's naked dove, Genesis 8.9.
returns again whence she was sent, and soars to heaven. No more then shall
Gods Children pain themselves in heaping together these exhalations of the
earth; for the heavens shall be ours, and this mass of earth (which ever
draws us to the earth) shall be buried in the earth. No more then shall we
weary our selves with mounting from degree to degree, and from honor to
honor; for we shall highly be raised above all heights of the world, and from
on high, laugh at the folly of all those we admired, who fight here foolishly
for less then a point or an apple, like little children. No more then shall we
have such combats in our selves; for our flesh shall be dead, and our spirit in
full life; our passions buried, and our Reason freed in perfection. Our soul
delivered out of this foul and filthy prison, shall again draw her own
breath, recognize her ancient dwelling, and again remember her former glory.

Philip Mornay de morte.
man is rather of celestial and divine quality, wherein is nothing gross or
material. This body (such as it is) is but the bark and shell of the soul,
which must needs be broken, if we will be hatched for a heavenly life, if we
will truly live and see the light. We look but through false spectacles; we
have eyes, but ouer-growne with pearls; we think we see, but it is in a
dream, wherein we see nothing but deceit. All that we have, and all that we
know is but abuse and villainy: Death only can restore us both life and light.
And yet so blockish are we, that we think she comes to rob us of them.
Though our soul (now for a while) be bound to our bodies (as Isaac was tied
to the Altar) yet so soon as the bonds are loosed, Genesis 22.9.
it mounteth up to heaven, a place of joy and bliss. Death depriues the soul
of no good, but (freeing it from the burden of the flesh) makes it fitter for
goodness. Ambr. de bono mort.
It is the very grave of sin to the faithful, and the instrument and means
to raise them up to the life of righteousness: through it the sinful bodies
are resolved to dust, that so defiled the soul, and so the soul (once
separated) aspireth to the heavenly Spheres.

But the quality of the earth (which we should imitate for our good) is to be
fruitful after tilling, because that the ground which brings forth briars
and thorns is subject to a curse. Heb. 6.7.8.


The dearest children of God (here in the flesh) are as 2 Cor. 1.22. and 55.
Ephesians. 1.13.14. Romans 8.15. Gal. 46.7. Genesis 32.25.
Yet if we have received but the earnest-penny of Gods Spirit in this life,
we shall be sure to receive our full wages and pay in the life to come.
Neither need we be dismayed that we limpe with Jacob, and be imperfect in this
life: for if we had no infirmities, we should be as proud as the Devil,
whereas now they serve to humble us, and make us thankful unto God, so
mercifully restrayning them, and so fatherly passing by them, and so they serve
to multiply our groans unto God, the sooner to be freed from this body and
bondage of sin. God does here buffet his children with their imperfections
(as he did Paul) lest they should grow insolent. 2 Cor. 12.7.
Now the Lord will trust us no more with perfection, since Adam lost it in
Paradise, but will exercise us with our weaknesses, lest we should step into
our old mothers conceit, to think our selves Gods. And thus the Lord cures
our gross sins by our infirmities, even as the best Triacle is made of
poison, and the skin of a Viper is the best cure against the sting of a
Viper. And though our infirmities be simply evil, yet qualified and tempered
(with God our Physicians hand,) they are turned to our good.

If God be on our side, who can be against us? Nay, rather Chrysostom) who is
not against us? Romans 8.31.
But howsoever they are against us, they shall not long trouble us: Chrisost.
for God is a recorder of our patience, and Death the finisher of our pain.
And though the heavy burden of our sinful flesh do load us, yet lightsomnesse
it is to a Christian to think that the way is not long. The traveler thinking
of his Inn (but especially of his home) which is the end of his travel, goes
more cheerfully on to the end of his journey. The bondman calling to mind the
years of Iubilee, Leuit. 25.10.
endures with more patience the years of his bondage. Great are our troubles
and travels in this life, but salvation will one day make amends for all; when
we shall once be landed on the shore of perfect security, and be delivered
from all toylesome labors, etc. Happy, yea, thrice happy and blessed shall the
faithful be, being departed from a shadow of life, to true life it self; from
darkness to light, from trouble to rest, from sinful men to the most holy
God; when the battle of their warfare shall be ended, and they quite freed
from all the throes of Sin and Death.

Augustine speaks) that the body is straight where the mind will; how much
rather shall a sanctified soul (disburdened of the body) pass with speed to
him that gave it? Eccles. 12.7.
The spiritual body raised up from the grave (by the spirit of Christ) shall
again (being united to the soul) obey it with admirable facility, all sense
of trouble being taken away, and all corruption and slownesse removed: when all
frailty and earthly pollution is converted and changed into heavenly purity
and steadfastness, Aug. de ciuit. dei. lib. 3. cap. 20.
which shall not need either meat or drink, but live for ever by the
quickening spirit of Christ.

Man, of woman, is borne in travel, to live in misery: Man Job 14.1.
He is borne into the world with cries, uttering at his entrance his miserable
estate: Straight (as he departs) with joyful songs he prayseth God for
ever. He is scarcely in his Cradle, but deadly enemies assault him: yet after
death no adversaries can annoy him. Whilst he is here, he displeases God:
when he is departed, he fulfilleth his will. In this life he dies through
sin: in the life to come he lives in righteousness. Through many
tribulations on earth is he still tried, (as gold in a furnace) but with
holiness unspeakable (in that heavenly life) is he endowed for ever. Here he
dies every hour: there he lives continually. Here is sin, there is
righteousness: here is time, there is eternity: here is mortal hatred, there
is heavenly love: here are pains and perils, there is pleasure and safety:
here is misery, there is felicity: here is corruption, there is immortality:
here we see vanity, there shall we behold the Majesty of God, with triumph
and unspeakable joy, in glory everlasting. Seek we therefore the things that
are above, where Christ Jesus our Savior sits in his Majesty to receive us.

Gods Children (in this world) are cast (as it were) into Apoc. 15.2.
and in great perplexity to shift for themselves: but at length God will
dragge them out to the shore, and give them ease in that blessed life to come.
Sin, with all misery, afflictions, and death it self, shall be shut up in
hell, (as in the proper place:) and the passing from death to life doubles the
joys of eternal life. As those that have escaped many dangerous shipwrackes
on the sea, greatly exulte when they come to shore.

Man's habitation here is in houses of clay, he leads his 2 Cor. 5.1^
here is no firmness of judgment, nor constancy in actions; yea, well-nigh
no faith to be found amongst men. In the day many an afflicted soul desires
the night, and when it is night, they wish for day. Bitter mourning they have
instead of meat, and salt bryne tears in stead of drink. No ease from
troubles, nor release from afflictions is here to be found: so that many desire
deaths company, and cannot have it; they sue to her for rest, and peace (as
tired seamen) for the port and haven. This world (to all Gods Israel) is an
Egypt of indurable slavery: Exodus 5.7.8.
here (for a poor living) they make brickes and pots, without straw or
stubble; they toil and labor for Onions and Garlic: here they lie (amongst
rusty and filthy pots) and are made as Scullions. Psalm. 68.13.
Their poor souls are sold for shoes, Amos 8.6.
and cut to pieces as flesh to the pot, Micah 3.3.
they are as bread and meat to ungodly men, and are daily swallowed up: Their
backs are broken with burdens, Amos 6.6.
and their hands feebled with immoderate labors. None in comparison, here,
regards the misery of poor Joseph, Psalm. 105.18.
though his feet be hurt the stocks, and the heavy gyues do pierce his
soul. This is the guerdon of the world, and the reward that the wicked ones
repay to Gods elect, Job 1.2. 1 Timothy 6.7.
as naked they came into it, so naked they shall leave it for all their toil.

2 Cor. 5.1.
to take possession of heavenly habitations, glorious and eternal mansions,
with the living God himself? To have perfect liberty and freedom, for their
miserable slavery and bondage; all fullness of joy and comfort, in stead of
their former sorrows and calamities, never to hunger and thirst again, being
still fully fed and fraught with the pleasures of Gods house, and fully
replenished with the dainties and delicates provided for the marriage of the
Lamb? Apoc. 19.9. Mat. 22.2. Phil. 1.21.23.
etc. Is not this a royal exchange and happy Mart? And therefore true is Paul's
Positions, that Death is the faithful man's advantage, and that to be with
Christ is best of all. If Peter and John, having but a glimpse of Christ's glory
in the mount, Math. 17.4.
could speedily be resolved that it was best for them to dwell there; what
shall we then judge of the fruition of happiness, and substance of glory, when
the very shadow thereof is so beautiful and glorious? why therefore should we
fear the sorrows of death and grave, being fully assured of the comfortable
presence and protection of God himself.

Therefore we rejoice (says Paul of himself and the Romans 5.
and why do they rejoice? because the love of God is spread abroad in their
hearts, through the holy Ghost. 2 Cor. 1.5.
For as the sufferings of Christ do abound: so do the consolations increase
in Gods elect, to their exceeding joy. Thus will the Lord, when sickness,
sorrows, and death it self approach to his children, comfort and visit them
upon their death beds, ministering most sweet refreshing to their souls: With
his right hand will he hold up their heads, and with his left hand, will he
embrace them in his love; Cant. 2.6 and 8.3
he will cover them with his wings, and they shall be safe under his feathers;
Psalm. 9.4.
his faithfulness and truth shall be their shield and buckler: who now would not
hasten to the fruition of such joy, and continual gladness of heart? And what
man in misery desires not to rid himself from the daily sorrow and sadness
of spirit: Cyprian. de mortalit.
And since videre Christum sit gaudere (as Cyprian says) to see Christ be the
rejoicing of Christians, and that without the sight of him it is impossible for
us soundly to rejoice; what blindness and madness is it in mortal men, so to
love and embrace this vale of tears, and not rather hasten to that perfect
joy, that they can never loose? Wherefore hidest thou thy face? (says
Augustine to God) happily thou will say, Aug. in soliloq.
no man shall see me and live. Oh then Lord that I were dead, so I might see
thee: Oh let me see thee, that I may die; even here I will not live; die I
would, yea, I desire to be loosed, and to be with Christ; I refuse to live,
Phil. 1.23.
that I may live with Christ.

CHAP. VIII. The holy life, heavenly conversation, cheerful death, and
blessed daparture of the faithful, redeemed by Christ.
Phil. 3.14.
to the glory of him, that has chosen them. And (being partakers of the divine
nature) they fly from the corruptions of the world, and give all diligence to
join virtue with their faith, 2 Pet. 1.4.5.6. etc.
and with virtue knowledge, and with knowledge temperance, and with temperance
patience, and with patience godliness, and with godliness brotherly
kindness, and with brotherly kindness love, and these things (being among
them and abounding) will keep them from being idle and unfruitful. The grace
of God to them appears not in vain, but teaches them to deny all
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, Titus 2.11.12.13.14.
and to live soberly, righteously, and godly in this present world, etc. and
being risen with Christ (from the grave of corruption, they every day more and
more seek those things which are above, setting their affections where Christ
sits, and not on the things that are on the earth, for they are dead to the
world, Col. 3.1.2.3.
and their true life is hid with God in Christ: therefore they labor to be
holy (as he that has called them to his kingdom and glory) is holy. 1 Pet.
1.15.16.
They daily employ themselves in reading and meditating of the word of God, 1
These. 2.12.
in prayer and religious exercises of holy devotion, loathing still this world,
and sinful life, daily growing to be spiritual and heavenly, having their
affections and zeal inflamed with the love of God. They say (with Augustine) O
Lord, Aug. lib. medit. cap. 21.
I delight to hear of thee, to talk of thee, to write of thee, to devise of
thee, and in my heart to print whatsoever I learn of thee. So must we walk
in these holy paths with all Gods Saints.

Godly devotion and holy meditations (says one) are Psalm. 14.1.2.
and the sauory smell of that odorifferous balm of a lively faith and
effectual knowledge of God, purge and cleanse the corruption of our lives and
unclean desires. God has chosen us to be his glorious temple (in whom he
dwells by his spirit) therefore we must have our hearts purified by faith, 1
Cor. 3.16.17
Acts 15.
and cleanse our selves from all filthiness and uncleanness both of bodies
and souls, and so adorn the place of his presence and habitation with all
virtue and holiness. 1 Cor. 8.17.
He that destroys the Temple of God, him will God destroy: for the Temple of
God is holy, which you are. 1 Cor. 3.17.
Saint Peter wills us to gird up the loins of our minds, teaching us that
as they which wear long garments (when they come in the foul ways) do take
and gird them up, 1 Pet. 1.13.
lest they should tag in the way: So we whose minds and affections do traile
(as it were) upon the earth (trudging through this foul, and filthy world)
must heave them up toward heaven, lest they should touch the damnable filth of
sin and wickedness.

It is in vain to boast of justification, without the unfeigned sanctification
of Gods spirit. For as there can be no fire without warmth, and light: so
neither can God by his spirit be in us, of with any of us, but he will also
purify us from vice, and corruption: therefore we must follow peace and
holiness, Heb. 12.14.
without the which no man can see the Lord. Christ has crucified our old man,
and put to death our vice and corruption, and shall we revive the same? Shall
we maintain our Saviors enemies, and give life again to these deadly poisons
of our souls? If we will be Burgesses of heaven, we must be strangers to the
earth: Where is the house of our Father, but in heaven? and there dwells our
eldest brother Jesus Christ, and all our christian friends and kindred; Heaven
then is our true Country, and on earth we are but travelers.

Moses had conuersed with God but forty days upon the Mount-Oliue, Exodus
34.29.
at his coming down, his face shined and glistered with heavenly glory: So
must we (beholding in a mirror the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, in his word
and Gospel) as it were with open face, and not with a veil (as did Moses) be
changed into the same image, 2 Cor. 3.18.
from glory to glory, as by the spirit of the Lord. If (I say) but this short
time, while we live we be conversant in heaven (by our most holy faith and
fruits thereof, in all holy affections, thoughts, words and meditations) we
shall in the end become heavenly, and spiritual, both in word and deed. As
we see by experience, when a countryman, has been trained up sometime in
the Court, he forgets his clownish kind of life, and becomes a Courtier:
Let us therefore leave the speeches, habit, fashions, and manners of this
wicked world, wherein we live, and inure our selves with the customs and
course of the court of Heaven. Let all our thoughts, words and communication
testify, that (in spirit) we are already there.

Romans 13.14.
as a garment) is a most royal robe of grace, holiness and sanctification;
and shall we be so sloathfull to traile and trample him in the dyrt of
filthiness and sin? Cant. 5.3.
or putting him off, to put on the vile, and spotted garment of the flesh, by
following the lusts thereof? Judge. 23.
When winter is once over, the nearer that the Sun draws unto us, the more
does the earth (being warmed with the heat thereof) fructify and increase;
and the longer the days are, the more work we may do: even so the nearer the
kingdom of heaven does approach unto us (by the coming of Jesus Christ, the
son of righteousness) or the nearer we draw to death, the more we should be
inflamed in the love of God, and all good works. As the Sun beams do come
to the earth, and yet are in the region from whence they are sent: so the
minds and souls of Gods children (though conversant in the earth) are truly
seated and settled with God in heaven, from whence they came.

Let vainglorious worldlings, who (with the Camaelion) Numb. 23.10:
that so we may die a righteous death, and live in peace and happiness, both
here and hereafter. If we live in the spirit, then let us walk in the spirit.
Gal. 5.25.
Our walking and behavior is a sure and certain sign whether we be alive or
dead. If our walking and working be spiritual, then do we live in the spirit,
but if our works be carnal, we are dead in the spirit, neither have we any
thing to do with Christ and his kingdom. As there is a resurrection to the
life of glory, so is there also a resurrection to the life of grace. As the
death of the soul went before the death of the body: so must the resurrection
of the soul (from the death of sin) be first, and then in due time will come
the resurrection of the body. Sin is a kind of death: this my son was
dead, Luke 15.24.
and is now alive: holy conversation is a rising again, and blessed are those
that have their part in this resurrection. Apoc. 20.5.6. Luke 15.24.
The prodigal Son by repentance found himself, who first by riot had lost
himself: and therefore let us give him our life, who gave us life.

Augustine) and think of that good which contains all good. August. de Ram.
Aug. de spirit. et anima.
Our devotion must not be as the Morning dew, which vanishes with the Sun;
nor like the leaves of Autumn that fall from the tree, but our goodness must
abide so long as we live; yea, we must rather yield up our breath and being,
then our faith and devotion.

Adam, and our souls are saved by faith in Christ: let the direction of our
thoughts to him be the messenger to our hearts, that our affections are in
heaven; for we are not placed that we should be planted here, but being bought
from this earth (by blood) we should cleanse our selves in this world with
water, that since some inferior affections must needs be found here below;
yet the dust only may cleave to our feet, and our head and hands lift up to
God.

So shall we have comfort in our death, being thus sanctified Ambrose.
but death should serve them (as a consolation) against all afflictions. So
that we should not only strengthen our selves not to fear it, but accustom
our selves to hope for it: for unto us it is not only a departing from pain
and evil, but an access and possession-taking of all happiness and good; not
the end of life, but the end of death, and beginning of life: because it is not
to us a last day, but the dawning of an everlasting day. Death now is the way
to recover our former estate, being lost by our first parens. It is the means
to translate us from our mortal condition, to everlasting immortality and
happiness in Christ. Who therefore will not be glad to exchange for the
better? Let them desire to live in the world, whom it loves and affects, but
all true Christians it hates evermore and despises.

What man being far from home, would not hasten to upon earth, I am (as it
were) in my wardship, but hereafter I shall have the full managing of all my
goods. O happy dying, and blessed death, which art made so gainefull unto me;
why should I fear thee which bring all sorrows and fears to an end? Thy
name is fearful, but thy effect full of consolation; especially when I behold
thee under his feet, 1 Cor. 15.54.55.56.57.
which has pulled out thy sting, taken from hell his command, and spoiled the
devil of his power.

August.
The grave (though it gape wide) yet can it not devour me, for although I must
rot in it, yet was it my Saviors bed, who was laid therein to sanctify it for
me, by his sweet funeral, and to prepare me there a chamber of rest. But O
Lord suffer me not to die, before I begin to live, nor to rot in the grave,
before I be assured of my immortal inheritance in heaven? wound my heart with a
holy sorrow; wash my soul with thy precious blood. Let other men desire to
live many years upon earth, my longing is to aspire to the days of heaven,
whereas one day consumes not another, but are endless, and eternal. The
reward of life, the joy of everlasting salvation and perpetual bliss, the
possession of Paradise (which were lost by sin) return again unto us as
soon as we leave this world.

Cyprian. de mortalitate.
and everlasting, such as are transitory and frail, is there any occasion so
to wail and weep? It belongs to him to fear death, that would not go to
Christ, which believes not that then he begins to reign in heaven, when he
leaves the earth: wherefore we must judge of death, not as it seems in it
self, but as it is in Christ. Naturally we desire to be, and consequently we
shun death, which depriues us of our being here. Death (I confess) is
fearful to the dearest children of God, for a while, because it is repugnant
to their nature: yet notwithstanding we see our estate, being holden (as
prisoners) in this body of sin, so long as we live, and therefore we ought
to long for the everlasting life, which is promised us after death. For when
we draw nigh toward death, then come we near to it, and death is the very
gate of life; assuring our selves that since Jesus Christ himself has passed
that way, we need not be dismayed, that death shall conquer us: for it is now
(through him) but as a rebated sword, and blunted knife, whose edges and points
are bowed and broken, which albeit they draw some blood, yet serves it but to
purge us.

Neither does God ever suffer his Elect to depart this Simeon) either in soul
or Spirit. Luke 2.28.29.
The life of this persuasion is the death of sin; and such hope of eternity,
is the revenge of iniquity. Fie upon sin, whilst I behold my Savior: fie
upon shame, whilst I behold my glory. Heaven is my hope, the spiritual
visions of my heart are the impressions of my joy. Therefore let us shake off
fear, and arm our selves to run this race, not seeking any by-way, but
keeping on the highway to heaven, whither Christ our captain has already
conducted us in his flesh.

CHAP. IX. The blessed and unspeakable happiness, joy, and immortality of the
faithful after this life ended.
NOw that our desires may be further enlarged has full dearly purchased for
us. Romans 8.18.
Saint Paul counts all the afflictions of this life that men can suffer, not
to be worthy of the glory which shall be showed, which he calls an eternal
weight of glory. 2 Cor. 4.17.
Our afflictions here are but momentany and temporal; but the joys of heaven
are eternal, not possible to be expressed. It is a show beautiful, in sense
wonderful, in weight excessive, in measure without bounds, in dignity without
comparison, and in continuance without end: yea, it is such and so great, that
as one torment in hell shall make a reprobate to forget all his worldly
pleasures; so the least taste of this glory, shall make the heirs of God to
forget all their former miseries. This glory is like God the giver of it, that
must be embraced for the excellency of it, and thirsted after for the
eternity of it.

The joys of heaven as far exceed these prison-ioyes Egypt; and the bread
that the lost son ate in his fathers house, the husks he ate abroad with
Swine. They are so great (says one) that they cannot be measured, so long that
they cannot be limited, so many that they cannot be numbered, so precious that
they cannot be valued: yet we shall see them without weariness, love them
without measure, and praise them without end. God in creating this transitory
world (which yet is but a poor cottage to his eternal habitation) what power,
what magnificence, what majesty has he showed therein? what glorious heavens,
and how wonderful has he created? what infinite Stars, and other Lights
has he devised? what Elements has he framed? and how strangely has he
compact them together? The Seas tossing and tumbling without rest, so well
replenished with all sorts of fish* the Rivers running incessantly through the
earth (like veins in the body) and yet never to be empty, or ouer-flow the
same. The Earth it self so furnished with all variety of creatures, as that
the hundred part thereof are not employed by man, but remain to show to man
the full hand and strong arm of his Creator. And all this was done in an
instant, with one word, and that for a small time in respect of the eternity
to come: What then shall we conceive of the house of God, that glorious heaven
it self? If the cottage of his meanest servant, (and that made for a time, to
bear off (as it were) a shower of rain) be so princely, so glorious, so
gorgeous, so full of majesty (as we see this world is) what must we think
that the Kings Palace it self is? appointed for all eternity, for himself
and his friends to live and reign in for ever?

O Lord (says Augustine) if thou in this vile body of ours give us so great
and innumerable benefits, Aug. in soliloq.
from the firmament, But these joys (alas) can we not comprehend whilst we
live in love with this world, no more then a prisoner shut up in a dungeon can
know what is done in a Princes palace; or a banished man in a foreign land,
can learn what is done in his Country, from which he is exiled.

If the very remembrance of the joys of heaven so affect Saints in heaven do
know God, all see God, all love God: then what will it be one day to be joined
with that celestial society, to know with them, to see with them, to love
with them? Now what a joy is it to consider the joy of this most joyful day to
all faithful believers in Jesus Christ, Romans 8.33.34.
who shall be quit by proclamation? Who shall lay any thing to the charge of
Gods chosen? How shall their hearts exult, when those that were not worthy to
be servants, shall be made as Gods sons, and coheyres with Jesus Christ of
everlasting glory? Verse 17.
True happiness (says one) is to have present all good things that the heart
loves, and to have absent and banished whatsoever the soul loatheth; when a
man both loves that which is best, and enjoys it; when a man enjoys all
that he wills, and wills nothing but that which is best.

1 Cor. 6.17.
Such is every one as his love is. So great then shall be our love to God and
heaven, as that we shall desire to love nothing else. For with him in his
Kingdom, we shall have perfect health without infirmity; health and
salvation shall be the walls of Gods elect, Esaias 60.18.
they shall always flourish as in youth, without any danger of withering old
age; yea, they shall be of the measure of age, and fullness of Christ; we
shall have saturitie without loathsomeness. Ephesians. 4.13.
Here the eye is never satisfied with seeing, nor the ear with hearing; but
then our desire shall be replenished with all good things: I shall be full with
thy image (says the Prophet, Psalm. 17.15.
) They shall not hunger nor thirst any more; yet being full, they shall still
affect; and in affecting shall be satisfied, that their fullness cloy them not,
and that they feel no want in their desires. Gregory.
We shall have beauty without any blemish or deformity: the just shall be as
the Sun in Gods Kingdom, Mat. 13.43. Phil. 3.21.
they shall be like Christ's glorious body. Our image shall be heavenly, as now
it is earthly: We shall have all abundance without any want: for God will give
his people a place where there is no penury. There shall be nothing without
them which they shall need to desire, nor any thing within them which they
need to abhor. Mortality shall be abandoned, Death shall be destroyed for
ever. Gods Children shall live in safety without fear, have perfect knowledge
without ignorance: for now we do but see in a glass, and then shall we she
with open face, and know as we are known. We shall have glory without
reproach, joy without sadness; for God will then wipe away all our tears,
grief and sorrow shall fly away when we shall enter into our masters joy.

They that come to the maine Ocean Sea, find water Apoc. 7.9.
when they shall follow the Lamb whither soever he goes. If there were so
great Faith in the earth, as there is most sure reward in heaven, what love
should we have to the life to come? Seeing Christ therefore has prepared
heaven for us, let us prepare our selves for heaven. What pleasure then shall
we have, when we shall be in the company of Angels? when we shall see our
blessed Redeemer with our eyes, and the infinite brightness of Gods divine
light? What a glory shall it be to behold that universal Goodness, in whom
are all good things? that greater world, in whom all worlds are contained? What
a joy shall it be to see him, who being one, is all things, and yet being one,
and most simple in himself, comprehends the perfection of all things? This
is the essential glory of the Saints, this is the center of their desires.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God: This is a vision that
makes us happy; a vision that passes the beauty of all earthly things, of
Gold, Silver, Pearls, and precious Stones; of woods, of fields, of Sea, of
air, of Sun, of Moon, of Stars, of Angels, and all creatures: for all
these things have their beauty from hence. This sight of God is the full
beatitude, and total glory of man, to see him that made both heaven and earth,
to see him that made thee, that redeemed thee, that glorified thee. For in
seeing him thou shall possess him, in possessing him thou shall love him, thou
shall praise him, for he is the inheritance of his people, he is the
possession of their felicity, and the reward of their expectation.

Augustine) thou only fittest, who desire nothing besides thee, which judge al
earthly things as dung in regard of thee, and heavenly things.

enter into thy Masters joy, which is perfect joy without all sorrow. There
shall be the living life, the sweet life, the lovely life: There shall be no
enemy to assault, no inticement of the flesh to alure, but sovereign and sure
security and quiet ioyfulnesse, and joyful and blessed euerlastingnesse, and
everlasting happiness. The happy Trinity and unity of Trinity, and deity
of unity, and blessed sight of deity: this is the Masters joy: O joy above
joy, besides which there is no joy; when shall I enter into thee, that I may
see my God, who dwells in thee! Blessed are they that have escaped from sea
to shore, from exile to their Country; from the prison of this wretched life,
to that surpassing Palace, enjoying this wished-for rest. Their comfort is
endless, their mirth without mourning, health without sickness, way without
wearisomnesse, light without darkness: where we shall be rich without
covetousness, advanced without pride, and shall possess all things without
desire, and shall live eternally without dying any more.

I can sooner tell (says one) what there is not in that No eye has seen, no
ear has heard, 1 Cor. 2.9.
neither has it entered into the heart of man, what unspeakable joys God has
prepared for them that love him. If it be so, what can I do else, but lift up
mine eyes to heaven, mine ears to God, and my heart to Paradise, to see and
understand what I can comprehend upon earth? and therefore my soul longs
after thee O God, and sigheth till it see the brightness of thy face. O
Kingdom of everlasting bliss, where thou O Lord, the hope of all Saints art,
rejoicing them on every side with thy blessed sight* If the wise men of the
East came so far off, and rejoiced to see Christ in the manger, what will it
be (in the sight of his Elect) to see him in his glory? If John Baptist a babe,
Luke 1.41.
sprang in his mothers womb for joy of Christ so newly conceived, and not yet
seen, what shall his real presence do in his royal Kingdom, but even
ravish with joy our very hearts and souls, when we shall continually enjoy his
most glorious sight? For it passes all other glory that the Saints have in
heaven, to be admitted to the inestimable sight of Christ his face in heaven,
and to receive the beams of glory from the brightness of his Majesty. 1
Kings 10.8.
If Solomon's servants were accounted happy (of Sheba the Southern Queen) for
their daily living and residencie in his Court, and hearing of his exquisite
wisdom, so admirable to all the world; how happy then, and thrice blessed
shall the Saints and servants of God be accounted, that live continually in the
Court of heaven, the very Paradise and Palace of God himself? Psalm. 16.11.
Blessed (indeed) are they that enjoy the pleasures of his house, in whose
sight is the fullness of joy, and at whose right hand there are pleasures for
evermore.

Moses honor to see Gods hinder parts, though possibly he could not see his
face and live: Exodus 34.6. Exodus 33.20.
and shall it not be then in incomparable joy and felicity to the faithful,
to see his glorious face in heaven? If the presence of God (says one) were
upon hell, it would become the port of Paradise: So on the contrary, if the
presence of our sins, miseries, and woes, should pester heaven, and reach unto
the Saints, then should heaven be turned into hell, rest into toil, peace into
war; life into death, etc. To conclude, as beauty seems more excellent when
it is paraleld with deformity; so will heaven show more glorious when it is
compared with hell. Oh how happy, and blessed is he which with the only
desire and love of eternity pyneth away? Such a one is neither proud, with
prosperity, nor cast down with adversity; for as he has nothing in this
world that he loves: so is there no loss of any thing in this life that he
fears. Sweet is the fountain to the weary traveler, and rest to the tired
servant: Comfortable is the cool evening after a hot sunny day; yet much more
sweet will it be to the Saints of this heavenly city to have peace after
war, pleasure after pain, joy after trouble, and constant security after
their so long endured sorrows. That City (says Augustine) is situate above
all the elements, where no floods can arise, no stormy winds can blow, no
tempestuous waves can beat, etc.

CHAP. X. The assurance and certainty which Gods Children have of their
salvation, and heavenly bliss.
HItherto we have heard of our comfortable Heb. 11.33. 1 Pet. 1.9.
even the salvation of their souls, yet for our further resolution herein, I
will dwell a little longer on this point.

One demanding the proof of another life, was asked likewise many good men in
continual anguish and affliction, consuming away with sorrow and grief to
death it self. If therefore there be a righteous God, it cannot be chosen but
there is another life, when these good men shall rest in bliss, and wicked men
in woe. For it is a righteous thing with God to recompense their tribulation
which trouble his children, and to give rest to his that are troubled: which
though many times it be not executed in this life, 2 These. 1.6.10.
yet the Apostle concludes it to be certainly accomplished at the coming of
Christ the righteous Judge.

Romans 8.39.
that nothing shall separate the love of God from us; so our Hope longs after
the incorruptible inheritance which we feel and know to be laid up for us in
heaven. So that this constancy and boldness of our hope without wavering,
laid up in our hearts, cries still within us, Apoc. 22 20.
come quickly Lord Jesus; and this hope is our warrant, that we are the sons of
God: which confuteth all such as conceive no other thing of hope, then to
desire to have a thing whereof we doubt; for being demanded whither they be
sure to be saved? they answer, they can have no assurance, for then how could
they hope? Thus they make hope a doubtful desire of a thing they wish, instead
of a present feeling of the thing they long for. But we are then indeed the
children of God, Heb. 4.6.
if we hold the rejoicing of our hope steadfast and sure unto the end.

Heb. 10.36.37.
but not to be prescribed a time by us; but he must take his own time, and our
patience must prevent al distrust. Faith is the foundation of our hope; for
what can we hope for except we believe it? as the ground of faith is the word
and promise; for why should we believe, but in respect of Gods promise? Faith
tells us, we beat not the air: hope bids us hold on our race, finish the
course, fight the combat, and then expect the crown of glory: yea, Faith is
fastened by hope, that it do not wander, and is continued by hope, 2 Timothy 4.7.8.
that it do not hasten but wait the time; and it is confirmed by hope, that we
may hold on the Faith. Example we have in the Cananitish woman, Mat. 15.22.
who suffered three denials of Christ, each of them doubled, with several
reproaches, yet her faith was relieved by her hope, and she had her desire. So
Jacob wrestled with God by Faith, and in an assured hope, Genesis 32.26.
told him flatly to his face that he would not let him go until he had
blessed him: Faith will not fly or yield a foot to her spiritual foes, and
hope will never be foiled: It is the sure and certain anchor of safety, Heb.
6.19.
to keep both ship and sails from dangerous shipwreck.

The sail that makes the Ship of our life to ride merrily Heb. 11.39. and 12.1.
and have happily arrived at the heavenly haven of rest. A faithful heart is
furnished (like a Ship of war) with shot and powder, and other strong
munition, which will surely make all hellish Pyrots and fleshly force, either
to pull in their heads, or betake them to their heels. The Devil and
devilish men, can never sink our Ship with all their subtilties: so long as
we cast our faith and hope upon Christ Jesus the cornerstone? but if it dash
upon the rocks of sin, it is in danger. Iona. 1.4.12.15
Ionahs sin had welnigh sunk the Ship. A Ship may more safely carry any
Passenger then a fugitive which is a vagrant and runaway from God, Epiphan.
so says Epiphanius. So long therefore as the rock of sin is in our way, we
can make no way toward heaven; wherefore let us cast away our sins into the
Sea (as Jonah was;) for with this sacrifice, the Sea of Gods wrath was appeased.

1 Timothy 6.16. Exodus 33.20. Ioh. 15. Esa. 45.45.
we must therefore believe the Son speaking of his Father, and search to
whom the Son has reueiled him, since we cannot see him with our eyes. God
only is to be believed touching himself, who only knows himself, and he
well believes God, who believes his teachers (in whom God speaks.) Neither
is it strange why we should believe God alone concerning himself, since we
must credit a mortal man touching his own secrets, whose spirit (next God)
knows best what is in him. 1 Cor. 2.11.
Humane understanding (in divine things) is as the sight of an Owl against the
Sun: Such things are known (by faith) in Gods word. Since God is the
highest, it is not possible to reach him (by the ladder of our reason) no more
then a Dwarf can reach so high as a huge and tall Giant. Now we cannot see
Gods face, but he is covered under something (as with a veil) yea, sometime in
such things as are contrary to his nature. As for us to behold his mercy in his
anger. In bringing us to hell, Faith sees him bringing us to heaven; in
darkness it beholds his brightness; in hyding his face, it beholds his
cheerful countenance.

Job see God (as they say) under Satan's cloak? for who cast fire from heaven
upon his goods? who overthrew his house, and slew his children? who stirred up
strangers to drive away his cattle, but Satan himself? and yet Job peirced
(with the sight of his faith) through all these instruments, and actions, Job
1.21.
confessing plainly, that as the Lord had given them, so the Lord had taken
them away, and so praised his name. And how often did holy David (amidst the
shadows of Death) see life it self? For Faith is of things absent, Heb. 11.1.
of things hoped for, of things desired; and can we desire any thing we know
not? and is there of heavenly things any other true knowledge, then by faith
grounded upon the word of God? Let us send then our faith in believing, and our
hope in expecting (as Iosuah sent messengers before) to view that heavenly
country that God has promised to give us, and these messengers will bring us
word, Iosuah 2.1.
that the eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor heart of man conceived
the excellency thereof, 1 Cor. 2.9.
which should move all faithful men to give this world willing farewell.

He that is eternal has promised these things, and he is Adams was in
Paradise) but it is made sure in the body of Christ, united with the person of
the godhead, and so are the ways in which we are led into it immutable: Our
faith is not extinguished, our love cannot be quenched, our hope fails not,
nor the holy spirit can ever be taken from us, but still they are new to us to
eternal life.

Apoc. 12.16. 2 Cor. 12.7 9. Esaias 53.5.
his floods can never drown us, and his buffetings shall be as our
preservatives against presumption. Christ our head was wounded for our sins,
and is healed again, reigning and triumphing in heaven; why then should we
which believe in him have our hearts heavy in earth, as though the head had
forgotten the body, or any part thereof? No, let us not doubt that he will
suffer a hair thereof to perish, which he so dearly purchased. Michael (I
mean our captain Christ) has conquered that dreadful red dragon, Apoc.
12.7.8.9.
and subtle serpent (with his leaders, and liuetenants) death and hell; why
should we be so much moved with any force of flesh and blood, or any mischief
the world can work us?

Be of good cheer (says Christ) I have overcome the world. Ioh. 6.33.
Seeing he has broken the head of our enemy what should his tail so much
trouble us? Seeing he has taken away our sins, what should any sorrow
remain amongst us? God does not choose them worthy, but in choosing them
makes them worthy. He has all in himself, which has himself, and he has
himself which has God, and he has God who believes, and confesses his
creator: Chrisost.
but he that has lost his faith, has nothing else to loose. Christ has said
it (and it is a warrant to our wearied souls) that those that his father has
given him, may be where he is, to behold his glory. This is his will, Ioh.
17.24.
and who dare wrest it? the head will have his members, the Bridegroom his
spouse, God his elect, and Christ his redeemed; and where will he have them,
but where he is? and that is in heaven.

So much what Death is in Christ. Now follows our preparation thereunto.

The end of the second Book.
THE THIRD BOOK. Of preparation unto DEATH.
CHAP. I. The necessity of preparation, with the motives: the remembrance of
Death much avails thereunto, to the godly; and the carelessness of most men
herein.
FOr as much as the best things are Luke 14.28.
For having the sumptuous tower of our salvation to build, we must first sit
down and reckon our costs it will stand us in: The crown of glory being
proposed, 2 Timothy 4 7
we must first fight the battle of faith without being foiled: And the
garland of salvation being hung up (as it were) before our eyes, we must strive
to run the race, without tyring, 1 Cor. 9.24.
until we come to the goal, where we must receive the prize of our pains
with endless profit.

Luke 14.24.
but the way thither is narrow and straight, and we must strive to enter in.:
the wicket-doore is small, and the throng great; Mat. 11.12.
therefore we must use a godly violence, to thrust our selves in, if we will be
saved. Now the way we have heard already, and the door of our entrance (which
is death) has sufficiently been described: It only remains that we be
christianly fitted and prepared for the entrance. Constant therefore we must be
in our course, and condition of life, enjoined us of God: for what avails it
the Seafaring man, to have sailed safely through the surging Seas, to have
escaped dangerous syrts and sands, the craggie rocks and rough passages, if
yet he be sunk, or sustain Shipwrake in the haven? What profits it the
Soldier, or most corragious Captain, to have given many on-sets in the
battle, and foyles to his foes; if yet he be killed before he overcome? It
booteth not to run ourselves breathless in the race, if we get not the goal;
and we shoot but at Rouers if we miss the mark. This world therefore being
as a Sea; a field, a race, and a mark to all Gods elect: Let them so sail
therein, as they may come safely to the shore; so fight in this field, that
they may overcome; so run that they may obtain, and so shoot that they
miss not the mark: that is, that they may after this life, come to the
expectation of their hope, end of their travel, even the blessed immortality
of everlasting life.

excess, or bad course of life, without Gods fear; then will every one wish,
that he had better served God, etc. Such are vain men's complaints, and late
lamentations. Yet now (whiles God vouchsafes means and time to live) why do
we not prepare our selves in time? Why hasten we not to live in such sort, as
at the day of death we wish we had. For look how Death leaves a man, so
shall the last Judgment find him. In this life there may be changes and
conuersions from evil to good, but after death there can be none at all: for
look where the tree falls, Eccles. 11.3.
there it lies, whether toward the North or toward the South. Need we have
to gird up our loins, 1 Pet. 1.13. Mat. 25.4.
and to get Oil for our Lamps, at all assayes, for the sudden and uncertain
coming of the Bridge-groome.

Our corrupt and cursed nature will still make us careless Esaias 28.95.
But it is too late to begin then to live, when we must leave our worldly
being: Seneca de breuit, vitae.
therefore to know our selves well, we had need to make some trial; and who
can do this that never came to proof? Virtue desires danger, and observes to
what it tends, what the scope thereof is; and not what she must endure for to
attain to the same: for even her very endurance is a great part of her glory.
A Pilot may be well known in time of a tempest, a Soldier in the heat of
battle. It is always best fighting with a known enemy, and what shall an
unskillful warrior do that knows not the nature, subtly, weapons and
policy of his adversary?

A good House-holder makes provision for himself, then calls in the poor.
With this penalty (says Augustine) is a sinner punished, August.
that when he dies, he forgetteh himself, who in his life time thought not
upon God. If a thief be brought from the prison, either to the Bar to be
arraigned before the Judge, or to the place of execution, he will bewail his
misdemeanour past, and promise reformation of life, if so be he might be
delivered. In this case, we are as fellons: for we are every day going to the
bar of Gods Iudgement-seate there is no stay or standing in the way: Even as
the ship in the sea continues in her course day and night, whether the Mariners
be sleeping or waking: therefore let us prepare our selves betimes, that in
death we may make a happy end.

Prou. 7.22.
and never epsy their dangerous estate before it be too late: And most men are
ready to take their farewell of the world, before they think of their
condition in the world; and then they would begin to direct their course
aright, when the time requires them to make an end. But one says otherwise of
himself, (drawing toward the period of his life) When I was a young man, my
care was how to live well; Seneca Ep. 32.
since age came on, my care has been how to dye well. August.
In this life (said Augustine) nothing is so sweet unto me, as to prepare for
my peaceable passage from this pilgrimage of sin, to life and happiness.
Alas we encumber our selves with many things (as Martha did) not regarding (as
we should) that only needful thing, Luke 10.41.
to serve our God in life and death. The tempest before expected does less
amaze us when the storm shall arise: He that leaves the world before the
world leaves him, and thinks of his death (as the sick man harkneth to the
clock) shall say with Simeon; Luke 2.29.
Now let thy servant depart in peace.

That which foolish men would gladly do in the end, Noah, Genesis 6.22. and 41.48.
to build an Arc while the season is fair and calm; with provident Joseph,
to lay up store of provision in the days of plenty, before the time of dearth
and penury come to pinch us; while the weather is fair to think of a strome,
and when opportunity is offered to follow our thriuing husbandry; still sowing
the seed of godly actions, in the field of a repentant heart, that so (in the
Autumn and end of our age) we may reap the fruit of everlasting comfort, for
our happy harvest and provision to come. It falls out to vain men, many
times in their death, (as to Pages and Seruitors in the Court) who being
allowed a candle to light themselves to bed, do spend it in playing and
ungodly sports, and are afterward constrained to go to bed darklings: So
wicked men do waste the light of life by sin and vanity, and at last are
void of comfort and knowledge at the hour of death. Therefore as our whole
life is a passage to death, so should we make it a preparing for death; that
how soon soever the body returns to the earth, the soul may be as sure to
go to heaven. Let us do that before death, which may do us good after death,
and then sooner or later death shall not hurt us, which is only evil to the
evil, and good to the good. If God offer grace to day, thou know not
whether he will offer the same to morrow, and therefore now use it, if thou will be sure to use it at all. The light will shine, when we shall not see the
closing in of the day; the evening will come, when we shall not see again the
breaking forth of the morning light.

It behooves every one not so much (with Ezekiah) to set Esaias 38.1.
as to set his soul in order, his conversation in order, for that after death
there is somewhat more behind, Heb. 9.27. 2 Kings 5.26.
and that is called a time of judgment. Elisha could say to his servant, Is
this a time to take rewards? and amidst the pangs of death, is that a time to
think of amendment of life? Saint Peter says, Be sober and watch, for your
adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, etc. As if he should
say; Watch, for you have a watchful adversary; if ye respect his old
experience, he was in Paradise; if his nature, a Lion; if his cruelty, a
roaring Lion; if his diligence, he seeks; if his intent, that is, to
devour: we had need then to watch having so watchful an enemy. Mark 13.33.
Luke 21.42.
Watch (says Christ) because ye know not the hour when the Son of man will
come: As if he had said; Because ye know not the hour, watch every hour;
because ye know not the month, watch every month, because ye know not the
year, watch every year. Why do we not then keep a continual watch over
our souls, since we know not at what hour Death will assail us?

T^sh, Genesis 3.4.
you shall not dye at all: As if he would have us to think the remembrance of
death but a melancholy conceit; and lest it should make too deep an
impression of the fear of God in man's heart, he will have the forbidden tree
to delight the eye, fair words to please the ear, and drive all away. Why?
You shall be as Gods: when his drift is to make them all as Devils. What a
dangerous Lethargy of the soul is this, when so many spectacles of man's
mortality, before our eyes, can nothing move us? or at least our moving (with
Agrappa) is not much, Acts 26.28.
but somewhat, which by and by is all forgot and gone; and so we think of our
end, by some running fits, and have done. We will and we will not, and so
(with the Sluggard) nothing is done. Some count it death to meditate of death,
they like the remembrance of it, as Ahab the presence of Eliah, 1 Kings 18.17.
to be troublesome to them.

Let fools (as they do) make but a sport of sin, and Prou. 10.23.
What have we to do with Death? They shall one day find that Death will have
to do with them, when he shall strip them into their winding sheet, bind
them hand and foot, and make their last bed to be the dark and slimy grave. 1
Kings 22.8.
Ahab could not abide to hear Micheas speak, for that he never prophesied
any good, but evil unto him; he would be wicked, and yet could not endure to
hear any other news then good: So wicked men cannot away to hear of death,
because they live a sinful life. Numb. 23.10.
Balaam desires to dye the death of the righteous, but he will never undergo
to live the life of the righteous. As Pharaoh said to Moses; Exodus 12.31.
Depart from among my people: so say the ungodly to Death, Be banished from us;
thy presence, thy shadow, and the very remembrance of thee is fearful unto
us. To muse of their end is the least of most men's thoughts. To hear Saint
Paul speak of Gods terrible judgment to come, Acts 24.25.
is too trembling a doctrine for our delightful dispositions to hear: with
Foelix we are not at leisure, for this is iarring Music, which sounds not
aright in the Consort of our worldly pleasures. To think of Death is Acheldama
(says one) even a field of blood: but wastfully to spend the time in the
dangerous delights of sin, and so to be flattered with promise of peace and
pleasure, is a tuneable Dittie to most men's ears, until their souls so
sleep in sin, as Sisera slept, who never woke again. Judge. 4.21.
But if any Physician would take upon him to make men live ever in this world,
what a multitude of Patients should he have? and how well would they reward
him? Alas poor fools, they are earth, and will not know it. But will the
forgetfulness of death preserve them from dying?

But Plato said truly, that there was no more honorable of death (through
Gods blessing) serves as a sounding Bell to awake us from the sleep of our
sins, and as a spur to prick us on to virtue, as a bridle to restrain our
greedy desires, as an ointment for our eyes, to make us clearly see the
foulness of our sin, whereof the Devil is the father, Death his fruit, and
Hell his dwelling place. Remembrance of Death is as the match and tinder, that
nourishes and inlighteneth the fire of all holy devotion; the Bellows that
kindle all godly affections; it is (as it were) the Fan that seuereth from
our souls the dust and chafe of all vanity and sin; it serves as a Pilot
to govern the right course of our life, who stands ever behind in the ship*
to conduct it the better to the desired Port; it is better Music then that of
David's Harp to Saul, 1 Samuel 16.16.22.
against all the raging fits and furies of all infernal Spirits.

Seneca.
It may be thou shall live long; will thou live a long life and a wicked
together, and be in danger to end thy life by a miserable and wretched death?
As the Husbandman is careful to cast seed into the ground, whilst fair
weather lasts; and the Merchant to lay out his money, whilst the Mart and
good Market endures: so must Christians take the time and good opportunity
offered; John 9.4.
for the night will come, when no man can work. We must use Gods mercies to
our gain, and not to our damnation. 2 Kings 1.13.
When the third Captain over fifty, saw how his two fellow-Captaines were
devoured with fire, it went so near his heart, that he went up, and fell
down, and besought the man of God, that his life might be precious in his
sight: But how many thousands of our fellow soldiers have we heard and seen
to fall in this spiritual fight? How many of our dearest friends have taken
their leave, and yet none or very few, makes supplication (I say not to the
man of God) but to God himself, that our lives and deaths may be precious in
his sight? Oftentimes has God knocked at the door of our hearts, to put us in
mind of our mortality; for who has not had experience of his declining
nature? But yet for all this, what little humbling of our selves is there
before him, whose dominion reaches unto the ends of the earth, 1 Samuel 2.6.
who brings to the grave, and raises up again?

The perfection of knowledge is to know God and our Gal. 2.20.
Christ Jesus comes and lives in us; and by our dying in the world, Phil.
1.23.
we are sure to go to live with Christ. We dye not (says one) because we
are sick, but because we live; so when we recover our sickness, we escape
not from death, but from the disease. Let us therefore make that voluntary,
which is necessary (says S. Chrysostom) and yield it to God as a gift, which
we stand bound to pay as a debt. Chrisost. Hom. 10 in Mat.
We must not (says Ambrose) neither loath to live nor fear to dye, because
we have a good and gracious Lord. Ambrose.
No good thing can be well and perfectly done at the first; seeing therefore it
is so great a matter to dye, and so necessary to dye well, it is expedient that
in our life we learn to dye often, that we may at last dye well, at the very
time of death.

The Soldiers that be appointed to fight, do first practice themselves in the
field, to learn in time of peace what they must do in time of war. The
horse that must run at the Tilt, trauerseth all that ground before, and
tries all the steps thereof, that when he comes to make his course, he be
not found new and strange to do his feate. Wherefore since all must run this
race, and trauerse this course of death (which is so long and large, reaching
from earth to heaven) considering withal the danger, that whosoever fails in
the way, and goes not upright, shall tumble headlong into the pit of hell, it
requires our best diligence and endeavor to the utmost.To guide the ship along
the seas is a point of skill, but at the very entrance into the Haven it self,
then to avoid the dangerous rocks, and to cast our anchor skilfully in a safe
Road, is the chiefest cunning. To run the race in a good order, is the part
of a stout and valiant Champion, but so to run that we may obtain the
crown, is the very perfection of al his pains. What more Christian-like then
a good and holy life? but after this life finished, to dye in the Faith and
fear of God, what more divine? Wherefore there is nothing so glorious as to
order aright the vpshot of our time, and farewell from this world. To end well
this life, is only to end it willingly, following with full consent the will
and direction of God, and not suffering our selves to be drawn by mere
necessity. To end it willingly, is to hope for, and not to fear our death
appointed of God. To hope for it, we must certainly look after this life for
a better. To look for it, we must fear God, whom who so well fears, fears
(indeed) nothing else in this world, and hopes for all things in the world to
come.

Ph. Mor.
It is all one to him, at what gate, or at what time he passes out of this
miserable life: for his businesses then are for ever ended, his affairs all
dispatched, and by what way he shall go out, by the same he shall enter into
a most happy, and an everlasting life. The threatenings of Tyrants are to him
promises; the swords of his greatest enemies are drawn in his favor, for as
much as he knows that threatening him death, they threaten him life, and the
most mortal wounds can make him but immortal: for who fears God, fears not
death, and who fears it not, fears not the worst of this life.

Why do we daily pray, that Gods Kingdom may come, Mat. 6.10.
that the general restoration of all things may approach, Romans 8.23.
if our greater and more affectionate desires would rather serve here below,
the enemy of our souls, then to reign above with Jesus Christ? It belongs to
him that takes all his pleasure in the world, who is caught with the baits of
earthly delights, and the flatteries of the flesh, to desire to tarry long in
this world. But seeing it hates the Children of God, why love they such an
enemy? why followest thou not rather Jesus Christ thy Redeemer, who so ardently
loves thee? Let every day be to thee as the last day, since thou know not
whether thou shall live till to morrow or no. For still we carry death about
in our mortal bodies, and our life (in a continual motion) still hastneth to
an end. Psalm. 90.12.
And yet no man marketh how his time passes. S. Paul says Idye daily, 1 Cor.
15.31.
(for even in the midst of life we are in death,) and the whole time of our
life is but a running unto death. Therefore seeing Death watches for us on
every side, wisdom it is to watch for him, that he take us not tardy.

The remembrance of our end must be as a Key to open Paul did the Viper into
the fire) then the daily meditation of our end. Acts 28.5.
God leads Jeremy into a house of clay, Ier. 18.2.
before he instructs him in his message: to teach us, that we are best
lessoned, where our frail estate may be best considered. Did we but sometimes
behold that pale horse (whose name is Death) in our musing disposition, Revel.
6.8.
it would make us trample underfoot many alluring occasions of vanity and
sin, which we pursue fast. Die we must needs, because our bodies are full of
sin, and so die we must willingly, that we may be delivered from this body of
sin. Die we must because we are full of corruption, and must be changed; and
die we must willingly, as desirous to put on incorruption, 2 Cor. 5.
that so we may behold our God. Die we must needs, because we bear the image
of earthly men, and die we must willingly, that we may be like the new and
heavenly man, Christ Jesus. Die we must needs, because God has so ordained; 1
Cor. 15.
and let us die willingly, to show our obedience to his will. Christians must be
as Birds on a bough, to remove at Gods pleasure, and that without resistance,
when the

Upon this condition we entered this world, to go out of it again; and this is
the law of Nations, to restore and pay that which we have borrowed, and
retained for a time. Our life is a pilgrimage or journey; when here we have
traveled much and long, at length needs we must return to our home. Again,
it is absurd to fear that which we cannot shun; thou art neither the first,
nor the last, 2 Cor. 5.1.
thousands have gone before thee, and all that are to come shall follow thee.
We are but Tenants at will, in this cleyie farm; the foundation of this
building is weak in substance; always kept cold by an intercourse of air;
the pillar whereupon the whole frame and building does stand, is the passage of
a little breath, the strength of it some few bones tied together with dry
strings or sinews; and howsoever we repair and patch this simple cottage, it
will at last fall into our landlords hands, and we must surrender it when
Death (the Lords Bailiefe) shall say this or that man's time is come: Therefore
Christians must have these temporal things in use, but eternal things in
desire; It is written of those Philosophers called Brackmani, that they were so
much given to think upon their end, that they had their graves always open
before their gates, that both going out, and coming in, they might always be
mindful of their death and latter end.

I cannot sufficiently wonder at the folly of our nature, so abhorring the
mention of Death: yea, even the aged men, whose spring is past, whose summer is
spent, and are even arrived at the fall of the leaf; whose heads are dyed with
snowie winter colors, and whose ship begins to leake and grate upon the
gravel of their graves: yet how fearfully are they amazed, to hear the last
sound of Deaths trumpet! O foolish imbecilitie, so fearing to be luld a sleep
in Deaths slumbering fits, which is so ready to close up this mortal day, to
bring their souls to an everlasting morrow. Man's life (says one) is a small
thing, but the contempt of this wretched life is a great thing. And why should
Christians so love this sinful life, and loath their death, which is so
gainefull. First it kills our familiar enemy the flesh, which lusts against
the spirit, and makes us that we cannot please God. Now there is no enemy
like unto a domestical and homebred enemy, that lies in our bosom, that
rests and sleeps with us, and is always a companion to the soul, urging and
hailing it to sin; but Death opens the door of this filthy prison, Gal.
5.17.
and stinking dungeon, of this body of sin, in which we live as slaves. It
freeth us from this pannier and dungcart we carry about, full of all corruption
and vileness; for this corruptible body is heavy unto the soul, and this
earthly mansion keeps down the mind, oppressing it with cares. It puts
an end to this our painful pilgrimage, full of bitterness and grief. For
what is this life but a heavy mierie way, clagging and tyring our feet and
orher limbs?

Consider then how absurd it is, for poor drudges (so is death then such a
silly life. We think not so much how near Death we approach (all of us being
reserved to die) we complain not so much of the thing it self, Senec. de not.
quest.
as of the day of our death: But would we not think him a fool (who amongst
many other being condemned to die) would crave it as a great benefit, to be
executed the last? So foolish are many, esteeming it such a matter to have
their death deferred, and a little to prolong their days. Malefactors hate
nothing more then the gives and fetters, bars and bolts of the prison doors,
wherewith they have been loaded, and wherewith they have been enclosed; and
we foolish men fear nothing more then the opening of this prison door, for
our egresse and delivery; we cannot abide it, we cannot endure to have the
locks and shuts (of this layle of our flesh) to be broken and battered, for our
everlasting manumission from this servitude and slavery of sin.

Romans 14.10.
And what great madness is it, for men (going actually to be judged) thus in
the way to provoke their Judge to anger, by continual sin? Let us better
open our eyes, and consider the way we take: let us forecast with our selves,
to what place we are going, and be ashamed of our evils, or at the least to
advise with our selves, how evil this that we do, agrees with that
business we have in hand. What a wonder is this, that every day we dye, and
yet persuade our selves to live for ever? we are like the Megarenses (of whom
the Philosopher speaks) in making proud and sumptuous buildings, as though
they should always live, yet living as though they had but mortal souls.

our selves to die? even from hence, that we presume our life shall last so
long: This false imagination persuades us that we have time enough for all
things; for the world, for our pleasures, for vanity, for vices, for frivolous
and curious exercises, and that yet for all this, we shall have sufficient time
to provide our selves to die; in so much as we dare dispose of our life (as we
will of a web of cloth (for our family) lying on a table) appointing one piece
for this purpose, and another for that: so we make account of our lives, as
though we had the signory and government of times in our own hands to order,
and our life at our own will and pleasure to dispose of. This fond conceit
grows and is grounded upon self-love, which always hates and abhors
Death, to avoid the pain and grief which otherwise it would conceive. Such a
one is easily induced to believe that another shall die, for as he is not
greatly in love with others, so is not the knowledge and belief of that truth
so sour and unpleasant unto him, but as he loves himself exceedingly, so is
he very loath to believe any thing that should increase his pain and grief.
Yet see how such a one is deceived, he first of all begins to lead the dance
of death, and others (so censured) long after do follow him. So that it fares
with these men, as with young seamen, and fresh-water-souldiers, who when they
come forth of the havens mouth, it seems unto them that the land and houses
depart away, when they themselves indeed do move and pass away, the land and
houses standing still.

Of what impatiencie is it, not to endure that evil other) be privileged from
dying? Remember therefore thy folly and pride, and rather encourage thy self
to die, having so many fellows and partners in this case: For indeed we have
no more cause to grieve that we shall die, then we have to be vexed that we
were borne, or that we were created mortal men, and not Angels immortal.
Senec. Ep. 36.
Death brings an equal law, and an inevitable necessity over all. Now who
can complain for being of such a condition, from which no man is excepted? for
the chiefest point of equity is equality. Let us therefore pay our tribute
chearefully, since we cannot be released; and let us second and follow the
will of God without murmuring, from whom all things are justly derived; for
Destiny leads him by the hand that goes willingly, and drags him along that
goes by compulsion. Senec. Ep. 121.


CHAP. II. How dangerous a thing it is not to be prepared for Death, or to
defer the time thereof.
Having partly heard of the necessity of preparation, Saul's harness that will
buckle handsomely to our backs, or any other furniture devised by man, 1 Samuel
17.29.40.
but only the sling of faith, casting out the stone taken out of that river,
or rather that invincible rock Jesus Christ, that will utterly foil this huge
Goliath Death.

For Gods children having continual experience of his 1 Pet. 4.19.
in all their extremities) they doubt not ever to commit their bodies and
souls to this their faithful creator: They do not fear to be ruled by him
in life and death; no they will go to God through fire and water; no dangerous
paths will they eschew when he calls them; they care not to go through the vale
of death (leaning on his staff) nor to sail as it were through hell, that
they may come to heaven, to enjoy his blessed sight; Psalm. 23.4.
knowing that by the susteining of a temporal death, they are freed from
eternal torments and endless fire of hell. For although (at deaths first
entrance,) a huge flood of sins and a fountain of sorrows issued out, yet
now being altered by Christ, it kills sin in Gods Saints, and perfecteth
their estate. And so far off is it from the destruction of a Christian man,
that it brings him to perfection; for after the death of the body, follows the
freedom of the spirit, nay, it is the very furnace appointed of God, for the
purifying both of body and soul from the dross of all corruption and sin.

But as it avails nothing (as I said before) to go to Senec. Ep. 26.27.
there is but one chain only that keeps us bound, even the love of this
life, and this must not wholly be shaken off, but extenuated and lessened, that
when occasion serves nothing may hinder us. If every day of our life were as
long (as that long day of Joshua) when as the Sun stood still a whole day in
the midst of heaven, Iosu. 10.13.14.
it would avail us nothing: For as in the end the night came, which dissolved
that long day, so the night of death will at last assail us, and make the
days of our life vanish away, how long so ever they have been; for every
thing subject to corruption fades, and he that troubles himself therewith
shall pass away. Man is resembled to a piece of rotten wood which breaking in
pieces, Job 14.7.
is turned into powder.

1 Cor. 15.26.
then let us watch him as an enemy, prevent him as an enemy, that so we may
endure his hard assaults when time shall serve. Do that before death which may
do thee good when thou art dead; Aug. de cura pro mortuis.
for if we provide not before death, there is no provision after. It is far
better to enter while the gate is open, Mat. 25.11. Esa. 55.6.
then afterward to knock in vain when the gate is shut; to seek the Lord
while he may be found, then to be found of him unprovided, when we would not be
sought. The morning was fair when Lot went out of Sodom, Genesis 19.23.
and yet before night it was burnt to ashes: Nebuchadnezar never thought
himself so sure as when he boasted himself of Babel, Dan. 4.12.
and (yet while the word was in his mouth) God pulled him down upon his knees.
The rich man never thought himself so likely to live, as when he said to his
soul; Luke 12.20.
Eat, drink, and be merry: yet the self same night it was taken from him.
The ship would be mended in the haven, not in the tempestuous Sea; the breach
would be repaired in the time of peace, not in the skirmishes of war. In time
a care would be had of our estate for the time to come. The days of man are
short, and his time uncertain; that little moment we have to provide for a
state of all continuance, and to gain eternity in, is quickly run over
before we be aware.

Gods mercy (in giving us time and space) passes along Boast not thy self of
to morrow, Prou. 27.1.
for thou know not what a day may bring forth. Our continuance here is
certain in uncertainty: therefore (says one) Let our uncertain condition
work a certain carfulness of our estate to come. That which once, and never
but once is done, should be advisedly begun, carefully prosecuted, and most
seriously labored, with all industry, unto the end. We sleep with our cause,
August.
and we rise with our cause (says Augustine:) Do well, and have well; live
the life of the righteous, and dye the death of the righteous. To him that
passes through dark places, one light carried before him, will do him more
good then many brought after him. When sleep is gone from the sick man's eyes;
when rather extremity of grief, then true sorrow, does rake out a little
sick repentance from the most careless person; when rest is departed from
their tossed beds, then many can wish they had better served God: but these
things should be considered in time; and here is time, therefore take it before
thou endurest a dying life, and a living death full of endless woe.

O good life (says a holy Father) what a joy art thou dishonored: the one is
quit by a joyful Proclamation, the other found guilty at the bar of his own
conscience. What a dangerous course is it, never to awake Christ till the ship
leake, and be in danger of drowning? never to begin to live well, until we
be a dying? never to call to mind that time of all times, before we hear the
Trumpet sounding, the graves opening, the earth flaming, the heavens melting,
the Judgment hastening, and the Judge (with his Angels) coming to denounce
the last sentence and doom? Psalm. 50.22.
O consider this you that forget God, lest he take you away, and there be none
to deliver you. This present life is our market, to make provision for our
souls against the life to come; now is the time of running to get the prize;
now is the time to fight to win the field; now is the time of sowing, for the
plentiful crop of harvest coming on: If we omit this time, there is no more
crown, no more booty, no other Kingdom, no other prize, Prou. 20.4.
no more harvest to be looked for: for He that will not sow in winter, shall
beg in Summer.

Mat. 25.
but Nescio vos, I know you not: And when they are known, Ite maledicti, Go
you cursed into everlasting fire. God has given other things double unto us,
Chrisost. ad pop. Anti. Hom. 10.
that if the one be hurt, the other may stand us in stead, as eyes, ears,
hands, and feet double, but he has given us but one soul, which if we
destroy, what is there in the world, whereby we may hope for any life? The
Son of God gave himself a ransom for our souls, that they might not be
accounted vile, but precious in our sight.

All that which thou have means to do (says the Preacher) Eccles. 9.10.
whither thou go, there it neither work, nor discourse, nor knowledge, nor
wisdom. Many then think of death When they cannot live, they pardon their
enemies when they cannot revenge, they give away their goods, when they can no
longer keep them, they forgive their debtors when they have nothing to pay,
they leave their whores when they can no longer keep them, they detest wine
when they cannot drink, and defy the world when they can no longer inhabit
it; pride they loath when they are preparing of their winding-sheete, sick
they are, but their repentance is sicker, etc. Death is at our doors,
Judgment over our heads, Hell is at hand, all horrible, and yet without
horror. We laugh, we leap, we dance, we drink, we sing to the sound of the
Violl vain delights, Amos 6.5.6.
and we invent to our selves Instruments of Music, like David; as he to the
service and honor of his God, so we to please our unsanctified affections and
extrauagant lusts. O Lord, set thy fear before our face, and so settle it in
our hearts, that we may readily obey thy heavenly call, by flight from sin,
for fear of Judgment: Let us not be like to the unwise Leuite, Judge. 19.9.
who at the end of the day would go on his journey, by reason whereof he
incurred peril, and was the cause of his wives heavy end: Let us rather rise
early, and go on our way, whiles the light of life does shine, lest darkness
surprise us. Old sores are hardly cured, and hardly shall you bring old dogs to
lead. Job 20.11.
An old man's bones (says Zopher to Job) are filled with the sins of his
youth, and continue with him unto the grave.

CHAP. III. Of the hindrances of our Preparation to death in general, and how
carefully they must be avoided.


perish; his righteousness must be our roabe to hide our raggedness, his
merits the only means to cloth our nakedness; etc. Which things we cannot
possess without a true and lively Faith, which is the gift of God: and
therefore we must pray to have it wrought in our hearts by the holy Ghost, and
all good means. This then (as we have heard already) will get us the victory
over the Devil, and all assaults. It will oppose to this our deadly foe, life
for death, holiness for sin, obedience for the Law; yea, all Christ's
satisfactions, to make the whole sum. But of this point we have sufficiently
discoursed.

Then comes the World, and will set abroach his I desire to be dissolved, and
to be with Christ; in whom indeed are hid all the treasures of God; who also
is the keeper of our true life: Phil. 1.23. Col. 3.2.
for this our wretched life which now we lead, is no life indeed, but a very
death. For, we are dead, and our life is hid with God in Christ; we walk by
faith, and not by sight; yea, so long as we are at home in this body, we
wander and go astray from God our Lord. 2 Cor. 5.7.
And thou (O World) (which bewitchest so many to love this life) what should I
gain, if I should serve thee? I am sure to be a foe to Christ who loves thee
not, who prays not for thee, John 17.9.
whose Kingdom is not of thee: and therefore to love thee is to hate my God,
which to do, is worse then death. Thy reward (I know) is nothing but
nakedness, for naked I came unto thee, and naked I shall go from thee: Job
1.21.
therefore I am willing to forgo thee, and desire to be freed to dwell with
Christ.

Math. 10.37.
For he that loves father or Mother, Wife, or Children, etc. better then
Christ, is not worthy of his presence. And though my friends lament the loss
of my life, Psalm. 89.48.
yet can they not redeem it: for what man is he that lives and shall not see
death? and shall he deliver his soul from the hand of the grave? No, no,
neither riches nor strength, neither power nor policy can prevail in this
point. Death neither spares poverty, nor regards wealth, it esteems neither
manners, age, nor time, but walks in the gates of old men, and sets snares
continually for young men: no worldly practice can escape the bands of death.
It always pursues us, and wheresoever we go, it lays hands upon us: And
though men labor to live long, and desire that they might never come to the
term of their days; yet indeed it is no other thing to live, then to make
haste to death. Wherefore men do walk, whither they would not come, and
willingly run to the end of that course which evermore they have abhorred;
for death is the punishment of all men, the tribute of all men, the rule of all
men, and the receiver of all men: God has set us our bounds which we cannot
pass.

and some grow: so is the generation of flesh and blood, one comes to an end,
and another is borne. We came not altogether, neither must we go altogether:
therefore O Flesh be content, O my friends be quiet: needs we must depart,
though to meet again we are full sure: And in going from you my earthly
friends, I shall not yet be destitute of friends, but make a good exchange; for
I go to the Saints of heaven, to the living God, who is Judge of all; to Jesus
Christ my Redeemer, Heb. 12.22.23.
to the celestial Jerusalem, to my abiding City, to the company of Angels, to
the Congregation of the first borne, to the spirits of the righteous, and to
joys unspeakable beyond all man's conceit. Such be the comforts, the rewards,
heritages, and exceeding privileges that God has (before all worlds) prepared
and always had in store for his elect. And therefore still I desire to be
freed from the flesh, to live with Christ; We have here no continuing City,
Heb. 13.13.14.
we look for one of God: And I know that so long as I am in the flesh I
cannot please God, and that if once this earthly house of this tabernacle were
destroyed, I shall have a building given me of God, a house not made with
hands, 2 Cor. 5.1.
but everlasting with God in the heavens.

Not to live (said one) but to pass the life well, is life Heraclitus and
Democritus could better discern this point then many Christians, of whom it is
reported that the one past his life in laughing, and the other always in
weeping: seeing (as it seems) that all our life is nothing else but
ridiculous vanity and lamentable misery. Moreover, if this life be a vale of
tears, a prison of guilty persons, and a banishment of them that be condemned,
how can thou place such great pomp and pride, such gay ornaments, and
stately furniture of houses and families, in such a wretched place? how can
thou take here thy pastimes and pleasures? how can thou delight thy self in
feasting and banketting? how can thou desire so greedily to gather the
provision of this world, and be so forgetful for the life to come? As though
thou were only borne to live always here with brute beasts, and had no
portion with the Angels in heaven. Such wretchedness shows of what a
miserable stock thou come, if nothing can persuade thee to behold this thy
great and palpable blindness.

Indians, who (for glasses and trifles) are said to part from their purest
gold: but we never think of our own folly, who forgo the treasures of
heaven for very bables, and sell our birthright and blessing for Esaus broth.
Heb. 12.16.
Men look unto pleasures as they are coming to them, and not as they are
going from them, when they are wont to leave trouble and vexation behind: for
the sting of the Scorpion is in his tail. We sell our hearts to the world for
very chafe, and God offers us millions for them; nay (to have our custom) he
gives us an assay of merchandise, peace of conscience, and joy of the holy
Ghost. Who would not traffic with so good a Chapman? that means no other but
to do us good indeed, and will give us heaven, when we have given him our
hearts who is in heaven. As all the waters of the River run into the Sea, so
all worldly delights finish their course in the salt brine sea of sorrows. The
peaceable days of the wicked, their immunitie from the rod, their dancing to
the Instruments of Music, have their present period, and in a moment they go
down to hell. Job 21. and 12.13
Such lusty-guts (in the prime of their pride, and raging madness) are sure of
a Judgment. The gurmandizing Epicure holloweth not so loud (whilst he
walloweth in his sensual life, as the Swine in their styes) but he shall
howl as much when he is in hell. 1 Samuel 16.23.
It was but a dumpish delight that Saul tasted (in his mad melancholy mood) in
the sweet notes of David, sung upon the harp.

We must mistrust worldly benefits, and baits covering Iezabell suborned to kill
innocent Naboth: After the manner of Egyptian thieves, they embrace us, that
they may slay us: They are as goblets of gold, sugered with poison. This
deceiptful Dalilah of delights, speaks thee fair, but in the end she will
bereave thee of thy strength, of thy sight, yea, of thy self. These waspes
fly about thy ears, and make thee music, but evermore they sting ere they
part. Sorrow and repentance is the best end of pleasure, pain is yet worse,
but the worst of all is despair. How much better is it for thee to want a
little honey, then to be swollen up with a venomous sting? We must use them
without trust, and want them without grief, still thinking while we have them,
that we possess a benefit with a charge. If crosses once befall us, the
comfort of riches fly from us (like vermin from a house on fire) leaving us
to our ruin. But he that has placed his refuge above, is sure that the ground
of his comfort cannot be matched with any earthly sorrow; cannot be moved with
any worldly thought, but is infinitely above all hazards. Let the world toss
and tumble how it list (as ever it does) the rest of Gods children is pitched
aloft, above the sphere of changable mortality? O the broken reed of humane
confidence! who ever trusted in friends that ever could trust to himself? who
was ever more discontented then the wealthy? Friends may be false, wealth
cannot but be deceitful: trust thou therefore to that (which if thou would)
cannot fail thee.

The Elephant (being coursed) casts her precious tooth what can be hard? But
if we follow our own appetites, and delicate niceness (rejecting Gods
pleasure) what can be easy? Therefore not ours, but thy will be done. God has
a care over us, our life is in his hand, yet scarce the hundredth man has this
fastened in his heart; for every one searches a way and means to save his
life, as though there were no power, and care in God: And yet in his hands are
the issues of death: Death seems to consume all things, but God delivers
out of that devouring gulf, whom he pleases, therefore let us leave it at his
pleasure, either to deliver us from present danger, or to take us to a better
life.

A wise man, ought always to keep himself from sorrow

furthest from that we seek. The pomp of the world, is like a blazing Star,
that dreadeth the mind by presaging ruin; and the temptations to pleasure,
are like canded wormwood that coosen the taste, and kill the stomach. To be
unknown in the world, we need not care, so be it we be in credit with God,
for he that is great with God, shall have quietness in earth, and
blessedness in heaven. When it ceased to be with Sara (says one) after the
manner of the world, she conceived Isaac the Son of promise, Genesis 18.11 and
21.2.
her exceeding joy: so when our worldly desires once wither, heavenly will
ensue. Let us therefore care little for the world, that cares so little for
us. Let us cross sail, and turn another way unto our long home, and
looked-for abode: from a life subject unto death, to a deathlesse life, even as
near as we can with a still and peaceable passage.

Am I contemned of the world, it is enough for me that The lust of the flesh,
the lust of the eyes, and the pride of life, are the idols that the world do
make their Gods. 1 Ioh. 2.16.
But the minutes that hackney at the heels of time, run not so fast away as
does this world with his pleasures, and fleshly joys. Let us therefore always
detest the eye-pleasing baits of carnal desires, and wholly delight our selves
with heavenly joys. He which once have drunk of the floods of Paradise (one
drop whereof quenches the thirst sooner then the ocean Sea) shall quickly have
the desires of this world, and fleshly lusts, extinguished in him.

CHAP. IIII. Of the allurements of the world in particular, and the remedies
thereof.
2 Cor. 44. Ephesians. 2.2. and 6.12
wherein he rules (in the justice of God) over the children of disobedience,
blinding the eyes of Infidels, with a false glory and glistring shows thereof,
that they should not believe the truth of Gods word; for their further
assurance of that incomparable glory and blessed state to come; it is expedient
more fully to disclose this dangerous place, wherein Satan pitcheth his camp
against Gods elect. Number 20.17.18 Deuteronomy. 8.15. and 32.10. Exo. 14.15.16.
And so much the rather because it is the passage of their pilgrimage, which
possibly they cannot shun. Israel must needs go through Edom where cruel Esau
dwells; and pass along this dangerous wilderness, full of savage beasts, fiery
Serpents, Tigers, and Scorpions: Yet go he must, through the red sea of all
fearful hazards and temptations (that spiritual Tyrant Pharo following him
fast to the heels, with all possible violence) before they can arrive at the
heavenly haven and blessed land of rest.

a third sort (with an insatiable desire) do plunge their whole body into the
water; others trusting to swim, so wrestle with the violent streams, Mat. 6.11.
and finding it deep (being wearied) sink to the bottom, which is most swift
and raging. We daily pray that God would not lead us into temptation, yet still
we feed our covetous humor, which drowneth us therein. And the Devil does daily
pitch his nets to compass us therewith, to hale us into hell, and covetousness
causes us to stumble and tumble thereinto. It ingendereth such noisome lusts
that drown men in perdition. 1 Timothy 6.9.10
It is Satan's forge and stithie (says one) where he fashioneth and frames a
thousand chains of impieties, Diogines in Plut. Apoth.
to pull men into hell, and a thousand fiery darts to wound men's souls with
all sorts of vices, it is the metropolitan city of all corruption and sin.

All other vices (says Hierome) do with age wax old, Ber. in Cant. ser. 39.
still drinking, their thirst increasing: Bernard compares it to a Lady in a
Chariot, whose wheels are contempt of God, in humanity, forgetfulness of
death, and mistrust, whose horses are niggardliness and rauin, and whose
carter is desire to have. Chrysostom calls the covetous man, an enemy to
all men, Chrysostom. in Mat.
imagining all others to be cast out for a pray, for him to rob and spoil. He
puts all things to sail, he labors to have all, and has the use of
nothing: he fills his Cellers, Garners, and Coffers, Salust.
but (Lady covetousness) lays up the Keys, and locketh from him the use of
all; like Horses and Mules going laden with the gold and silver of others, eat
nothing but hay themselves: such a man's wealth is but as a fair Tapestrie,
that covers foul and broken walls: The higher such a man clymeth (says
Ambrose) and the higher he goes the greater is his fall: August.
Before he gains he has lost himself (says Augustine.) Such beasts are
these misers that they know not this life, yet can they not deny but they must
die. What pleasure therefore can they take in cutting the wood, and making the
faggots, wherewith in hell (without repentance) they shall be burnt for ever.
The customers of this world (says one) who have got their wealth with fraud
and deceit: they sleep like the Nightingale with a prick against their
breast; so do such slumber with a pricking conscience, and live in horror of
Death.

Exodus 16.3.
what would we do if all our life were sweet? what would we do if it were
wholly to our taste and tallage? who would then contemn it for Gods cause? who
would exchange it for heaven it self? When Jacob was hasting into his own
country, Laban (in his great have pursuing him) said, why did thou not tell
me of thy departing, Genesis 31.27.
that I might have let thee go with mirth and melody? when his meaning was to
have kept him still in drudgerie. But as Jacob did well (seeing Labans
countenance set against him;) so should Christians (finding the world to frown
upon them) be ready to pack from the world, Genesis 19.26.
it being no fit place for them to tarry in. Lots wife (setting her mind upon
her substance in Sodom and other pleasures there) she looked backward, but
never looked forward again: She is turned into a Pillar of Salt: a Pillar, and
so stands for an example; of Salt, and so should season our unsavory desires
of this world and worldly things.

Small cause had the Isralites to care to continue among Exodus 1.11.14.
no more have Christians to dwell in this world, as in a wilderness, among many
wolfes. Surely this barren light land wherein we live (after all our drugery
and excessive pains) yields nothing else but a crop of cares, troubles,
fears, and vexations of mind. How acceptable therefore may death be, when in
dying we sleep, and in sleeping we rest from all the travels of this toylesome
life? Love the world says one, and it will devour thee, for it knows better
how to swallow up her lovers, then to support them. There is no trusting to
this worlds security, for in one moment the sea ouerwhelmes the same nauies
which a little before played and sported upon it. Now, that this world is a
sea, the small number of safe passingers, and the great company of such as
perish therein does prove.

Here we are placed (as it were) between heaven and hell, Facilis discensus
Auerni, etc. d. 6
Learn not to love the world, that thou may learn to embrace thy God,
turn away from it, that thou may turn to him. Power out the dreggs, that
thou may be filled with pure wine, thou art to be filled with good, power out
the evil, do thou think that God will fill thee with honey, if thou be
full of gall? Our love must be as a just balance, affording every man his
own; but the weights of worldly lusts are unequal, valewing earthly things to
be most precious, Phil. 3.8. Luke 16.15. Ose 1.12.
whereas with the christian, they should be esteemed as dung. These make that to
be of weight and great with man, which is most vile and abominable in Gods
account. Such are the deceitful scoales of cursed Canaan: Leuit. 25.15.
Amongst the Jews for that their contracts and bargains had by a prescript
law, a day of determining and of being void, therefore, the shorter the time
was, the less and slight was the price and valuation of the thing. And
therefore how much more vile and of less account should all these momentanie
and earthly things be reputed, subject to such loss, which though they were
not, yet Death it self dispatcheth us of all?

Pindarus.
as the subject and foundation) can no longer endure then the substance it
self. Now if the life be no more but a dream of a shadow, what must we think
of the glory of this world, which is shorter of continuance then man's life?
What account would one make of a stately building, if in case it should stand
upon a false foundation? What reckoning would one make of an image of wax very
curiously wrought, in case it should be set against the Sun, where (presently
being molten) it should loose both form and fashion? Why do we make so little
account of the beauty of a flower, but because it begins to fade so soon
as it flourishes; for being nipt from the stalk, it presently loses the
pleasant gloss and hew. And albeit glory do continue after the end of our
life, yet what shall it avail thee man, that has no sense? What profits it
Homer, that now thou praise his Iliads? Ierom.
even as Jerome speaks of Aristotle, that he was praised in the world where
he was not, and condemned in hell where he was indeed. Therefore well said
Euripides, Euripides.
that men fall into a frenzy to use pride after Death.

Ambrose) showed the glory of the world in the twinkling of an eye, which
likewise shall vanish in a moment; like Nabuchadnezzers Image, Dan. 2.33.34.
that had ahead of gold, breasts and arms of silver, etc. and yet one dash
(with a stone, out of the rock) brought all to ruin. All worldly glory is no
more sure and certain, then calmness in the Sea, which is still subject to a
storm. O world (says one) most unworthy to be affected! where are the riches
that poverty has not decayed? where is the beauty that age has not withered?
where is the strength that sickness has not weakened? where is the pomp
that time has not wasted? I say not of men, but of Cities and Empires
themselves? Those that so eagerly seek after the things of this world, and so
seldom and slightly after heaven and heavenly things, are not unfitly
resembled to children, that esteem more of Apples and Nuts then the assurance
of rents and revenues. And indeed most men (and those the wisest in the world)
do not so much as understand the Kingdom of heaven and the righteousness
thereof, so far are they from seeking it, rather then the riches of the
world. Such men (as they say) set the Cart before the Horse, first seeking
things for the body before they take any care for the soul. Luke 16.8.
These men yet are wiser in their generation, then the children of the
Kingdom, and have eyes as broad as the Moon in her full; but such advantage
has the Owl of a man, whose sight is better at midnight then man's. Such
Owle-faces are better sighted then the children of light. In wily craftiness
the rudest Rusticke easily circumuenteth the cunningst Christian: yet he is
but an Ass in the shape of a man, who has not learned Christ; Ier. 8.8.
and Jeremy wondreth how he should be a wise man that is not a godly man.
These do not so much as wet their lips at the wellspring of wisdom, and
having not so much as a smacke of Gods Word, how should they not but be fools?
Such are fools in grain, and a burden to the earth, setting up man's folly as
a monarchy in the world, displaying (as with a banner) their own worldly
fooleries.

Mat. 6.7.
Many that make this prayer to God, would be very loath he should take them at
their word, and daily give them bread but for a day at once: yet such men (in
using this prayer) do nothing else but scorn their provident God; but let
good Christians learn to cast their care on God, that they may the better
moderate their desires.

Learn not so much (says Plato) to increase thy possessions, as to diminish
thy lusts: for the highway to be rich, is to be poor in coveting: and he is
the richest that coueteth the least, and is content with a little. Now the way
to cure this Fever (which causes such a thirst of the world and worldly
things) is not to give us drink, and fill of our desires, (which increases
the disease) but by diminishing the immoderate love and liking of the same. Now
one special means hereunto is to trust in God, since the root of this sin
is distrust in God. Before the creation of man, the world was made and
replenisht with all things requisite for his use, and before the soul the body
was created to receive it: Since then God provided for man before his creation,
and nourished the body in the womb before it was borne, and gives care to the
mother of sustayning and clothing it before the birth; shall we call into
question his fatherly care over us? Let not these things therefore hinder us in
the highway to heaven; but casting all our care upon God, let us be packing on
our journey. Let the messengers of death be welcome unto us, and Death himself
be embraced when God does send it: For though they deprive us of the world
(with his wealth and pleasures,) yet they put us in possession of heaven
itself, and happy treasures. And for these transitory things (which are but as
vapors and exhalations of the world,) A godly man (says Augustine) never so
fully enjoys his desire, as when he is willing nothing at all to desire
them. August.
Contentment (says one) consists not in much, yet he has much that has it;
and this is soon obtained of God in a low estate. Nature (we say) is content
with a little, and only contentation ministers rest and peace unto our
minds. The Sea of this world (says a holy Father) freezing unto us, it
hardens, Mat. 14 29.
that we may safely walk upon it, as Peter on the water.

CHAP. V. Of the great grief of forsaking our wealth and worldly estate, and
leaving of our manifold friends and acquaintance in the world: with the
remedies thereof.
Fearful is the consideration to flesh and blood Job began to feel and
confess in his trials with loud exclamation; Job 1.21.
Naked I came into the world, and naked shall I return. God indeed made all
these things for man; yea, the whole world it self, of which he took
possession; yet forgetting his homage to God, and chiefe-rent of obedience, he
forfaited all again into his hands, and from whence he came, thither sent he
him again, giving him just as much with him, as he brought at first; Dust
thou art, and to dust thou shall dissolve. Genesis 3.19.
And indeed this provision is sufficient enough for the place whither he
goes. For what great matters should we look for in the grave, where
rottenness is our father, and worms are our mother? Job 17.14.
When our breath once vanishes, and we shall be turned out of the house-roomes
of this world, repayring to our doomes-day house, where the worms (the dead
men's Lawyers) shall take their fees out of us their graue-clyents, and our
bodies with our bowels shall be their bread to satiate their hunger. Then happy
(I say) are those that by the wings of a lively faith, have their souls flying
up to the heavenly habitations.

Jacob to Laban; only by Gods providence, Gen 28.20.21.
we are that we are. If God will give us food to eat, and clothes to put
on, God shall be our God. These herds and droues about us, Genesis 33.11.
they are from the mercy of God; not plants growing in our own soil; not
vapors that did arise from us, but of the nature of influences from heaven are
come upon us. Every one sueth to God in forma pauperis: for things necessary
we are poor Publicanes, (receivers only) God is the giver of all. We cannot
call any thing ours but Time; While we have time let us do good. Nay, this
time it self is not in our hands, but in the Lords. All these temporal things
come from the great storehouse of heaven. We may not say (as the Tempter did)
All these are mine: Mat. 4. and Luke 4.6.
no, all is Gods, who is the best Landlord. He requires no more but our
acknowledgement of his blessings, with thankfulness in our obedience. We may
have them, we must not be had of them: we have had them to live, the end
ceasing, the means also cease concurring to the end. We must not make Idols
of them, Exodus 32.14.
as the Egyptians did of their treasure.

Mat. 6.21.
but where our heavenly treasure is placed? Christ, who is our treasure is in
heaven, whither first our affections must ascend, and then we follow after.
Prou. 27.34.
Riches (says the Wiseman) help not in the time of need, they take them to
their wings and fly away: they are but straw and stabble, no sure foundation
to build on. For all worldly goods are ebbing and flowing (like the Sea,) and
we do not possess them (as we ought) unless at all times we be ready and
willing (when God sees it good) to forgo and leave them. Let us consider that
when we dye, we depart from the world, and therefore worldly affections should
now depart from us. Let us betake our selves wholly to a better habitation,
better societies, to better joys, and so desire chearefully to be dissolved
and to be with Christ. God many times punishes our ouerlouing of earthly
things with their loss, or great hinderance; because he thinks them unworthy
riuals to himself, who challenges all height of love, as his only right. So
that the way to loose them, is to love them much; and the largeness of
affection makes an open way to dissipation. The fayrer and higher in the world
our estate shall be, the fayrer mark has mischief given unto it, and (which
is worse) that which makes us so easy to hit, makes our wound more deep and
grievous.

Neither must we think that we hold any thing of to our everlasting
inheritance. Let us learn then not to reckon with our host; and that we hold
our lives, and all we have, not in Fee-simple, but as Tenants at will, that so
from day to day, we may resign to God the sovereignty of reuoking us, at his
pleasure. Thus when we see our selves shut up, and find that we be
entertained in this life (as Iourney-men for the present day) not knowing what
will become of us to morrow; we shall better desire to take our rest in the
bosom of Gods providence, and to strike our sails the lower, when the Lord
proclaymeth war with our secure estate, and learn to cut our prosperity by
the pattern of humility; that when we are well, to look for worse; that so
in abounding we may see our wants, in health our sickness, and still to stand
in doubt, that these outward things may be holden with one hand, and lost with
another.

Job of all manner of things save only of his life, Job 2.4.
and it seemed to him that all the rest were of small account in comparison of
the loss thereof. So that the thing that naturally is loved, is let go and
lost with greatest grief of heart. Earthly things in themselves (without Gods
blessing in the use) are like alluring strumpets, catching many (in their
snares of beauty) to lust after them, yet depriving such as enjoy them of all
virtue and happiness. They are like unto sweet wines of artificial Nectar,
alluring a man to excessive drinking, yet withal taking man from himself, in
making him senseless. They trouble the mind, and replenish the heart with
passions. When wicked men will use their riches, they pollute themselves with
pleasures and pride: when they keep them, Socrates.
care consumes them, and eats out their hearts: when they labor to get
them, they grow more wretched and miserable. They are like to wild beasts,
which a man can hardly take, and when he has taken them, must take great heed
they do no hurt. Vain confidence in wealth, Chrisost.
becomes not only a poison to Humility, Modesty and Faith, but quite and
clean transformes them into Pride, Arrogancy and Infidelity. Such goods are
as plenty of Sugar and fruit (in the liberty of children,) as pleasant wine to
a drunkard, and as a sword in a mad naked man's hand, more ready to hurt them
then to do them good. All immoderations are enemies to health (so said
skillful Hipocrates.) He that desires, wants as much as he that has nothing.
The drunken man is as thirsty as the sweating traveler. It is true of riches
and all outward blessings that we say of Fire and Water, They are good
servants, but ill masters: Make them therefore thy slaves, and they shall be
good in use; good to thy self, and good to others by thee; But if they be thy
masters, thou have condemned thy self to thy own Gally-slaues: Now if a
servant rule, he proves a Tyrant.

If thou seruest God for goods and greediness of worldly Judas did his
Master,) thou may soon prove a looser of a happy estate, and strangle thy
Soul. Wherefore let us use our riches as our raiment: such as are fit, are
better then those that are too long. For covetousness grows with riches, as
the Iuy with the Oak. Our hutches may be filled, but not our hearts: and
though we here loose all our goods, yet are we scarce deprived of a farthing:
And in another life we have not only Kingdoms and Empires, but God himself,
and everlasting goods, in comparison whereof all the pomp, mirth, cheer,
honor, dignities, and preferments of the world, are not to be esteemed as
casting Compters toward the finest Coin, and vilest dross to the purest
plates of gold and precious stone. We may lend our selves to the things of the
world, but not give our selves unto them. Neither is any thing possessed (as it
ought) except we be ready at all times to loose it. Seneca.
We must remember always that they are transitory things, which may be lost
and forgone when time requires. These earthly things are good, but woe be to
thee (if for the love of the creature) thou forsakest thy creator. If we love
not any thing that seems not good unto us, then let us be ashamed so to
stick to them, and not to the love of him that has made them good. O Lord
(says Augustine) he loves thee too little that loves any thing with thee,
Aug. in ser. quodam.
and loves it not for thee. God therefore is to be loved above all things, and
all things for him. He requires all thy love that made thee wholly: and marvel
not that he will have thy whole heart, being sufficient to fill thy heart. O
Lord thou have made all things to serve man, that man alone might serve thee;
and that man might be wholly thine, thou have made all the creatures his.

God has created all outward things for the body, and Aug. in Soliloq.
that man might only obey him, and only love him, enjoying God for his only
solace, and all inferior things for his service. That was never thoroughly good
that maybe lost. My true riches will not leese me, though I forgo all to my
skin. For if he be rich that has some thing, how rich is he that is the
maker and owner of all things, whom I enjoy? So long as God favors me, I
shall have liberty in prison, home in banishment, honor in contempt, in loss
wealth, health in infirmity, life in death, heaven in hell, and in all these
happiness and rest. If the fire commonly flame according to the quantity of
fuel heaped upon the same: great then is the fire of Gods love to the
faithful; who in stead of fire (to inflame it) has as many benefits for man,
as he has Creatures. All things love him, that loves God; Romans 8.28.
for to those that love God all things work for their good. Good men therefore
so use the world, and the things thereof, that they may enjoy God: Aug. de
ciuit. lib. 15.
And the wicked so use God, as that they may enjoy the world.

If we love God less then we ought, when we love many Luke 14.10.
such Christ pronounces not worthy of his glory. Therefore happy is he (O
Lord) which loves thee, and his friends in thee, and his enemies for thee; for
he can never be destitute of friends who inioyeth God, which is never lost, and
esteems all as friends. Gods children and chosen can never be poor, that are
joined to so rich and glorious a head, even Jesus Christ, the Lord Treasurer of
heaven; Col. 3.9.
in whom all the riches of Gods wisdom, mercy, goodness, etc. are hid, and
godhead it self does corporally dwell. But (alas) thou will say it is hard to
forgo our sweet children, and dear wives, our trusty and best beloved
friends, our pastures and tillage, our grounds and sumptuous buildings, our
mannor-houses, rents and revenues, our great treasures and Jewels, and other
worldly wealth: Phil. 3.8.
And what of all this to him to whom all things are counted loss, and esteemed
as dung, in regard of Christ? And have not the true soldiers of Christ learned
long ago to despise all these assaults; whose souls still watch in the ward
and tower of this body, expecting every moment to hear the sound of the
trumpet, to follow their Captain Christ? Therefore they use this body, 2 Cor.
5.1.
not as a home or strong hold, but as a Tabernacle and pitched tent, for a time
to serve their turn in this field of their warfare: They hoord not their
treasures here, but are content with their daily pay, always watching in the
camp, harnessed for the fight. The soldiers of the world lie sleeping and
snorting: Christ's soldiers are always watching and waiting for his coming.
If we love our friends too much, and not God above all things, then has our
sorrow no measure as it ought.

Jacob said (when he should die) I shall be gathered to my people; Genesis 49.29.
hereby declaring that death is a passage to many more folks, and greater
friends then we leave behind. There is God our Father, his Son our brother,
his heaven our inheritance, and all his Angels and Saints as our brethren,
sisters, and kinsfolks; with whom we shall enjoy eternal bliss. That man
never thoroughly knew what it was to be familiar with God, that complains of
the want of his home and friends, while God is with him. If the Son naturally
love his Father, Aug.
of whom he has his body; how much more should the children of God love him,
of whom they have both bodies and souls? Carnal Parents and friends are to be
loved, but the Creator to be preferred and double embraced. Love him therefore
most of all which thou can not loose; even thy Redeemer, who (to draw thee
unto his love, and to deliver thee from the love of the world) stretched out
his arms upon the cross, and suffered a most vile and cursed death, to
purchase for thee, not an earthly, but a heavenly and an everlasting life*

CHAP. VI. Now Death is and may be feared of the faithful, and how of wicked
Infidels. No man is to be censured simply for the manner or suddenness of
Death. We may not covet to know our death, or for any thing to shorten our life.
THere is no one greater hinderance (to the common to all men (without
exception of any,) in a measure and degree; for so long as we remain in this
body of sin, we cannot choose but fear death (the wages thereof, Romans 6.23.
) which follows and pursues the sinner to his grave, as the shadow does the
body till the Sun be set. And indeed it is both natural in all to desire
their being, and so to hate Death, depriving them thereof in this world: as
also lawful in Gods children for their true humiliation, before they be
exalted in the highest heavens. It may be feared, in regard it is the
destruction of nature in a man's own self and others; Luke 22.44.
and in this respect Christ feared it himself, without any sin: But we must
not fear it otherwise, then sickness, poverty, famine, with other calamities
of body and mind, which God will not have us to despise or lightly regard, but
to feel the pain thereof, because they are sent as punishments for sin; and
he does therefore lay pains and torments upon us, that they may be feared and
eschewed; and that by eschewing them, we may further learn to hate the causes
of them, which are our sins, and by our experience in feeling pain, to
acknowledge that God is a just Judge, and an enemy to sin.

And albeit (I grant) that the most faithful men have their fits of fear, yet
are they ever free from the bondage Bernard.
and anon vanquisheth and overcomes the same; it fears us with the
greatness of him whom we offend, and yet overcomes the same by leading us to
Christ, our atonement to God.

Ezechiah was an upright man, yet feared he the sentence of Death, his very
bones did shiuer and all his joints did quake, yea, his tongue did chatter like
a Swallow; Esa 38.3. etc. Luke 22.44.
and Christ himself had his agonies and wrestlings. The affections of nature
are not simply evil in themselves, but lawful and tolerable when they are
ordered by Gods spirit. But if we fear death, let us seek out the cause of
this fear: are our sins the cause? let us repent and amend: Is it the love
of this world? let us hate it: Is it for want of faith? let us pray, Lord help
our unbelief.

Father not my will, but thy will be done. Secondly, for as much (as by death)
all sin is abolished, and we for ever cease to offend our God any more: Our
bodies likewise are brought to a better condition then ever they were in our
lives; for by death they are made insensible, and so freed from all the
miseries of this life, ceasing to be the instruments of sin any more. Again,
it gives the soul passage to rest, life and heavenly glory, in which we shall
see our God as he is, perfectly know him, and praise his name, keeping an
eternal Saboath in the celestial places. And lastly, it executes Gods
judgment upon the wicked, and purges his Church from such filthy dung and
dross. Let Pagans therefore (says Cyprian) and Infidels fear Death, who
never feared God in their life; but let Christians go as travelers unto their
native home, and as children to their Father, willingly and gladly. Balaam
would feign have comforted himself with riches and honor (which he esteemed
so much,) yet was he not without fear, which at last brake out, Numb. 23.10.
and forced him to wish that his soul might die the death of the righteous,
and that his latter end might be like unto theirs: So (I believe) it is with
all wicked reprobates, they know it, and even (as Iosuah says) withal their
hearts, Iosu. 23.14.
and withal their souls they know it* that the righteous man's life is better
then theirs, and tremble and quake at the remembrance of their own death,
which is far worse then theirs, desiring to die the death of those, who in
their life and practice they utterly detest.

True it is, that wicked men (in appearance) die quietly Job 21.13.
having (as Job speaks) no bonds in their death: But judge such a one no more
by his death, then by his birth; for many women may have more easy travel of
a reprobate, then some of an elect child of God. Hypocrisy it may be, has
put the conscience to silence here, that they may more suddenly and fearfully
roar out in hell. It may be a crust is grown upon their hearts, that they rot
and fester within, and feel it not; whereas the elect have the wound of their
sin kept always open; neither can they fly the least breach of the Lords
displeasure, but are anguished; neither can they think that they ever fear
enough; which tender heart of a Christian, is like the Adamant, as it to draw
the iron, so this to draw the oil of grace into his soul, for his solace. If
a man die like a Lamb, and pass out of the world (like a bird in a shell) the
sottish sort, say that certainly he is saved; although neither holiness was
in his life, nor God in his mouth, grace in his heart, nor yet repentance,
faith, or feeling at his death. Such men says one (excepting their
feather-beds and pillowes) die liker beasts, then Christians: For they shall
never have their sins forgiven, which first or last do not undergo a holy
despair for them, acknowledging nothing to remain in themselves, but matter
of judgment and everlasting death, and comfort and eternal life, to flow
alone from Jesus Christ. For through him we see our sins purged, the devil
vanquished, death and condemnation abolished, our selves established and
infranchised into the liberty and freedom of the Saints in heaven. Are we
ready to go out of this world (as the Israelites out of Egypt? Exodus 9.12.22.
let us sprinckle our hearts with the blood of the Lamb, and the destroyer
shall not enter, nor have power to hurt us. Romans 8.32.
Let us call to mind Gods love, who spared not his Son, but gave him to
death for us, and how shall he not give us all things with him?

Psalm. 116.15:
yet still precious in Gods sight is the death of his Saints.

Elie was a Priest and a good man, yet brake he his neck 1 Samuel 4.^^.
Jonathan a godly man and a faithful friend to David; yet was he slain in
battle by the uncircumcised Philistimes. 1 Samuel 31.2.
The Prophet that came from Judah to Bethel (to speak against Jeroboam, and his
Alter) was a good man, yet killed by a Lion. 1 King. 13.24.
So was Josiah slain in the valley of Megiddoe. Jobs children (so well brought
up by their Godly Father) were slain by the ruin of a house, in a violent
wind? 2 Chro. 35.23
We must not therefore judge so much of men by their manner of death, as by
their life; for though sometimes a good death may follow an evil life, yet an
evil death can never follow a constant good life. Correct therefore thy evil
life, and fear not an evil death, for he cannot die ill that lives well. Aug.
de discip. Christiana.
So that sudden death is only evil to them which lead an evil life; it
finding them unprepared carries them suddenly to hell: But it cannot be evil
to them which live well, for finding them prepared, it freeth them from pain
which others endure, by long and lingering sickness, and brings them forthwith
to the place of happy rest. Some pray against sudden Death, which yet can
never come suddenly to Gods Saints, whose whole life is a continual
meditation of Death. We ought rather to pray to be delivered from a bad and
wicked life, which makes the death of the reprobate so sudden and fearful.
And with what reason can we name Death sudden, which every day manifests it
self to all our senses? For what else do we hear from the cradle, then
lamentations and mourning for the dead? What do we oftener see with our eyes,
then exequies and funerals of the departed; mourners weeds, and monuments of
men deceased? Now if we regard not the burials of others; Death comes home to
our own doors, and houses, to our friends and kinsfolks: Yea, how often are
we our selves remembered in our own persons, by the messengers of Death? Who
has not sometime or other bin in danger of the same, by sea or land, by storm
or tempest, by war or famine, by thieves or Pyrots, by sickness or some
disease or other? Wheresoever thou turnest thee, Death still pursues thee:
Every man's house is as his refuge, and Castle; yet how many are overwhelmed
with the ruins thereof? how many has the earth swallowed up, and the air
choked? Famaine and thirst (without continual relief) are as Deaths
Soldiers, still ready to strike us to the heart. What shall I say? Man can no
sooner be named, but his mortality is sounded out. Death therefore can be
sudden to none, but to wilful, ignorant, secure, and careless sots, who
(although they live a hundred years, and are daily warned thereof) will be
still unprepared.

Eccles. 9.12.
Some require a certain space and time in their sickness, for to repent and
amend. Some desire quickly to be rid out of pain, that they be not tormented
in themselves, or troublesome to their friends; but these be notes of our
infirmity and weakness. True faith makes a Christian careless of these
circumstances, and constantly to commit both kind, manner, space, and time of
sickness, and death it self, to the wise disposing of their almighty and
merciful maker. Neither may we be moved (as many unjustly are) for that the
time and hour of death is hidden from us, for herein God manifests his
goodness, to keep us from presumption to sin; and that we should not
defer our repentance to the latter end. By this means he cheereth us and
freeth from that grief and sorrow which we should too truly receive of our
death and grave. Thus he restrains the wicked, that they do less hurt to the
godly, and the godly themselves are feared from doing evil, as those that may
die to morrow, or (if God will) in a moment: and withal inforceth them to do
well, as those that should live for ever.

to Calculators, and birth-Wizards (no better then very Witches) to
Babilonicall, or rather Diabolical Southsayers, and Inchanters, to know their
end and age. But what madness is this, to desire to know our end, of such as are
ignorant of their own? Such are like to King Saul, 1 Samuel 28.8.9.
who sought to the Witch at Endor, 2 Kin. 1.2. etc.
and like to Ahazia that sent to Baalzebub: but what auayled this, but to
double their death, in hazarding the salvation both of body and soul?

And as we may not use any unlawful means for the preservation of life, or
be too curious in searching out then we go to it before our time. Life is
precious, and it is great impiety to bring it into peril. For a man to see
the greatness of his sins finally, and not the greatness of Gods grace (in
the remission thereof) is Caines disease, Genesis 4.13. Mat. 27.5. Genesis 9.5.
and a fruit of Judas kiss. Will God require blood at the hand of man and
beast, and shall he not require it at thine own hand? Thou may not kill
another, therefore not thy self. Aug. de ciuit. des, lib. 1. cap. 24.
Holy Job would rather endure in his flesh all extremities, then to procure his
delivery (by an untimely death) to be free from his miseries.

Cant. 3.4. and 2.9
but his Spouse at last shall see his cheerful face. I will not fear in the
evil day (says the Prophet:) Is not the evil day the day of our end? Aug. in
Psalm. 49 5. Aug. tract. 52. in Iohannem.
This evil day (by the hope of the resurrection) is made a good day. The
wickedness which our mortal enemy casts at our heels, is now removed by
him, Ioh. 21.18.19.
who has broken his head. Christ told Peter, that when he was old, they
should bind and lead him whither he would not: to show that he should suffer
of another, and not of himself. God gives to every one their hyre in their
due time and turn: But he who leaves his work (before God calls him) loses
his wages; and who importunes him before the time, is destitute of reward. We
must rest then in his will, who in the midst of our troubles will set us all at
rest in his due time.

pleasures, which shall never more perish. Again, to fly it is childish, and
in flying from it, we meet it: Much less ought we to seek it, (for that is
temer^tie) nor every one that would dye, can dye. It is enough that constantly
we wait for deaths coming, that she never find us unprovided. We must not
fall suddenly upon death, but march valiantly toward the same, by little and
little: Seneca Epist. 26.
we must not rashly or unadvisedly leave our life, like one that takes his
run to fetch the better rise.

CHAP. VII. Consolations against the agony of Death, and horror of the Grave,
and Corruption.
THE very remembrance of Death is bitter Luke 22.44.
before he got the victory. Although (I confess) the burden of our sins) and
Gods wrath, were importable to any but himself, yet was he fitted with grace
and power without measure; and for all that felt this horror: and therefore
the best and strongest regenerate men cannot go free, but are made conformable
to the sufferings of Christ in a measure: Besides, the corruption of sin
remaining in us, which finally must be purged by the bitter pill of death.

Ezechiah (after the sentence of death pronounced against him by the Prophet)
complayneth how his days were cut off, that he should go to the gates of the
grave, to the pit of corruption, where he could not see the Lord any more, in
the Land of the living: nor the inhabitants of the world, to confess and
praise God as the living do, Esa. 38.10. etc.
and hope for his truth. He cries out, that his habitation is removed like a
Shepherds Tent, and his life cut off as the weauers web; that God brake all
his bones like a Lion, and so made an end of him. This made him in his prayer
to chatter like a Swallow, and mourn like a Dove: He says, he was
oppressed, and walked to his grave in the bitterness of his soul, etc. What
should I speak of many other of the faithful? which cry out alive, as men
free among the dead, drawing near to the grave, and going down to the pit:
who are remembered no more, but cut off by Gods hand, lying in a place of
darkness, and in the deep, feeling Gods wrath lying upon them, being vexed
with all his waves and storms? How do they stretch out their hands with
lamentable complaints? saying, Shall thy loving kindness be declared in the
grave? Psalm. 88.4.5. etc.
or thy faithfulness in destruction? Shall thy wondrous works be known in
the dark? and thy righteousness in the land of oblivion? I omit to speak of
Job, of Jonah, and many of Gods children, who have rufully complained in this
case.

them to see ought, but what may torment them* Great (no doubt) are the
horrors of death, when the sick man shall see the world, his friends, and all
earthly things, forsaking him; but far greater is the horror of judgment,
to consider he is now going to answer for all that he has done in his body,
whether it be good or ill. If the countenance of an earthly Judge be fearful
to a guilty prisoner, how much more shall the beholding of an eternal Judge,
amaze all such, who find a thousand witnesses in themselves, to give in
evidence against them? But as he that is to pass over some great and deep
River, (upon a narrow plancke and strait passage) must not look downward, to
the stream of the water, but (for preventing of fear) must set his foot
sure, and cast his eyes to the bancke on the further side: So must he that
draws near to death (as it were) look over the waves thereof, and fix the
eye of Faith upon eternal life. If in the time of temptation we look to
sail a right course (neither sincking nor slipping into the gulf of
desperation, neither battering our Bark against the rock of presumption,) let
us in a contrite spirit cry to the Lord our God, and say, Heal my soul, Psalm.
147.3.
for I have sinned against thee: for thou healest those that are broken in
heart, and bindest up their soars. I see (and that with joy) how my flesh must
decay; for look what freshness soever was in it at the first, diminishes day
by day: And I need not go far to seek for death; for I feel not so small
an infirmity in my body, but the same is unto me a messenger of dissolution.
Yet for all this, I shall see my God, and when I am covered in the belly of the
grave, I am assured he will reach me his hand, to raise me up again to
immortality and life; so that this base cottage and shade of leaves being
brought to dust, shall yet in the end be conuayed unto my incorruptible house
in heaven.

That dissolution is well bestowed, that parts the soul death that determines
this false and dying life, and begins a true and happy life? Acts 7.56.
He that has Stephens eyes to look into heaven, cannot but have the tongue
of the Saints, Revel. 22.20.
to say; Come quickly Lord Jesus. Such a man (seeing the glory of the end)
cannot but contemn the hardness of the way: but who so wants these eyes,
though he say, and swears he fears not death, believe him not. But is thy
soul sorrowful unto death? Remember Christ's prayer in his Agony, Luke 22.42.
Father, not my will, but thine be fulfilled: Teaching us what to do in the
time of distress, what we should think, how we should speak, whom we
should invoke. In his temptation he withstood the Tempter, to show us how to
come out of temptation: Mat. 4 4.
In his Agony he prayed, to teach us how, and what to pray.

Job 1.15.16.17.18.
Great were Jobs crosses, which he endured; none of his Sons and Servants
were left, but only four messengers, to bring him tidings of sorrow; and
those not altogether, but one after another, to increase the same. Ierom. ad
Julian.
All Jobs comforts go away together, and Satan was persuaded that this train
of troubles would have blown up the strongest fort; but he is deceived, Job is
the same man still: For he that did truly serve God in time of prosperity,
did also bless him in his greatest adversity. Here was patience with
thankfulness well met together. Satan took away many things from him, but
God he could not take away, that gave him all; Job 13.15.
his resolution was too strong for that, Though he kill me, yet will I not be
kept from trusting in him. It is God that knows the perils of thy death, and
can only defend thee. Through his power shall thou get through, and drink the
bitter draught: Though we dye, yet lives God before us, with us, after us,
and is able to preserve us for ever.

Death (as one speaks) is even as a dark cave in the Ioh. 19.39.40.
and the darkness vanishes away: The sweet spices of Christ his burial,
expels the strong scent and ill savor of our rotten graves. He is our hope,
our safeguard, our triumph, our crown; we may be dead, Col. 3.3.4.
but our life is hid with God in Christ. Our true life then is not in this
world, but laid up with God in heaven, and shall in time (through Christ) be
gloriously revealed. And although after our departure from our soft lodgings
and beds of Down, our bodies must be placed for a time in dark dungeons and
loathsome graves, there to rot in the earth, and be consumed of worms; yet
Christians looking upon them (in this so vile estate as they appear) with the
Crystal eyes of Faith, and considering them aright, as now altered and
changed by Christ (who has vanquished Death and pursued her to her den) we
need not to bewail our evil exchange, or think our bargain hard; for that
our bodies hereafter shall become most beautiful and precious, and even
conformable to the glorious body of Christ himself. Phil. 3.24.
And albeit the gate of death be so narrow and hard a passage, yet our heavenly
Father shorteneth it; and though the pains thereof should pass all that we
have felt upon the earth, it endures not long, but makes quick dispatch; and
when the pain is greatest of all, then is it nearest an end, and God can then
more comfort us, then the most horriblest death, with the pangs thereof, are
able to disturb or torment us.

Such is the state of this world, that one evil cannot be as our life began
and continued in all sorts of grief and sorrow, so necessarily must it end in
like afflictions. We mark not (as one says) that it is the remainder of our
life, not of death, that tormenteth us: The end of our navigations that paineth
us, not the haven we are to enter, which is nothing else but a sure refuge,
against all storms. And thus we complain of death, Ph. Mor. de vita and
morte.
when we should indeed complain of life: as if one having been long sick,
(and now beginning to be well) should accuse his health of his former pain,
and not the relics of his disease. For what is it else to be dead, then to be
no more alive in the world? Now simply not to be in the world, is it any pain?
did we then feel any pain when we were not?

Seneca Epist. 24.
Such a death is never to be deplored, which is seconded with immortality and
everlasting life. Will thou fear that once which is always acted? Fear
thou to dye once, when thou dyest every day by little and little? Seneca Epist.
71.
Death, which we so fear and fly, takes not from us our life, but gives it
truce and intermission for a time. and Epistola 57.
Neither children nor madmen fear Death, and how absurd is it, that reason
and wisdom should not be as able to furnish us with security, as they are
fortified by their simplicity and fury?

then out of our bodies for a time; and so destroy them, to build them up
again, and make them fitter habitations for our souls, have we any cause to
mourn? Nay, rather if we look not so much on the present condition of our
bodies after death, as upon their glorious estate at the day of resurrection
(by the eye of faith) we have great cause to praise our God, for this our good
exchange. And why should the faithful be affraide of Death, by which they are
delivered from the slavery of sin? For when Death has made us all, even
level with the ground; the grave shall be to us as a fould, until our
Shepherd come; and to the wicked as a shambles, till the destroyer of their
souls shall have received an endless commission to torment them. What cause
have we then to shut our gates against the gasp of Death? Or like trembling
leaves, to entertain the gale and blast of sickness, which does but prune our
feathers, to fly both faster and swifter toward heaven itself. For if
neither the weight of our corruption (though it sorely press us) nor the
violence of affliction (though it soundly beat us) can separate us from the
love of God, nor the league with his creatures; Job 5.23.
Romans 8.
Into what fond vanities are we fallen, if we would still be hedged in and
enthralled in this vale of tears? and not desire to ascend on that ladder,
which Jacob knew to be the gate of heaven? Genesis 28.17.
the skirts whereof (but seen and felt of the Apostles) did so ravish all
their senses with delight, as that they only vaunted in the crosses of Christ,
Acts 4.24.
which was also their preservative against the fear of death, and their spur
and preparatiue to set the houses of their hearts in order, before they
descended to the grave?

We may learn by the very food that nourishes us as the teeth can make them;
and so from the mouth to the stomach, there to be boiled and dressed, before
they be fit for our nourishment. Is it then any marvel if Christians (who are
to be as Gods delicates and dainties) in the life to come, be now so defaced
and deformed in this world, (as in a Kitchen and Mill, to boil and grind
them,) should by death and the grave, be quite altered and changed for a time,
till they atchiue their happy perfection in the world to come? And as we look
for no nutriment of our meat, before it be digested: So must we not expect for
our happy state of heavenly bliss, before the corruption of the world and
flesh be first swallowed up of immortality. Raw flesh is not fit meat for the
stomach, nor unmortified men meet for God and heaven, till by death and grave
they be altered, and by Gods spirit renewed, as fit Citizens for his kingdom.
Let us therefore wait for sickness (as the forerunner of sleep,) and
welcome death (as the sickle of the Lords harvest,) beholding our grave as the
faithful treasury of our bodies, and look up to heaven as the undoubted
Paradise of our souls.

CHAP. VIII. In what things our Christian preparation to Death does chiefly
consist.
I will briefly pass by them, and come to the principal provision it self.

And as for the disposing and well ordering of our goods Eccles. 12.1.
Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth (says the wise man.) Much
more then ought we wholly to think on him in the time of sickness; when every
day is suspected to be the last day we have to live. Many are affraide to make
their Testaments betime (as things unfortunate, and presaging evil) but this
is their ignorance and infidelity: For the disposing of our worldly goods, and
exempting our selves from earthly cares, makes none die more quickly, but more
quietly. Esaias 38.1.
So had Ezechiah counsel from God to put his house in order; and Abraham
divided his goods to Isaac, and the rest of his Sons: Genesis 25.56.
So Isaac (dim sighted) yet in good and perfect health, took order for his
children before his death; So did Jacob for his Sons, after his Fathers
example: Which duty is very fit to be seasonably performed of every
Christian, and 27.
of any state or wealth, for the cutting off of contention between brethren
and kinsfolks. Besides that, and 29.
many diseases are so sharp and sudden, they give men small leisure to
dispose of themselves; much less so large a time, as to order their goods and
family. As he that dreamed of long life, had suddenly his answer; thou fool,
this night shall they take away thy soul: Luke 12.17. Luke 17.26.27 and
Suddenly came the flood upon the wicked world, being eating and drinking; and
suddenly was Sodom consumed with fire, amidst their fleshly pleasures:
Suddenly fell the Tower upon the eighteen men in Syloah, Luke 13 4. 2 Pet.
3.10.
not expected: and suddenly will Christ come in the clouds, as a thief in
the night: Apoc. 3.3.
But because all men (for the most part) are provident enough for these worldly
matters, and means of state, family, friends, Physic, etc. I come to more
necessary matters, concerning the soul against the time of need.

Noah's Arc to save us from drowning in the flood of our sins; and from the
devouring of the dangerous gulf of death, amidst the proud waves, and
bottomless sea of our innumerable transgressions; able to sink and swallow
us up with the wicked world: And hope in God, is as the immovable anchor,
fastened to the almighty power of God (as to the most strong and vntwineable
cable) ready prepared to keep us from Shipwreck of our souls, in all the
raging storms, fearful tempest, and rough passages of Death and Hell. For
albeit Death be a fray-bug to all faint-harted Soldiers, and faithless men
(not built upon Christ the corner stone, by a lively faith, and undoubted
hope,) threatening, and fearing them with the loss of life, worldly wealth, and
all things else: Yet the flock of Christ, do scorn and despise her; who
account all the world (with his wealth and pleasures) but dung and dross; yea,
all things loss to win the love of Christ. Phil. 3.8.
Their riches and treasures are placed on high, whither their affections and
delights were sent before; not basely groueling and crawling upon this filthy
earth below, but aspyring and climing to the heaven of heavens, whither long
before they were ascended and settled. All earthly things to them are but as
toys and trifles, their inheritance is in heaven, there is the true portion of
their cup, Mat. 6.20.
there be the Iemmes and Jewels that they affect, even such as are safe from
rust, and free from corruption; And thither they are assured (by death) to be
speedily conuayed.

needs must he fear to forsake it, when he hears and sees how roughly
death deals with other men round about. This makes Physic so seriously
sought for (though never so costly,) and Physicians more honored of many, then
the God of heaven himself: This causes so many salt brine tears to trickle
and distill from the eyes of worldly men, being in danger to die, which
(although they be reputed to come from a remorsed soul for sin) yet from
many (God knows) they proceed from this fountain; namely, that they are
flitting from this world, where (if they might live) they are sure of
something, unto another life, where they are uncertain of any good thing. Such
men are as a Ship without sail or anchor, tossed and tumbled with every storm
and tempest, and always in ieopardie of sincking or ship-wracke.

Therefore that we may be assured, that we truly have and enjoy these precious
jewels of a saving faith, and hope 1 Timothy 1.5.
Love out of a pure heart, and of a good conscience, and faith unfeigned, be
linkes of one chain, beams of one Sun, streams of one river, fruit of one
tree, twins of one womb, etc. To separate any of these is to make shipwreck of
the soul. A good conscience watches over the soul, Charity is careful to
keep Gods commandments; and a pure heart loves and imbraceth God above all;
and faith unfeigned is never ashamed of professing Christ, and his Gospel for

By faith conceived in the heart, professed with the mouth, and practiced with
the hand, the righteous man lives: For as it is certain, there is no
salvation without faith; So there is no faith without repentance; no repentance
without amendment of life, nor any amendment without forsaking of sin: whence
we may conclude, that no evil liver has any part in Christ's death, but the
marks of Gods vengeance abiding on him; and that he aduentureth his salvation
that deferreth his repentance. For what know thou, whither tomorrow shall
ever come? Dally not therefore thus with God, till the Devil take thee in the
lurch: For as Christ came to save us from the damnation of sin; so also to
free us from the dominion of sin; 1 Ioh. 3.8.
and as he was sent to destroy the Devil, so likewise to overthrow the works
of the Devil: And most absurd it is, for such as are the slaves of sin, to
vaunt themselves for the servants of God.

2 Cor. 12.9.
He that has a soul, must needs breath, and he that has Gods spirit, must
needs bring forth the fruits thereof. Faith (I confess) is ever alone in
justifying, but never alone in the person justified: even as the eye alone
sees, but the eye separate from the body does not see at all, but is a dead
eye: As Christ never raised up himself without his humanity, yet not his
humanity but his divinity raised him up. Though faith does work by love, yet
is it not enclosed in Faith (as Papists say) like a Diamond in a Ring: neither
yet is Faith as the shell, and Charity as the kernel; but faith must have
this place which apprehends Christ, who adorneth faith as the color
beautifieth the wall. Faith is a certain obscure knowledge, or rather
darkness in it self, which sees nothing, and yet Christ (apprehended by
faith) sits in this darkness (as God in mount Sinai) and in the temple:
Wherefore Christ apprehended, and dwelling in the heart, Exodus 19.9.
by Faith, is the true Christian righteousness, who gives us eternal life.
Christ is the Lord of our life, in him we are by faith, and he in us. This
Bridegroom must be alone with the Bride, in his secret chamber (all the
servants and family set apart;) but after (when the door is open) then let
them minister unto them, let Charity do her office, and all good works be
busy. When Faith is feeble, Love loses her feruor; but pray we the Lord to
increase our Faith, and Love forthwith will be on fire. By Faith indeed we
take hold of the righteousness of Christ; by which alone, we are reconciled
unto God: but of this we cannot take hold, except withal, we apprehend the
sanctification of Gods spirit; for he was given to us for righteousness,
wisdom, sanctification, and redemption. 1 Cor. 1.30.
Therefore Christ justifies none, whom he does not also sanctify. Wherefore
our endeavor and care must be (for the sure approving of our faith and hope,)
to have in readiness a pure heart, and undefiled conscience, which may be as
unreprovable witnesses before God and man, that we have had a sincere care to
please our God, not only in outward action, but inward affection, laboring to
the utmost of our knowledge and power, to put in practice all the holy duties
of our callings, toward God and man. Thus if our heart condemn us not, we are
sure to have peace with God, howsoever we are troubled in the world, 1 Ioh.
3.20.
or afflicted in the flesh.

Now to cleanse our conscience, and to have it single and sincere, is by the
bloodshedding of Christ, which Acts 15.9.
Which conscience thus cleared, shall now no more accuse, but excuse us before
our God. And albeit our former ignorance and infidelity, hardness of heart, and
security (with the innumerable evils both original and actual) have stained
and defiled the same heretofore: yet now our conscience (being bathed in the
blood of Christ, and rinsed from the guilt of sin and uncleanness) does
henceforward, behold Gods anger turned into favor, his justice into mercy,
etc. Which sight so purifieth a Christian soul, that neither death nor devil
can dant it.

But on the contrary, such as want this good testimony Esaias 57.20.21.
that casts up mire and dirt. A pure conscience (says one) is as the sweetest
sugar, to delay the bitterness of all afflictions; it is as marrow in the
bones, and good blood in the veins; as sound health to the body, fitting and
inabling it to sustain all blustering storms, and winter blasts: It is as a
watchtower, and Beacon on a hill, to give us warning and word of all danger
imminent to our life: As a Trumpet to awaken us from our sins: It is as the
match and tinder, to kindle the fire and zeal of all holy devotion; faith, and
obedience, still pricking us forward to all virtue and godliness, till we end
our days in peace. We may say of the conscience (as Zeno the Philosopher) of a
Wife, that she is a continual comfort, or a perpetual cross. A good
conscience is an invincible Tower, it may be besieged, but never battered and
raced to the ground: It will neither be borrowed, nor bought, nor sold; yet if
it should be set a sale, few would buy it. The bed of a good Conscience
flourishes always, as the green borders in a Garden.

If our hearts be settled in love and obedience to the O Lord take from me
(says one) (if thou will) my goods and riches, my pleasures, etc. yea my life
to, Anselm. in med.
so thou leave me my heart, which way never cease to love thee, trust in thee,
and call upon thy name. Thou can not be friends with thy self, till thou be
with God; for thy Conscience (like an honest servant) takes his masters part
against thee, when thou have sinned, and will not countenance thee till thou be
reconciled to God; neither dare it be kind to thee, and unfaithful to her
Maker. God does commit men to their Conscience (as unto a Tutor) which
vigilantly attends upon them: Isidor.
and a man may better fly from any thing then from his own heart: And
therefore this has always been the joy and rejoicing of the faithful, 1
These. 2.10.
to have the witness of a good conscience, that they have simply and honestly
walked with men in this world: This is their Crown and comfort, to think how
holily and unblameably they have behaved themselves; that they have fought a
good fight, and finished their course, and kept the faith; that they have kept
the profession of their hope without fainting, 2 Timothy 4.7.
still (with a good Conscience) making their request to God. This oil of
gladness has cheared their countenance, and this pure wine of a good
Conscience has gladed their heart; amidst all their grief it has sweetened
their sorrows, Romans 5.2.
having the love of God shed in their hearts through the holy Ghost: And
therefore our greatest care must be to have always a clear Conscience toward
God and man, Acts 24.16.
which will greatly cheer us against our death.

Heb. 12.14.
pursue after peace and holiness, without the which no man can see God. For as
he that has a hope to live again (when he is dead) must dye while he is
alive, to sin and wickedness: So he that will escape the second death, Reu.
20.6.
must be made pertaker of the first resurrection, to newness of life. And
those that are delivered from darkness, must be translated into the Kingdom
of Christ; and being dead in themselves, must live the life of Christ. Col.
1.13.
And this is the end, why they are freed from their deadly foes, to serve God
in holiness and righteousness all their days: Luke 2.
So shall they come to peace of Conscience, and joy in the holy Ghost.

The end of all things (says Saint Peter) is at hand, 1 Pet. 4.7.
therefore be sober and watch in prayer. Every one in his death shall find
this end of all things: when men are once dead and carried out of doors, all is
at an end with them, neither has their body any more then their length of
ground.

One being demanded when it was time to repent, answered, boast not of to
morrow, Prou. 27.1.
for thou know not what a day may bring forth. It is a folly to dissemble
our sores whilst they are cureable, and after make them known when there is no
remedy. Many pretend to amend all in time, and this time is so deferred from
day to day, until God (in whose hands only all times consist) does shut them
out of all time, and send them to pains eternal, without time, for that they
abuse the special benefit of time in this world. For custom grows to
another nature, and old diseases are hardly cured. Will thou go to heaven
living in sin as thou do? It is impossible. As soon thou may drive God
out of heaven (says one) as go thither thy self in this wicked kind of
life. What then, will thou forgo heaven, and yet escape hell? This is less
possible, whatsoever the Atheists of this world persuade thee. Will thou
defer the matter, and think of it hereafter? Thou shall never have more
ability to do it then now; and it may be never half so much again. If thou
refuse it now, thou may greatly fear to be refused thy self hereafter.
There is nothing then so good, as to take this good occasion while it is
offered.

Break from those tyrants (which detain thee in servitude) Hierom.
who stands (with open arms) ready to embrace thee; Luke 15.25.
make joyful all the Angels and Saints with thy conversion; strike once the
stroke with God again, and return to thy Father. Who would be so base minded
(with the Prodigal Son in this world) rather to eat husks with the Swine,
then to turn home with him again, to be so honorably received; have such
good cheer and banketting, and hear so great melody, joy, and triumph for his
return? He that will live without repentance, must look to dye without
repentance. The sparing of the Thief on the Cross at the last gasp, Luke
23.43.
was set out as a medicine against desperation, and not as a matter of
imitation. Chrisost.
God (says one) spared one, that no man might despair, and he spared but
one, that no man might presume. The Lord has promised pardon to him that
repents, but to live till to morrow he has not promised.

Bernard.
The world (says Bernard) had not perished with the Flood, if the floods of
tears for sin, had ever flowed from men's eyes.

August.
And because we cannot plead the plea of Innocence, Faith bids us boldly
plead the plea of Mercy, and tells us the Judge is reconciled. But this is no
Palsie-faith (as we have heard) but firm and constant unto the end, which
still concludes (through Christ) to the Conscience (that living and dying) we
are the Lords. Hope is the pillar, sustayning this building of our Faith, which
failing, our Faith falls into the gulf of Despair. Bern. in Cant.
And there is nothing makes more clear the mighty power of the Word, and of
Gods promise, then that it makes men so mighty that hope and trust in God: for
all things are possible to him that believes. Mark 9.2^.
When we seem (as it were) in the whirle-pit of Despair, and are carried by
a violent stream of trouble we know not whither, and are constrained to diue
and plunge down, the water of affliction running over our souls; yet the Lord
will recover us, and set our feet in a steady place. If we be cast down, so
that we can but scrawle up again; if we be so tired of Satan (by
temptations,) that yet we can but kick against him in affection; if we can
but open our lips, and accuse him of malice before the Lord; there is yet some
hope of comfort to be found. And in all our trials and temptations, we must
have recourse to faithful prayer, that so the burden thereof may either be
removed, or at the least eased, or we better strengthened and enabled to
sustain the same.

Hope to a Christian (in this life) is as a staff to a traveler Esaias 40.31.
and thence to fetch all fragrant smells, to season the bitterness of our
sorrows, whose nature is to glory in trials. Romans 5.3.
It ouer-floweth with dainties in the pining Desert of this world; Who is this
that ascends from the Desert, Cant. 8.5.
flowing with delights? It esteems not the loss of temporal goods; for it is
said of the Saints, Heb. 10.34.
that they had sustained (with joy) the spoiling of their goods. And, Psalm.
73.25.
whom have I in heaven but thee? and there is none in earth with thee. It
brings rest in labor, a shadow against the heat of tribulation, joy in
mourning; it shows us life in death, and heaven (as it were) in hell. He may
boldly give (says one) that has so good a pawn; and he may be sure of
heaven, that has the pledge of an assured Hope: But Despair is as a tree
pulled up by the roots; it is a bottomless gulf, out of which few or none
return, that fall into it.

CHAP. IX. The true knowledge and assured persuasion of the Resurrection of our
bodies, much furthereth our cheerful resolution to Death.
Paul) our Preaching is in vain, 1 Cor. 15.14.
our Faith in vain, Christ dyed in vain, all Religion in vain, the
persecutions and sufferings of Gods children in vain; nay, then let us
scoffingly conclude (with Epicures and Atheists, Verse 32.33.
) Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye. But such evil words
corrupt good manners. I will therefore endeavor (as much as in me lies) to
make it plain to all men's senses, that are not bruitishly senseless; or at the
least, to make it clear and out of question to the spiritual eye and
understanding of all believers (to whom only it is given of God) to be
persuaded of this truth.

Job, (who wishes his words to be written in a Book; yea, to be engraven with
an iron pen in Lead or Brass (but more deservedly in Gold;) I know (says
he) that my Redeemer lives, Job 19.23.24.25.26.27.
and though worms destroy my body, yet I shall see God in my flesh, whom I
myself shall see, and mine eyes shall behold, and none other for me. Esaias
26.19.
Thy dead men (says the Prophet Esaias) shall live (even with my body) shall
they rise: Awake and sing ye that dwell in the dust; the earth shall cast out
her dead. Many that sleep (says Daniel) in the dust of the earth shall awake,
Dan. 12.2.
some to everlasting life, and some to shame and perpetual contempt. The hour
shall come (says Christ) in which all that are in their graves shall hear his
voice. John 5.28.
The Trumpet shall blow (says Saint Paul) and the dead shall rise. 1 Cor.
15.52.
I saw the dead (says Saint John) both great and small stand before God.
Revel. 20.12.
Now the Scriptures are not of man, but of God, Tit. 1.2.
who is true, and cannot lie.

Besides, there be many reasons (derived from the word of God) to convince the
truth hereof. 1 Cor. 15.16.
If the dead be not who is the pledge and assurance that Christians shall rise
again, and the Head of his Body the Church, of which we are members. And as
the body cannot dye, nor the members of it (if the head do live:) no more can
we dye if Christ live: Col. 1.18.
Because I live (says he) you also shall live. Secondly, 1 Cor. 12.27.
because the Spirit of Christ dwells in our body (for our body is the temple
of the holy Ghost) therefore they shall rise again: John 14.19.
1 Cor. 6.19.
Romans 8.11.
For that same spirit which raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken
our mortal bodies, because it dwells in us. If Gods love be so great toward
our bodies, 2 Timothy 1.12.
to have his Spirit dwell in them, he will not suffer them to perish. Again,
because the faithful believe in God (who also loves them who love and serve
him, John 14.1.3.
) therefore he will raise up their bodies. For we that have given and
committed our selves unto God (as the Apostle speaks) cannot perish, 2 Timothy
1.12.
because he is able to keep that which is committed unto him; and will,
because he loves us, John 16.27.
believing in him. If the dead should not be raised to life, God should not be
just, (which cannot be: Genesis 18.25.
) For in this world it happens to him that serves God, Eccles. 9.2.
as to him that serves him not. Then also the body (wherein God was glorified,
as well as in the spirit) should have no reward. Then did Christ take our
nature upon him in vain, and in it ascended into heaven in vain: Luke 21.18.
for it had been sufficient only to take our spirit. If the body must perish,
then the whole man cannot be saved, which is contrary to the Scripture. Psalm.
8.6. and 89.47.
Then the most excellentest creature under the Sun (for whose sake all under
the Sun was created) should with all the creatures be made for naught, which
is absurd.

Revel. 20.13.
as it was to make the sea and earth, and all that is therein of nothing, and
that only with a word? It is a less matter (says one) to bring again unto
life that which is dead, then it was to give life unto it before it was made.
When thou wast not, thou wast made; and when thou shall not be, thou shall
again be made, and live. Here is nothing strange or unlikely. Consider how
thou earnest into this life before thou were borne, and thou need not doubt,
how to be restored to life after thou art dead. I omit here to speak of so
many apt similitudes and fit resemblances of the undoubted truth of this point,
which the best and greatest Divines have fetched and derived from our meats and
drinks, from trees and plants, from corn and grass, which in the winter seem
to have neither sap nor show of life, yet (when the winter is past, and the
springtime comes) do live again, and are most gloriously arrayed.

Mat. 13.32.
The Mustard-seede (says Christ) when it is sown, is the least of all seeds;
and when it is grown it is a tree, the greatest among all herbs. In one so
little a grain does consist the whole greatness of that tree, which afterward
comes forth. Now if that which we see to be true in the grass of the field,
in the corn that is swone, yea, in the seed of the trees, and wood which grow
(albeit they wither to naught, they rot and dye, yet live again,) why should
we not think it as true of men, that albeit they dye, and are turned to dust,
that yet they shall be raised to life again? For he that is Lord of the
spirit, and has life in himself, Ioh. 11.25. Eccles 8.8. Ioh* 5.2^. Luke 3.8.
and in his own power and will, can as certainly give life to the body (which
is utterly without life) as he is able to give life to a stone, and so to a
piece of earth, to ashes, or any other thing. And as it is no harm for the
seed to be harrowed and hidden in the ground, for that it shall spring and
flourish again, and bring forth fruit in due season: no more is it any hurt to
our bodies to be cast into our graves in weakness, for they shall rise again
in power; being sown natural bodies, they shall rise again spiritual, being
sown in dishonor, they shall rise again in glory; Thoufoole (says Saint
Paul) that which thou sowest is not quickened, except it first die. A little
corn, or wheat, 1 Cor. 15.43.44. and 46.
or other grain, cannot have virtue to become so fruitful, in bringing forth
thirty or forty times better then it was; being multiplied to so many (all as
good as it self) and bringing forth besides such fruitful increase of straw
and chafe, except it first be cast into the ground and die. And therefore how
should thou enjoy so good an exchange, except thou first corrupt and die?
And how much better art thou then a grain of corn? when through corruption
thou shall come to incorruption, thy glory then shall be unspeakable, and all
things shall serve thee.

Thy hope now, if thou could in large it a thousand Genesis 8.11. Numb. 17.8.
The keeping green of Noah's Oliue-tree under the flood; the budding again of
Arons rod; the deliverance of Jonah from the depth of the Sea; Ion. 1.10. Psalm.
90.3. Job 19.25. Ezech. 37.4.5.6. etc.
the voice that calls come again ye children of men; the hope that Job has
to see God with the selfsame eyes; the dry bones that should come bone to
bone, and be knit together with sinews, etc. may stir up in us a joyful
hope, and cheer our pensive souls, against the fear of death, and doubt of
our resurrection: but above all, the rising again of Christ: The voice of
Christ (is through Christ) the voice of Christians, (says Augustine,) Death
where is thy sting, Hell where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15 45.
If the sin of Adam (who was a living soul) was the cause that Death reigned
over all men; much more the resurrection of Christ (who is a quickening spirit)
shall be of power to raise up all believers, to the hope of a blessed and
eternal life.

Dan. 12.2.
he declared what we should hope for: For all the bones in Golgatha shall
rise, and those that sleep in the dust, shall awake. Wherefore though Death
do swallow us up (as the Whale did Jonah, Jonah. 1.17.
) and bind us hand and foot (as the Philistims did Sampson; Judge. 16.7.
) yea seal the Sepulcher upon us (as the Jews did upon our Lord Jesus: Mat.
27.60.65.66.
) yet we shall come forth, and break the bands, (as the bird out of the
snare,) the snare shall be broken, Ephesians. 4.8. Col. 2.15.
and we shall be delivered. Christ our head and Captain reigns now most
gloriously in heaven, and as a most victorious conqueror, has led away
captive, Death, Sin, and Devil, in show and open triumph. Wherefore we may
no less assure our selves, that we shall rise again and reign with God: for
seeing he has taken our flesh, and suffered for our sins, and has borne the
judgment and curse of God in himself, and died for our redemption; so may we
be as sure and certain our flesh shall rise again in him, and be exalted unto
the glory of God, above the highest heavens: 1 Cor. 15 20.
And therefore he is called the first fruits of them that sleep in him, Col.
1.18.
and the first borne among the dead; so called indeed, because he is the
first, and only one which is risen again, by his own divine nature, and
power: As the only spring and original fountain of the resurrection of life,
to all the faithful, which die and rise again in him, and only by him: He
has given us a pledge, and taken one of us, to put us out of doubt. He has
taken our flesh (which he has carried into heaven) to put us in possession;
and he has given us his holy spirit for an earnest, to seal his promises in
our hearts, witnessing to our spirit that we are the Sons of God, and
co-heires with Jesus Christ, Romans 8.16.17.
to reign with him in glory.

Seeing then that we are the children of God, and have 1 Ioh. 3.9. 2 Pet. 1.4.
to become true man,) to make us Gods, that is, divine and spiritual; 1 Cor.
15.36.42.43.44.
that even as the corn (that is sown in the ground) does die in the same, and
after grows and takes root, springs, eareth, and brings forth fruit for
the harvest: so should we be well assured that when we die, and have our
bodies sown (as it were) as seed in the earth, yet that they shall again be
quickened in Christ, and rise again to immortal life; for as much as we carry
with us, the warmenesse of Gods spirit, which cannot die.

And though our flesh do rot, yet shall the spirit of resurrection, and so
assuring our selves, that having sowed with tears, Psalm. 126.6.
we shall reap with joy.

CHAP. X. Very fruitful and necessary considerations, much auailing to our
Christian preparation for death.


Abraham) when the Lord shall call and command us, to leave our own country,
and remove our tents, to pitch them where he pleases: And so to follow him
with all obedience, where he will lead us. Heb. 11.8.9.10.
He abode (says the Apostle) in the land of promise (as in a strange country,
as one that dwelt in tents) for he looked for a city having a foundation,
whose builder and maker is God. And all the godly groan in these their earthly
tabernacles (being laden with corruption) that this mortality may be swallowed
up of life, 2 Cor. 5.2.
for they know that corrupt flesh and blood cannot enter into heaven. Gods
children (I say) are grieved, not because they bear about their bodies (for it
is a grief for them to lay them down,) but they sigh to be cleansed from their
sins, and corruption of their bodies, which make them so wretched. We ought
not therefore to long so much for this present life (which indeed is nothing
else but an image of death) but rather loath it, to be unloaded of our sins.

And as for Death, it appertains to all men (as we have Iosu. 23.14. Job
30.23.
or skill can avoid it: There is no salve to heal this soar, no Physic to
be found for this sickness, it is the way of all the world, and the house
appointed for all the living: It is an Axe that heweth down, not only the low
shrubs, and small Osiers, but the great Elmes and huge Oaks, yea, all the high
and tall Cedars of Libanon. The days of man are but as the wind, and weauers
shittle, as grass and flowers, which in the morning are fresh and green, but
anon (toward the evening) dried up and withered. We bring our years to an
end, as it were a tale that is told. Our life is like a stage, on which men
play their parts, and pass away: Man is like a thing of naught, his days are
like a shadow. God bids Esaias to cry, All flesh is grass, Esaias 40.6.
and that all the grace and goodlinesse thereof is but as a flower of the
field. O that the Lord would open all our eyes, that in this glass we might
behold our estate! What, are we all but grass? and shall we wither like hay?
Alas, we cannot so persuade our selves, for (if we could) it would pluck
down our pride, and lay our lofty looks: it would then reform our disguised
ruffes, and make our monstrous attire more modest: it would mitigate our
madness, and make us humble minded: we would then throw down our selves (with
Abraham) and say to God, we are but dust. Genesis 18.27.


And to the end that our resolution to death may be more cheerful, and this
rough way (as it seems to the with these meditations, let us say unto our
soul, why art thou so sad? Psalm. 42.11.
why art thou so unquieted within us? Put thy trust in God, which is the help
of our countenance, and our God? For why should a Christian man so fear the
violence of Death, whose force is broken? Can Death deprive him of Christ,
which is all his comfort, joy and life? No, but Death shall deliver him from
this mortal body, full of sin and corruption, which bears and beats
down the soul. Feign would the flesh make strange of that which the spirit
does embrace. Oh (says a holy Martyr) how loath is this loytering sluggard to
pass forth, and go forward in Gods path to heaven? Saunders, Acts and
Monuments.
So that were it not through the force of Faith, plucking it forward, by the
bridle of Gods sweet promises, and of Hope (the anchor of salvation) pricking
still behind, great adventure there were of fainting by the way.

not at thy condition, being ready to depart this world, seeing thy self taken
betimes out of those shipwracks, and warranted from the blows that threaten al
such as survive thee?

Wherefore (to the end that the former persuasions may

Alas this our wretched life is a vapor, a smoke, a shadow, a warfare, a
wilderness, and a vale of wretchedness, Daniels den is not so dreadful, as
this dungeon we dwell in. In this life, we are daily challenged of our deadly
enemies, the devil, the world, and the flesh. Our own sins are as swords, to
pierce our souls. Covetousness, uncleanness, anger, ambition, worldly
lusts, and fleshly thoughts do fight against us. Here we are urged to curse,
to swear, to lie, etc. Who therefore would care for such a service, after
which damnation (without repentance) shall be our due? It is truly said that
counterfeit sanctity, is compound iniquity; and that deceitful felicity is
double misery: For if this sinful life would simply show itself (without
dissembling) we would not so lightly loose our souls for the love thereof: But
see how it deceives us? being soul and filthy, it is sold for beautiful, and
fair; being short it seems very long; and continually changing, it
professes constancy.

Jerome) when thou was made an infant? can thou tell how thou came to be a
stripling? or how thou grewest to man's estate? or when thou beganst to be an
old man? That which we call life, is but a kind of death, because it makes us
to die; and that which we account death, is the very birth of our true life;
for that it makes us to live eternally. Evil men are sorry that this time of
our present life passes away so fast, but the godly desire to be where time
passes not all. And though we make never so much of our bodies (to keep them
in health and life) yet can we not long contain them from corruption, though
we feed them most finely, and cloth them most costly, and cherish them most
carefully; yet at the last they will become a thing of naught* their beauty
shall fade, and they shall be deformed, their strength taken away, their
agilitie lost, yea, all their parts shall perish, and fall away like dust: He
that knew them before, would never judge that dust and earth, to have been the
flesh, blood, and bones, of a living man. Every man's life, is like a rock in
the sea, beaten upon by the floods, on every side; and like a tree on a high
and open hill, blown upon by the winds from every quarter: and like unto a
But, or mark, unto which, sorrow shoots, misaduenture shoots, and at last
Death (that most sure Archer) shoots, and strikes it dead.

Thou that flowest with wealth, and gloriest in reputation, will thou know thy
weight? Psalm. 144.34. and 39.5.
thou art lighter then vanity, then nothing. Will thou know the length of thy
days? they are but a hand-breadth. Will thou know how and in what sort thou
fadest? Esa, 40.6.7.
as a slender picture or Image. And though one herb be sweeter then another,
of more virtue then another; and one flower of more indurance then another: yet
at last all herbs shall wither, and all flowers fade: So one man may be wiser
then another, and richer then another, and learneder then another, and more
honorable then another, and stronger then another, etc. but the state and
condition of all flesh is to be miserable and mortal. Mark how huge and
stately the vapors appear, Iam. 4.14.
(when they mount upward unto the heaven,) and yet how soon they vanish, in
the turning of a hand: Such is this life, though it deck it self with never
so glorious pomp, yet it falls away as a bubble. Our life is compared to a
top (which children whirle and drive to and fro with the scourge) it is
tossed up and down, forward and backward, Greg. Nazian.
and when it seems to stand constantly, it falls suddenly.

A stranger or a traveler, has little or no contentation, Basil in Psalm. 45
Greg. in Job, c. 28
All the joy (the godly have in this life) is as a sour grape gathered out of
time: And the Children of God here, not only in sorrow, but even in joy, shall
sometimes shed forth tears. Here the sweet Easter-Lambe must be eaten with
sour herbs. Exodus 12.8:
Ambrose.
The godly (says one) finding no joy in the earth, have their conversation in
heaven, and Satan finding no joy in hell, has his conversation in the earth:
So that the earth is a hell to us, but a heaven to him. One desired God to
spare him a little, that he might weep for his misery and grief, thinking
(as it seems) that a man could not have time enough in this life, (though
never so long) to lament and rue the miseries of this life, Bernard.
though never so short. This life (said Bernard) is a most dead and mortal
life; that by how much the more it increases, by so much the more it decays;
which the farther it proceeds, the nearer it approaches to death.

Jonah under the hatches, Jonah 5.6.
when others cry and are afraid of drowning, they lie snorting and sleeping in
the sea of their sins. Here we are continually subject to fear, anguish, and
sorrow, and death it self, lies ever in Ambush for us; but when we are in
heaven it shall have no place.

entrance to felicity, the end of all misery, and the beginning of all
blessedness? It is the very bed of Down (says one, and therefore well
compared to a sleep) for the doleful bodies of Gods servants to rest on, out
of the which they shall arise, and awake most fresh and lusty, to everlasting
life. It is a passage to the Father, a chariot to heaven, the Lords messenger,
a leader unto Christ, a going to our home, a deliverance from bondage and
prison, a dimission from war, a security from all sorrows, and a
manumission from all miseries. It is the fulfilling of our pilgrimage, the
laying down of our burden (being laden) the lighting from a wild and furious
horse; a dispossessing of our selves from an old ruinous house, it is the
escaping of all dangers, the wasting and diruption of all evils, the payment of
our natural debt, the end of our race and journey, and our entrance into glory.

Wherefore though Death in it self, be as a fiery Dragon, in captivity and
bands) and when by death it begins to be shaken, and cannot choose but fall,
shall we be sorry? For then indeed approaches our deliverance and freedom
from all sin and misery, and presently we are brought to the joyful
fruition of God himself, and all happiness. Eccles. 7.2.
So that this day of death is better then the day of birth: yea, this day
(which thou fear to be thy last) shall be thy nativity to everlasting life.

And indeed we cannot make the world to dye in us,

The way of this life is strait and narrow, full of thorns Canaan is
cumbersome, over hills and mountains, and lies through the wilderness, where
we shall find many wants: yet may we not be discouraged, but the rather be
assured we are going to the promised Land. We must all arrive at the port of
death, and land at his stayres, when we pass from this life to our graves,
where the body abides the time of the restoration of all things; that (with
all the coheyres of Christ) we may enter into the Land of promise. And who
being a traveler in foreign parts would not gladly hasten homewards? Cyprian
de mort.
who would not willingly sail to his friends, and desire a lusty gale of wind
to speed him, that he might sooner see the faces of his dearest kindred? If
we look for our felicity here, we are deceived: Elias must go to heaven in
a whirle-winde: 2 Kings 2.11.
God will send Jacob an Angel of comfort in his journey, (after all his
troubles with Laban) and God will bring him home with abundance of increase at
the last. Genesis 31.11.12.


When old Jacob saw the chariots of Egypt, then he perceived Joseph was alive,
Genesis 45.27.28.
then his fainting spirit revived; I will go see him (said he) before I dye.
Our true Joseph lives (even Jesus our Savior) and seeing we can not see him
living, let us willingly go by the chariots of death. Since man cannot see God
and live, let me dye (O Lord) that I may see thee. When we are borne (says
one) we are mortal, August.
but when we are once dead we become immortal. We are alive in the womb, to
die in the world; but we are dead in the grave to live in heaven. Here the
souls of Gods children are pent and pind (within the clayie, walls of their
corruptible bodies) where they may look (as it were) through the iron grates of
their busy thoughts, but can never quite be released, till that God (who gave
us our Mittimus into this layle) send us our delivery, with a Return ye
sons of Adam. Psalm. 90.3.


To be short, what other thing is this death, but after a Paul, the bondage of
sin) would not also cry out with him; Who shall deliver me from this body of
death? Romans 7.24.
And feeling the good (that death brings unto us) will not also desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ? Phil. 1.23.
Death and Life are as two twins, united and knit together, until the
separation of the soul and the body, which separation is called Death; and is
rather indeed the deadly stroke of death, (the body being then exempted from
pain, and the soul from corruption and sin) waiting until the remnants of
death be swallowed up in victory, at the day of resurrection: And shall we so
lament our death, which is so gainefull? The very Pagans in some places (as it
is recorded) did celebrate the day of their death, with mirth, melody, and
minstrelcie; and shall we that are Christians be so dismayed, and cast down?
should such a friend as it is be unwelcome? shall the foulness of his face,
fear us from his good conditions? shall the hardness of the husk hinder us
from the sweetness of the kirnell? shall the roughness of the tide, fear us
from the bank, and shore, and so hazard our drowning; rather then the desire
of our home, drive us to the land with all expedition? shall the hardness of
the saddle, set us on foot, to slacken our voyage; rather then we will leap
up, and endure the same a little, and so come swiftly to the place we do
desire?

Apoc. 21.3. etc.
Behold (says Saint John) the tabernacle of God is with men, and he will dwell
with them, and they shall be his people, and he their God, and he shall wipe
away all tears from their eyes, and there shall be no more death, nor sorrow,
nor crying, nor pain, (for the former things are past.) O most blessed
tabernacle? O most safe refuge! O region most resplendant and glorious! All thy
inhabitants wear crowns of glory; sit in thrones of majesty, live in life
eternal, and possess a paradise of infinite pleasures. Which (as Saint
Bernard says) are so many, that they cannot be numbered; of such eternity,
that they are endless; so precious as they cannot be estimated, and so great
as they cannot be measured. This City is made of pure gold, the very walls of
precious stones; having twelve foundations, made of twelve distinct precious
stones, having twelve gates set with pearls, the very streets paued with
gold, and interlaied with precious stones: The light of this city is Christ
(in his shining brightness) sitting in the midst thereof; from whose seat
proceeds the water of life, and there grows the tree of life, bearing
continual fruit, for the continual refection of the Saints. There is no night
in that city, nor any defiled thing, but they which are within, shall reign
for ever in unspeakable glory, who shine as the Sun in the Kingdom of their
Father.

If one Sun can lighten and fill the whole world with Dan. 12.3. Mat. 13.43.
What shall so many glorified bodies of the blessed appear, that shall be as
so many Suns, so many Lamps, and so many shining lights in heaven? Then
shall we be blessed indeed, when we shall be like unto God, which by nature is
blessed; and we shall be like unto God when we shall see him as he is: 1 Ioh.
3.2.
For this only sight of God, is our whole happiness. 1 Cor. 13.12.
O what a joy shall it be, when (at one view) we shall behold the most high and
hidden mystery of the inseparable trinity, and of the love of God therein?
For what shall not he see, who sees him that sees all things? Then shall man's
mind have perpetual rest and peace; neither shall it desire any further
understanding, when he has all before his eyes, that may be understood. Then
shall man's will be quiet, when he enjoys that felicity, wherein all other
good things (as in the fountain of all happiness) are contained: Then shall
Faith have her perfect work, and Hope shall enjoy that which she long desired,
but Charity shall endure for ever. Then shall be sung continual praises unto
the Lamb, Apoc. 14.3.
and the song (although it be always sung) yet it shall be ever new. The joy,
mirth, melody, pleasure, power, wealth, riches, honor, beauty, fellowship,
dainties, odors, glory, wisdom, knowledge, treasures, securities, peace,
quietness, and eternal felicity, is beyond all understanding, and
comprehension of man; which the faithful shall have and enjoy world without
end, with God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost; with Angels, and
Arkangels, Patriarks, and Prophets; with the Apostles, and Evangelists; with
the Martyrs, and Confessors, and with the Saints of God, in the palace of the
Lord; in heaven, the kingdom of God, the glory of the Father; Where there
shall be an everlasting Saboath, which no evening shall end.

Behold (says Augustine) that which is in the end, Aug. de Ciuit. dei. lib.
22. ca. 30.
is without end; for what other end is there ordained for the godly, but to
attain to that kingdom which has no end? We call Paradise our Country, and
the Patriarks our Fathers, and the Saints our brethren and friends: Why run
we not then (with all speed) to enjoy our Country, and to salute our Parents?
A great number of our friends and kinsfolks, brethren and children, already
assured of their immortality, and desirous of our good, do there attend,
wishing and expecting our coming: Cyprian de mort.
What joy will it be both to them and us, there to renew our acquaintance, and
meet one another? What pleasures are there amongst the inhabitants of heaven,
which now fear death no more, and are sure to live for ever? Woe to the
blindness of our eyes, that see not this: woe to the hardness of our hearts,
that feel not this: woe to the deafness of our ears, that hear not, this
in such wise as we should do, where through we might be so far from fearing
death, that rather we should wish it, with old Simeon, Now let thy servant
depart in peace: Luke 2.29. Psalm. 42.2.
and (with David,) when shall I come and appear before thee?

abide a few pangs for glory? How foolish are we to fear a vanquished enemy?
Christ has triumphed over death, it bleedeth (as it were) and gaspeth under
us, and yet do we tremble? It is enough that Christ died, neither would he
have died, but that we might die with safety and pleasure. How truly may we
say of this our David, thou art worth ten thousand of us, yea worth a world of
Angels? yet he died, and died for us. Who would therefore live, that knows his
Savior died? Who can be a Christian, and would not be like him, that would not
die after him? Think of this, and judge whither all the world can hire us not
to die.

But (alas) great is our unbelief, full faint and weak is our faith; or else
night and day, tears and cries, should Psalm. 42.3.
where is now your God? we should wish rather to be doore-keepers (in the house
of God) then to dwell in these ungodly tents: For one day in his courts, Psalm.
84.10.
is better then a thousand. It is a token of little love to God, to be so loath
to go unto him, when he calls. Herein we ought to lament the weakness of
our faith, and seeing our wants, to prepare for remedy, against the time of
need: and to beg of God, his aid, strength, and comfort against the pinch:
which things undoubtedly (if we ask in faith) we shall obtain, and find his
promise true. God reaches out his hand to conduct us; but we draw back our
own, and run away, when he calls us. If he bring us into the way of
salvation, Genesis 19.26.
we mourn for the world, we look behind us (with Lots wife) and
procrastinate our desire of well doing. We must therefore rouse up our selves,
and not remain st^ll in the mire: we must be fortified in his virtue, who
supporteth and comfort us in all distress.

Let us attempt to despise corruptible things, and to desire heavenly and
eternal. When God calls, at every us, in the person of his Son. He
causes us to see the means how to come unto him. We must therefore request
him to bestow upon us will and desire to come thither by Faith, Repentance,
Hope, etc. and that he would maintain his gifts and graces in us to the end;
that here we may mourn in this mortal life, and attend (in the assurance of
his mercy) for the end of this world, and our last day, which shall be the
beginning of our true life. Beseeching God our heavenly Father, (for his Son
Christ his sake) to keep us souls and bodies, to his kingdom and glory, and
to lead us, order us, and dispose of us, as he will, in all things, in all
places, and for ever; that at the length, we may come whither we would, that
is, into his own blessed presence and fruition of immortality, with Christ and
his Saints, world without end. Amen.

Trin vni Deo soli, sit sola and solida laus, and maiestas, in aeternum.
FINIS.
A TWOFOLD CORD OF CONSOLATION, for afflicted Christians in their greatest
CONFLICTS.

Serving to strengthen their Faith, and to support their Patience, in the day
of TRIAL.

Delivered in two SERMONS.

The first whereof, contains, The effect of the true knowledge of Gods WORD.

The second, contains, The power of faithful and fervent PRAYER.

BY JOHN MOORE, Minister of Gods word at Shearsby, in LEICHESTERSHIRE.

LONDON: Printed by T. S. for GEORGE EDWARD'S, and are to be sold at the sign
of the Greyhound in Paul's Churchyard. 1617.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL AND VIRTUOUS LADY, THE LADY ELIZABETH TVRPIN, Wife to
the Right Worshipful and worthy Knight Sr. WILLIAM TVRPIN, his approved kind
Patron, etc. the increase of all outward blessings and spiritual comforts, be
multiplied and increased, through JESUS CHRIST.
Worthy MADAME;
Having experience of your christian love, I am imboldened (upon so urgent
occasion and strictness of time) sooner to present to your view these my poor
Meditations, purposed more maturely to be published, if the unexpected
speediness of the Press had not prevented me. Howsoever, my hearts desire is,
and (I trust) shall so continue, to glorify God in my calling, and to profit
his Church by any lawful and hopeful means, to the uttermost period of my
days. These infallible comforts of Gods word and faithful prayer (so approved
and experienced to every true Christian heart) I commend unto your good
Ladyship; whose use (by Gods blessing) may sted you with others, having your
portion (no doubt) and lot of Trials in this provoking world, (a very furnace
of afflictions) to all Gods children. I can promise little, being the meanest
of Gods Ministers: Yet will I pray (as my purpose was) that it may prove
profitable to your self, and such as shall read it, for the increase of true
patience, comfort, and Christian courage, that we all may fight the good fight
of faith, and finish our course with joy, and so be crowned. I write unto you
as no stranger to my Ministry, who often have heard (upon occasion) the
handling of these points in the public place: Now only I entreat your
favorable acceptance and patronage hereof, as the meanest requital of your
manifold kindnesses; And so commending your Ladyship to Gods blessing and
protection, I humbly take my leave: From my poor study in Shearsby. Feb. 8.
1616.

Your Ladyships wholly devoted and obliged in Christ Jesus. JOHN MOORE.

The principal points of doctrine, contained in both the SERMONS.
The Doctrines of the first SERMON. PSALM. 199.92.93.
GOd always provides means to keep his children from distress, in their
greatest trials and afflictions. Doct. 1 The excellent use and profit of Gods
word, being able (through his blessing) to keep us upright in our ways, and
from falling away from God, in our greatest trials and temptations. 2 Gods word
cannot simply profit us, and keep us from perishing in our afflictions, except
we take joy and comfort in the same. 3 The best men, and excellentest
creatures, are not able of themselves to stand and continue upright in their
trials and temptations, without Gods special providence and provision in the
means. 4 It is the duty of every Christian to remember the means of their
comfort and deliverance from their former troubles and afflictions, and to be
careful to use the same again, as occasion serves. 5 It is peculiar and
proper to Gods word alone, to cheer the heart in afflictions, and to quicken
and revive the soul in the greatest extremities. 6
The Doctrines of the second Sermon. LAMENT. 3.55.56.57.58.
TRue and faithful prayer is a most sovereign means and remedy for comfort
and deliverance in, and from our greatest distresses. Doct. 1 True and
faithful prayer must be made and directed to God alone. 2 True and effectual
prayer is and must be grounded upon the assured knowledge of Gods name and
power. 3 There is no outward condition of life so miserable, or affliction so
grievous, which the dearest children of God are not subject unto in this world.
4 This is one fruit and effect of sin, that it stops the passage of our
prayers, and hinders Gods blessings from us. 5 Afflictions not only stir up
men to prayer, but also make their prayers more fervent and effectual. 6 Gods
children never pray in vain, but are heard and helped of God in their greatest
afflictions. 7 The experience of Gods love in our former deliverances out of
danger, ought still to encourage us to resort unto him, when the like or
greater troubles shall again assail us. 8 God is still ready, and at hand, to
comfort and relieve his children in their greatest dangers. 9 God will
maintain and uphold the righteous cause of his servants, whatsoever be their
dangers. 10 There is nothing (many times) more dangerous in the world, then to
defend and maintain the truth of God. 11 God not only maintains the cause,
but preserves the persons of his servants, (in their greatest perils) that
defend his truth. 12.
FINIS.
The first SERMON.
PSALM 119.92.93. Except thy law had been my delight, I should now have
perished in my affliction. I will never forget thy precepts, for by them thou
have quickened me.


THe sum of this Psalm is the Prophet David's long and earnest suite to GOD,
The scope and drift of the whole Psalm.
to be fully informed in the sound and saving knowledge of his word. The
excellent fruits and effects whereof, he relates and inlargeth (wellnigh) in
every verse; and professes to have found and felt the sweetness, power, and
efficacy thereof, not only for his daily use and instruction (in that his
changeable, frail, and weak estate then living) but for the assurance of Gods
love, and truth of his promises, to be accomplished, and performed to him, and
all the elect in the life to come.

Now in these two Verses he speaks of his afflictions, so great and grievous,
confessing that he had perished except Gods law had been his delight. His
meaning is, The sense.
he had miscarried in his troubles, had not the joy and comfort he received
from Gods word (teaching him to rely upon his special providence and
promises) far surmounted and exceeded his worldly sorrows, so sore oppressing
him; and that indeed he had dyed, and utterly perished, had he not been
quickened and recovered by the virtue thereof; and therefore resolves never to
forget that most comfortable and sovereign means of Gods word, so relieuing
and restoring him in his distress.

Division.
The words in effect offer unto us, first, David's confession; and secondly,
David's resolution: with a several reason annexed to the one, and to the other.
His confession, that he had perished in his affliction. The reason why he did
not, was the joy and delight that was ministered unto him from Gods law.
Secondly, his resolution, that He will never forget Gods precepts; the reason
is, For by them thou have quickened me, being out of heart and hope in his own
conceit.

Sum.
The substance and sum of all, is briefly this: That David could never have
endured the extremity of his crosses, had not the word of God comforted and
confirmed him in his faith and resolution, to depend upon God. But before we
proceed to particular instructions let us in a word consider the variety of
Names and Titles he gives to Gods word in this Psalm, The manifold names of
Gods word, with the reason.
and the reason thereof. He calls it hereby the name of Law, and precepts;
and in other places, Statutes, Commandments, Ceremonies, Judgments, Counsel,
etc. The reason is, to express the excellent use thereof to every Christian,
and to teach every man not lightly to esteem of the Scriptures, (as words of
liberty and licentiousness) but such as exact obedience at our hands, and
bind us with a penalty (as sure as any law or statute) to perform our duties.
And that we cannot do, judge, counsel, resolve, or be warranted of the
lawfulnes of our actions, without the direction thereof. And this is proper to
the whole word of God, both in the Old and New Testament. Hitherto for the
information of our knowledge, for the Text it self: our further instruction
for the Christian use thereof, follows.

Text.
Except thy law had been my delight I had perished, that is, if thy word had
not been provided as a means and remedy of comfort, I had been swallowed up
with despair: Whence first arises this instruction.

That God always provides means to keep his children God always provides
for his children in their greatest extremities.
David had perished in his troubles, if Gods law had not comforted him. But
Gods word brought joy and delight to his afflicted soul, therefore he perished
not.

Christ, speaking of the destruction of Jerusalem, and of the last and worst
days, before the consummation of the world: Mat 24.21.22.
And having amplified the dangers thereof (especially amongst the Jews) by
many circumstances, he adds, that the tribulation shall be such, as was not
from the beginning of the world to that time, nor should be hereafter (being
indeed beyond the compass of all comparison,) and concludes, That except
those days should be shortened, no flesh should be saved: Yet for the elect
sake (says Christ) those days shall be shortened. Exodus 1.11.12.13.14.
So Israel in Egypt (that house of bondage and furnace of afflictions) was
made to serve with sore labor in Brick and Clay, and all manner of work in
the field, being weary of their lives, besides the hard usage of their
taske-masters, and what mischief else could be devised by the Devil and
Pharaoh, utterly to root them out, yet the more they vexed them, the more they
grew. Their estate is well resembled by the bush that burned and yet was not
consumed: Exodus 3.3.
As their enemies devised to do them h^rt, so God devised to do them good,
Who knows (as Saint Peter speaks) to deliver the godly out of tentation, 2
Pet. 2.9.
and to reserve the unjust unto the day of judgment. I cannot reckon up the
crosses of this people, after their deliverance out of Egypt. See the Catalogue
thereof in the Psalms, They wandered in the Desert, Psalm. 107. throughout.
both hungry and thirsty, with fainting souls: They dwelt in darkness, and
in the shadow of death, being bound in misery and iron: Their hearts were
humbled with heaviness, and there was no helper: Their soul abhorred all
meat, and they were brought to deaths door: Yet, when they cried to God in
their trouble, he delivered them out of their distress. The miseries of Gods
children infflicted upon them by Satan and his instruments, The miseries of
Gods children cannot be more then the means of deliverance, which he provides.
cannot be so many as the means and remedies of comfort and deliverance that
God provides for them. See how the Church and children of God triumph and
exult upon the experience of this point. They have oftentimes afflicted me
from my youth up, (may Israel now say:) They have oftentimes afflicted me
from my youth, Psalm. 129.1.2.3.
but they could not prevail against me. The Plowers plowed upon my back, and
made long furrows, but the righteous Lord has cut the cords of the wicked.
Although God suffer his people to be used as the field that is plowed, and
their enemies be as the strong and lusty iades appointed for the plough: Or as
the stalled Oxen to break up the fallow ground, renting and tearing the
furrows of the same, and not leave so much as a clod unturned, but attempt all
manner of ways (every way) to annoy them: Yet the just God (most faithful in
his promises, and sure in his judgments) does cut the cords, and break the
geares of these vnrestie, fierce, and savage beasts, disappoynting the purpose
of the greatest tyrants in their extremest rage, and fury, and sends his
Children freedom and deliverance in his due time. Iehoshua, so admirably
preserved in that long captivity of the Jews (being as a brand taken out of
the fire) arrayed with filthy raiment, Zach. 3.2.3.4.5
as one coming out of a dungeon: Yet the Lord cloatheth him with changeable
garments, and sets a Diadem upon his head, and still rebukes Satan that is
about to hurt him in his person, and hinder him in the work of his Ministry.
And though his Children have lain among the pots, Psalm. 68.13.
and been used like Scullions; yet shall they be like the Dove, whose Wings
are covered with Silver, and her feathers like yealow Gold: They shall come
forth out of their adversity most glistering and glorious, through the grace
and favor that God will show them. Genesis 37.20.24 28. and 39.20. and 41.40. and
42.6.
Joseph was accused of his brethren, put into a pit, sold as a slave,
slaundered for filthiness, and so committed to prison as a guilty person: yet
delivered, and promoted to be Prince and ruler over all the Land of Egypt; to
whom (afterward) his brethren bowed, and every one did obeisance. So they
sought an occasion against Daniel, concerning the law of his God; Dan.
6.5.13.22 28.
they censured him as a refractary man against King Darius, and his command:
and so he was called, judged, and committed to the Lions den; yet the Lord
preserved him alive, and set him aloft, over all his adversaries. Mordecay was
in disgrace, Hest. 3.8.12. and 9.1.2.3.5.
and all the Jews out of credit with King Ahashuerosh, by means of Haman
(that cursed Amalekite) their lives bought and sold, Read the particular
means of their deliverance in their stories.
and their utter destruction sealed: yet were they all safely delivered, and
honored in the sight of their foes, whom they saw confounded. To omit Moses,
Jeremy, and the rest of the Prophets; Paul Peter, and other of the Apostles,
and holy men of God, together with the plots and devises intended against them,
their variety of persecutions and troubles, so great and so grievous, Yet the
Lord delivered them out of all. Therefore most true it is, that the Apostle
Paul speaks of himself, Psalm. 34.19. 2 Cor. 4.8.9.
and gods Saints, We are afflicted on every side, yet not in distress; we are
in doubt, but we despair not; we are persecuted, but not forsaken; cast down,
but we perish not.

Now, the reason of this doctrine is, first, that God is their God is their
Creator.
who cannot despise the least work of his hands. Thou Lord do save both Man
and Beast, Psalm. 36.6.7.8. and 31.19.20.
but how excellent is thy mercy (O God) to the children of men, that trust
under the shadow of thy wings? They shall be satisfied with the fatnes of thy
house, and thou shall give them drink out of the Rivers of thy pleasures.
Therefore the Apostle says, We labor and are rebuked, 1 Timothy 4.10.
because we trust in the living God, which is the savior of all men, specially
of those that believe. If there be no man (no not the wickedest) but he feels
Gods goodness toward him in his protection, and preservation: how much more
Gods elect, whose names are written in Heaven. Luke 10.20. Mal. 3.16.
And which again, they have surrendered unto him in a holy profession of his
truth, and suffering for the same. Luke 12.6.7.
Are not five Sparrowes bought for two farthings? and yet not one of them is
forgotten before God. How far more dear and precious then are the lives
safety, and estates of Gods children, Whose very hairs are numbered? Such
shall be sure of all outward helps and means (so far as is fit) and at the
least God will bestow upon them faith, hope, patience, consolation, and
constancy, (which are the best supplies) in all their necessities. Therefore,
fear not, thou worm, Jacob, I will help thee (says the Lord) and thy
Redeemer, Esaias 41.14. and 43.1.2.
the holy one of Israel. Fear not, says the Lord that created thee, and he
that framed thee, o Israel, fear not, for I have redeemed thee, I have called
thee by thy name, thou art mine.

2. Reason. They are within his covenant.
Secondly, they are within Gods covenant; he has indented, sealed, yea, and
sworn their safety. His name is called upon by them, they have his word and
his Sacraments, all his promises and assurances to be their God: Heb. 6.17.18.
Ier. 14 9. Gal 6.10. Ephesians. 1.19. Esa. 63.16. Mal. 3.6. Psalm. 23. Psalm. 100.3.
Cant. 4.5 10.11 12. and 5.1. Genesis 17.1.
They are of his household and family, and so cast upon God to be cared for: He
is their Father, and they his children: He is their shepherd, and they are his
people, and sheep of his pasture. He is the husband of his elect, and they his
Spouse, who of right must defend and protect them, and therefore how can they
miscarry? All sufficiency is in God, who has undertaken their protection;
Power, and will, faithfulness, truth, and unchangeableness, all the means
that may be, meet and concur in him that has promised preservation, and how
then should he sail us?

See Psalm. 68. and 95.8 10. Heb. 3.8.9.10.
who in their fits and fevers of afflictions, think all is gone; that murmr,
grudge, and repine, with the unbelieving Israelites, at every turn and trial,
tempting, and blaspheming the Lord, shortning his hand that he cannot help,
and making deaf his ear that he cannot hear. To which fault also the dearest
children of God are subject. David complains that he was cast out of Gods
sight, That he had forgotten to be gracious, Psalm. 77.8.9.10
and that he had shut up his loving kindness in displeasure. Ier. 20.7.
Jeremy charge God to have deceived him, That he was a stranger in the
Land, as one that passes by to tarry for a night: Ier. 14.8.9.
Why art thou (says he) as a man astonyed, and as a strong man that cannot
help? But it is their great infirmity so to think; for God is constant in his
care and unchangeable in his love. Can a woman forget her child, Esaias 49.15.16.
and not have compassion upon the son of her womb? Though she should forget,
yet I will not forget thee. Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my
hands: Ier. 22.24. Psalm 121.4.
Such are, as a signet on his right hand, and as a girdle wherewith he it
girded: He neither slumbereth nor sleeps that keeps his Israel. And albeit
our sins make a separation between God and us, Esaias 49.1. Lam. 3.9.44.
building (as it were) a bulwark of hewn stones to stop up our ways, and
cause him to cover himself as with a cloud, that our prayers can have no
passage; and make him to return to his place, Hosea 5.15. and 6.1.2.
as one that will not be spoke withal, nor entreated: Yet, if we acknowledge
our faults, and in our afflictions seek diligently unto him, he will then be
found: After two days will he revive us, and in the third day he will raise us
up, and we shall live in his sight. Psalm. 30.5.
Our heaviness may endure for a night, but joy shall come in the morning.
Though for a moment he hide his face from us, for a little season, yet with
everlasting mercy he will have compassion on us. Esaias 54.8.


Secondly, it serves for our instruction, that we labor Heb. 6.17.18. Genesis
17.7.
If we be within his Covenant he has sworn not to forsake us; if we be his
people, he will be our God. We must keep our selves in his fold, (as good
sheep walking in his ways) and then he will heed us. If we wander like the
prodigal, Luke 15.
we shall waste our goods, and want, until we hasten home. If we will have
the privilege of his Sons, we must honor him as our Father, and if we will
be his Spouse, Mal. 16. 1 Pet. 1.17. Ephesians. 4.24. Genesis 20.16.
we must be loyal only unto him, and not fall in love with others: So will
he be our veil against the heat of afflictions, our shield and defense
against all our enemies, and still preserve and deliver us from all extremities
and distresses.

Jews incited in the Psalms, to take up this note of Praise (as the burden of
their Song?) Let them therefore (says the Prophet) confess before the Lord
his loving kindness, Psalm. 107.8.15.21.31.32.
and his wonderful works before the Sons of men: And let them offer
sacrifices of praise, and declare his works with rejoicing. Let them exalt him
in the congregation of the people, and praise him in the assembly of Elders.
And see the practice of the Church concerning this duty, and the manner of
their confession, as well in amplifying their deliverance, as enlarging Gods
praises. Psalm. 124.6.7.8.
Praised be the Lord, which has not given us as a prey unto their teeth. Our
soul is escaped as a Bird out of the snare of the fowler, the snare is broken
and we are delivered. Our help is in the Lord which has made Heaven and
Earth. This is a duty commanded of God himself; Psalm. 50.15. 2 Cor. 1.3.4.
I will deliver thee, and thou shall praise me. So the Apostle blesses God,
even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, (which comforted him, and the rest)
in all their tribulations.

Psalm. 93.4.
and make them still: for though they rage horribly, yet he that dwells on
high, is mightier. Genesis 15.1.
Fear not Abraham, I will be thy shield and buckler, and thy exceeding great
reward. Esaias 43.2.
Fear not, O Israel, when thou passest through the waters, I will be with
thee, and through the floods, that they do not ouerflow thee. When thou
walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, neither shall the flame
kindle upon thee. Psalm 23 4.
Though I should walk through the valley of the shadow of death. I will fear
no evil, for thou art with me, thy rod and thy staff, Psalm. 46.12.
they comfort me. God is our hope and strength, and help, in troubles ready to
be found: Therefore will not we fear, though the earth be moved, and though
the Mountains fall into the midst of the Sea.

Text.
The delight he had in GODS word, kept him from perishing, which yields unto
us this second instruction.

That every Christian should learn to know (by David's The effectual knowledge
of Gods word, keeps his children upright in their trials.
which is able through Gods blessing (being truly understood, and fitly
applied) to keep us upright in our greatest afflictions and trials, that we
fall not away from God, nor miscarry in our selves. He professes plainly that
he had perished, had he not been comforted, and so supported by Gods word. See
how fearfully his faith was assailed, his feet were almost gone, Psalm.
73.2.3.4. etc.
his steps had well near slipped, to behold the prosperity of the wicked, and to
see them so lusty: How they escaped all manner of troubles, when Gods dearest
children were fearfully plagued. They exceeded in pride, which they put on as
a chain about their neck; and as for cruelty, it covered them as a garment:
they were licentious in their words, and presumptuous in their talk, setting
their mouth against Heaven it self, blaspheming God, whom they labored to
deprive both of knowledge and providence: Yet these wicked men did prosper
always, and increase in riches, when he and other godly men were punished
daily, that had care and conscience to cleanse their hearts, and wash their
hands from all such defilements of sin; So that he knew not what to think,
or how to find out the cause thereof: Though he took pains in this point;
yet certainly his heart was still vexed, and his reins pricked, so foolish
he was and ignorant, (like a beast,) until he went into the sanctuary of
GOD, (to consult with his word in the holy ministry thereof) then presently
he understood the reason hereof, and was resolved: Then he as well considered
the end, as the beginning, and proceedings of such miscreant and blasphemous
wretches, in what slippery places God had set them in, how suddenly he cast
them down into desolation, being horribly consumed: Their prosperity changed
as a dream, and their very image was despised. Thus God did guide him by his
counsel to recover himself, in this staggering temptation. The law of God was
in his heart, Psalm. 37.24.31.
and his steps did not slide; though he was ready to fall away, yet the Lord
put under his hand, and preserved him from destruction by the benefit of his
word. Psalm. 93.12.13.
Blessed therefore is the man whom thou chastisest (O Lord) and teach him in
thy law, that thou may give him rest from the days of evil, whiles the pit
is dug for the wicked. First, God chastises, then he teaches, and lastly
resolves, and gives rest and contentment to the afflicted Christian. Is it
not reason that we endure with patience, the dead corpse (though otherwise it
would annoy us) while the grave is making, to put it in, and which never again
(being once buried) can trouble our sight, or my sense? So the wicked that
trouble Gods children, are dead in Gods decree, and their grave is a making.
Surely the Lord will not fail his people, neither will he forsake his
inheritance, but minister comfort unto them in the midst of all their troubles,
by the means of his word: Psalm. 92.6.7.9.
But an unwise man knows it not, and a fool does not understand this. When
the wicked grow as the grass, and all the workers of wickedness do flourish,
that then they shall be destroyed for ever: For lo, thy enemies (O Lord) for
lo, thine enemies shall perish, all the workers of iniquity against thee, thy
Church, and children shall be destroyed, but thou, O Lord, art most high for
evermore. Psalm. 119.25.28 50.143. etc.
How often (in this long Psalm) does the Prophet stir up himself? when his
soul cleaued to the dust, and melted for heaviness: when he was almost
brought to the grave, and dropping away like water in his trials and
temptations; he prays God to quicken and to raise him by his word. Trouble
and anguish are come upon me, yet thy commandments are my delight. Thus Gods
word was his comfort in his trouble, and still his promise refreshed his soul.

God is the Author of it, who is the God of comfort.
The reason hereof is, first, in regard of God himself the Author thereof, Who
is the Father of mercies, and God of all comfort, which thus comfort us in
all our tribulations: which is our rod and our staff, our only hope and
refuge, in troubles ready to be found. 2 Cor. 1.^.34. Psalm. 23. and 46.1
When Abraham believed God, and obeyed his word, in forsaking his Country, Gen
12.4.
and following him whether he would have him, he needs neither to care, nor
fear, then God will be his buckler, and his exceeding great reward. Genesis 15.1.
and 17.1.
If he walk before him and be upright, then God all-sufficient will make a
supply of all his wants, and will bless those that bless him, Psalm.
91.1.3.11.14. etc.
and curse those that curse him. If we once dwell in the secret of the most
high, and abide in the shadow of the Almighty: If we make God our hope and
fortress, to trust in him, then will he deliver us from the snare of the
Hunter, and all noisome evils; then need we not to fear the dangers by night,
or day; his truth shall be our shield, and his Angels our guide. Thus if we
love him, will he deliver us; he will exalt us, because we have known his
name. Psalm. 27.1.5.
If the Lord be our light and salvation, whom shall we fear? If he be the
strength of our life, of whom shall we be afraid? For in the time of trouble
he shall hide us in his Tabernacle; in the secret place of his tent shall be
hide us, and set us upon a rock. Paul therefore (in the person of the
faithful) challenges heaven and earth, with all their force, and still
resolves, Romans 8.38.39.
That nothing is able to separate him from the love of God.

Secondly, Gods word is so effectual to comfort and recover By nature it is
comfortable.
in respect of the nature, quality and virtue thereof, being the immortal
seed, to beget us again to a lively hope. 1 Pet. 1.23. James 1.18.
Of his own will begat he us by the word of truth: And so it is called the
word of faith and life, Phil. 2.16.
and that grace of God which brings salvation to all belieuers. It is full of
heavenly wisdom, which all the adversaries of Gods children are not able to
resist In it are contained all the promises of God, Tit. 2.11.
Luke 21.15.
to comfort us and confirm our faith. Notable persuasions to appease the
troubled conscience, with most excellent examples (of all sorts) both persons
and causes to encourage us; even a whole cloud of witnesses, Heb. 12.1.2.
companions of our faith, and patterns of our patience, in their variety of
crosses and afflictions. Besides the most famous example of the author and
finisher of our faith, Christ Jesus himself; to whose sufferings we must be
conformed; with whom (if we suffer) we shall reign together with him. 2 Timothy
2.12.
Now, he for the joy that was set before him, endured the Cross, and despised
the shame, and now is set at the right hand of the throne of GOD. Ephesians. 6.11.
There shall we learn to put on the whole armor of God, that we may be able
to stand against all the assaults of the Devil, and quench all the fiery darts
of the wicked: For without it we come naked and vnharnessed (as Soldiers into
the field) to fight.

1 Timothy 6.12.
that so we may fight the good fight of faith, and lay hold of eternal life;
to buckle about us this armor of proof, Ephesians. 6.
which is able not only to defend us, but to foil all our spiritual
adversaries, and their forces whenever they shall assail us. 2 Cor. 10.4.5.
These weapons are not carnal, but mighty through God to cast down holds,
and every thing that is exalted against the knowledge of GOD, and will enable
us to wrestle, not only against flesh and blood, but against principalities
and powers, against worldly Governors, and Princes of darkness, yea, against
all spiritual wickedness in the highest places. Psalm. 119.162. Psalm. 56.10.
This made our Prophet to say, I rejoice at thy word, as one that finds a
great spoil. In Gods word will I rejoice, in the Lords word will I comfort
me. Let therefore the word of God dwell in us plenteously, and that in all
wisdom, to teach and admonish us how to behave our selves, Col. 3.16.
and hold out in our greatest afflictions. Thus Christ got the conquest over
Satan and his temptations, Math. 4.
who hereby was forced to forsake him; and so shall we be sure by the shield
of faith, and word of the spirit (which is the word of God) to quench all their
fiery darts. The comfort of this Word made Peter to sleep as soundly in the
prison (bound with two chains) as if he had been at liberty in a Palace.
Acts 12.6.
And Paul, and Sylas* to sing as sweetly after their imprisonment and beating,
as in their greatest hearts ease, and liberty. Acts 16.23.24.25.
And this made the Apostles to rejoice, That they were counted worthy to suffer
rebuke for Christ's name. Acts 5.41.


Secondly, it confuteth and confounds all Epicures Mal. 3.14.
What profit is it (say they) to walk in his ways? They say to God, Depart
from us, we desire not the knowledge of the highest. Job 21.14.
Who therefore become desperate in their trials and afflictions, being ready
(for any comfort they can find) to hang and murder themselves with Judas,
Saul, and Achitophell.

The delight he had in Gods law kept him from perishing: whence we thirdly
observe,

That Gods law and word cannot simply profit us except Gods word cannot be
profitable, except first it be comfortable unto us.
we must first taste and prove the sweetness thereof, we must beforehand find
out and feel the virtue thereof; as of our food and physic, before it can
strengthen our hearts, heal, cure, and recover us from the maladies and
miseries of our afflicted estate. When wisdom enters into thy heart, Prou.
2.10.11.12
and knowledge delights thy soul, then (and not before) shall counsel
preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee, and deliver thee from the
evil way, and from the man that speaks froward things, etc. When we once
delight in the law of the Lord, Psalm. 1.2.
and exercise our selves therein day and night, then shall we flourish like
the planted trees by the rivers of water, that are fruitful in due season,
whose leaves shall never fade in any drought of danger. Then (I say) whatsoever
we do and take in hand shall thrive and prosper. So that if we will have
comfort in our afflictions, we must first find comfort in the ministry of
the Word; for there is true joy and peace to be found, there is life and
salvation (as before was said) the sweet promises of God, faith, grace,
spiritual strength, and every good thing offered unto us.

GODS Church with the holy ministry thereof, is CHRIST'S Garden of pleasures,
wherein he banquetteth with his Elect: even he which is the fountain of the
Garden, (the true and only head of all particular Christian Churches, Cant.
4.12.15. and 5:1.
) The Well of living waters, and the spring of Lebanon. Hither he comes to
eat his pleasant fruit. This only true and Christian Church (being his sister
and Spouse) is as a garden enclosed, as a spring and fountain sealed up, not
only sufficient to refresh it self in all the parts, as beds and plants, but
strongly fenced against all strangers, enemies, and annoyances, that may hurt
or hinder the flourishing estate thereof. Hither Christ comm^th to make merry
with his friends, and to banquet with his beloved; there he gathers his
myrthe with his spices there he eats the honey comb with his honey, and
drinks his wine with his milk, delighting himself with the sweet, pleasant
and profitable fruits that the children of God do yield unto him. Even as one
in gathering most sweet smelling herbs, and spices; or eating honey, or
drinking the best wine and purest milk (by which no doubt he means, the word
of God, and doctrine of the Church;) Here Christ sollaceth himself (as the
good Gardener) with the diversity of his plants, and variety of flowers, which
himself (with the borders thereof) has trod out, planted and watered. And the
faithful again refreshed, comforted, and furnished with his graces, grow
still in spiritual strength against all temptations. Now, the reason why the
word of God cannot profit us without delight, is.

Comfort and love to Gods word procure liking and diligent hearing, and so by
gods blessings, faith and obedience.
and diligent hearing (by Gods blessing) begets faith, and faith brings us
assurance of Gods love and protection; the evidence and certainty whereof, are
the infallible promises of God, which are Yea, and Amen.

Again, Love supporteth our labor, and sets our faith aworke: Romans 10.14.
It suffers all things, it belieueth all things, it loving Rahell, served
twice seven years for her sake; Gal. 5.6. 1 Cor. 13.7. Genesis 31.39 40 41.
neither the heat of the day, nor the frost of the night, nor the breaking of
his sleep; no danger, loss, or cross, could drive him out. So the Israelites
toyled and traveled many miles to the Temple, hungry, weary, and thirsty, they
going through the vale of Baca, Psalm. 48. throughout.
make Wells therein (contented to refresh themselves with the rain that filled
their pooles in so barren a Wilderness) and thus they went from strength to
strength till they appeared before the Lord their God, in their long desired
Syon. And what was the reason hereof that they still proceeded without any
interruption? even this was the reason: O Lord of hosts, how amiable are thy
Tabernacles! Our soul longs and faints for thy Courts, our heart and flesh
rejoice in the living God. Blessed are they that dwell in thy house, and in
whose hearts are thy ways: for the Lord our God is a Sun and shield unto us,
(the Author of all good things, and the deliverer from all evil.) He will give
grace and glory, and no good thing will he withold from them that are
sincere: Therefore, O Lord of hosts, blessed is the man that trusts in thee.
We see that every action without affection is laborious and toylesome, and none
ever soundly profited by the word, and holy ministry thereof, that delighted
not in the same.

Which point serves to stir up our love and liking of Psalm. 19.7.8.9.10.11.
The statutes of the Lord are right, and rejoice the heart: The commandment of
the Lord is pure, and gives light to the eyes: The fear of the Lord is
clean, the judgments of the Lord are truth, and righteous altogether: By them
is thy Servant made circumspect, and in keeping of them there it great reward:
And therefore they are more to be desired then gold, yea, then much fine gold;
sweeter also then honey, and the honey comb. Gods word is the means for young
and old to redress their wicked ways; Psalm. 119.9.19.35.105.
a Counselor to advise us, a guide to direct us, a lantern to our feet, a
light to our paths; a resoluer of our doubts, a sweetning of our afflictions,
able to revive us being dead: Therefore (says David) I will delight in thy
statutes, Psalm. 119.16.72.97. Verse 103.
and I will not forget thy word. The law of thy mouth is better unto me then
thousands of gold and silver. O how love I thy law? it is my meditation
continually. How sweet are thy promises unto my mouth? Yea, Verse 111.165
more then honey unto my taste. Thy testimonies have I taken as an heritage for
ever (no earthly thing being comparable to them) for they are the joy of my
heart. They that know thy law shall have great prosperity, and they shall have
no hurt. Keep them and do them (says Moses) for this is your wisdom and
understanding in the sight of other people. Deuteronomy. 4.6.8.9.
Who shall say, only this people is wise; and what Nation is so great, that
has ordinances and laws so righteous? Therefore take heed to thy self, and
keep thy soul diligently. Let not these things depart out of thy heart, and
7.12.13.14. etc.
all the days of thy life, but teach them thy Sons, and thy Sons Sons.
Hence proceeds all blessings from Heaven and Earth, upon man and beast, Corn
and Cattle, Wine, Oil, or what can be desired. For Godliness has the
promise of this life, 1 Timothy 48. Mat. 6.33.
and of the life to come. If we seek the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, all other things shall be ministered unto us. This is the best
part and most necessary duty that caused Marie to be preferred before Martha,
for setting all other things aside, to come sit at Jesus his feet, Luke
10.41.42 Math. 13.44.45.46.
to hear his word. This Pearl must be purchased with all we have; all other
things are but dross and dung, in respect of the excellent knowledge of Christ
Jesus our Lord. Therefore we must not only hear, and read, Phil. 3.8.
and meditate, but by all possible means increase our love, liking, and
delight, to the holy ministry of Gods word, Psalm. 42.12.
longing and thirsting after it (with David;) As the chased Heart brayeth for
the Rivers of water; so to have our souls pant and thirst for the living God,
and word of life, not so much to labor for the food that perishes, but for
the meat that endures to everlasting life. John 6.27.
Thus every good Christian must whet the appetite of his soul to delight in
Gods law, by conference, meditation, hearing, reading, praying, preaching, and
daily frequenting of all holy assemblies. I was glad when they said unto me,
Psalm. 122.1.
we will go to the house of the Lord: So was it prophesied of the Christian
Church, that many people should go and say, Come, Micha 4.1.
let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of Jacob:
and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk in his paths. Who are these
that fly like a clowd, Esaias 2.3. Esaias 60.8.
and as Doves to their windows? Noting not only the greatness of the number,
but diligence and zeal of such as should come to Christ, and receive his
doctrine. And Christ said, That from the time of John Baptist hitherto, Math.
11.12.
the Kingdom of Heaven suffers violence, and the violent take it by force.
Thus, Psalm. 69.9.
the zeal of Gods house should eat us up.

Which serves also to confute and reprove all such as Prou. 22.13.
and worldly business does put them off; Psalm. 119.51. and 69.7.11.12.
there is a Lion in the way, they shall be had in derision, or called into
question for their forwardness, or at least be censured for hypocrites: Some
have their Oxen to prove, Luke 14.18.19. 20.23.24.
their Farm to see, their Wife to marry; all these yet are invited to come to
the Feast, though unworthy of the same; therefore God will fill his house with
any others then with such, even those that sit in the high way, and under
hedges; the most basest and vilest of men shall enter before them, and be
saved; even whores and Harlots shall sooner be received, Mat. 21.31.32.
then those that seem children of thy kingdom. God will raise up to Abraham
sons of stones, Mat. 3.9.
rather then these viperous serpents shall have the name of his seed.

Again, many Atheists say, It is in vain to serve Mal. 3.14.15.16.17.
and what profit is it that we have kept his commandments? and that we have
walked humbly before the Lord of hosts? Therefore they count the proud
blessed, even they that work wickedness are set up, and they that tempt God,
yea, Mal. 3.14.15.
they are delivered. But the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a book of
remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord, and thought
upon his name. They said also unto God, Depart from us, for we desire not the
knowledge of thy ways. Who is the Almighty that we should serve him? And what
profit should we have, if we should pray unto him? But let the counsel of the
wicked be far from me (says Job, Job 23.12.
) who esteemed of the words of his mouth more then his appointed food. And as
for those, and such like Atheists, Job 23.12. Job 21.14.15.16.17.18.
God will divide their lives in his wrath, They shall be as stubble before the
wind, and as the chafe that the storm carries away. So every one derided
Jeremy, and daily scorned his ministry, Ier. 20.7.8.10.11.
The word of the Lord was made a reproach, and daily they mocked him. All his
familiers watched for his halting, saying. It may be he is deceived; but his
persecutors shall be overthrown, and not prevail, and their everlasting shame
shall never be forgotten. So they talked of Ezekiell, in derision, by the walls,
in the doors of their houses: Come, Ezekiel. 33.30.31.32.
I pray you, and hear what is the word that comes from the Lord; So, they
come and sit before him, and heard his words, but they will not do them; for
with their mouths they make ieasts, See verses 29.33.
and thou art unto them a ieasting song: But then shall they know that I am the
Lord, when I have laid the Land desolate and waste, because of all their
abominations that they have committed. And when this comes to pass (for lo
it will come) then shall they know that a Prophet has been among them. Mat.
7.6.
But Pearls are not to be cast among Swine. And such Gaderens are more worthy
and meet to have the company of devils, Mat. 8 33.34.
then the presence of Christ, and preaching of his word. Text.


I had perished in my afflictions, except they law had been

The strongest Christians are not able of themselves to stand under their
crosses, without Gods assistance. 1 Samuel 13.14. Genesis 12.7. and 2.8.9. Genesis
3.6.7.17.18. 1 Kings 11. to the 10 verse, and 9. chapter throughout.
We may learn also from hence, that the best men and excellentest Creatures are
not able of themselves to stand, and continue upright in their trials and
temptations, without GODS special providence and provision in the means.
David, a man after Gods own heart, possessed with his spirit, and having a
large portion of his grace, was yet ready to perish in his afflictions, had he
not been supported: Nay, Adam himself, in his innocence created most
excellently, according to Gods own image, had no sooner entered into Eden,
(that Garden of pleasures, and Paradise of happiness) but suddenly forfeited
his estate by Satan's temptations. Who can but admire the fearful fall of
Solomon, wanting neither wisdom nor wealth, nor any means else (as one would
have thought) that God or the world could afford him? yet see whither he was
falling, even to the gates and gulf of hell; from whence he had never
returned, had not the hand and powerful arm of God retired and reclaimed him,
by an extraordinary conversion and repentance. But come we from Men to Angels,
when GOD had once left them to themselves (though their condition with other
Creatures was incomparable) could not yet keep their standing and estate; 2
Pet. 2. Jude verse 6.
but fell from Heaven to Hell, and so of heavenly Angels became infernal
Devils. But to come to the trial of afflictions (which is more proper to this
place) how soon are the best men crushed and broken with the burden thereof?
and who is able to bear off the blows of Gods displeasure? Job was valiant in
his sufferings, Job 14.44.
and very patient for a time. Yet mark how wonderfully he is distempered in
his passions, and takes on? Job 3. to the end.
Cursing the day and night of his conception and birth, with the Midwife and
Messengers, yea, all the Instruments, helps, and means of his coming into
the world. Why dyed I not in the birth? Why perished I not when I came out of
the womb? Why did the knees prevent me? And why did I suck the breasts? Why
was I not hid as an untimely birth? either as infants that have not seen the
light? For my sighing comes before I eat, and my roarings are powered out
like water. The arrows of the Almighty are in me, Job 6.4.11.12.
the venim whereof does drink up my spirit, Job 7.12.
and the terrors of god fight against me. What power have I that I should
endure? Is my strength the strength of stones? or is my flesh of brass? Am I a
sea, or a Whale-fish, that thou keep me in ward? Job 10.9.
Remember (I pray thee) that thou have made me as the clay; and will thou
bring me to dust again? Who can express David's distractions and fearful
convulsions (as it were) both in body and soul, able to have divided both of
them from God, had not his grace prevented him, and his powerful spirit
preserved him? Every where (in the Psalms) we may see the anatomy of his and
the best man's frailty, in their afflictions.

God manifests his strength, by our weakness.
and his unchangeable condition, by our variable disposition, who (the best of
us) are notable of our selves to stand upright in the day of our trials,
without his helping hand, power, and special providence underprop us.

I am, By this he shows his privileged power, and unchangeable nature.
) to show his being of himself, and unchangeable essence, and to let us know,
that all his Creatures have not only their being, but their standing and
upholding by him that only is, and so constantly abides, Exodus 3.14. Acts
17.25.28. Psalm. 102 27.
without fainting or failing evermore.

Again, by this means God does beat down our pride, He humbles us by our
infirmities, that we may only rely upon his strength and might.
God therefore will prove us by afflictions, that we may know our selves, our
faith, our strength, and chiefest of our man-hoode; that so finding out our
weakness, we may only and wholly rely upon his strength and might.



Also it makes much for our consolation in our greatest 2 Cor. 12.9.
and that when there is no other hand or help to relieve us, yet he himself
with his own right arm is able to save us, and to provide such means as shall
be sufficient to comfort us in our greatest assaults.

Thus much of David's confession. Now follows his resolution. The second part
of the text.


I will never forget thy precepts; since they kept me from perishing in my
afflictions, and ministered such joy and comfort unto me, not only refreshed
but revived and quickened me (being as good at dead in my own apprehension):
For this cause I resolve never to forget so comfortable and powerful means of
my recovery. From whence we may learn.

That it is the duty of every Christian, still to remember We must remember
the ancient means of comfort and deliverance, if we will be eased in our
present miseries.
and so to manifest their love and care for the use and respect of Gods
ordinances, not only for the time past, but also for the days to come. As he
that has been cured of an old disease. and healed of a wound, will hardly
forget the receipt and plastour. David having formerly found that the comfort
of Gods word had kept him from perishing, had quickened and revived him (being
as good as dead in his own judgment and sense) resolves never again to
forget Gods precepts: So he tells us how he was disquieted, and found no
rest, how his very bones consumed, how he roared all the day, until he
confessed his sin (which was the cause thereof.) Then I acknowledged my
sin, neither hid I my iniquity: Psalm. 32 3.4.5.
for I thought, I will confess against my self my wickedness, unto the Lord,
and thou forgauest the punishment of my sin. Therefore shall every one that
is godly (in like case) make his prayer unto thee, in a time when thou may
be found, (for then is God nearest unto his children when their troubles are
the greatest;) surely in the floods of great waters they shall not come near
him. So, going into the field against Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.37.
he remembers how God delivered him from the Lion and the Bear, and so still
resolves to hope for help and deliverance at gods hand, and he prays to God
to have mercy upon him, and to harken unto his prayer, who heretofore had heard
him in his distress, Psalm 4.1.
and set him at liberty.

We are still subject to the like trials and afflictions, and therefore must
remember the ancient remedies.
together with our form: distressed estate is, because we are subject again
to fall therein and may still have need of the old receipt: as those that fall
again into the same disease, as they have their relapses, so they must have
the same remedies. He that is well may and will be sick again; he that is
healed may be wounded again, or at least have his sore to ranckle and break
out again therefore the provident patients record their receipts, and resolve
to use them as occasion serves.

There are no receipts more safe then those that have been proved.
such for the most part are void of danger, and infallible. And as he is
worthily accounted the best Physician, that recouereth most patients, and he
the skilfullest Surgeon that heals most dangerous wounds: So that physic,
that potion, that plaster (by which sick and sore men have been cured,
healed, and restored) is most worthy to be registered and recorded: Such
receipts (I say) are most precious, that have been proved, and will not likely
fail.

That we should remember them, they are written and registered to our hands.
and to keep us from despair, they are written and registered to our hands in
Gods book; as also to confirm our knowledge, practice, and obedience in and
for the holy use thereof, they are commended unto us by Gods word, they are
urged and applied for that purpose in the holy ministry thereof. So is the
patience of holy Job, by Saint James, James 5.11.
You have heard (says he) of his patience, and what end the Lord made: And
whatsoever things are written aforetime, Romans 15.4.
are written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
Scriptures, might have hope. And as the same infirmities, sickness, and maladies
both of body and soul, do still remain to mortal men: So the same wholesome
receipts, means and medicines, with the same Physicians hand and manner of
recovery, are still commended in Gods word, to all the faithful for their use.

Which serves for the instruction of every Christian, to David did) at the
prosperity of the wicked; Psalm. 37. and 73.3
we must learn with him to see our folly, and go to Gods Sanctuary and
observe the end of such like sinners; and so be comforted and confirmed from
falling away from God, or following their wicked course. To cure our own
stubbornness and rebellions, we must not (with the unbelieving Israelites)
harden our hearts, or tempt the Lord in our troubles: Heb. 3.8.9.10. Exodus 7.
and 8.9.10.
neither lift up our selves with Pharaoh) in such variety of judgments to have
our hearts harder and harder, and so to strive against our Maker; which is the
high way to increase his plagues, Leuit. 26. Ier. 2.35. Amos 4. Hos. 5.15. Heb.
3.13.
and bring us to destruction, but rather be humbled, and tremble at his word,
with melting hearts, and not still to exasperate the Lord, and sharpen his face
against us, but rather ( while it is called to day) to hear his voice, and be
reclaimed.

This also reproves all such as are so mightily distracted they say they are
weary of their lives, they cannot tell what to do, they would pardon them that
would rid them out of the way; most truly discerning Satan's censure, Job
1.9.11.
(which to holy Job and Gods children is nothing but a slander) they cease from
blessing God, and fall to blaspheme him to his face. Therefore Gods children
must be wary from yielding to such infirmities, to which they are also
subject, and pray for true patience, whereby they may possess their souls,
Luke 21.19.
and for a true and a lively faith, whereby they shall be able to overcome the
devil, the world, and the flesh, 1 Pet. 5.9. James 4.7. 1 John 5.4.
and get the conquest over themselves, and such unruly affections. If they
search the Scriptures, they shall see a cloud of Witnesses; who by the shield
of faith, and sword of the spirit* have fought the fight, and got the conquest
in their greatest fears and doubts. Thus God has comforted us (says Paul of
himself, 2 Cor. 1.4.
and the faithful) that we may be able to comfort them which are in any
afflictions, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are comforted of God. Let
us remember the time past (with David) and think upon all his wondrous works.
We must not be careless, and cast away the medicine when once wear healed,
Psalm. 76.5.7.
for the time of our old disease, and sores, may come again; but still write
in our note-Bookes such sovereign receipts, and approved remedies, to
remember afresh when our infirmities newly assail us: At such a time I prayed
and was delivered from the pricks of the flesh from such and such buffetings of
Satan did the Lord defend me; 2 Cor. 12.7.
therefore will I pray again being newly assaulted: Such a day and year I
humbled my soul by fasting and prayer, and was saved from such a judgment. At
another time (in my melancholy mood, and the strong temptations and delusions
of Satan) I conferred with godly men, and diligently resorted to holy
assemblies, and this relieved and restored me: I will never therefore forget
this comfortable means, but will for ever remember them; yea, daily practice
them upon every good occasion, and just respect. Thus good things must be
pondered with blessed Marie, Luke 2.51.
and not only conceived, but readily brought forth against the time of need.
Such treasure of heavenly store must heedfully be locked up in the treasury of
our souls. I have hid thy promise within my heart, that I might not sin
against thee. Psalm. 119.11. Pro. 2.11. and 4.21.
So wisdom counsels to hide his commandments within us, and to keep them
in the midst of our heart: And the Apostle exhorts us not to let them
slip out of our minds; or not to have our souls as crazed vessels,
receiving much, and holding nothing. Heb. 2.1.


Where the Prophet seems to distinguish between law and law, precept and
precept, word and word; saying, Text.
Except thy law, thy precepts, and so in the rest of the Psalm, thy word, thy
judgments, thy statutes, thy ceremonies, thy commandments, etc. q. d. They,
and they only do this, and that, and every thing: They and none other have
this virtue and operation of comforting, converting and saving.

This may teach us that Gods word alone, and no other, Gods word alone does
quicken and comfort the distressed soul.
rejoices the soul in temptation, and quickens and reuiueth us in the
greatest extremities and distresses. Moses, speaking but of the law and
commandments delivered from God, inforceth obedience to the same, Deuteronomy.
11.26.27 28. Deuteronomy. 32.47. Phil. 2.16.
in telling them that it is the word of Life; that it sets before them life
and death; life to the obeyers, death to the breakers. And Paul calls the
Gospel The word of life, which indeed quickens us by faith, in believing the
promises, when the law (for want of obedience) slays us; Romans 4.13. and
10.5.6. Romans 7.9.10. 2 Cor. 3.6. Psalm. 1.9. Heb. 4.
therefore he prefers the righteousness of faith, before the righteousness
of the law, which is a killing letter to unregenerate men; when the Gospel (
to all belieuers) becomes a quickening spirit. This is the word that is able to
convert our souls, which is mighty in operation, and sharper then any sword.
The weapons of our warfare (which we fetch from hence) able through God to cast
down strong holds, and every high thing that is exalted against the knowledge
of God, 2 Cor. 10.
and to bring into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ. The
powerful preaching whereof is The power of God to salvation to all that
believe. Romans 1.16. 1 Cor. 1.18.
This forces the very infidel (through the working of Gods spirit in the
heart) being rebuked in holy assemblies, to fall down on his face and worship
God, 1 Cor. 14, 24.25
and plainly to acknowledge that God is in his messengers. This powerful word
of Christ raised Lazarus from the grave of corruption, John 11.43.44
and is able to revive us being dead in our sins; and to raise us from the
death of sin, to the life of righteousness.

The reasons why Gods word (in the holy ministry thereof) is of such efficacy
to quicken us, are the same with doctrine the second.

It is the Instrument by which he works and effects his purpose and decree.
Besides, Gods word is the special instrument by which he works and effects
his purpose and decree. By his word he created all things, and by his word they
are vpholden and preserved: By, and according to his word, he saves and
condemns, disposes and orders all persons and actions, Heb. 1.2.3. John
12.48.
yea, all creatures, with their motions, referring them to their ends
appointed, and making them all to serve his glory. God and his word are in a
league inseperable* he never crosses it, being his good will and pleasure. He
that hears it and the messengers thereof, Math. 10.14. Luke 10.16.
hears him, and he that despises it, and them, despises him; where it is
not received, he accounts himself rejected.

Which serves, first to teach us to honor God in this Romans 10.14.
If we will not effectually hear in the holy ministry thereof, we cannot
believe; if we believe not, we cannot be saved. If we contemn and despise it,
Acts 5.39. John 12.44.
it shall be our judge at the latter day. He that resists it, strives with
his Maker. Without the comfort of Gods word, we must needs perish in our
afflictions; if Gods precepts quicken us not, we are but dead and damned.

and traditions, their commandments and inventions. This word alone is the
rule of faith, and the resoluer of the conscience: All other humane devises are
but as straw and slubble, yea, dross it self to the purest gold. 1 Cor. 3.12.
Psalm. 12.
This has been tried to the utmost in the furnace, and is still more
glorious. The turning of men's devises are but as clay. Esaias 29.16. Esaias 8.19.20.
Should not a people enquire at their God? To the law, and the testimony (for
shame) if they speak not according to his word, it is because there is no
light in them. Ier. 8.8.9.
And Jeremy reproacheth those that say they are wise, Ye have cast away the
word of the Lord, and what wisdom is in you? Therefore the Prophet that has
a dream, let him tell a dream, and he that has my word, let him speak my
word faithfully. What is the chafe to the Wheat? Ier. 23.28.29.
Is not my word even like a fire (says the Lord) and like a hammer that
breaks stones, etc. See more in the uses of the first doctrine.

The end of the first Sermon.
The second SERMON.
LAMENT. 3.55.56.57. Text.
I called upon thy name, O Lord, out of the low dungeon, thou have heard my
voice: stop not thy ear from my sight, and from my cry. Thou drewest near in
the day that I called upon thee: Thou said, fear not; O Lord, thou have
maintained the cause of my soul, and have redeemed my life.


THe Prophets meaning is, that he prayed heartily to God (the ruler of the
whole world) from the place and condition of greatest extremity, when no means
of deliverance appeared, resting still in the experience of Gods love, who
heretofore had heard his petitions, and now (hops) will not refuse them,
(being earnest and hearty.) And though he seem to be far off, Sense.
will yet take notice of them in the manifestation of his love (in the means,)
according to his gracious promise, still encouraging his servants in their
greatest dangers: Neither doubts he but God will defend both his life, and
good cause, that procured the danger; and will send deliverance from the lands
of all those that would destroy him and his Church.

The words contain, first, a description of the Prophets misery in times past:
Secondly, Division.
the means he used for his deliverance: Thirdly, the fruits and effects
thereof. His misery is enlarged: 1. In regard of the place being a low dungeon:
2. In regard of his condition, he sighed and sorrowed, he was full of fear,
and in danger of his life. The means which he used was Prayer: which is
commended; 1. For the faithfulness: 2. For the feruency thereof: For the
faithfulness, he called upon God alone, and grounded his prayer only upon his
name and power: For the feruency of his prayer, he says, he called, cried,
sighed and sorrowed: 3. The fruits and effects of his prayer are noted, by
these circumstances: 1. God heard him: 2. He drew near, manifesting his care
and providence toward him in the means: 3. He freed him from fear,
maintained his cause, and redeemed his life from the danger of death.

The sum is, Sum.
that as God heretofore had heard and delivered him in, and from such great
dangers and distress, so he would still hear, help and deliver him, and his
afflicted Church, in saving him, and redeeming him, and it, from their so great
present dangers and afflictions.

Being in the low dungeon destitute of all worldly help, he called upon the
name of the Lord: Teaching us. Text.


That true faithful prayer and invocation of Gods name, Prayer is the most
soueraign means of help in our greatest dangers.
when all other helps do fail us, this will serve our turn; and is the
only refuge of all Gods children. I looked upon my right hand, but there was
none that would know me; Psalm. 142.45.
all refuge failed we, then cried I to the Lord, and said, thou art my hope.
When the snares of death compassed me, and the griefs of the grave caught me,
when I found trouble and sorrow, Psalm. 116.3.4. and 107. and 22.11.
then I called upon the name of the Lord, saying, I beseech thee O Lord deliver
my soul.

The reason hereof is, It is gods commandment and ordinance to relieve us.
that God has commanded and ordained it so to be. Call upon me in the time of
thy trouble, so will I deliver thee, and thou shall glorify me. Come to me
(says Christ) all that travail and are laden, and I will ease you. Psalm.
50.15.
He shall call upon me, Mat. 11.28. Psalm. 91.15.
and I will hear him: I will be with him in trouble, I will deliver him, and
glorify him.

God is the revenger and defender of his, who being called upon will hear and
help.
he hears all causes and controversies, defends the cause of the widow and
fatherles; he sits in the throne and judges right, O Lord God the auenger,
exalt thy self clearly, exalt thy self thou judge of the world: How long
shall the wicked triumph? and so he concludes that God is his refuge and rock
of his hope. Ps. 94.1.2.3 22 and 9.4.9.13.18. Psalm. 10.1.12.14.17.18.


The use hereof is, to make us fervent and forward in prayer. Is any man
afflicted; let him pray; for the prayer of a) heaven and the ear of God is
open to him. Acts 12.5. James 5.13.17. Exodus 17.11.
When Moses held up his hand Israel prevailed; That the Israelites might see
that his hand had a greater stroke in the fight, then all theirs, Hosea 12.3.
Romans 15.30. Psalm. 106.23.
the success must rise and fall with it. Therefore we must wrestle, with
Jacob, who by his strength had power with God; and strive with Paul, and stand
in the gap with Moses.

Secondly, it condemns all such as contemn this ordinance, 1 Timothy 4 5.
as Chariots, Horsemen, Money, Bread, Physic: which most excellent ordinance
of God is yet least and last thought upon by many: For if men or devils can
sted them, they will not be beholden unto God; when it is too late then will
they send for the Priest (as their Proverb is;) yet so will infidells do,
Yea, Pharoh himself, with Ahab and the greatest Athiests.

Ezekiah, Esaias 38.14. Psalm. 55.2. 1 Samuel 1.13.15.
make a noise in their prayers with David, and but even move their lips with
Hannah, it is sufficient if thy soul be powered out with hers; for God knows
the meaning of the spirit, which likewise helps our infirmities. Romans 8.26.27.
So that when Gods children are in any danger, faith does accompany them, and
moves them to prayer, and in praying they are still more fervent: they can
never be brought so low, but they can cast their eyes to Heaven. When they
have none other to deliver them, they can deliver themselves by faithful
prayer: So Jonah was heard out of the Whales belly, Jonah 2.2. Dan. 5.22. Exodus
14 15. Psalm. 130.1.
Daniell out of the Lions den, Moses at the red Sea, David out of the deep,
all these wonderfully perplexed, and overwhelmed (with outward sorrows) yet
heard and delivered by faithful prayer.

He only called upon Gods name in the dungeon. Text.


True and faithful prayer must be made and directed Thou that hear the
prayer, God alone must be prayed unto. Psalm.
to thee shall all flesh come. Whosoever calls upon the name of the Lord
shall be saved. For this is Gods commandment, 62.2. Joel 1.38. Romans 10.13.
with his promise annexed, that we call upon him in our troubles, and he will
help us. Ask, and you shall have, (says Christ,) seek, and you shall find,
knock, and it shall it be opened unto you.

It is a part of Gods worship and service: Psalm. 50.15. and 91.15. Math. 7.7.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. In the
days of Enosh son of Seth, Prayer is a part of Gods worship, proper unto him.
men began to call on the name of the Lord; that is, they began to be
religious, and professed the same, by calling on Gods name. Therefore God
vpbraideth Jacob for not calling upon him; and says, Israel had wearyed him
in not performing this service, and going Mat. 4.10. Genesis 4.26. Esaias 43.22.


Again to call upon creatures, is without any warrant; and whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin; and it crosses the To pray to any Creature is without
warrant.
doubtless thou art our father though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
know us not, yet thou O Lord art our father and our redeemer, thy name is for
ever. Romans 14.23. Esaias 63.16.


Which doctrine serves to direct us to God alone in our prayer and
supplications; being according to his word still practiced in Gods church,
agreeable to the form of Christ's prayer, Mat. 6.9. John 16.23. 1 John 5.14.
(a most perfect pattern for us to follow,) and Christ himself does assure
us, that whatsoever we ask the father in his name, he will give it us: if as
S. John says, we ask it according to his will.

Baal from morning to evening, 1 Kings 18.26.
roaring like beasts; that pray to angels and Saints and other creatures; that
offer so many sacrifices of prayer and praise to the Queen of heaven, Ier. 44.
devising (I know not how many) Letanies and Dirges to He-Saints, and
Shee-Saints, with the multitude whereof they have stuffed their Kalenders, till
their be no room; and to fill up their account have cannonized and invested a
number of Traitors to God and their governors, in time past; who more justly
may be placed in hell, then have the meanest room in heaven: yet these be
their goodly intercessours, that must have their prayers.

Text.
I called upon thy name: As one acquainted with Gods power, he depends alone
upon his providence and protection. Observe again from hence:

Faithful prayer is always accompanied with effectual knowledge of Gods name
and power.
Therefore he that will come to God (says the Apostle) must believe that God
is, and that he is a rewarder of them that seek him. They that know thy name
(having experience of thy grace and might) will put their trust in thee: for
thou Lord have not failed them that seek thee. The name of the Lord is a
strong tower, Heb. 11.6. Psalm. 9.10. Prou. 18.18.
the righteous run unto it, and are exalted: being beaten from their
standings (as poor soldiers in the field) yet the name of the Lord is their
sure defense and only refuge. David assuring himself of Gods protection, and
resting upon his name and power, secureth himself against all assaults, as one
that is in the strongest castle and surest hold; be dare come forth into the
field and challenge all his foes: Psalm. 18 2.
when once he has got the Lord to be his shield and buckler, Genesis 15.1.
then Abraham need not to fear wheresoever he goes.

Now as calling upon Gods name, Reason.
is a most special means to deliver us from our greatest dangers; No man can
call upon God that believes not, and none can believe that knows not God in
the ministry of his word.
so How (I pray you) shall they call upon him, in whom they have not believed?
and how shall they believe on him, of whom they have not heard? Such ask and
have not, because they ask amiss. All Gods promises are intailed to those
alone that do believe; such are within his covenant, which he has indented,
and sealed, yea delivered with his hand, for the undoubted assurance of their
deliverance: Such may but ask and have, if they do but knock, Romans 16.14.
James 4.3.
the door shall be opened. Be it unto thee (says Christ) according to thy
faith. Math. 7.7. Math. 9.29. Math. 15.28.
O woman great is thy faith. If Gods children have faith in their hearts, it
bears down all before it, and breaks through* all manner of lets and
hindrances in the world; it ouercomes the world, and vanquisheth the devil,
and he that truly has it, may challenge the force of all the creatures, if
they should lay siege against him: 1 John 5.4.
For there is nothing impossible unto faith, which only is grounded upon God
and his word: Math. 17.20.
So that we must know our faith in God, by our knowledge of God. If we have no
word, we have no warrant, our faith is but infamy. This made Paul to suffer
with cheerfulness for the gospel, 2 Timothy 1.22.
and was not ashamed: for I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded he is
able to keep that which I have committed to him against that day: so says
Peter, 1 Pet.4.19.
let them that suffer according to the will of God, commit their souls to him
in well doing, as to a faithful creator. So sure and well known is God to
the faithful, that they put both bodies and souls, life and goods (with all
things else) to his disposing. For faith is the ground of things hoped for, and
an assured evidence of things that are not seen: Heb. 11.1.
it makes things absent, as though they were present, and makes things
promised, so certain as if they were performed.

The consideration whereof must make us very industrious faith, and attayning
to the sound knowledge of God, which in a Christian are always inseparable;
and so to use the means whereby they may be come by, and increased, which are
the Word, and the Sacraments; experience of gods love, examples of good men,
and their conference, delighting in Gods Sabaoths, and holy assemblies, etc.



Hannah was of Ely, 1 Samuel 1.13.15.
) yet pouring out their souls, and calling upon Gods name, (in the confidence
of his power) they shall be relieved, though their faith be weak (yet if true)
and assuredly grounded upon Gods name and power, they shall be heard, even out
of the dungeon of extremities.

Text.
Out of the dungeon he called upon Gods name:] Which also may teach us:

Gods children are subject to the greatest dangers in this life.
which the dearest Children of God are not subject unto in this world. Jeremy
was in the myrie dungeon, where he stuck fast, and his life was shut up,
casting a stone upon him. Daniell in the Lions den: The three Children in the
fiery furnace: Ier. 38.6. Lam^nt. 3.53. D^^. 6.16.17. and ^ 21. Exodus 1.11.12.
Acts 12 6 and 16 23. and 5.41. Heb. 11.
Israel a bondslaue in Egypt: So was Joseph imprisoned, slaundered and
disgraced: Paul, Peter, and the faithful, stocked, fettered, imprisoned, and
many other murdered and massacred, as we may see a whole Catalogue of them
mustered by the Apostle, all of them so excellent that the world was not worthy
of their company. Join to these Abraham for his uncertain dwelling: David
for his manifold enemies: Job for inward and outward miseries of all sorts.
All these with the rest, whose pilgrimage is ended, and many that now live and
still remain to the worlds end, must go the same high way to Heaven, drink
of the same whip and bitter cup. All kind of crosses and calamities attend
upon them in the world, until they be at rest with God in Heaven.

The reason hereof is, that since the same corruption of Gods children have the
same corruption of nature, and community of sin.
spreads over all alike without exception, needs it must follow that all be
justly inwrapped in the outward punishment and mulct thereof; since all kind
of miseries follow sin, with death it self, as the shadow does the body.
Sin is the work, and these are the wages. And God in justice must needs
show his anger against sin in this life, even upon his own servants. Here
they must be judged that hereafter they be not damned with the world. 1 Cor.
11.32.


Secondly, God uses them as scourges, purges, and They are medicinable and
wholesome to heal their sinful nature.
and reform our sinful, sick, and disordered nature. Here we must be
weined with the wormwood of calamities, from the breasts of the world, (which
we always would be lugging) that so we may be brought in love with heaven and
heavenly things.

The use is first for our instruction, to make us wise in the Psalm. 93 12. and
74.
Blessed is the man whom thou chastenest (O Lord) and teach him in thy law;
these trials must hasten us to Gods Sanctuary, to stay our violent passions,
and bring us our resolutions in such doubtful cases.

Secondly, it reprooueth all such as judge according favor and credit they
are in with the Lord. Since an outward condition is here to all men alike;
Eccles. 9.2.
All things come alike to all, and the same condition is to the just and to the
wicked; to the good, and to the pure, and to the polluted; as is the good, so
is the sinner; he that swears, as he that fears an oath. For although it be
most certain, that God has a special care for the salvation of the
faithful; yet such is the course of things falling out unto men in this life,
that it cannot be judged, by the outward show and appearance whom God loves,
or whom he hates: Such a certain, infinite and endless confusion, is cast
before the eye of man; and therefore Gods children must not promise themselves
any immunity from troubles, or worldly success, but rather to look always
for the contrary, and labor still to subdue their inordinate passions, in
thinking their case to be singular, censuring God to be too rigorous, and so
calling his justice into question, which is near unto blasphemy.

Text.
Stop not thy ear from my sigh, and from my cry:] As if he should say, we
pray, and thou hear not; nay, thou art angry with our prayers, and stoppest
thy ears (speaking after the manner of men) and showing by effects, that it
was as good for sinners not at all to pray to God, as to pray in vain.

Sin stops the passage of our prayers, and keeps Gods blessings from us
and keeps Gods blessings from us; it makes GOD (as it were) deaf, and
dumb, and blind, that he will neither hear, help, nor respect us. The Lords
hand is not shortened, that he cannot save, neither is his ear heavy that it
cannot hear: but your iniquities have separated between you and your God,
Esaias 59.1.2.
and your sins have hid his face from you, that he will not hear. Sin
makes God as a stranger that he will not tarry among his own people: Ier.
14.8.9.
and though he be most strong, yet it so astonieth him, that he cannot help

Gods hatred of sin.
Such is his hatred to sin, that he will not hear, nor help, he
disclaymeth their service, Esaias 1.12.13.14.15. and 66.5.
and cannot abide their prayers. Their persons are odious, and how shall their
actions be acceptable? His Will, and Word is against them; remaining sinful,
he will not own them for his, John 9.
but excludes and excommunicates them from his presence, and Church. Prou. 1.28.
GOD hears not sinners: Such as be wicked cannot stand in his sight. Psalm.
1.5. and 5.5
Will you steal, murder, and commit adultery, and swear falsely, and come and
stand before me in this house, whereupon my name is called? Ier.7.9.10.11.
Is this house become a den of thieves?

This must make us careful to hold up pure hands, when we pray unto God, Use.
1 Timothy 2.8. Acts 15.9.
praying him first to purify our hearts by faith, which may manifest it self
by unfeigned repentance: That so when we draw near unto God in our service and
worship, James 4.8.9.
and would have him draw near to us in the acceptance thereof, we may both
cleanse our hands, and purge our own hearts from all kind of sin and
hypocrisy. Wash you, make you clean, Esaias 1.16.17.18
cease to do evil, learn to do well: Come now, let us reason together. If
iniquity be in thy hand, put it far away; Job 11.13.14.15.18.
and let no wickedness dwell in thy Tabernacle: Then truly shall thou lift up
thy face without spot, thou shall be stable, and shall not fear, and thou
shall be bold, because there is hope.

Being in the dungeon, He not only called, but sighed, Text.
and cried unto God.

Afflictions not only stir up men to prayer, but make Afflictions set an
edge on our prayers.
Jeremy perplexed in the dungeon, called sighed, and cried unto God. Hearken,
O Lord, unto me (says David,) and answer: I mourn in my prayer, and make a
noise. Psalm. 55.2.
It makes men to cry as a woman in travel. Demand now, and behold, Ier. 30.6.
if Man travel with child? Wherefore do I behold every man with his hands on
his loins, as a Woman in her travel? Esaias 13.8. Exodus 9.27.28. 1 King.
21.27.29
and all faces are turned into palenesse? It forces very infidels to humble
themselves as Pharaoh, Ahab, etc.

See the variety of Gods punishments before he can make his people yield;
Leuit. 26.41.
yet in the end their uncircumcised hearts shall be humbled; and they shall
pray for their sin.

Afflictions subdue the pride of man's heart and sturdy affections.
and nature, makes them to melt and relent; who may know (by woeful
experience) that God will not cease from punishing, till they leave their
sinning. God still adds seven plagues to seven (increasing the number and
the greatness) till his children be turned unto him, Leuit. 26.18.21.24.28.
etc.
and be thoroughly humbled: Amos 4.6.7.8.9.10. Hosea 5.15.
So in Amos, he sends his judgments successively, because they returned not
unto him: So he says, he will return to his place, and not be found, until
they seek him, and amend: and God affirms, that he will enter into judgment
with Jerusalem, Ierem.2.
because she says, I have not sinned.

Afflictions make us know our selves and state.
before I was troubled I went wrong. In my prosperity I said, I shall never be
moved* Ephraim in presperitie was as an untamed and wanton Calfe, not wonted to
the yoke; Psalm 119. and 30.6.
but by chasticements afterward repenting and being converted and instructed,
I smote my self (says Ephraim) upon my thigh, Ier. 31.18.19.
I was ashamed and confounded, because I did bear the reproach of my youth.

Afflictions show us Gods wrath.
flaming as an unquenchable fire, and burning to the bottom of hell; and in
them we prove our own weakness not able to undergo, or endure them. Deuteronomy.
32. Psalm. 39.10.
Take away thy plague from me: for I am consumed by the stroke of thy hand.
Therefore David prays God, not to rebuke him in his anger, Psalm. 6.1.
nor to chastise him in his wrath.

Micah 6.9.
That we take notice of Gods judgments, in acknowledging the author, and the
end thereof; Amos 4.12.
that we humble our selves and meet our God, that we pray for patience and
strength to undergo trialls, and seeing our weakness, to run to God for aid.

Again it makes much for our comfort, that afflictions Adam to hide our
sins. Job. 31.33.
As malefactors (on a rack;) and unhappy Scholars in a School, are forced to
acknowledge their faults; so God by affliction wresteth out a confession of
sin, and resolution of amendment in his Children. Thus God does scowre and
cleanse away the dross and drowsinesse of our nature, and so rowseth and
raises up our dead hearts to earnest and faithful prayers, that it turns
them to cryings, Romans 8.26.
sighings, and groanings, that cannot be expressed.

Calling upon Gods name, he heard his voice.

Gods children never pray in vain, Gods children never pray in vain.
but are heard and helped of God in their greatest afflictions. I called upon
thy name (O Lord) out of the low dungeon, thou have heard my voice, I called
unto the Lord in my trouble, and he heard me. See the proofs and reasons
hereof, with the uses, in doctrine the first, etc.

Thou have heard my voice:] That is, heretofore thou

The experience of Gods love in our former deliverances out of dangers, The
experience of Gods love, ought still to encourage us to pray for deliverance
out of danger.
ought still to encourage us to resort unto him, when the like or greater
troubles shall assail us. Thou have set me at liberty when I was in distress:
have mercy upon me, and hearken unto my prayer. That God had delivered David
from the Lion and the Bear, Psalm. 4 4. 1 Samuel 17.37.
was the special motive and encouragement unto him to encounter with Goliath,
and his best assurance to conquer and overcome him.

So the church cheareth her self in her great ruins and afflictions, hoping to
be redeemed again from the captivity of Babylon. Esaias 51.9.10.11.
O arm of the Lord, rise up as in old time, in the generations of the world;
Art not thou the same that have cut Rahab, and wounded the Dragon? Art not thou
the same which have dried the Sea, even the waters of the great deep, making
the depth of the Sea a way for the redeemed to pass over? Thus they speak of
their deliverance from Egypt, Psalm. 87.4. and 89.10.
which is called Rahab; putting some part of the Land for the whole, and the
people therein contained; meaning also by the Dragon that tyrant Pharaoh,
dwelling in the midst of the floudes, Ezekiel. 29.3. 1 Timothy 4.17.
(as Ezekiell speaks,) hyding himself in the River Nylus; and as Paul
calls Nero a Lion, so here is Pharaoh termed a Dragon, to express the
quality of Tyrants: Thus, with the remembrance of that eminent deliverance out
of Egypt, they comfort their hearts, and cherish their hopes, to be freed from
the present captivity: for what shall hinder God from bringing them out of
Babylon, more then it did the freeing of their forefathers from the slavery of
Egypt?

Reason.
God is still the same, without change or alteration; his nature and condition
is ever to be gracious, God is of an unchangeable nature, still of like power,
and goodness.
and ready to forgive: he is faithful and will not deceive his people; his
power and will are never weakened; his truth and promise shall abide for ever.
Has he said, and shall not he do it? or has he done it, James 1.17. Numb.
23.19.
and cannot he do the same again? Fear it not, for GOD is constant and
unchangeable in his nature.

Psalm. 44.1.2.8.
in the old time; how GOD had driven out the heathen, and planted them in; how
he had destroyed the Nations, and caused them to grow, and so he concludes,
that they will praise God continually, and confess his name for ever.

This also reproves the peruersenes of our nature, and Esaias 59 1.
that he cannot or will not hear and help us in our troubles, nor cares for
our estate; Luke 12.7.
who yet has numbered our hairs and put our tears into his bottle. Psalm 56.9.
We should indeed rather censure our selves for weakness of faith, and
thank our own sins, which have made a separation, and caused God to hide
his face. We have angered the Lord, and now there is a breach, and his wrath is
gone out against us. Cant. 5.2.6 7.
The Spouse was sluggish, and would not hear the voice of her bridegroom,
knocking, and standing without, at the door, till his hair was full of dew,
and his locks with the drops of the night; but afterward she opened, and her
well-beloved was gone and past: she sought him and could not presently find him,
but is beaten and wounded of the watchmen, and has many crosses; yet still we
must remember Gods former mercies, and our old deliverances and so recover our
hope.

I called upon thee, and thou drewest near, and said, Text.
fear not.

God is still ready and at hand to comfort his children God is still ready and
at hand to comfort and relieve his children, in their greatest dangers.
God is our hope, and strength, and help, in troubles ready to be found. For
further proof and use of this, see doctrine 1. in the first Sermon.

Now God eases them of their fears by showing them his favor, in giving them
the spirit of adoption, which remoueth the cause of fear, Psalm. 46.1.
and makes them as bold as Lions* because their sins are removed, Reason.
and they reconciled to God through Christ, yea, Romans 8.15.17. Prou. 28.1.
made his children and heirs annexed with Christ. This spirit is the earnest
of their safety and salvation. 2 Cor. 1.22. and 5.5. Ephesians. 1.13.14. Romans 8.
The Lord is on their side, and who can be against them? All things now work
together for the best, and therefore, what, or who can separate them from the
love of Christ? surely such can never be moved, nor be afraid of ill tidings;
their heart is fixed and believes in the Lord, Psalm. 112.6.7. and 34.4.
they seek to the Lord, and he hears them, and delivers them out of all
their fear.

Use.
Which must make us diligently to seek the Lord in our dangers. If we would be
soundly cured of our fears, let us go to him by our faithful prayers, and
this will free our hearts from unnecessary doubts, and keep out despair, that
we shall never be dismaide. In nothing be careful, (says the Apostles) but
in all things let your requests be made known unto God; and then the peace of
God (which passes all understanding) shall keep your hearts and minds in
Christ Jesus: For this peace quieteth the heart, and setleth the mind in the
assurance of a happy issue, from all difficulties and dangers. Psalm. 3.4.5.6.
This course took David, who is not afraid to challenge ten thousand enemies
that compass him round about; nay so secure he was in the confidence of God
(whom he called upon) that he laid him down and slept, and rose again,
without any more ado; because the Lord sustained him.

Text.
O Lord thou have maintained the cause of my soul, and have redeemed my life.
Verse 5.8.


God will maintain the righteous cause of his children.
whatsoever be their dangers and troubles, he will have a special care both
of their persons and business they have in hand. He shall bring forth their
righteousness as the light, and their judgments as the noone day: Psalm. 37.6.
Their righteous cause and holy conversation he will make to be so evident, as
the Sun when it rises, nay, as at noone when it is the highest, and shines
brightest. He will stand by them, and deliver them, and their cause, from
unrighteous judgment: See the execution; how he sits in the assembly of
Gods, Psalm. 82.1.2.
to see and examine both them and their proceedings. See further of this point,
Doctr. 1, and the first Sermon, in the proofs.

It is his place and office so to do; Reason.
Shall not the Judge of all the world do right? It is his place and office.
It belongs to him to render unto every man according to his works: He must
needs defend the truth, being the God of truth, yea, truth it self; Genesis
18.25. Psalm. 146.7. Revel. 20.12. Acts 9.4.
and his servants bear witness to the truth, and are ready to seal the same
with their lives: And shall he not defend both it and them? Yes assuredly; for
God has promised protection of them both.

The truth of which doctrine ought to encourage and Buy it me may, but never
sell it at any rate, Prou. 23.23. Colos. 27.
for this is Judas merchandise. We must labor to be rooted and established in
the truth, which may be blamed, but never shamed, nor yet forsaken of God and
good men.

Likewise, it reproves and condemns all such as are Mat. 11.7.
John Baptist was no shaken Reed. A faithful man is as the house built upon
the rock, no storm or shower can shake it, Mat. 7.24.25.
much less overthrow it. Great is the force of the truth, and of the faithful
professors thereof, which still prevail and get a conquest over all things.

The cause of my soul:] That is, Text.
the cause wherefore his life was in danger.

There is nothing more dangerous (many times in the world) then to defend and
maintain the truth of God. Doctr.
The defense of Gods truth is many times most dangerous.
This is the cause of Ieremies soul, which called his very life into question.
The world hates me (says Christ) because I testify that the works are evil
thereof. Every one that does evil hates the light. Many times it hazardeth
liberty, life, Ioh. 7.7 and 3.20
and goods: Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake. It makes sometimes
a separation between the nearest and dearest friends, Father and Son, Mother
and Daughter. Luke 21.16.17^18. and 12.52 53^ Ioh. 9.21.22.34
The poor blind man (once believing and defending the truth) is not only
excommunicate of the Church, John 12.42.
but cast off by his parents; they leave him and the cause; yea, every one that
confess Christ openly are cast out: Paul became an enemy to the Galathians,
Gal. 4.15.
because he told them the truth.

Satan's rage against it.
and the mighty weapons that cast down his strong holds; by it he is driven
out of possession, 2 Cor. 10.4.5.
and falls from heaven like lightening; he can have no room in the Church
nor place in the hearts of Gods chosen, Luke 10.18.
for the preaching of the truth.

The corruption and malice of man's heart.
which opposes against it, in maintaining things unlawful, which the word of
truth condemns. And here begin the wars, every one strives for his lusts
and to have his own will, James 4.1. Job 4.12.
which it reproves. It is a sword, a sacrificing knife, a hammer, a fire, to
kill, conquer, and consume whatsoever evil in is our nature, Ier. 23.28.29.
whether in reason, judgment, or practice.

Use.
The use, is to teach us to be prepared, and to pray to God, that we may be
strengthened against all the dangers and persecutions which usually follow the
sound profession of the gospel, the word of truth. We must resolve to sell
all, Math. 13.45.46
not only for the buying, but keeping of this precious pearl, which will
prove the richest merchandise. It is best to cast our accounts for the building
of this glorious tower, Luke 14.28.31.
and to muster our best forces for these spiritual wars; that we may be
conquerours, and not ouercommed: We are not in this spiritual fight, to
wrestle against flesh and blood, but against principalities and powers, we had
need therefore to be well harnessed with the whole armor of God, Text.
that we may be able to stand to our

God maintains both the cause and person of such as defend his truth.
God not only maintained his cause, but redeemed his life.

Lastly, from hence we may learn the safety and security of all Gods servants,
that do their best endeavor to mainetaine Gods cause and truth. In their
greatest perils, he keeps them safe and sound; he maintains Ieremies cause,
and redeemeth his life: for the proof and uses they are all one with doctrine
1.

Thus having briefly unfolded the secret virtues of these two sovereign
receipts (the Word and Prayer) to be most cordial and comfortable in our
variety of afflictions and greatest trials: Conclusion.
The one to instruct us in the lawful means that we are to use, and to
moderate our violent passions, and unruly affections, that (howsoever) with
patience we may possess our souls: and also, for as much as our knowledge
proves very weak (for the most part,) or not so sanctified that the increase
thereof can always sted us in it self; the other prescription of prayer is
necessarily to be adjoined, without the which the best ordinances of God,
themselves will be unfruitful. And therefore for the right use of our
knowledge (by the holy ministry of the word) and the strengthening of our
faith and hope, whereby we may be enabled to persevere unto the end: we had
more then need continually to practice our selves in this holy duty: That so
being armed by the word, and supported by faithful prayer, we may be always
furnished in our christian warfare, to fight the good fight of faith, and so to
attain the end thereof, which is the salvation of our souls.

FINIS.

