A Gagg for the new GOSPEL? NO: A NEW GAGG FOR An OLD GOOSE.

Who would needs undertake to stop all PROTESTANTS mouths for ever, with 276.
places out of their own English BIBLES.

OR AN ANSWER to a late Abridger of Controversies, and Belyar of the
PROTESTANTS Doctrine.

By Richard Mountagu.

Published by AVTHORITIE.

LONDON.

Printed by Thomas Snodham for Matthew Lown^^ and William Barret. 1624.

To the READER.
PROTESTANT or Papist, English or Romish Catholic, Christian if thou be,
though to all or any, I intend what I write, yet I will not press thee ^o
peruse the Treatise ensuing, for I am indifferent whether thou do or no. Nor
would I have so much as troubled thy Patience with a Preface, it being not
tanti, which the Gagger has grated upon, but that being put upon such a
copesmate, I was of conueniency to acquaint thee first with three things: My
undertaking: then my performing: and the motive of the Second, his deserving.
What moved me to meddle with this Gagger: In what sort I thought fit to arrest
him: wherefore I have dealt with him in such sort. And first for the first, be
pleased to know

That I coped not with him voluntarily: nor thrust my self forward of my own
accord, out of a desire to be doing. I have other employments, of much more
behoof, to better purpose, and my greater benefit every way; or, if I had none,
pater a^ has her as non sic per dear, I profess, I would never be so idle, but
could more pleasingly and profitably spend my time, then in catching or killing
of Flies. But be pleased to hear a story, Reader, which put me on this
posture, and performing. And thus it was.

About some two years since, as I remember, some of our Catholic Limitors,
had been roming and rambling in the Country, and brake into my pale secretly,
at my Parish of Standford-Riuers in Essex: and according as commonly their
custom is, (that you may know of what companions Saint Paul intended, his
Leading silly women captives) fell in with some, one at least, of the
subordinate and weaker sex: indeauouring to make Proselytes of my neighbors
wives. Now you know their ordinary onsets, with great Outcries of Damned
Heretics, out of the Church. No Service: no Sacraments: no Ministry: no
Faith: no Christ: no Salvation. Terrible Shawe-fowles to skarre poor Souls,
that have not the faculty of discerning Cheese from Chalk. Horrible affrights
and mormolyceues, to put young children out of their wits, that cannot
distinguish a visnomie indeed from a visour.

So it fell out, that a neighbor of mine, with whom in this sort they had
been tampering, became not a little dismayed, and perplexed with these
bug-beares of great names and thunderings in her ears; till it came at length
unto my knowledge what was done. I let her know, they were but scarr-crowes:
mere words and wind, bragges and boastings, and so settled her disquieted
thoughts again. But yet it seems, they left not so. The Devil has a name,
Beelzebub, the God of flies, expressing his nature, like a fly, insolent,
importune, pressing on; though he fall off to day, he will re-enforcce to
morrow, though he fail to day, he will assay to morrow, and still hope to
prevail at last. So These, as He, came on again, though ever by owlelight.
For they came to steal, and therefore feared blaunchers. I could not come to
God-speed, nor to confront them.

But this I did: When next you meet with these Romish Rangers, commend me to
them, said I unto my neighbor. Tell them, I much desire to be acquainted with
them. I was borne, and bred, and brought up, and professed in the Religion of
the Church of England: which I hitherto have thought to be the truth: held and
taught as the truth: if I have been deceived, and have deceived others, I am
sorry for it: my desire is to know and profess the Truth, to wave heresy, to
quit error, to go out of schism, to find out the true Church of Christ, and
become a member of it; and so consequently, by all possible means to save my
Soul. If then their intention be such sincerely, as they pretend it is, To
save Souls; they may do a meritorious deed to come and save mine, the rather,
because they may go compendiously to work, in gaining me to the side, who am
like enough to draw you, my Parishioners, with me, at least to make you more
seasable, then otherwise you would be for them.

But it seemed canebam sur dis, and I believe, if the relation was made, as I
think it was, they gave no great credit to my words, or had less hope of their
performance. For the truth is, the most of these Limitors are but poor
Ignaroes: take them out of their beaten paths, they cannot hold pace.)
Wherefore, seeing I could not tell where to find them, and they would not
find me, where they might have me: I thought to send after them to know their
minds, to understand their opinions, and see what they would say, to win me
unto their Catholiqne faith. So I took pen and paper, and wrote, as I thought
fit, three Propositions, promising conformity upon resolution, to this effect,
and I suppose, in these terms.

1 If any Papist lining, or all the Papists living, can prove unto me, that the
present Roman Church, is either the Catholic Church, or a sound member of the
Catholic Church, I will subscribe.

2 If any Papist living, or all the Papists living, can prove unto me, that the
present Church of England is not a true member of the Catholic Church, I will
subscribe.

3 If any Papist, etc. can prove unto me, that all those points, or any one of
those points which the Church of Rome maintains against the Church of
England, were or was, the perpetual Doctrine of the Catholic Church: the
concluded Doctrine of the representatine Church in any general Council, or
National approved by a General: or the dogmaticall resolution of any one
Father, for 500. years after Christ, I will subscribe.

And to these severally I set my name, which I did to try their sufficiencies:
or abate their insolences: and to settle the wavering upon those goodly
pretenses of Antiquity, Universality, and Conformity. I am sure I come home to
them, and touch them in their freehold, as they claim it: I give them scope
enough to insist upon. If they can perform this, I will not eat my words. I
make it now public, which I then said in private, let them perform it, I
will subscribe.

These three Propositions, thus conceived, and signed, I then delivered unto my
neighbor, the party that should have been proselyted: entreating her, to
deliver them unto those her perswaders, if they came again, as she thought they
would. This she promised, and at their next meeting, accordingly performed,
within few days. I expected, I confess, some great undertaker, and some
mighty opposition, to purpose, in points of that Nature, which touched them so
near, and came up to the head of their Catholic cause; and so began to
compose my self against expected adversaries of some performance at least. But
many weeks, many months passed, eighteen at least, and I heard no noise of
those Hereticke-quellers, my great Masters, who cease not yet to call for
disputation. At length, after much expectation, upon the fifth of October last,
the same party premised, presents me at once with two several presents.
The one, two sheets of Paper, written in haste, not fully out, with two
several hands. The Scribe was some puny-nouice in every point of Scrib-ship.
For neither could he tell how to use or dispose his points: nor yet how to
spell his words. I have the Original by me, to show. Any man that reads it,
will many times be to seek, to make sense, or English of it. The Dictator, (if
yet the Author and writer were divided) subscribed himself yours in Christ
Jesus, A. P. a silly man God knows as ever talked idly of the Catholic
Church: the head of the Church: the Mass, Confession, and Purgatory. For his
discourse (beside some ^^urrility without wit or ^artnesse, of my Worship,
Doctorship, etc.) smattered a little, but very poorly, and at random, upon
these points: but concerning, or unto, my Propositions; (...) my quidem
Lucilianum? the Innocent meant me no hurt, therefore, he bit not.

Marry he had a cleanly put-off for that, thus. He desires me at my going to
London, to repair unto Master May his house (these are my friend A. P. s own
words) in Holburne, in Partridge-alley. A man, that I never knew, nor saw, nor
heard of, albus an ater, I cold not tell, nor happily should have known in
have, but by his relation. From him I have it: that, He was not long since a
Minister, but is now become a Catholic. In good time: through discontent
perhaps, or ambition; or some such ordinary motive of such Turne-coates. My
employment thither, was for Satisfaction: if yet I had been sure thereof. For
I had some cause of doubt, in that which follows. If he will not satisfy
you, at least he will procure some body else. If he will not: but what if he
cannot? Then from Partridge-ally, I might happily be posted to
Woodcocke-walke: and thence flushed to Fooles-wharfe: and so return home, as
wise as I went out.

But secondly, to prevent or supply the worst, beside, and with his two sheets
of Paper, my good friend A. Pe. out of Curtefie, addressed unto me, for my
better Edification, a pretty little whip-iacke, of less then ordinary assise,
in a blew iacket; marked in the forehead, with A Gagge, for the new Gospel:
whose worship, until then, was as little known to me de nomine, as was Master
M^^. He was sent with this Elogium and Inuitation at least: If you please to
answer this little book, and so explicate all the places of Scriptures and
Fathers; which are cited in it, it will be a good work fit for a Doctor of
Divinity (here my friend shot at rouers, I am not the man; for Doctor of
Divinity I am none.) And I doubt not but by searching out of these points, you
will be of another mind, as many of your coat have been, when they went
sincerely, and for the love of God, and their own souls (add, and somewhat
else) unto their studies. So he, in his missi^es of October, unto me.

Thus briefly, as I could, I have related the occasion of my engagement, in
this gagling, with the Gagger. Those Papers I answered presently as I thought
fit, and left the answer to be returned unto A. P. who promised to call for it
within three days; but came not within threescore, as I am informed, and if
yet he have come for it, I cannot tell. The Gagge I took to task, upon my
return unto my books, at Windsor: as mere a gaggler as ever grased upon a
green. Many idle Pamphlets in this very kind, have I seen in my days; but a
verrier idiota saw I never any. With a strange opinion of their own worth, are
these Catholics possessed. This poor silly Creature thought Himself
somebody, and his Performings no ordinary Adventure: else sure he would not so
have proscribed his pamphlet, the Gagge of the new Gospel: which necessarily
implies thus much, He has stopped the months of all Protestants for ever:
the proudest of them dare not hiscere hereafter against Himself, or any one of
his Lagg: but, as geese, when they go in at a barn door, or are driven on by
night, a long staff or pole being held over them, go without noise or
reluctance, holding down their heads: so the appalled Protestants, being
crestfallen, and cast down for ever, must go as this Gagger will dispose of
them. My friend A. P. sic mulus mulum scabit, was well persuaded of this man's
performance, and irresistible ability, when he sent him to me to convert me,
being assured I could say little to him, no not so much as bough to a Goose, as
for, Answer him, it went beyond my possibility. For this, set the jury
consider: but for Conversion, no such matter I assure him: his assurance has
failed here. I am more confirmed, then ever I was in my Protestant profession,
through his insufficiency. Nay, had I not been a Protestant, he would have made
me one through his poor performing of what he had undertook, upon view.

Whatsoever he intended, whatsoever he has said, was by Him, and His,
addressed, not against John a Noke, and John a Style, this man and that man of
the Protestant party: not against private tenants, and peculiar opinions. For
what has the world to do to take public notice of them? as they are
singular, so let them stand or fall: Salus Ecclestae, non vertitur in istis,
the Church will stand and subsist without them: but he driued directly at the
Church of England, that moate in the eyes of Romish Priests and Jesuits. For
though he set his book to sail, with general commendations, A brief
abridgement of the errors of the Protestants of our times: and so may seem to
enclose our neighbors abroad: yet his drift was directly against us at home:
against the Doctrine and Discipline of o^^ Church. Therefore he wrote in the
English tongue alone. Therefore his address is to The Protestants that are in
England only. Therefore he talks of our English translations, and in precise
words instituteth his Refutation, by Express words of our own English Bibles:
which confine his Gagge to us alone, that are of that Church for, English
Bibles, belong to English men: Strangers have their own, in their own Mothers
tongue: they understand not ours, which concern them not at all.

Now in point of carriage against the Church of England: in his Refutation of
our Churches errors: in gagging up our mouths for defense thereof for ever;
see the small honesty, little sincerity, and petty performing of this Gagler.
In all Churches that are, or have been under heaven: even in the Chutch of
Rome it self at this day, notwithstanding the conclusions of the Council of
Trent: the Decisions and Edicts of Popes: the inquisitors of Heresy, and such
like inhibitions to the contrary. There are public Resolutions held of all,
and private opinions maintained by some, by men particular in their own
Conceits: and Societies in a more general agreement in things indifferent, not
de fide, or if yet of a looser and lower tie, and alloy. As those are proposed,
resolved, maintained, tendered and commanded: So the other are free, and
disputed and questioned, not enjoined as de fide, or Subscribed, because
Problematicall, and no more. If a man should collect the private opinions of
private men, which are differences in Schools among Scholars: nay, of the
Master of Controversies, or of sentences, and impute them unto the Church of
Rome, the Faith of Rome, this Gagger (if he know what to do) and his gagle,
would refuse them, disclaim them, think themselves wronged, proclaim
themselves belied, as Bellarmine does often in the like case. Ex aequo and
bono, and more maiorum, we may do the like. Yet see the honesty of this
Imposter against us in this his poor pamphlet.

He has collected together, out of C. W. B. and such companions: and disposed
as it happened, without order or method xlvii. several propositions. All
pretended errors of the Church of England: because all contrary to express
words of our own Bibles: and repugnant to Antiquity, in the Writings of the
Fathers: so to fasten Novelty, and Heresy, and Impiety upon our Church. Of
these xlvii. only viii. or ix. are the Doctrines of our Church. 6. 13. 15. 18.
30. 36. 42. 44. and yet not all these, as they are by him abused, embeasted,
confounded, and circumscribed. The rest are partly left at liberty by the
Church: not determined for doctrines either way. Many imposed by him on the
Church, are directly disclaimed, abandoned, oppugned by the Church, and the
flat contrary to them commended and commanded. And accordingly believed,
practiced, and maintained against oppugners. A mayor part are the mere
opinions, private fancies, peculiar propositions of private men: many of them
disclaimed by the very Authors: some falsely imputed to their Authors: some
raked together out of the lay-stals of deepest Puritanisme, as much opposing
the Church of England, as the Church of Rome. So that whatsoever is in this
Gagger, is, or childishly fancied, or ridiculously mistaken, or wilfully
perverted, or slanderously imputed, or maliciously proposed, or ambiguously
conceived, or not justified any way: as may evidently appear in the
particulars in my answer ensuing: In which,

Whatsoever is to be owned by the Church; as resolved, and tendered, and
subscribed in the authorized Doctrine or Practice thereof, is by me justified
fully against him, and shall be maintained against his betters, as not contrary
to Antiquity, in the Tradition of the Church, much less unto Scriptures in
our own Bibles. What is inuolued by him maliciously, to procure envy to the
side, is explicated and asserted to the proper tenants, and terms, it is
showed how far the Church of England resolves, where, and what things are
left free and undetermined, for men to hold with them or against them. Private
opinions, are left unto their Authors, and Abettors, old enough, and able
enough to speak for themselves: In a public cause (as is, the Faith of Gods
Church) peculiar interests, that I know, have no such share, at least
ouer-awing, as to command undertaking against opponents.

In answering of whom, to come unto my course observed with him, which I
thought fit in conueniency to let the Reader understand, for my own excuse,
and justification, I have gone along with him, cap apee, and point per point:
first, for his Scriptures, both express and to be seen; then, for his
Fathers, that affirm the same, that is nothing to purpose, as little as his
Scriptures did, as I could find them quoted, or could guess at them, by
imagining where they might be probably spoken withal, or where I could
remember to have some time left them. For our Catholics Romish, secure no
question of the goodness of their cause, or rather relying upon the
tractablenesse of their patient Proselytes, so they can make a dumb show with
scoring up Fathers, do not much trouble themselves with caring, where or what
they say. So this Gagger stood affected it is more than apparent. For I was
often left to go blow the seek, for his Fathers. For, poor man, he took
them up as he could find them by tale, without weight or trial. Some few
peradventure, in the country abroad: but the mayor part by far, out of C. W.
B. What he is, I cannot tell: and as he has them, truly or falsely quoted,
rightly registered, or mistaken, so in every point are they in the Gagge,
unless worse. Such supine negligence, secure discoursing, childish disputing
in such a Master in Israel. Such infant-like performance in such a Goliath, upon
whose head the Philistines have set up their rest (I speak no more in effect,
than I have heard of him since I undertook him) who can bear? Beside the
scurrilous fellow, according to his breeding, and education it seems, sure I
am fitting enough his disposition comes in with Cobblers, and Bakers, and
Tinkers, and Tapsters: and Hosts and Hostesses, and bottles, and bottle-ale.
Insulteth upon poor Protestants, Out of their wits, sick in their wits.
Prateth of Horses and Asses praying, and such like stuff, out of his
Coblersshop, or Hostesses ale-bench no doubt. And who is able to possess his
Soul, or contain his pen in patience: that has to do with such Impostors,
Mountebankes, and Buffones? such rake-shames, and rakehels, as these ramblers
are? I confess, that subjects of this nature, should, above all, be
moderately, calmely, and quietly handled: but so, if we meet with moderate
men, with quiet men, with temperate, honest, and discreet men: with men not
proiected, prostituted, and given over, unto lying, calumniating, traducing of
all that concur not with them; as this companion, and his comerades are: who
have no intent to make up any ruins or decayed places in the Church: to heal
the sores, cure the wounds, mollify the swellings, cleanse out the
empostumations in the mystical body of Christ: that aim not at peace, nor
would procure unity, nor any way endeavor that those who profess Gods holy
name, may agree in the truth of his holy word, and live in unity and godly
love, but make their (...), their whole endeavor their special study day and
night, by all kind of iniquity, to keep a faction on foot, and maintain
opposition, even where it needs not. Such are to be curryed in their kind:
and to be rubbed as they deserve: in no case to be smoothed or sleeked over,
lest they please themselves too well in their impiety.

It was ever held lawful to call a spade a spade. Saint Paul gave not Elimas
any gentle terms: nor did Saint Peter speak butter and honey unto Simon Magus.
Our Savior himself, that man of meekness, called Herod a Fox, and Judas a
Devil, when they deserved it. I confess, I have dealt with this man, as I
would not have dealt with every one, nor so as happily, my person and calling
would in some men's opinion require: but sure, as he, and such as he deserve to
be dealt withal. For shall I suffer him, to rail upon to blaspheme, to
calumniate, to belie so impudently the Church of England, as he does, beside
his Tapster-like phrases of Ale, and Hostesses, and not make him hear of it on
both his ears, but guild him over with good language? (...). Let himself, or
his companions, or any Papist in the pack, go honestly, sincerely, soberly,
scholler-like to work: Let him set affection, faction, partiallity, sinister
ends apart: Let him come home to the points controuerted, without rolling,
rambling, rauing: join issue instantly with the Question where it lies. I am
for him, no man more ready, more willing, more submisse, more desirous to go
calmely and sedate to work, for Gods glory, the Churches tranquillity, the
good and benefit of my self and others. To learn, to hear, to be advised, to
yield to evidence, and conuicting proof, out of Scriptures, out of Fathers,
the total Tradition of the Church: No otherwise willing to deal with moderate
men, then I have and do, with that worthy Baronius, in his kind. But for
this man, those that think otherwise must pardon me; As a wise man is to be
heard with attention, so a fool must be answered according to his folly. And
so have I answered this goodly Gagger.

Thus Courteous Reader, having given thee an account of my coming upon this
employment, and secondly of my carriage of it, with the reason of my demeanure
in it, I come to the Gagger, to cope with him, leaving thee to the Protection
of the Almighty.

Windsor, December 28. Thine in Christ's service RI: MOVNTAGV.

THE PREFACE, answering that of the Gagger's to his Catholic Reader.
IAm not, nor would you have Courteous Reader, before I press thee to peruse
this treatise, have, I pray thee, so much patience, as to permit me, to give
thee my advice concerning some certain po^nts very necessary for th^e, the
^ett^^ to some thy self th^^of with fruit and p^ofit.
me, it seems by your inscription Sir Gagger, much interessed in this your
Preface. For you will not, I suppose, admit me^ for one of your Courteous
Readers: and I profess, I am none of your Catholic Readers: that is, as you
intend it, according to the Romancutt. Your inscription, is only to the
Catholic Reader: your address alone unto the Cu^^eous Reader. And sure I am,
you need both the one and other: Catholic and Courteous, or none at all, to
ouerview your pure Naturalls. Indeed, because Catholic, believing any thing:
therefore so courteous, admitting, admiring any thing. You are sure of a
Courteous one, without more ado, if he be a Catholic one that reads it. Such
Readers you lead in a string by the nose: you need not pray them their
patience: spare that pains and engagement, you are sure enough of so much
patience, as heart can wish, though, otherwise affected, or but indifferent
Readers, would count it a pressure, to peruse such idle treatises, as you
permit your selves leave to send amongst them. But Sir, what incongruity is
this, which your Gagger-ship presents us with, at the first Gaping? It was
intended by you, and accordingly fitted, to choke up the new Gospel, and
Gospellers for ever. The very title does challenge that opinion, and threaten
that performance, and yet see your unadvisedness, you would not have it put
into their mouths at all. Catholics alone, are addressed and invited to it:
that is, Biddengape to begagged. They only are to read it, and to receive
advice in what sort to use it: that is, to serve themselves thereof with fruit
and profit. Whereas in all Eristicall discourses, those ad oppositum are to be
Readers, if not only, yet principally: as men to be converted or confounded,
of that which is written against them. For my part, I desire not, nor would I
willingly mask under a Catholic cloak at all, yet as some Protestants
sometime, out of a desire, to be Eyewitnesses of your Antique tricks there,
do covertly repair unto your Masses: so for once I care not if I take upon me
the style of a Courteous and Catholic Reader, to hear your advice concerning
those same points which are so very necessary for your Catholics in perusing
this treatise, the better to serve themselves thereof with fruit and profit; in
all, and in The first point is, that in the inscription thereof, it does not
tell thee out of which English Bible, the alleged p^stages are extracted. For
as much, as this were mecrely in vain: since that England has brought forth
within these few years past, to the number of 20. seueral^ ^orts of Bibles,
far different one from another, so that the Protestants have not all one sort
of Bible Notwithstanding know this for certainty, that they are faithfully
taken forth of the B^^le in quarto Printed at London by Robert Barker, Anno,
1615.
the several points, no doubt, of great and much behoouefull observance.

The first point is, an excuse of some negligence, or at least oversight in the
very title of the Pamphlet. For whereas the refutation of the errors of the
Protestants, so vaunted of, was undertaken to be out of express texts of their
own Bibles: this indetermined generality may amuse and puzle the Reader, who
will be to seek without all question, out of which English Bible, the alleged
passages are extracted. Well thought upon, and to purpose. Bonum factum, had
he been so punctual and precise in his Texts of Fathers, to be seen for
affirming, God knows what oftentimes: in none of which, the editions are
specified; being many, diverse, and different. In many of which, no place
designed: or but at rouers and randon, or else falsely, and not to purpose. Some
advice would have been thought upon here: Bibles are of more special care, I
grant. Therefore as this was necessarily done: so in discretion that should not
have been left undone.

And yet, what such necesssity; to tell the Reader, out of which English Bible
they were alleged? Great doubtless: For Qui been distinguit been docet.
England has brought forth within these few years past, to the number of
twenty several Bibles. I grant that, perchance to the number of twenty, and
twenty thousand, in many several impressions, and editions, in folio: in
quarto: in octauo: as many has Rome, and Lions, and Antwerpe, and Paris, and
other places, nay far more, brought forth several sorts of the vulgar Latin,
and sent them abroad into the world. It was very unadvisedly therefore done of
Bellarmine, Valentia, Vasquez, and the rest of our Controuersors, not to give
us a special direction unto that precise Edition which they followed, as you
have done for yours, of 1615. in quarto, by Robert Barker: that we might
address our selves, in perusing Controversies, unto the Edition by them
followed, the time, place, and quantity thereof. Surely a material and most
remarkable advice, Catholics could never have perused this treatise with
profit; without this.

Oh but the Protestants sorts of Bibles, are sarre different one from another.
Mean you in form? So are yours: but then you enlarge beyond art and skill.
There are but five several forms of Bibles at the most. You mean in matter:
For the translations differing one from an other. Then in plain English, you
lie. Name me ten of this twenty if you can. Some different Translations there
have been of late, but authorized I know but two: The Bishops as they call it,
and this last which has perchance been printed in several forms, twenty and
twenty times, but without diversity in the Translation. So that you might as
well have directed your Catholic Reader to 1614. 1616, or any other year, as
well as 1619. by Robert Barker.

But admit there had been amongst vt twenty several Translations, (as you
belie us:) so long as authority gave not countenance unto them, what can we be
taxed for more then the Church of Rome may? not so much as the ancient
Catholic Church might. For beside eight or nine several translations into the
Greek tongue; Saint Augustine is punctual, Lib. 2. cap. 11. de doct. Christ.
that the several Latin Translations in his time, could not be numbered: and
Hierome in his preface upon Joshua says, there were Tot exemplaria quod
codices: as many Translations as Copies. Which variety he misliked, but S.
Augustine does well like. And in the Church of Rome at this day, are more
several Translations extant of the Scriptures into Latin, then are in England
into English: beside the corrections of the Lovanists, of Sixtus 5. and Clemens
Octavus, contrary, repugnant to one the other. Besides the infinite variety of
the vulgar Edition, not one copy almost like unto another. It cannot be
objected with such good reason unto us, what edition do you follow? as it may
be unto you with reproof enough. Do you follow Sixtus or Clemens in your
quotations? For we affix^ no infallibility unto any Translator, as you do to
their Holiness, that have thwarted and crossed shins with one the other. And
if you tie your men in public passages unto your authorized Edition: so do
we our men in public Liturgies, in like sort. Iam sumus, ergo pares. And you
may turn your finger home upon your self, before you point it out to us; so
that we Papists have not all one sort of Bible.

One, or many: if it had been so material, or so necessary for the Courteous
Catholic Reader to know, which Edition it was you followed, but that you are
merely a vain man, the inscription might have told us which you followed:
without any great ado, or incumbring of the Page, thus; After, English Bibles,
you might have added, in quarto, by Robert Barker, 1615. and not made so much
ado about plain nothing: but then you could not have had this fling at so
necessary a Point, the great variety of our translations: and such an
opportunity was not to be slipped, for giving the Protestants a wipe with a
mere lie, of the multiplicity of Bibles differing one from another.

Seconded with another of like nature: For know for certain; Reader,
whatsoever thou art, there is no such If any one shall show unto thee some
other Bible, wherein they are not so written, word for word, as here they are,
yet rest assured, and out of doubt, that thou shall find the^ written as they
are here alleged, at the least in this of Robert Barkers.
faithfulness in these citations as this man pretends. For neither are all
citations word for word expressed in the Gagger, according to our Bibles of any
Translation, but sometime the sense only: sometime not that: and sometime
express consequence and no more. Contrary to promise and undertaking: even so,
when the sense is not differing from the supposall: For by promise he was bound
unto express and direct words. And yet pardon him this false asseueration,
that they are not so written, as he pretended, not in that Edition of Robert
Barker. As for instance, Luc. 24. 27. and 8. 13. Math. 9. 3. 3. 8. and 3. 5. 6.
and 19. 12. Act. 15. 14, 15. 1 Cor. 14. 32. 2 Cor. 11. 2. and 2 Cor. 5. 10.
Philip. 2. 30. Esaias 49. 21. And happily other places beside these. This is the
first point, Reader, to serve thee for thy profit and togather fruit thereout.

A second is, touching the splendor of Truth: which The second point is, that
thou admire the splendor of Truth, and accordingly to stand as stoutly and as
immooueably in the maintenance and defense thereof.
indeed is admirable and attractiue. Falsehood, and fraud are corner-creepers,
but (...). Truth is ever with a cheerful countenance: and as the vertical
sun at noone: which having dispelled both the darkness of the night, and
fogges of the day, shines forth in brightest glory. But there are shadows as
well as substances: et nota mayor imago, most an end in course of kind, the
shadow is of greater aspect then the substance. Truth is, appearing, as well as
Being. The devil will seem an Angel of light. Not the veriest These that
ever took purse, but will say of his fellow, and swear for himself, we are
honest men, Change but the terms, the case is yours Sir Gagger. The truth is
your own, is it not? Oh take it as granted: though nothing more questioned or
so questionable, yet the Truth is onyour side; there is no ^ay. You may speak
it boldly, and stand to it stoutly, to your Catholic Readers. For if you want
Knights of the post, themselves will supply the place, and swear it. That
notwithstanding the Protestant Ministers have endeavored to observe (you would
say obscure) the same by so many varieties of translations, and by such an
infinite number of corruptions and falsifications, yet nevertheless their
condemnation is so expressly set down, in their own Bible, and is so clear to
all the world, that nothing more needs hereto, but only that thou know to read,
and to have thine eyes in thy head, at the opening of this their book. Even as
you put the words into their mouths, as a witness at large, in case of Tithes
once did swear in my own hearing, he knew the place, Tithable, for 300.
years, and yet was aged but 99. years. This man spoke with a good will to the
cause; So will your Catholics if you ask them; touching Protestant Ministers,
their Translations, Corruptions, and Falsifications believe you, forestall you,
protest and swear for you, accordingly. Can you desire greater Courtesy then
so? Some variety of Translation betwixt ours and yours your self have taken
the pains to observe: in these Propositions: 7. 14. 15. twice. 25. 29. 38. 46.
and happily some others. Are these Corruptions or Falsifications of the text?
you charge them not so: you cannot: you dare not do. Variety of Translations,
for all your enlarging, there are not many. As many or more in the Church of
Rome. If so: not authorized, you will say. Why no more are ours. The Council of
Trent has authorized yours: and the Church of England representative, ours.
Neither one nor other, this or that, for Authentical variety of Translation,
there may be some, if this make Corruptions, or Falsifications, your
Authentical Latin is in a poor case: or rather a shop of Corruptions, to
deprave and obscure the splendor of Truth, which is such and so passing bright
notwithstanding that it shines forth above, and against them all. For if a man
can but read and have his eyes in his head: at the very opening of the book,
he shall find your Bibles infinitely full of such varieties: which no man will
deny, per adventure not your self, who yet may claim to wear Yet
nevertheless their condemnation is so expressly set down, in their own
Bibles, and is so clear to all the world, that nothing more needs hereto, but
only that thou know to read and have thy eyes in thy head at the opening of
this their book.
a Livery, as one of Belzebubs attendants in this kind. And for Corruptions and
Falsifications, if they be so infinite and so clear, it had been honesty to
have named half a score, half a dozen, one at least, to have acquitted your
tongue of Lying and slandering: as it is, Calumnia est, non accusatio. There are
quoted by you in your Abridgement, 276 several places of Scripture, or
thereabout. It seems strange unto me that not one of these should fall foul
upon that infinite number of corruptions and falsifications which you talk so
freely and loudly of unto your Catholic Reader. Had there been any such thing
to be discovered, your charity we know is no way so Transcendent, as to
conceal it: we should have heard thereof on both ears to a purpose. He can
do little that can not belie his adversary in gross, though put him to
proof, and he proves recreant. Do this, I challenge your Gagship if you can
or dare; or prove your self a Gagler and a Goose for ever. For variety of
reading, deprauation, corruption, falsification, here I offer to charge and
prove, your most Sacrosanct Authentical edition of Trent, in the best and
most corrected copy you can choose, is as guilty of at and every one of these
particulars, as you or your betters can prove our Bibles to be. When you will,
or when you dare, undertaken it shall be.

And This in my mind cannot choose but be an exceeding comfort unto a
Catholic. Yea, rather a great sign of security and assurance concerning the
truth and uprightness of his cause in showing himself content to be tried by
their own Bibles. The translations whereof does in a number of places, and
particularly in those that are now in controversy, swerve and differ
notoriously from the Authentical Latin and that to the incredible
disparagement, darkning and obscuring of the Catholic verity.
this in my mind is but a cold comfort unto a Catholic, who opineth, poor
deceived soul, that he may be secure, and build his salvation upon the facing
impudency of every light-skirt mountebanck, and shaued emposter. You do well to
seal up the truth and uprightness of this forlorn cause of yours, with
security, and assurance, that is, to captiuate their understanding with
implicit faith. For you know, and I can make it good, that let the Truth you
talk of, come to scanning, Lucians true History will be as warrantable. It is
true, I deny not, our translations all, and singular, and so your own, done by
your own men, differ both amongst themselves, as also from the Authentical
Latin, as you call it, notoriously: your Authentical Latin, differs from it
self: Is this to the disparagement, darkning, and obscuring of the Catholic
verity? Look you to that. I can rid my hands of it well enough, and clear
both our Church and Bibles, of all such imputation, or impeachment of Catholic
verity any way. If it bring such disparagement, the reason is, in my conceit,
you swarued even from the Council of Trent, which never intended such a royal
prerogative unto your Latin edition, as the Jesuits and Iesuited faction give
unto it. I speak not this to disparage it. I profess, I respect it, as much
as any Translation extant, and to quite your kindness, in being content to be
tried by our Bibles, I will be tried in any point the Church of England
maintains this day against the Church of Rome, by no other but your own
Authentical Latin. Eat your words Goodman Gagger: Never did, nor never dare
our adversaries offer themselves to give the like advantage to us, as to be
tried by our own translations.
I am your adversary I profess my self: I will and dare offer my self to
give what advantage you can make thereof, to be tried by your own Translation:
and to deserve your love the more, may happily ere long Gagge your mouth in
this very kind of putting you to it with your own translation. In the interim,
put me to it when you please, I will not wave your so Authentical Latin, in
maintaining the assertions of our Church. And so much for your second point of
advice unto your Reader.

Thirdly, you advise him somewhat farther off, for general affronting the
Protestant in any point whatsoever, The third is, that when thou shall urge, or
allege, any passage in favor of thine own faith, if any one return the
change, be it either in recrimination^ and blaming of the Roman Church; or be
it in alleging some obscure text, and ill understood to counterpoint thine.
Show, etc.
as I can conceive it in brief thus. The manner of the Protestant is in
conference of controuerted points, when he is urged with text of Scripture,
plain and euidens, to beat back the argument, or as you phrase the thing, to
Counterpoint it, with some other text of Scripture. For instance, when you
bring those evident few words, This is my body, they use to rebutt it with John
6. 63. The flesh profits nothing, the words that I speak unto you, they are
spirit, and they are life: and by this allegation, suppose they have put by the
point of your weapon, or given you a great overthrow; as you speak. In such a
case, your advice is, to show the party amiably; that this is not to proceed
by order, and that he deals not with thee as he ought, nor sincerely, in
opposing a passage dark and obscure, to confound a passage that is most
clear. A man may take good counsel of his enemy, though against his will: and
so have no cause to thank him for it. Sir Gagger, of your self and your own
gagle, this advice we mean to make use of, and put it home to your selves, as
we have occasion, frequent enough. I know no men guilty of this blameable
carriage, at least, so guilty, as your selves be: I have rubbed your memory
with it sometime, as it fell out. But here, having so just cause, you can not
blame me if I gagge you with your own gagge. Mystical passages are not
argumentatiue. What so mystical as the Revelation? In which are, tot
Sacramenta, as many dark passages as there by words. And yet we want not
proofs of plainer particulars, from mystical signing in the forehead. The
number of the beast. Power given to the Saints over nations. What more absurd
then to prove ordinary economy in Gods disposition, by extraordinary
dispensation? This you have done, out of Math. 17. 3. Math. 27. 52. or points
of faith, as you would have them, out of a dream. 2 Mac. 15. 12. Prayer unto
Saints, is defined in your Creed. Your proofs for that against evident
scripture, Psalm. 51. 15. are Luke 16. 24. Job 5. 1. Without Purgatory, Popery
cannot stand. The (...), two pillars of Purgatory, are those two places of S.
Paul. 1 Cor. 3. 13. 1 Cor. 5. 29. then which there are not two more obscure
places in all the scripture. Add to them a third, though of a baser alloy,
that intricate and depraved place of 2. Match. 12. 44. I could go further, and
gagge you Doper, out of your own practice: Who if you had not so much honesty,
as to forbear belying of your opposites, should have had so much discretion,
as not to object that unto another, which, had you that good sign of a bad
cause in you, Blushing, might ashame you, being by recrimination retorted upon
your self.

I say belie: for it is not better, nor worse, but even so. For
Transubstantiation, that monster of monsters, you have never done with, This is
my body. Which we deny not, either in words or sense. The very body of Christ
really received in the Sacrament of the Altar, is warranted by those formal
words of Institution, This is my body: but not per modum Con, or Trans, or any
other like. It is not said, This is my body corporally; eaten orally; there
carnally; conceived of grossly. This cannot be, say the Protestants: and for
proof thereof, that the thing being granted, the manner cannot be so
conceived, proceeds thus: That which one Scripture proposes cannot be
contraried by another: But this carnal sense of those words, This is my body,
is contraried by another: an instance. In John 6. 63. The flesh profits
nothing: as plain a text against carnal eating of Christ's flesh as can be.
Our Savior had formerly discoursed of eating his flesh, and drinking his
blood. His very Disciples, supposing as you do, that he meant they should eat
his Flesh, as they did the Fishes, or used to eat the Paschall Lamb, were
here it offended. Our Savior understanding this their scandal, replyeth in
these words, according to your Latin Authentical edition, Hoe vos scandalisat?
spiritus est, qui viuificat, caro non prodest quicquam: verba, quae ego locotus
sum vobis, spiritus, and vitasunt. You remember an allegation you brought out
of S. Paul? If these things be hidden, they are hidden unto those that perish.
I put it to you, if this be obscure, it is obscure to him that will not see, or
to him who justly God has abandoned and given over. Nothing can be more direct
and plain, then that our Savior tells them, his speech of eating his flesh,
was Sacramental: not carnally but spiritually to be understood. This is it,
says Chrysostom, which he means: You must conceive of me spiritually: For
he that takes this carnally, is not benefitted thereby, nor gets any good
therewith. It was a carnal thought to make a doubt, in what sort he came down
from heaven: And to suppose him the son of Joseph: And to dispute, how can he
give us his flesh to eat? All these were carnal thoughts: which must be
mystically and spiritually understood. The words that I speak unto you, are
spirit and life; that is, are divine and spiritual, having nothing carnal,
not any inference or consequence natural: But are freed from all such
necessity as this, surpassing legal ties and conditions below; containing
another sense, and meaning, then is literally set down. If this be not an
important passage, go gagge Saint Chrysostom, and other ancient Fathers that
put this saying into the Protestants mouths: as plain a text of Scripture as,
in the beginning God made heaven and earth. Plain or obscure, yet to no
purpose. For, it affirms nothing less then that which they pretend to prove
thereby. And what is that? are you aware of it? That the flesh of Christ
profits nothing. It is plain the flesh profits nothing. It is plain, the
passage is of Christ's flesh: Therefore the flesh of Christ profits nothing.
This you say is absurd. And so say I: nay I add, this is impious. For, his
Flesh is life; and gives life, and therefore nothing profits so much as
that. If the passage be not of Christ's flesh, of what is it, can you tell? I
believe you cannot. But your instructors can tell you, they would have it
taken, that Carnalis intelligentia non prodest. Good: And so say I. But
Intelligentia cuius? of a certain indiuiduum vagum, abstrahendo from all
subject, or object whatsoever? Idle, and absurd. But Carnalis intelligentia of
that which must be taken spiritually. And so of this place: and principally,
and primarily of this place, as giving occasion unto this Axiom of our
Savior: The flesh profits not. This is not urged by Peter Martyr, or any
Protestant, against Hoc est corpus meum, This is my body: but against This is
my body by this means; This way, that is, by Transubstantiation. Which is
carnally to take that, which was spoken and intended spiritually only.

It is easily granted you by the Protestant, and you might have made your
friends of this advice that way. That it is doubtless better to explicate an
obscure passage by one that is clear, then one that is clear by a passage
obscure. For reason it self, and commonsense will dictate this, that the
proof must be more evident then the thing proved. The epexegesis, more
manifest then that which is explaned. The Protestants observe this course they
say. You in this so small a Pamphlet, as I have let you see, are culpable that
way more then once. It is much more clear and evident what our Savior means
by Flesh and Spirit: Then how; This can be my body. Sic etiamsi carnem ait
nihil prodesse ex materia, dicti dirigendus est sensus. Nam quia durum and
intolerabilem existimauerunt sermonem eius, quasi vere carnem suam, illis
edendam determinasset, vt in spiritu disponeret statum salutis, praemisit,
spiritus est, qui viuificat. Atque ita subiunxit, caro nihil prodest ad
viuificandum scilicet. Tertul. de Resur. cap. 37. Intanglements and obscurities
in this place, if there be any, proceed from your glosses, not the places, nor
yet the Resolutions of antiquity. Were your rule (...), That one text should
give place to many, rather then many unto one or fewer, yet apply that rule you
may, where it will or need be fitted, here no need of any such advise at all,
where, Alterius sic alter poscit opem locus, and conspirat amice.

The fourth will hardly come under the title of advice, The fourthis, that they
reject some one of the passages, which thou producest, pretending it to be
Apocrypha, though it be not true.
it is rather a vaunt, at most and best an Information, what is observed in the
Gagge, concerning texts out of Scriptures Apocryphal, to make good the
assertions against the Protestants. The man supposed exception would sometime
be put in against some of his witnesses (though for my part, I have passed them
all, without putting back any, as homines legales, to say what they could) for
he knew well enough they were exceptiue, and not passeable in strict terms
and just exception. Therefore to prevent what he feared, their credit is salued
as That to prevent this objection, no such scriptures as they call Apocryphal
are there produced, but still there go accompanied with them others also that
are Canonical.
much as may be, that is, they are brought in as o in cipher, to enhaunce the
number only, so as they with others may make up a tallie. Others beside them
pass current and with weight. They without others carry no credit. Know, says
he, that to prevent this objection (viz. that the testimonies are authentical)
no such scriptures as they call (and have proved, and will maintain to be
Apocrypha) are here produced, but still they go accompanied with others that
are Canonical, by their own confession. Which I grant is observed, for the
most part at least. Nor will we refuse a testimony of Aristotle, or
Demosthenes, that agrees with, and comes in with subordinate dependence upon
Scripture. Where Scripture is apparent, and consent incident, and manifest. But
non feremus, as in the point of Purgatory is obtruded, a plainer and more
obuious place of Toby to interlope betwixt two Canonical Texts, the hardest
two in Saint Paul, and all agree in one as well as harp and harrow: nor any
correspondency in the vinculo communi, as is pretended, to make vtraque vnum:
and all speak for that which is far enough from all, or any state of
Purgatory after death.

The second branch of your fourth point I mislike not at all for the matter of
it. Scripture is not in the words, but in the sense and meaning of the words,
that is, in the notions But if they shall contend with thee not about the words
themselves, as being both clear and Canonical, but about the sense, or
meaning of the^ know this that for such places as may be subject to such
cavil thou have here the warrant and authority of the holy fathers which have
understood these places, in the selfsame sense that Catholics do. A thing
which they can never do in their defense.
and intents of the Spirit of the highest, intimated under the covert of words.
There are more things then words to express those things by. Hence doubts and
ambiguities do arise about the meaning of things expressed by those words.
There is none at all, or little contention about the words of Scripture. All is
about the sense and meaning of the Scripture: and how we may grow unto
resolution, where doubts and ambiguities do intervene. I will not go with you
about the bush. I come home, up to your own desire; The warrant and authority
of the holy Fathers, that is, the practice and tradition of the Church, shall
regulate, I promise you, my resolution, and settle my judgment in things that
are huius controuersi. I will not put in exceptionem fori. For I am assured I
need not, I appeal unto antiquity and will follow you where you dare adventure
to call me. I know your performance that way: I laugh at your vanity in braging
of Fathers that have understood these places, in the self same sense that
Catholics do. What Fathers have said for you in Gagging our mouths I have
examine (...), every one. Their answers to the questions proposed to them:
their resolution for the points remembered, he that will know may find, and as
he finds, so pronounce. What we can do in our defense may appear when we
come to be defendants. This I will promise, out of my ownepoore reading I will
drop Fathers with a better read man then you are in them point per point, And
what reason were it then to prefer the private interpretation of a Cobbler
before S. Chrysostom, of a Baker before S. Basil? of a Tinker before
Tertullian? and so of others.
and if I say not more for my cause, that is for justifying the Church of
England, then you have done for calumniating of it: or can say for justifying
your Popish faith, I will be reconciled to Pope Vrbans faction: For unto the
Church I need none. We use not Sir scurility to consult with Cobblers, or
Bakers, or Tinkers, they and their Trulls may meet at their stawling kenns with
such clapperdogeons as your self. Little better are those Patrons of your
forlorn cause, Abdias, Amphilochius, Martialis, and others: and those
Tararagmales, the Decretall Epistles of the Popes scullen-boyes making: or the
outcasts of some grooms of his stable. Tertullian, Basil, Chrysostom, and
the rest of the worthies of their times, we neither geld, nor delumbate for
speaking too plain nor use them like you; as merchants do their counters,
sometimes for a que, sometime for a thousand pound. Ever in their place we
hear them speak, rise up with reverence, at their asseuerations yield unto
their dogmaticall conclusions. Take not this as an enlargement, or
braggadochianisme. I that say it will perform it: Put me to it as you can or
dare, if I fly from antiquity, hiss at me for ever. I could have played the
fool in alliteration, and hunted the letter as you have done. But I speak
plain English, without a Cobbler for Chrysostom. a Tinker for Tertullian, a Baker
for Basil. Then Tertullian, Basil, Chrysostom, and the rest of their
compeeres I desire no better dayesman, or Diribitores betwixt you and me.
Therefore set your heart at rest, set out when you will, I will walk along
with you to the Fathers houses; and stand to their award whatsoever.

But the fifth and last is any thing rather then advice: indeed, vox, and
praeterea nihil, pure Popish Catholicisme, that is, insolent triumphing before
victory, nay before stroke stricken in the field, dividing of the spoils of
poor Protestants, men of no action or performance at all; men that will look
before they leap, and go warily and wisely to work, never sell the skin
before the bear is slain. It may be some one, nay any one Protestant, that
has but been at Rama, and saluted the school of the Prophets, can discern
Saul amongst them, a fellow that as idly takes God to witness, as Saul bound
Israel foolishly with an oath, which in conclusion might have cost him dear.
The man was afraid he should hardly find I here protest in the presence of
God, whom I call upon in this behalf.
credit upon his word (being happily known for one amongst his people, that
will speak when he cannot do, or means not to make performance) therefore
he puts forward with an oath, and protests in the presence of God more
then he is able (believe me Reader) to make good; That it is not in the power
of all the Protestants in England to find in their own Bibles, one only
express text; what to do? by which they can possibly prove one only point
of the false doctrine. I might say he does aequiuocate in false doctrine, and
intends a refuge, when he is shamed, viz. That false doctrine is not proved
by our Bibles. But I cavil not at words, I take his meaning. He suppeseth all
our doctrine is false, and not to be justified out of Scripture. Which if it be
not, I will grant it false, and am ready to disclaim and to abjure it.

It is our doctrine, he says, No man can forgive sins but God. If it be,
there is express text for it, and that also exclusive, Luc. 5. 21. Who can
forgive sins but God only? An interrogation, in your own learning, is
equivalent to a Negative. None but God can forgive sins. Here is, neither
adding, nor diminishing, nor changing ought. Your own Authenticke Latin has
it so, Quis potest dimittere peccata, nisi solus Deus? It is our doctrine, he
says. No man has seen God at any time. If it be so, it is express words of
our, and your Bibles. No man has seen God at any time. Deum nemo vidit
vnquam. Johan. 1. 18. Here are two texts, that is more then one only; in their
Bibles also, not only in our own, express as may be, without adding,
diminishing, or changing, to prove two points of our doctrine imputed unto us
by himself, collected out of his observations: and yet the brazen face, and
leaden heart, is not ashamed to brag it so Catholikely, and call God to
record of an apparent lie. It is our doctrine that some things are hard in
divine Scripture. Saint Peter 2. 3. 16. says as much. It is our doctrine, some
things are easy. Heb. 2. 2. Write the vision and make it plain upon tables,
that he who runs may read it. Deuteronomy. 30. 11. This commandment which I
command thee this day is not hid from thee: neither is it far off. It were
easy to pass through all points of controuerted opinions and show the vanity
of this vaunt: the confident impudency of this Ignaro. But extra oleus: this is
no place for that purpose. I may happily find him more work this way then he
can handsomely clear his hands of in have: without adding art, diminishing,
changing, or such like practices of litting Law, the Architectonicall science
of our Popish Catholics. Ex animi tui sententia Gagger. Who are more likely
to play such tricks of legerdemaine, those that never used to pare, prune,
shave, gold, or correct Authors, but plainly send them forth in puris
naturalibus, as they find them: or those that make a trade and profession of
it, and blush not to publish unto the world, that all Writers, old or new,
sacred and profane, must speak as our Masters will have them speak, or hold
their peace for ever. This you nor can, nor do deny. To this day you put it in
practice. For according to such directions from higher powers. The Bibliotheca
Saint Patrum, was last year printed at Cullen. Shameless Mountebancks that
object that to others, whereof themselves are notoriously guilty. But it
seems this man did, as the tale is; a wench once gave her mother counsel to
do. A brace of neighbors, women by sex, scolds by profession, falling out,
after they had passed some ordinary language, says a daughter of one of them
to her mother; Oh Mother, call her where first, least she call you so, and
prove it. Have you heard of this good counsel? I am sure ye follow it to an
heir. It is your profession, to add, diminish, alter, change, to aequiuocate
your selves, and teach your Authors so to do notoriously. For fear we
should justly lay it to your charge, you prevent us, and cast it in our teeth.
But play the honest man once in your days: name where, when, how, by whom this
has been done.

I name your self guilty of this cousening trick; and name for false and
ridiculous interpretation, the 1. of Saint Luke 8. 9. and Leuit. 16. 17. in the
sixth Proposition. For adding to Math. 9 8 in the eleventh Proposition. For
diminishing Phil. 2. 30. in the fourteen Proposition. Tria are not omnia: but
enough to shame you if you be not past grace and shame. In brief your whole
book is compacted by this art. For 39. of these Propositions, are no doctrines
of the Church of England; those that are, are unfaithfully handled. By
ambiguity, by adding to, taking from, perverting of sense and meaning, this
little Pamphlet is merely made. Detract these particulars, not so much will
remain, as with a whole impression to stop one mustard pot. I shall not need
actum agere here, I have discovered your false play in particulars hereafter.

This is to employ I ^rowe, man's wiliness if not wisdom to serve the devil:
both are bad, but yet better it were Which yet should be to alter the text, and
to employ man's wisdom in stead of the word.
to employ man's wisdom in stead of the word. For true wisdom is of God
wheresoever or howsoever, Lying is, you have heard from whom: the father of
lies, that graund Paedagogue in the Jesuit schools brought you up a good
Proficient in this faculty: you may sing a song of degrees there in medio
chori: according to your progress from our twenty several Bibles, and their
manifold varieties, to their more Corruptions and Falsifications, to darken and
obscure the truth: and yet those also handled sophistically, and contrary to
the mind of all antiquity: nor only so, but never produced without some trick
of adding, diminishing, or A thing by their own confession forbidden them they
protesting, etc.
changing by interpretation: that the old saying may take hold upon the Gagger,
Qui semel verecundiae fines est transgressus, eum grauiter oportet esse
impudentem. Sir know this. Our profession is not such as yours is: our practice
answerable to our profession. We protest you say, and we do so indeed, that,
The word of God contains all that is necessary to salvation. Your
sarcasticall irony shall not beat us from it. And therein we say no more then
Saint Paul in that well known place of 2. Tim. 3. 16. 17. The whole Scripture
is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable to teach, to improoue, to
correct, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be
absolute being made perfect unto all good works. For to know God in Christ is
life eternal. Ioh. 17. 3. That is the way unto, and means whereby to attain
eternal life. The absolute direction for that way is Ioh. 20. 31. These things
are written that you might believe that Jesus is Christ, the Son of God, and
that in believing ye might have life through his name. These are more texts
then one, and without adding, diminishing or changing ought by interpretation,
as express as words can make them: that all things necessary unto salvation,
are contained in the Scripture. Yet farther to be enforced by this reason.
Salvation is the end of reueiled knowledge from God: If that knowledge be not
sufficient, God is defective in proportioning the means unto the end intended:
which avouch, if you can, without blasphemy. If man add any thing to it as
defective: or detract from it in the materials, or alter and change it against
mind and meaning, we may well enquire, quo warranto he does it, and condemn
his presumption as enormious. An Ambassador has commission and instructions
from his pen, according to them he must proceed. Differ he must not upon
life: nor change the state and terms of his direction so far, as to come
short of, to exceed upon, to be thwart unto, and against the maine of the
business negotiated. Explane he may, add, detract in words: alter phrases, or
occurrences according as occasions are, so he hold the maine, and keep close
to the meaning, and direct unto the end of his negotiating still; Circumstances
sometime may alter much, this point discretion must regulate as it may: but
substances altered, make a maine change, indeed aliud, and aliud, not aliter If
we say it is not lawful for men nor Angels, to add, diminish, or alter ought
thereof, we mean for the maine and substance of the Gospel, we intend not
such a precise observance, as not to say, Rites, for ceremonies: statutes for
ordinances: Church for congregation, and such like, or vice versa. And therein
we say no more then Saint Paul himself has said in so many words (an other
express text, for another point of our false doctrine) Gal. 1. 8. Though we,
or an Angel from heaven, preach unto you otherwise, then that which we have
preached unto you, let him be accursed. Otherwise, so as (...), thereby to
corrupt and abolish the Gospel. Now this is not only when they preach
contrary, and amolish the whole. (...), if they alter and change some small
obuious thing, says Chrysostom: and his reason is, The Scriptures were
commended to us by God, the Lord of all: Men and Angels are but servants,
whose commendation is, to do his will.

This precise obedience has that warrant yet further: It is better to obey God
then man. If men stand ad oppositum to God. But we are not thus persuaded of
Antiquity: We nor use them so: nor speak so of them. We command not our
followers utterly to renounce all antiquity, customs, multitude, humane
wisdom, judgments, decrees, edicts, or counsels. The Councels of Trent, of
Florence, of Laterane, are not all Councels. We refuse them as factious, as
bastards, as partiaries, as having nothing but the names of Councels. You
refuse more Councels then we do: in the four first so highly commended by your
own Gregory, you presume to prescribe, you reject, and retain what you
please. We accept them absolutely sans exception. We may as well press you
with the Sinods of Gapp and Dort, as you us with Trent, and diverse others.
Edicts, and Decrees, and Imginents, what mean you by them? of whom? where?
when? upon what grounds? why? a rambling logodiarrhe without wit or reason.
Edicta Principum. Decreta Synodorum. And iudicia pro tribunali, are of large
extent, of different alotment: For, against God, Equity, Truth and Honesty:
what an idle discourse is it thus to shoot your bolts as boys do stones, to
make Duckes and Drakes upon the surface of the water, to glide smoothly for two
or three grasings, and then sink to the bottom without any more ado. Add
quantity to judgments, Decrees, Edicts, we shall know what you would say, and
so answer. As for humane wisdom, that help on our right hand; have you such
cause to boast, we have no sense nor reason? I think you do not find us such
arrant fools, as utterly destitute of humane indowments: If you do, the
better for you: You may carry the cause against us without more ado. Customs
we have many, of the better sort: not all your anticke fits, and
gesticulations. You have not all antiquity had, you have many they never saw.
Silly man, know you not most customs do and may vary? keep your own if you
please: we are not so wedded to them, nor to all ours, but upon reason, we
have, will, and may change by better warrant then you can avoid. As for
multitude, we dare drip Siders with you, old and late: but these are mere
flashes of your Catholic vanity, I have said it often, I repeat it in the
close, that you may remember it the better, at least, you shall find, that is
my self, that will join issue with you when you dare, to maintain the
doctrine of the Church of England, and oppose the doctrine of the Romish Church
by all of these or any of these, Antiquity, Custom, Multitude, humane
wisdom, Judgments, Decrees, Edicts, and Councels. If I have not for me in
all or every one as good and better share and interest, for my confession, the^
you for yours, I will yield. As for Miracles, Visions, and such
hobgoblin-stuffe, I am contented you appropriate to your own. So did the
Gentiles brag of the like as Chrysostom observes, Orat. 1. in Iudai santes
page 34. Edit. Heshe^. So did the Donatists as S. Augustine reports, de notis
Ecclesiae, ca. 19. Their miracles were then, as yours now, Figmenta mendacium
hominum, aut portenta fallacium spirituum. (...): is a prouerbiall speech in
Athenaeus. Fools may be frighted with Hagges, and Fairies, men of
understanding know it is but knavery: At Lauretto, Sichem, Annuntiada, or
wheresoever we have the like puppet plays amongst our Catholic neighbors:
Cachinnantibus daemonijs, at such iugling tricks for their advantage. And yet
take me not so, as if I cast off all miracles: I admit, I admire them, that
were true, for a true end, the ratificatiou of Truth, unto the soul, (...).
That such as would not yield unto the word preached, might yet be convicted by
that miraculous power, says Clemens in his Constituions. This was that the
world might believe, but yet since and ever Chrysostom said true. (...)? One
faith and belief is to be regulated, not by miracles, but by the Scripture,
which on good foundation, we defend contains all that is Necessary Farewell my
dear Reader, seeing I have now said all that unto thee which I desired.
for our salvation. You have done with your Reader, and I with you, till we
meet again at the next turn: till then farewell.

A list of the several errors imputed to the PROTESTANTS by this Gagger, being
so many Lies.
I. THey maintain in the first place, that the Scriptures are easy to be
understood. II. That in matters of Faith, we must not rely upon the judgment
of the Church, and of her Pastors, but only upon the written Word. III. That
Apostolical Traditions and ancient Customs of the holy Church, are not to be
received, nor do oblige us. IIII. That the Church can err. V. That the Church
has been hidden and invisible. VI. That it is forbidden in holy Scripture,
the public service of the Church, to be in a Tongue not understood by all the
Assistants. VII. That Saint Peter was not the first, or chief among the
Apostles: and that none was greater or less among the twelve. VIII. That Saint
Peter's faith has failed. IX. That a Woman may be supreme Gouernesse of the
Church, in all causes as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal, as Queen Elizabeth
was. X. That Antichrist shall not be a particular man, and that the Pope is
Antichrist. XI. That none but God can forgive, or retain sins. XII. That we
must not confess our sins but only to God. XIII. That Pardons and
Indulgences were not in use in the Apostles times. XIIII. That the Actions and
Passions of the Saints do serve for nothing unto the Church. XV. That no man
can do works of Superer^gation. XVI. That by the fall of Adam, we have all
lost our free will, and that it is not in our own power either to choose good
or e^ill. XVII. That it is impossible to keep the Commandments of GOD, though
assisted with his Grace, and the holy Ghost. XVIII. That only Faith
justifies: and that good works are not absolutely necessary to Salvation.
XIX. That no good works are meritorious. XX. That Faith once had, cannot be
lost. XXI. That God by his will and inevitable decree, has ordained from all
eternity, who shall be damned, and who saved. XXII. That every man ought
infallibly to assure himself of his salvation; and to hold that he is of the
(...) her of the praedestinate. XXIII. That every one has not his Angel
keeper. XXIIII. That the holy Angels pray not for us. XXV. That we may not pray
unto them. XXVI. That the Angels cannot help us. XXVII. That no Saint
departed, has afterward appeared to any upon Earth. XXVIII. That Saints
deceased, know not what passes in the Earth. XXIX. That they pray not for us.
XXX. That we may not pray to them. XXXI. That the bones or relics of Saints
are not to be kept, no virtue proceeds from them after they be dead. XXXII.
That Creatures cannot be sanctified, or made more holy then they are already by
their own Nature. XXXIII. That Children may be saved by their Parents faith,
without Baptism. XXXIV. That imposition of hands upon the people, (called by
Catholics Confirmation) is not necessary, nor to be used. XXXV. That the bread
of the Supper, is but a figure of the body of Christ, not his body. XXXVI. That
we ought to receive under both kinds, and that one alone suffices not.
XXXVII. That sacramental unction is not to be used to the Sick. XXXVIII.
That no interior grace is given by the imposition of hands, in the Sacrament of
holy Orders. XXXIX. That Priests and other religious persons, or any others,
who have vowed their chastity unto God, may freely marry, notwithstanding their
vows. XL. That fasting and abstinence from meats, is not grounded on holy
Scripture, nor causes any spiritual good. XLI. That Jesus Christ descended
not into hell, nor delivered thence the Souls of the Fathers. XLII. That there
is no Purgatory fire, or other prison wherein sins may be satisfied for after
this life. XLIII. That it is not lawful to make, or to have Images. XLIIII.
That no man has at any time seen GOD, and that therefore his picture or Image
cannot be made. XLV. That it is not lawful to worship Images, nor to give any
honor to any dead, or insensible thing. XLVI. That blessing, or signing upon
the forehead, is not founded on the Scripture. XLVII. That it is both
superfluous, and superstitious, to repeat one and the same Prayer sundry
times.
These XLVII. several positions, are said to be Contrary to the express words
of our own Bibles, whereof some are cited literally; others we are sent to
see, with this Item, See more; and supposed farther to be contrary to the
Doctrine of the ancient Fathers, unto whom we are addressed often, not ever,
with See Fathers that affirm the same.

Whatsoever Text, or quotation is in the Gagge, the Reader shall find it in
the Margin of this Answer, or sometimes in a different Character, in the
Corpse of the Answer. So that no need shall be of the Gagge, unto the Reader,
nothing being omitted, in this Answer that is in the Gagge.

The Erratues that by reason of the Authors absence have happened, the Reader
must be entreated to amend thus.
In the Preface.
Page 10. lin. 27. urged. p. ^1. l. (...). deeper. p. 12. l. 12. whom. p. 1^.
l. 9. iuris. p. 18. l. 17. ^^^as. p. 19. l. ^5. gn^uiter. p. 20. l 14. Prince.
p. 21. l. 27. judgments. p. 2^. l. 20. dropp writers. l. 24. find one, that
is. p. 22 l. 22. Our.

In the Answer.
Page 15. lin. 8. (...): p. 43. l. 3. to be converted. p. 57. l. 7. (...) out.
l. ^8. went the. p. 59. l. 19. upon him. p. 66. l. 1. not so much. p. 67. l.
(...). that w^ (...). 83 l. ^0. ^^^is pos(...)i p. 90. l. 10. what then. p.
120. l. 20. is possible. p. 14^. l. ^2. urged.

AN ANSWER TO THE LATE GAGGER of PROTESTANTS.
I.
They maintain in the first place, that Gag.
The Scriptures are easy to be understood.

WHat hope can we have of honest and square dealing with this
Catholick-copes^mate, who begins so captiously and deceitfully, as, to play
at fast and loose in ambiguities? For no Protestant living, affirms that all
Scripture is easy. No Papist living, will, or dares say, that no Scripture is
easy. If some Scripture be easy: and some be hard, this General Proposition,
The Scriptures are easy, is true, and this General Proposition, The
Scriptures are not easy, is also true, viz. Some Scripture is: and some is not
so. This is easy: that is hard.

That which the Protestants maintain, is it expressly Contrary to the express
words of their own Bible.
against Scripture? Yes says this gagger, Contrary to the express words of
their own bible, 2 Pet. 3. 16. Where Saint Peter speaking of Saint Paul's
Epistles, says. In which are some things hard to be understood. Saint Peter
says, but some things; by this fellows own confession: he does not say, All
things in Saint Paul's Epistles are hard: or, All Saint Paul's Epistles are hard,
nor indiffinitely, Saint Paul's Epistles are hard, but only, some things, in
his Epistles, are hard. That some things are, it was ever granted, that all
Scripture, all things in Scripture, are easy, it was never so much as dreamed.
So what contrariety of the Protestants doctrine, is there unto their own
bible? No honesty in this fellow, nor his director C. W. B. thus to pervert the
state of the Question, and fasten a lie upon the Protestants, I am sure.

That place of Esaias not understood by the Eunuch, Acts 8. 30. 31. is not to
purpose against the Protestants; Against Acts 8. 30. etc.
And Philip said unto the Eunuch, understand thou what thou read? and he
said, How can I, except some man should guide me? therefore, etc. This is but
one particular place, and proves no more, but one obscurity in one place of
Scripture. It is also a Prophecy: and Prophecies are assised at obscurity. The
events of Prophecies are obscure, before they fall: and being accomplished, not
straightway discerned. The Eunuch did know what was said, but he could not
tell of whom it was spoken. The difficulty was but in one point: and the
hardness not general neither, but in part. That partial hardness, but in
one particular. That particular, but for a time. Judge, Reader, how many
insufficiencies are in this allegation to prove that, all Scripture is hard,
because one place, a particular case, in one point, at that time, was hard.
What honesty in that Proposer, this Gaggers good Gossip C. W. B. who has it
thus, The Eunuch could not understand the Scriptures; who could not understand
but one thing in the Scripture, that we know.

Christ called two of his own disciples fools, and beginning Against Luke 24.
15.
at Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them all the scriptures,
the things concerning himself, before that they could understand them: First,
the answer is the same which served for the former, that the things which they
understood not, were but some Scriptures. Now it follows not, that all are
hard, because some were. Secondly, they were Prophecies, and so obscure till
their accomplishments. Thirdly, Prophecies of one subject, all; the Messiah.
Fourthly, the Case is altered with them now: they are now easy that were then
hard, and our Question is of Scripture at this day to men now adays, not of
scripture then, to men then living. I add farther, they are fooled for their
slownesse of heart: that is, not so much for a dis-ability to understand those
things there spoken of, as for dis-proportion in their affection; or
dis-attention rather unto those things, not so obscure or difficult of
themselves, especially considering the times then: The Shepherd being smitten:
the sheep scattered; and meeting with those occurrences which they looked not
for, in the fulfilling of their Hopes: we hoped it was he, that should have
restored the kingdom of Israel, so that a cloud of humane darkness and
disheartnings were at that time cast upon their affections and understandings.
And if at some time I be ill-disposed to any business, it is no argument I am
so always; or should totally be excluded from meddling therewith. And lastly this
their slownesse, was but partial: to understand something, of one particular
person. Which obscurity, if in the Subject it self, is nothing to obscurity
universal.

But yet further to this point: This fellow came forth to quarrel, not to
plead for naked and bare truth: else would he have dealt sincerely and
ingenuously, not only in propounding what the Protestants hold, which he does
not: but also in not belying the text, as he does. For is it found in our
Bibles, or in any Bible, He expounded unto them all the Scriptures? or, He
expounded unto them, in all the Scriptures, the things that concerned himself?
Thus I find it, and not otherwise. For in this there is a sense: in that other
there is none. So that the Holy ghost is made to speak plain nonsense, to fit
a turn for a Catholic cause. This may stand, and yet the Protestants
assersion be not infeebled, He expounded unto them in all the scriptures, the
things concerning himself. For they do not deny, but that some things are
hard. That other cannot stand. For it implies, that all things are hard. So we
have obseruable, a pretty niggling trick of a false knave: a small word, (In)
left out, to mar all. For with In the text is for this, and no more, Some
things in Scripture needed exposition, and therefore were hard. But without In,
though there be no Sense (but what simple Proselyte attends to that?) the
implication is, All Scriptures need Interpretation, and so are all hard; which
the good Catholic believes not himself; dares not avouch; yet feign would
have his nouice take it so, to traduce the tenent of the Protestants, that some
Scriptures are open and easy. Thus in the very in-steppe of his stolen
pamphlet, he belyeth the Protestant for his opinion: abuses the Scripture to
bolster his Forgery: and yet for all that, fights only with his own fancy,
as dogs by moone-light bark at their own shadows.

To your question then inferred upon the premises, I How then are Scriptures so
easy to be understood of the unlearned, when the Disciples themselves
understood them not, till first they were expounded unto them?
answer, first, As easy to be understood of the unlearned now, as of them
then, who were none of the Learned ones at that time: and had incident
impediments at that time. Secondly, scriptures, hard then, unto them, may be,
and are easy now, without any such Interpretation. For one Day teaches
another: and especially in Predictions, as these all were; that is, after
easy, which at first was hard. If now they be not easy, there is no explicit
faith: implicit faith must save all. Sir Gagger, whosoever you are, know that
Scripture is not all of one height, depth, or alloy. Some was hard, that now is
easy. Some easy now, and ever. Some yet hard, but not for ever. To be
understood, but not in the way: only in visione faciei, when we shall see face
to face, and know God as we are known, and some points, at least explicitly,
not now to be understood, nor yet then. (...). it was a secret, a mystery,
says Basil of Seleucia; at the beginning, and shall never cease to be a
mystery; In some point or other, the work of our Redemption in Christ, he
means.

See more who list, they shall see nothing to purpose. See more, 2 Pet. 1. 20.
No Scripture, says Saint Peter, is of private motion, or Interpretation, as
you will. Ergo what? All Scripture is hard? Teach me this Consequence, and I
will thank you for my New-Logicke. This I do see: where the Scripture is
hard, and needs interpretation, there that Spirit which dictated it at first,
must direct in the understanding it at last. For man is permitted to expound
himself, and best can give his own meaning. So this Text is not to prove,
that Scripture is hard; but to prove that in Case there be a Doubt, we are not
to address unto private Fancies, or peculiar opinions, but to the Direction of
Gods Spirit, and that in the Church. I subscribe, Math. 13. 11. 36. it is
remembered, that Christ, taught the People in Parables. Well: what if he did?
Why a Parable is a dark kind of speech, so that there is obscurity in the
Scriptures. I answer: No man denies but there is obscurity. No man denies but
Parables are obscure. Some, not all. In some things, not in all. Those Parables
were obscure; admit it, that are remembered there: but they are not all the
Parables that are in Scripture. Nor are Parables the hundredth part of
Scripture, and many of them are of easy understanding, and many are expounded
where proposed: and when understood, best remembered, most beneficial to the
Hearer.

Luke 24. 45. Then opened he their understandings, that they might understand
the Scripture: which act of our Savior unto, and upon his Disciples, at that
time slow of heart; may rather excite unto, then detar from the Reading of the
Scriptures. For that which he did to them personally, he will do unto all
mediately; and does it unto the simplest actually, of those that are interessed
in him, though but by a general tie. For the poorest member of the Church,
does now understand that which he taught them; that he was the Messiah; the
Promised seed; according unto Prophecies, and Predictions of old; then hard,
now easy. 1 Cor. 12. 8. Saint Paul speaking of diversity of gifts, says; To
one is given by the spirit, the word of wisdom, to another the word of
knowledge, by the same spirit: which words are as much against understanding
Scriptures, hard, by interpretation: as Scriptures easy with interpretation.
For those that have it, have it by gift: immediate by God, without help or
instruction. Those that have it not, by warrant of this place, and go no
further, cannot have it at all, because these things remembered were all of
Infusion: of extraordinary indowment: and so, singular and peculiar. Again,
admit it in common course; yet it is rather a warrant for facility of
Scripture, because there are designed Expositors, or if for difficulty, because
expositors are needful; yet this difficulty is but in some, to some, not
universal, of which we must be understood, and of no other, if we be rightly
taken.

Luke 18. 34. The Disciples understood none of those things. Does it follow
they understood not any thing in the Law or Prophets, which were the Scriptures
of those times? If you cannot read a letter in Cipher, can you not read a
plain letter in Italique hand? Those things, beside that they were not then
written, and so no part of Scripture; and so not to purpose; were particular,
and personal, and not performed. Now they are performed; now they are in
Scripture, now easy to be understood of all, without Expositors, the
Sufferings of our Savior at Jerusalem. To them then, they were hidden: are
they now to you Catholics? Do you not know Christ suffered at Jerusalem? If
you do not, I grant Scripture is hard, and hidden; but hidden unto those, that
perish only, because they will hud-winke themselves, and not see. Not a Lixa,
Calo, or Agaso, not a shepherd or muleter but does, or else may know this now,
which then was a secret not known unto many: many particulars, not unto the
blessed Virgin her self: such difference there is in things wrought by time;
so little wisdom to take things at all times alike; and to conclude alike.

Indeed, the same: that is, the thing in question, as little Gag. See Fathers
which affirm the same, Iren. lib. 2. cap. 47.
as those Texts do, and to as little purpose as those texts do. Irenaeus Lib.
2. 47. Having insisted upon, and instanced in obscurity in Gods word in Nature,
he proceeds unto Gods word in Scripture thus. Si ergo and in rebus creaturae,
quaedam quidem eorum adjacent Deo, quaedam autem and in nostram venerunt
scientiam, quid mali est, si et eorum, quae in scripturis requiruntur,
vniuersis scripturis spiritualibus, existentibus, quaedam quidem absoluamus
secundum gratiam Dei, quaedam ante commendemus Deo? If so be in the works of
Creation, some keep close unto God in secret, some are apprehended and
understood by us: what hurt or inconvenience is it, if in Scripture, all
Scripture being spiritual, there be something contained, which through
assistance of Gods grace, we can go through with, and again, some thing that
we must leave unto God? Just the doctrine of the Protestants; that some things
may be understood, some things past our understanding. Non solum in hoc
saeculo, so it follows there, sed et in futuro. Not only in this world; but
that to come, that God may ever teach, man ever learn of God. The waters of
Silo, some where run pleasantly, and may be passed: in other some places not
foordable. Origin lib. 7. cont. Celsum.


Origin sings the same Protestant song, and that in more places then one of
his books against Celsus, as lib. 5. twice, hom. 14. upon Exodus, and other
where. The place you mean, lib. 7. contra Celsum, I think is this: (For you
could not tell whereabout, or what it was, because your good founder C. W. B.
failed you,) Celsus being a Pagan, and an Epicure, as happily you are, made the
same objection, I am sure, which you do now, page 345. edit. Graec-Lat. that
the Scripture was obscure and uncertain: the sense and meaning not to be found
out by wise men: so that the ignorant and indiscreet, abused it at pleasure.
More then which no living Jesuit could have said: No Protestant would answer
a Jesuit otherwise then Origin does, unto that Pagan Celsus. Certe ipsi
Prophetae, quicquid erat opus mox ab Auditoribus intelligi; et quicquid ad
corrigendos mores faciebat, absque vllis involucris proposuerunt ijs, ita vt
Deus voluit. The Prophets themselves expounded to their Auditors anon,
whatsoever was for them to be understood, and whatsoever served to make them
good men, that they proposed unto them, as Gods will was they should, plainly
without obscurity at al. Had the Protestants feed him, he could not have
spoken more fully, and to purpose, in their cause; and yet he proceeds to
declare, why Figures, Parables, and Allegories are used therein, a long
discourse to purpose, page 345. See him that will.

It is not denied, Saint Ambrose Ep. 44. to Constantius, Ambr. Ep. 44 ad
Constant calls it a Sea, a depth of Prophetical riddles.
compares the holy scriptures unto a Sea: and calls them a depth of
Prophetical riddles, Mare est scriptura diuina habens in se sensus profundos,
altitudinem Propheticorum aenigmatum: in quod mare plurima introierunt flumina.
But not all scripture in his opinion is that Sea: only Prophetical riddles,
are that Sea; beside which, diuersa sunt scripturaru^ fluenta: as he adds,
diverse streams, brooks, shallowes, and currents be in the scripture. Habes
quod primu^ bibas, habes quod secundum: habes quod postremum. Scripture fitted
to every capacity: I know no Protestant that will ask more.

Saint Hierome is next, who out of Bellarmines observations could have afforded
us three places more, and Saint Hier in praefat. commen. in Ephesians.
more material, from whence this man's director took his store, and rather
should he have taken any testimony then this, if he understood the credit of
his witness. For the commentaries upon the Epistles, extant under Saint
Hicromes name, be none of his, but are the Collections of Pelagius the
Heretic; as not Protestants say, but Papists of name and note: Catharme,
Senensis, Pererius, Bellarmine and Victorius Marianus: Such an advocate we
need not envy our adversary; Much good may Pelagius the Heretics testimony
do him. But let him pass for Saint Hierome, there is not any thing to purpose
spoken by him. That which he says is this: He had studied the Scriptures much
and long, had conference with diverse learned men all his time, about the sense
thereof, and had purposely undertaken a journey unto Didymus at Alexandria, vt
ab eo in scripturis omnibus quae habebam dubia sciscitarer: Therefore, what?
First this: Didymus, at least, understood all scripture; or how could he
resolve all the doubts of scripture? what needed Hierome to have gone so long a
journey unto him? therefore, scripture, al of it, is to be understood. Secondly,
unto Hierome, all scripture was not hard: he proposed unto him the doubts he
had: which implies, they were not infinite, not all scripture obscure or
doubted of: therefore thirdly, this proves the Protestant opinion true, that
the Scriptures are some of them easy enough to be understood

Saint August. Ep. 119. cap. 21. says somewhat Saint Aug. Ep. 119. cap. 21.
says, The things, etc.
more: For he descends unto Comparison, and says, The things of holy
scripture which I know not, are many more then those which I know. Such was his
humility, to say so; like unto Saint Paul in the same case: who knew nothing,
and yet your self Sir, a man of less skill then Saint Augustine, not to be
named the same day with him, if you should go and make a list of the
particular verses in the scripture, which you understand, and of those you
understand not, I do not doubt but those would be more then these: and yet
further, these being so, he might justly and truly say so of all almost. For
of one and the same place there may be more senses then one: yea, even literal
senses, and intended by the holy Ghost: so that knowing one sense, perhaps
primary and natural, he may be ignorant of the other: and thus all Scripture
may be hard.

Saint August. opinion was indeed no other then our opinion is, as appears in
Ep. 100. to Volusianus, Tanta est Christianarum profunditas literaru^ etc. Such
and so great is the depth of Christian scriptures, that I might still every day
learn and profit by them, inform my self of that I know not before, if so
be that at most leisure, with my utmost pains and travel, endowed with as
good a wit as any man can have, I should set my self to learn them, and them
alone, from my very infancy to decrepite age. Hitherto Saint August. in
appearance for the Papist: now insueth for the Protestant. Not s^, but that the
things absolutely necessary to Salvation, are compassed with much loss,
difficulty, and understood. But when a man has once resolved his Faith in
them, without which no man can live well and godlily, those men that will go
forward with greater proficiency, shall meet with so many things in such wise
shadowed with mystical meanings: so great proof and depth of wisdom therein
couched, not only in the words which set forth the things unto us; and to our
understanding: but also in the things understood. Insomuch as that ancient
students, of pregnant wit, of unwearied pains, do find it verrified in
themselves here, which the same scripture has in a certain place, Sirac. 18.
7. When a man has done, then is he to begin. So truly does Saint August.
resolve, for either opposite part, who have shared the Truth betwixt them.

This was the doctrine once even of the Roman Church: For Saint Gregory upon
the 6. of Ezechiel, Saint Gregory hom. 6. in Ezech, and many others confess
the same.
said, If the understanding of holy scripture were plain to all men, it would
come in time to be of no reckoning. Where he gives a reason of that
obscurity that is in it. Who yet upon the 6. of Job, more atfull interprets
his own meaning thus. Sacra scriptura, cibus est in locis obscurioribus, quia
quasi exponendo frangitur et mandendo glutitur. Potus vero est in locis
apertioribus, quia ita sorbetur sicut invenitur. The holy Scripture is Meat in
the more obscure places, because in the expounding thereof it is broken as it
were, and in chewing swallowed. Drink it is in the more perspicuous places,
because it is as easily swallowed down, as it is found. Thus the doctrine and
belief of the Roman Church was sometime, Scripture in some places, is hard, in
some places easy. Has that Church now forsaken her former faith? if not, we
differ not: for we maintain the easiness of holy Scripture, no otherwise then
Saint Gregory the Pope did. This Goose may fit the Gagge for his Ganders mouth,
the Gospel will soon enough be rid of it.

II.
That in matters of faith, we must not rely upon the judgment of the Church,
and of her Pastors, but only upon the written Word.

I Know no such tenent exclusiuely. I know no such Assertion negatiuely, the
Church of England has no such faith as this. You set up a Shawfoule for a
mark, and shoot your bolt at it your self alone. In our 11. Article, (put on
your spectacles and see if you can read it) we profess, The Church has
authority in controversies of Faith.

The written word of God is the Rule of Faith with us. And has been so with
all our Fathers of old. Unto the Law, and unto the Prophets, was a direction of
a perpetual Morallity, and is continued in that of our Savior, Ioh. 5. Search
the Scriptures: for in them you hope to have eternal life. A rule absolute in
it self, a rule most sufficient unto us, for that end intended, To make the
man of God perfect in every good work. Sufficient sanctae et diuinitus
inspiratae scripturae, says Athanasius, ad omnem institutionem veritatis.

Truth is of two sorts amongst men, manifest, and confessed truth, or more
obscure, and inuolued truth. In his quae aperte posita sunt in scripturis,
inveni^ntur illa omnia quae continent fidem moresque viuendi spem scilicet and
charitatem. Plainly delivered in Scripture are all those points which belong
unto Faith and manners, Hope, and Charity to wit. And accordingly I do know no
obscurity upon these; I know none of these controuerted inter parts: the
Articles of our Creed are confessed on both sides, and held plain enough.

The controuerted points are of a larger and an inferior alloy: of them a man
may be ignorant, without any danger of his soul at all. A man may resolve or
oppose this way, or that way, without peril of perishing for ever. Now if a
question be moved iuris controuersi, in controuerted matters, who shall decide
and settle the doubt? you say, The Church, and so say I: nay so say we. You say
we say the Scriptures; but without the Church: that is, each private man's
opinion and interpretation of the Scriptures, even against the Church. No such
thing Sir: you mistake us. We say the Church must do it, explaining,
declaring, resolving the Scriptures, as the direction is from God himself, to
purpose, Deuteronomy. 17. 8. and as your Texts and Fathers do pretend it, and no
otherwise.

And yet the Scripture may well be called judge. As the Law determines
Controversies betwixt man and man: In plain cases iuris positiui, no deciding
Judge or legal proceeding shall need. But such as are iuris ambigui and
controuersi, must be determined by the Court, by the Judge, according unto Law.
So is it in Scripture, according to the Protestants opinion. In points of
Faith, they disclaim not the judgment of the Church, nor yet appeal to
Scripture alone, understood by themselves without a judge, but refer it unto
the Church. And they have reason for it enough, seeing Gods Word and the
ancient practice of the Catholic Church, that is both Law and Judge, are both
for them: In the name of the Church of England, I will be tried thereby, and
maintain it against all Papists living. Take one for all, Cyril of Jerusalem
in his fourth Catechism says, (...), In any point concerning the divine and
holy mysteries of our Faith, not any, the least thing, must be tendered without
warrant of divine Scripture. And he adds, Believe me not that speak and
deliver these things unto you, unless for proof of them I do bring plain
and evident demonstration out of divine Writ. Was this man a Protestant or a
Papist? Those Bibles he had then which we have now: and it seems that
addressing his own belief and doctrine accordingly, varied not in judgment
any whit from us, who make Scripture the rule of our belief. And in doubtful
points that require determination, appeal unto the Catholic Church for
judgment in that Rule.

This is not contrary to any deduction from, much Contrary to the express
words of their own Bible. Math. 23. 2.
less to the express words of our own Bible, Matt. 23. 2. The Scribes and
Pharisees sit in Moses Chair, all therefore whatsoever they bid you observe,
that observe and do. Therefore, etc. Do you find, either Faith or Judgment,
Pastors or Church, expressly named in this text? Look once more, and look back
upon your undertaking. Their refutation by express words of their own bible.
For words express you fail, undertaking more than you can perform: an
ordinary trick of Catholic Braggadochioes. Let us see if Consequents will
hold the tewghing any better.

Those that answer the Church and her Pastors in your Thesis, are the Scribes
and Pharisees, in your proof: who whole and some, head and tail, be Doctors
and Pastors of the Church with you. But of the Church of Rome it must be
supposed, for we disclaim any Conformation at all with them. And do you
suppose that our Savior approved them so well, as that he would have had the
Jews in matters of Faith to rely upon them and their decisions, as Pastors of
the Church in points of Faith? If this were his meaning, what meant he then to
give warning elsewhere, Take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees? that is, as
the holy Ghost expounds it, Of their doctrine. If the question had bin put,
Art thou the Christ? would he have sent them unto the Scribes or Pharisees for
resolution? or advised the people to believe on them? we find it not
practiced: the contrary we do. What then is this text, in consequence unto the
point? Surely he meant no more but this: and in that he will declare himself
a Protestant; Whatsoever they bid you observe out of Moses, observe; that is,
so long as they teach but Scripture, they must he heard: if there they fail,
then hear them not. Verba legis proferendo, in the opinion of Saint Augustine,
so long as they speak Law. This is not our Heresy but Catholic Doctrine. De
legis ac Mosis doctrina loquitur perinde enim est acsi dicat, Omnia quae Lex
and Moses vobis dixerint, Scribis and Pharisaeis recitantibus seruate; says
Maldonate, no friend nor favorer of Protestants. And after him Barradas
another Jesuit, in this resolution a very Protestant, Hoc est, says he, omnia
quae legi Dei and mandatis non repugnant. Ergo, bound in the text with this
restriction, as you must, and it is a plain Gagge to the Gospel.

Luke 10. 16. He that hears you, hears me: and he 2.
that despises you, despises me: and he that despises me, despises him
that sent me: Therefore, etc. You know not what you say. All this we constantly
believe. But first I answer, this is a text indeed to purpose, to vindicate
authority to the Church and her Pastors: but not expressly, which is your
undertaking; by necessary consequence, and indenied it is, but you have tied
your self, fool as you were, unto express words: and express words are not
here extant. Secondly, perhaps it is not so pat as you imagine, because the men
intended there and then were of another making, fashion and account than ever
were any since or before: and therefore their privileges more peculiar, of
greater extent: insomuch as that all were not to be heard so respectively as
they were: they without Scripture or allegation of Scripture, having mission
immediate from the Son himself, which none ever had but they. But thirdly I
answer, take it with Saint Cyprian, Epist. 96. and others, in a larger extent,
ad omnes praepositos qui Apostolis vicaria ordinatione succedunt, unto the
Governors in the Church, who succeed the Apostles in the Churches
government, by imposition of hands and ordination, and go and answer your
self out of Saint Bernard, thus, Be the commandment tendered by God or man, as
Gods agent, it is to be received with like reverence; Vbi tamen Deo contraria
non praecipit homo; As far as man does not gainsay the will and commandment
of the most high. A flat Protestant in his assertion; and upon reason: For a
Nuntio must go to his Commission.

Matthew. 16. 19. I will give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and
whatsoever thou shall 3.
bind on earth shall be bound in Heaven: whatsoever thou shall loose in earth
shall be loosed in heaven. Which text has no such mention of relying upon
Church or Pastors in matters of faith, expressed. Nor hitherto perhaps any such
meaning. Your Compeeres were wont to cry us down with this text, For Saint
Peter's jurisdiction over all, and the Popes universal power in claue
potestatis. You now wave that power, it seems, and cast aside that key, and
lay hold upon that other key of knowledge. Shall we believe your Puniship or
them? This cannot be good Catholic unity, in so fundamental a point of your
Faith, except for near alliance betwixt Saint Peter and his Spouse the Church,
whatsouer is remembered of the one, must be likewise true of the other.

But out with your Table-bookes, you that have them amongst you, and Note here,
that he does not say whosoever, but whatsoever: giving us thereby to understand
that not only the bonds of sin, but as well all other knots and difficulties
in matters of says and manners, are to be loosed by Saint Peter, and by the
Pastors that succeed him in the Church.
Note: the man will give you something worth the noting: that is, our Savior
does not say whomsoever, but whatsoever. We take it, and note it, and mean to
make good use of it: inferring thereupon through your own confession, that
therefore St. Peter by Christ's commission, must in case of binding and loosing,
and executing the power of the Keys (which whether it be all one with binding
and losing, you are not agreed amongst your selves) let whomsoever alone for
ever; and betake himself unto whatsoever: that is, not meddle any more with
Kings and Princes: with cantoning of their Kingdoms and estates: but content
himself with whatsoever matters of fact inferior: matters of Faith, and the
like decisions, at least with Causes and Persons within his own Verge, indeed
Causes, that is, knots and difficulties, for Persons are none of that
combination.

So, to shake hands with your memorable observation; Therefore in matters of
faith even by their own Bible, we must not rely upon the written word only;
but upon whatsoever Saint Peter shall tie or untie: which we in this case are
contented to do, and to say with that Council of which he was a part (you say
President) visum est spiritui sancto and nobis, the decision of the Catholic
Church, we receive as the dictate of the holy Spirit: but be you sure it is
the judgment of the Church, for you are good Proficients in equivocation, and
present us the Church upon no better terms, then if you should tender us a man
of straw for a perfect man: or a shadow for a substance.

Indeed to this effect, that is to as little purpose as See more to this
effect, Deuteronomy. 17. 8.
that which went before. In cases of controversies and of doubts, in matters of
fact or civil cognizance, which could not be determined by ordinary course of
Law, in the several Counties as it were, or Places of judicature, the Parties
plaintiff and defendants were to refer it, to the Leuits, Priests, and Judge,
in these days: that is, to the Church and to the Pope, you dream: and let
your dream go once for truth: and they must hear it, determine it,
definitiuely, It was capital to refuse, or to appeal. Good: but yet this
comes not home: for they must determine it according unto Law, to which
supreamest decision, both concur: the Rule of right, and determiner of right
according to that rule. In our construction to our present question, the
judgment of the Church according unto Scripture, the selfsame that the
Protestant maintains.

In this text I grant more is to be seen then in all the rest, viz. when the
word of the Lord came unto See Aggee the 2. and 11.
Agge the Prophet. Which thing how it sorteth with the present position, I
cannot tell: speak those that can. But the word that then came unto him was
this, in the 12. verse, Ask the Priests concerning the Law. And the Priests
answered according unto Law, thus and thus. And this is resolving of a doubt by
the Priests: but the doubt resolved according unto Law: so the written word is
relied upon. Not I my self, the word only, Quis enim respondet? Did ever any
man deny that the Church and her Pastors, are not to be heard speaking out of,
or else according unto Scriptures? Show this, and take it, else Nihil ad
rhombum.

That of 2 Chronicles. 19. 8. is all one with Deuter. 17. 8. an exemplification of
that rule: a practice according 2 Chronicles. 19. 8.
unto that direction there: somewhat more. For hereby it appears that the
Precept was not for Tell the Church: and hear her Pastors: but go take the
ordinary course appointed, the judgment of a standing court, mixed of Clergy,
and of the Laity: as it were our court of high Commission; or indeed the
Star Chamber, consisting of both robes; Ecclesiastical and civil: not any
thing to purpose for Church or for her Pastors propounded.

The last out of 2 Thessal. 2. 15. was wont to pass current for unwritten
verities: now it comes in limping for Church and Pastors: resolve where it
shall stand, and then we will rank it in degree and desert.

So I would, could I tell where to find them: they See Fathers which affirm
the same.
walk in tenebris: I cannot speak with them by clear daylight. In brief,
what they affirm, I profess I cannot tell. I know many things which they
affirm in those remembered books and passages: but what the man here means,
I can but guess at, so dissolute and at random are his quotations, as if to
name and muster up some Fathers were enough: as I can conjecture, so come I to
them: if I miss, I must have better information hereafter.

Gregory Nazianz. in Oratione excusat. says somewhat S. Gregor. Nazian. in
Oratione excusat.
I resolve of, and to some purpose, but what I certainly do not know: nor yet
which Oration is by him intended. For I find not any under that title in
Billius whom these men follow, unless it be one of his Apologies. In the
former of which two, I find somewhat that may look that way: this, In
Ecclesijs constituit vt alij pascantur and pareant, quibus videlicet, id
conducit, ac cum sermon tum opere ad officium diriguntur: alij autem ad
Ecclesiae perfectionem Pastores, ac magistri sunt, qui virtute, coniunctioneque
ac apud Deum familiaritate vulgo sublimiores sunt, rationem animae ad corpus,
aut mentis, ad animam obtinentes. A thing reasonable, profitable, and of
absolute necessity for the being of a Church, to have a distinction of Pastors
and People: some to teach, some to be taught: to lead, to be led: to rule, to
obey: a thing established, practiced, and defended in England, no otherwise
then was in the Primitive Church, and is in the Church of Rome at this day.
Unless we can see more showed us in Gregory Nazianzene, we have seen but
little unto any purpose yet: and other thing then this I know not.

Tertullian next to be seen, against Heretics prescribes Tertul. lib. de
praescrip, Haeret.
the rule of Faith, so do we: appealeth to the first institution of the
Catholic Church of Christ in his Apostles, and to their Doctrine then taught
and delivered: and so do we above all, primerily thereto he descends unto
Succession: so will we. Not any prescription insisted upon by Tertullian, but I
embrace it, and dare appeal unto it, and stand to the award thereof: Ex fide
personas approbantes, non ex personis fidem. Is this that which he would have
with Tertul. out of Chapter 21. What Christ revealed unto his Apostles to be
preached, I will prescribe, that it ought to be proved no otherwise, then by
testimony of those Churches which were first founded by the Apostles in their
preaching; partly by word of mouth, and partly afterward by writing? If this be
the place of Tertullian, meant by the Gagger; then Currat a Gods name, we
accept the Condition, and join issue, and come on with Tertullian, as it
insueth, Si haec ita sunt; If this be so; it must needs be, that all Doctrine
which concordeth with those Apostolical, mother, and original Churches, is
true, as being that selfsame which the Churches received from the Apostles:
they from Christ, Christ from God. Whatsoever other Doctrine is beside this, is
false, against the truth of the Apostles, Christ, and God. Thus he, thus we. I
desire no other Judge, or better trial, join issue when you will, or when you
dare. I accept the Condition, for any point controuerted betwixt the Church of
England and Rome at this day, for 500. years after Christ at least.

Discipulus magistrum. Cyprian comes next to S. Cyprian Lib. 1. Epi. 3.
be seen, in his 55. Epistle, or as your Authors suggest it, Lib. 1. Epist. 3.
In which Epistle, I could pitch upon places, more then one, that happily you may
entend, for they look this way: but that which is purposed I suppose is this,
in the second sect. Actum est de Episcopatus vigore, and de Ecclesiae
gubernandae sublimi ac divina potestate: The rather because the Texts of
Scripture here cited, are by Pamelius the Roman Scholiast, there applied,
though to no purpose. For it is the received Doctrine of the Church of England,
that in the office of a Bishop, there should be that vigor as he calls it,
and that the Calling it self is Divine, and an high calling. Nor does any
Papist living more respect and approve that saying of Saint Cyprian in the same
Epistle, Sect. 19. then our Church of England does. Non est ad hoc deponenda
Catholicae Ecclesiae dignitas, etc. The honor and the dignity of the Catholic
Church, is not to be abased so far: nor the unspotted majesty of the Flock
of Christ: or Priestlike power and authority to be so dejected, that men
consisting out of the Church should dare profess they will pass censure upon
a Bishop of the Church. That Heretics should presume to censure Christians:
wounded men, judge the sound: lapsed men, those that never fell, guilty persons
judge the Judge: Impious Sacrilegists, the Priests. This you approve: so do
we. To what end do you will us see Saint Cyprian?

Or Saint Augustine against Cresconius the Donatist, S. Aug. lib. 1. cont.
Cres. cap. 33. and lib. cont. epist. Fund. ca. 5.
if yet we could tell where in special and what to see, is this that which
you mean, Cap. 33. We uphold the truth of Scripture, when we do that which
the universal Church commands, recommended by authority of the Scriptures,
so far as that because the Scripture cannot deceive a man, that would not
willingly err in this question obscure, should go and enquire what the Church
says of it? If this be the place, as in all likelihood it is, we subscribe
unto it with all our hearts. For in Divinity Questions, Controuersi Iuris,
there must be a Judge to determine: that we say is the Church, whether part
contending has Law and right: that is, consent of Scripture upon his side, and
we profess with the same Saint August. in his 118. Disputare contra id, quod
vniuersa Ecclesia sentit, insolentissimae est insaniae. A most in solent
frantic fool were he, that would dispute against the tenent of the
universal Church. Sir, bring us to the trial, and gagge us if you can, with
this resolution of Saint Augustine; belie us not for our opinions, against your
knowledge.

But all this while we have seen in the Fathers what we could find or
imagine, yet we never saw clearly till the close. Drink was your arrand, but
draffe would you have: your plea has been for the Church, and Pastors; your
intent was merely for the Pope: for so Saint Anselme, Lib. de Incarnat: cap.
1. written unto Pope Urban, says unto him; Unto no other is more rightly
referred to be corrected whatsoever arises in the Church against the
Catholic Faith. What is this saying of S. Anselme unto us? in matters of
faith we must rely upon the judgment of the Church, and her Pastors. There
be more Pastors in the Church then the Pope; though he be granted first, he is
not all. There be more Churches then his Church; what has Pope Urban, one man,
to do with Pastors? with the Church, but that, which we know well enough, by
Pastors, and Church, in conclusion you mean the Pope. I could interpret Saint
Anselme well enough; as that, if a Controversy were referred by the Church, or
an Heresy to be corrected in the Church, which touched the case of the
Catholic Church, it could not be put over more fitly to any one man by the
Church representative in a Council, then unto the Pope, first Bishop of
Christendom: of greatest, not absolute power amongst Bishops. But I know your
Saint Anselme well enough. This was not his meaning: he was partial: post
natus: not fit to speak in this cause, nor amongst the Fathers. A great Bishop
I grant him: He was Archbishop of Canterbury, no great Doctor, but respectively
considering the barbarous times in which he lived: far from being one of the
ancient Fathers, or their grandchild. He lived in the days of Whether now
will thou believe so great a Bishop as S. Anselme, or some other Host, or
Hostess, that sell bottle-ale?
King Henry the first, and was a factionist for Pope Urban, his good Lord and
Master. So ask my fellow if I be a thief: your bottle-ale Hostess, where you
use, it seems, to meet, in Partridge alley with your gossips, is well enough
acquainted with these passages, and can tell you as much as Saint Anselme
could; if an Heretic ask her who is Supreme ale-canner on Earth, she will
answer, no doubt, why who but his holiness? In this case I believe them both
alike; as good reason for one as for other. Sure yours are no better then those
Corkes with which your Hostess uses to stop her bottles: but agree as you
can, you and your Hostess; we proceed to the next Proposition.

III.
That Apostolical traditions and ancient customs of the holy Catholic
Church, are not to be received, nor do oblige us:

THis is also contrary to the express words of Contrary to express words of
their own Bible.
our own Bibles? How? wherefore? we shall see when we can: In the interim, thus
we draw on. Traditions are of two Sorts in the writings of Antiquity, as the
word is ambiguous, of two significations. There are Traditions written,
improperly so called, and there are Traditions unwritten, delivered from hand
to hand. The name is sometime applied to the one, and sometime attributed to
the other: you mean not here Traditions written, I know it; no more do we: we
agree to take it of unwritten Traditions, in opposition unto Scripture: as
where Tertullian speaks in his Book de corona militis thus, Scripturam nullam
invenies, Traditio tibi praetenditur euictrix: Scripture for this you can find
none, the original came from Tradition.

Traditions are considered Originally in their Authors: Christ; the Apostles:
the Church priuatemen: which have their authority more or less, answerable to
the worth of their Originals. Again, they are considered materially, in regard
of what they treat of, what they contain, whereof they are; of Orders, Rights,
practices, opinions, in common use and custom amongst men.

Traditions instituted by our Savior, even in points of belief and Faith,
have Divine authority as his written word has. Traditions derived from the
Apostles, have equal authority with their Preachings and their writings. I
approve that process of the Controuersor, The authority of Gods Word, is not
because it is written, but because it comes from God. Traditions of the
Church have such authority as the Church has: all bind and oblige, as they
were intended; and as their extent is. For they must be considered not only
from the Author, but from the End: Some were intended to be Permanent; others
only to be transient: for a Time only, or else for ever. Some universal,
some only Partial: for the Catholic, or else a private Church. Such variety
and difference is in Traditions, which this Hudler confounds, to deceive his
Nouice with indistinctions.

Now the question is not whether there be Traditions, or have been heretofore,
we do grant it in every kind, that either there are, or have been Traditions
of Christ, his Apostles, the Church, private men. The question is not of what
authority they are: we grant their authority is from, and as the Authors: but
the question is of their Credit and Extent. First, whether the pretended
Traditions of Christ and his Apostles, were indeed so ordained or derived, as
they are pretended; or rather counterseits and suppositions. Prove them true,
undoubted, and we rise up unto them. Secondly, to what ends they were
instituted, whether to last and endure ever, or for a time: whether to supply
the defects of Scripture, not else sufficient for the end. This we deny: for
it is our Position, that the written Word of God, without unwritten Traditions,
is perfect, and absolute, and sufficient for the end whereto it was intended;
To make the man of God absolute in every good work.

Abuse not your selves, nor your Proselites here: slander not, nor belie us:
give us any Tradition of Christ, or his Apostles: give us good evidence for
what you say: go prove it conuincingly to have come from them, by Scripture,
Fathers, consent of Antiquity; can you ask any more? and we receive it with
both our arms, as Gods holy Word and Institution. Quae vniuersa tenet
Ecclesia, ab Apostolis praecepta been traduntur; quanquam scripta non
reperiantur: Though I find it not upon record in Scripture, yet I receive it
as proceeding from the Apostles, if the universal Church embrace it; said
Saint Augustine, and I subscribe unto it: bring us any such Tradition so
accepted, so received, so commended, and you shall see we will reverence it as
much as you, or more: but if you give me copper in stead of gold, pardon me if
I believe you not, nor receive it for pay. Ecclesiastical constitutions are
more, more certain; of the same authority with the Churches written Laws:
which bind generally, if made for general obligation: or else particularly,
if they have but local and confined limitation, omni modo, bind they do unto
obedience, so long, in such sort, so far forth, as the authors did intend:
till the same authority disa^ow them, which gave unto them being at the first.
In the 34. Article to this purpose we read of and concerning Ecclesiastical
Traditions.

It is not necessary that Traditions and ceremonies be 1.
in all places one, or utterly like, for that at all times they have been
diverse, and may be changed according to diversities of Countries, times, and
men's manners. So that nothing be ordained against Gods word. Your Catholic
cares be they round or long, cannot be offended with this position, I think.

Whosoever through his private judgment, willingly 2.
and purposely does openly break the Traditions and ceremonies of the Church,
which be not repugnant unto the word of God, and be ordained, and approved by
common authority, ought to be rebuked openly, that others may fear to do the
like, as he that offends against the common order of the Church, hurts the
authority of the magistrate, and wounds the consciences of the weak. Lo
Traditions not only auowed, but maintained: the infringers censured. So that,
but read over your Position again, That Apostolical traditions, and ancient
customs of the holy Church, are not to be received, nor do oblige us: compare
that with this decision, and then give your Catholic honesty the lie.

Every particular or national Church, has authority to ordain, to change, and
abolish ceremonies or Rites 3.
of the Church ordained only by man's authority, so that all things be done
unto edification. Nor is this against your Catholic Doctrine or practice, and
yet this is all that our Church delivers touching traditions, in their
public authorized, received, constitutions. Private opinions, if there be
any, tie us no more then they do you. Nay we deal more sincerely, and
positiuely than you do, distinguishing Traditions for plainness sake,
whereas your Fathers of Trent give this only in command, That Traditions be
received as the Scripture: playing fast and loose in ambigiuous terms, not
differencing humane, divine, Apostolical, Apotacticall, Christian, Paganish,
general, particular; free, of necessity, temporary or permanent Traditions.
Can you or any Papist defend this?

The Popish Doctrine thus delivered, is not only contrary to express words of
your own Bibles, but to piety and religion, to sense and reason: that any
idle, fantastic, foolish, impious, profane, humane invention, for your words
run generally, and extend to all, should be received as Holy Scripture: but
the protestant doctrine declared, as before, is not contrary to express words
of our Bibles.

2 Thessal. 2. 15. Therefore Brethren stand fast, and hold the traditions which
ye have received, whether by word or by our Epistle. Therefore, etc. We deny
not obedience unto this exhortation, but endeavor to stand fast in the word of
truth: and hold fast all those Traditions which Saint Paul delivered either by
word or writing. All Protestants give due respect to such divine authority.
Show any that does not, and you say somewhat. But, good Sir Gagger, He that
refuses those manifold botcheries, and brokerages of your Romish Church, and
casts them off as impious and ridiculous, does not straight transgress this
Apostolical direction: no more than he, that rejects a counterfeit Pass,
made by some jarkman under an hedge for a Rogue, does resist lawful authority.
Prove your Tradition such as you pretend, then see what we will say unto you.

2 Thessal. 3. 6. Now we command you, brethren, in the name of the Lord Jesus
Christ, that you withdraw you selves from every brother that walks
disorderly, and not after the Tradition he received of us. Which we receive and
obey: But Tradition may run for Example here: in effect, not according to our
example. And so Saint Chrysostom upon the place: or it may be something extant
also in writing: or order prescribed them by the Apostle temporary and
occasional; or of moral dispensation. If you can name it, we will not
refuse, for our conclusion differerh not from yours, Traditions are to be
received, and do oblige us: but you must let us know them, and their credit
first.

1 Cor. 11. 2. I praise you brethren, says the Apostle, that you remember me
in all things, and keep the Traditions as I have delivered them unto you. So
he would us, were he now living: so would he not you, that have broken them:
for that which he delivered unto them, that, he received of the Lord, 1 Cor.
11. 23. and that which he received was touching the whole entire communion,
the Cups, as well as the Bread, you have broken this Tradition through your
(...) and presumptions. But can you resolve me what Tradition he means
here? perhaps they were Temporal, and not intended for us. If such, your own
rule is, They oblige not. It may be no unwritten Traditions, but the written
word, at least such things as be written now. Howsoever, the allegation is not
to purpose; for it does not prove what the Protestants deny: and that which it
proves, they deny not; That Traditions are to be kept.

2 Timoth. 2. 2. Where there is no express mention Thas Traditions are to be
received, see more.
of Traditions, but only of things received from Saint Paul: by which
Traditions, peradventure, not written, are meant: and peradventure things
written; who can tell whether these or those? show them, and we refuse them not.

John 20. 30. and 21 25. are both to one purpose: Tradition is in neither text
expressed: nor to be collected from either: for neither text is for Tradition:
both one and other, intimate no more, but that all which Christ did or said, is
not recorded in the Gospels. Does any idiot believe the contrary? This fellow
might beg us, if we said or taught, that Christ did nor said any thing but
that is written. Till then, himself may be begged for a fool, that would put
upon us this unhandsome belief, All that Christ did or said is not written:
therefore any thing must be received that is pretended to be Tradition
Apostolical or Divine.

1 Cor. 11. 34. Paul says, The rest I will set in order Shall then the saying
of some unlearned Baker, over bear great Saint Basil?
when I come. Therefore you may go learn to bake a batch of Bread; or go
drink an health to the Vicar of St. Fools with your Host of Holborne. The
inference is, Saint Paul had not ordered all, till he came: when he came, he
made good his promise, and set all things in order at Corinth: therefore any
thing, though never so absurd, which Papists pretend, as Tradition, must be
received as Gods word.

1 Timoth. 6. 2. Saint Paul says nothing of Tradition; except these words will
bear out Tradition, These things teach and exhort: which things are written,
not unwritten. For, These things, do design things there remembered.

Saint John 2. Epist. 12. says, He had many things to write unto them, which
he would not commit to paper, but come himself, and teach them by word of
mouth: which he repeateth, Ep. 3. verse. 13. Therefore he wrote not all things
unto them: And who says he did? therefore, what? our Gagger is a goose; no
other sequel: and so he must stand until he show, that some of his Romish
Traditions, were part of that which Saint John would not write unto them, but
teach them by word of mouth.

Act. 16. 4. and 15. 28. We read of no Traditions: we do of Decrees,
ordained in the Council at Jerusalem; but the mischief is, they are written:
and yet so, our Gagger, and his Comerades keep them not. For tell me, did you
never eat a Goose, or her pudding, Capon, Hen, or Chickens, at your Bottle-Ale
house in Partridge-Ally? if not there nor otherwhere, I have nothing to say to
you. But if so I return it to your teethe, you belie us in that which you do
your selves. The Traditions Apostolical, and ancient customs of the holy
Church oblige you not: For among these Decrees, or, as you will, Traditions,
Act. 16. 4. this is one, Act. 15. 29. To abstain from blood and strangled.
Exempt such dishes specified, from such dressing, and have with you to Mass to
Mr. Mayes, as I am invited by Sir A. P^. peradventure your self.

2 Timothy 1. 13. We find (...), the form of wholesome words, in our Bibles: And
if this be Traditions unwritten, judge you good Catholics: and set not so
high a price upon this arrant blunderer; then whom, a verier Goose never
handled Goosequill. And so go see, if your leisure will serve, Fathers See
Fathers that affirm the same.
that affirm, somewhat, not what they should.

The first you must see if you please, is Irenaeus, Lib. 3. cap. 4. for he will
not trouble your seeing with Clemens, Ignatius, Dionysius, Areopagita,
Polycarpus, Egesippus, Justinius Martyr; all elder than Irenaeus, and vaunted of
by his good masters: and no doubt, as much to point as Irenaeus, who yet is
held to be resolute and irrefrageable in that place. Propter quod oportet
deuitare quidem illos, quae autem sunt Ecclesiae, cum summa diligentia
deligere, and apprehendere veritatis Traditionem: For which cause we must shun
and eschew them, but with all possible diligence make choice of the things
belonging to the Church, and lay hold upon the Tradition of truth. Which
Tradition is no other thing, but the rule of our faith, The holy Scripture:
nothing unwritten, uncertain, beside much less against Scripture. This is
somewhat, in your opinion, but that which is the thing intended indeed, is
this which follows in Irenaeus: Et si quibus de aliqua modica quaestione
disceptatio esset, nonne oporteret in antiquissimas recurrere Ecclesias, in
quibus Apostoli conuersati sunt, and ab ijs de praesenti quaestione sumere quod
certum and re liquidum est? Thus he questioneth: I answer affirmatively, yes.
No doubt we ought for resolution in points of doubtful controversy, rely
upon that decision of the eldest Churches. Do we refuse this trial good Sir
Gagger? Where you will, in what point you will, I undertake thus to justify
the Church of England, name you the Controversy, one or more; and maintain the
contrary if you can or dare. The question is not with Irenaeus, what must be
Law, but how the Law is to be expounded and interpreted. Scripture the Law, and
Tradition the Interpretation: that is, the perpetual praxis of the Church, to
expound the doubtful texts of Scripture.

But Irenaeus proceeds farther than so, it will be said: For, What if the
Apostles had left us no writing at all? Nonne oportet ordinem sequi
Traditionis, quam tradiderunt ijs, quibus committebant Ecclesias? Farther
indeed, but to no purpose; this is upon supposition: If it had been so; which
is not so, nor could be so. Secondly, it follows not, that because if God had
not given Israei a Law, it is probable he would have continued his former
course with Abraham, Isaac, and the Patriarchs: therefore, when he had given
them his Law, they were still to look for immediate, or Angelical
Revelations, as before. No more is it consequent to reason, piety, or Irenaeus
intent, that albeit, if no Scripture had been written, only Tradition must
have been followed: therefore, Scripture being written, we should, as
otherwise address our selves unto Tradition. But thirdly, we come home to
point: Show us any thing tendered by those Ecclesiae antiquissimae, to be
believed, and observed, and see if we respect it not as well, and as much as
you. Till you show us such Traditions, leave your prating idly at random,
touching worth and weight, and use, and authority of Traditions. Your
Traditions tendered in these days, are only in name, as Simon Magus was, and
Simon Peter, the same: no more of credit, than he of piety: both alike.

Origin is next to be seen in cap. 6. ad Roman. He calls Baptism of
Infants, a Tradition; and let it be so. It is the universal judgment, and
most ancient practice of the Catholic Church, deduced, at least from
Scripture, if not proved in Scripture, as the controuersor himself confesses.
Be it a Tradition, it is more for our advantage than otherwise: For we admit,
receive, defend, and practice it, which must needs give the lie unto your
proposition, That, according to the Doctrine of the Protestants, Apostolical
traditions, and ancient customs of the holy Church, are not to be received,
nor do oblige: For the World knows, your brazen face will blush to deny it,
we receive it, practice it, are obliged by it.

S. Damascen may stand by, unless you mean to make your friends with him: a
child in years, of yesterdayes birth, in respect of those old Heroes of the
Primitive times. Not that he says any thing, Lib. 4. cap. 17. more than an
other: or more effectual and to purpose, but because he is not of that desert
or esteem to be ranked with the Fathers of the Primitive times: being long
post natus, and a Partian many ways: for which cause I answer him not.

S. Chrysostom is peremptory and through for Traditions: In 2. ad Thessal. 2.
verse. 16. he says, Hence it is plain and apparent, that the Apostles
delivered not all in writing, but very many things without book. Thus he; but
to what end? For no Protestant living in his right wits will deny this, That
the Apostles spoke much more then is written: And whatsoever they spoke, as
Apostles, in execution of their Ministry, is of equal authority with that
which they wrote: For ink and paper confer no authority or validity, beyond
the subject and author of the writing. Therefore the Tradition of the Apostles,
and of the Church, is, without all question of good credit and esteem; and so
much we profess, Art. 34. I grant it has displeased some which is said,
(...), It is Tradition which auoweth it, seek no further. I see no reason why
any should be so displeased therewith: For if it be a Tradition of the
Catholic Church, (and such Traditions only he means) Chrysostom says
there no more than he may. No more than Augustine and Tertullian have said, It
is Tradition, I go no further. No more will^ in any thing, for my part, I
promise you, that is controuerted betwixt you and us, at this day. Make that
appear, which you propose, to have been a Tradition of the Catholic Church,
and you and I shall soon agree; shake hands, and no more ado.

Saint Basil you have kept for the close, it seems, S. Basil. lib. de spirit.
Sanct. ca. 27. says, that some things we have from Tradition of the Apostles,
both which have force alike, unto godliness.
and for the vpshot of all; and he indeed is, in the place remembered, very much
for all Traditions unwritten; derived to the Church from the Apostles. I know
some Protestants, especially of preciser cut, do discredit the Author, as a
Counterfeit; only upon Erasmus bare word, who sauoured some discongruity,
which I could never find, of style: I am not of that, or their mind. Others
being at a stand, because of their own private fancies, oppose Saint Basil,
unto Saint Basil. For my part, I believe no such allegation, nor will I oppose
him unto himself. Thirdly, some go to it with downright reprehension, that
he gave too much unto Traditions, and therein erred; which censure and taxation
is too surly. I like not that the ancient Fathers should so be philipped off,
and sent away like schoole-boyes with snips; that most learned, religious, and
most judicious Writer, says no more then is justifiable touching Traditions.
For thus he: The Doctrine of the Church, is two ways delivered unto us: First,
by writing; then by Tradition from hand to hand: both Some things we have from
Scripture: other things from the Apostles Traditions: both which have like
force unto godliness.
are of like value unto piety. And this is true, if certainly both come from
the same Author, to the same intent and purpose: for writing and speaking do
not under, or ouer-value a thing. In Edicts, and Precepts, and Proclamations
from a Prince, some have his mind, his words, his handwriting; other his
mind, and words; all his hand: others his mind only, and no more, being
conceived, and penned by a Secretary of State, according to directions: yet are
all the Acts of his Majesty, not of a Servant, or a Subject.

To this Basil adds, which some mistake, and therefore mislike (...), etc. If
we venture or presume to tax and reprove unwritten Customs, as not much to
be respected, we may unwittingly and unwillingly prejudice, and that in points
of moment and consequence, the very Gospel of Christ, and bring Preaching to
be but a bare name: which censure, I see no such cause to censure. For Saint
Basil says not, Take away Tradition, and the Gospel is nothing: as if the
credit, and weight, and authority of the Gospel, were merely from Tradition:
but, that the Gospel will receive prejudice thereby. Meaning, that through
Tradition, that is, the universal consent of the Catholic Church, we are
assured, that the Gospels of Saint Mark, and Saint Luke, are divine, and true;
and that the Gospels of Saint Thomas, Saint Bartholmew, and others, are forged:
though these were Apostles, those but Disciples. But (...), to what purpose is
this, for Popish Traditions? Is there any of them so commended unto us, as the
Gospel of Saint Luke, or Saint Mark, is by Tradition? Saint Basil says,
(...), etc. that is, not some things, as you perfidiously relate it; but, of
the Doctrine, and Discipline, heretofore, and yet observed in the Church; part
we have from written instruction, and part from the Tradition of the Apostles
we have received: which has been transmitted unto us covertly. Both which
have the same force, unto piety. We admit this saying, and profess as much;
let it be (...), a perpetual practice of the Catholic Church of Christ, and
see what we will say unto it. Saint Basils first instance in the point is,
(...), to sign us with the sign of the Cross: you know we commend it, we
practice it, we command it, we propugne it. Every Baker could have told you so
much, that ever had Shall then the saying of some unlearned Baker, ouer-beare
great Saint Basil?
Child Christened in our Church: Ask your acquaintance; I make no doubt but
you are interessed in some Bakers basket for a toste, or a new loaf: Bakers
and Bottle-ale are so much in your mouth. But leave we you to your Bottle-ale,
and Baker: great Saint Basil, that patronizeth you suppose, so much your
Traditions, in his Morals, Reg. 12. cap. 2. gives you this Item; remember it
well, (...). We ought not to follow the Procepts of men, so far, as to set
by the Commandment of God. Hold you here, and have along with you; in your
Traditions as you will: fail here, Basil and we leave to gang alone.

IIII.
That the Church can err.

FAst and loose, Sir Iugler: For why express you not plainly, what Church you
mean, when you say, that the Church cannot err? or in what things, and how
far the Church cannot err? Particular, and Topicall Churches have erred, (such
may then, and can, even in Fundamentals) and so ceased to be any more Churches;
as those of Galathia, Ephesus, Philippi, Colossae, Thessalonica. Those unto
whom Saint John sent his Revelation; glorious and goodly in their time: but
now, Cages for unclean Birds. But as touching the Catholic Church, take it
thus from me: The Catholic title includes two things; universality of Time
and Place both, or universality of Place only. In the former acception take
the Church, and that Caetus euocatus, which has been heretofore, and which is
now, make it up. The Apostles, their Disciples, all their Successors, are
included: And so the Catholic Church, has not, did not, cannot err; either
in Factor Faith: Fundamental, or less Fundamental. In the second acception,
according unto universality of Place: The Catholic Church of Christ is
twofold, Diffusiue, or Representative; in every part and member, in every
place: In some special parts, in one place, a general Council for the whole,
or all particulars that make up the whole. The Catholic Church at this day
cannot err, in all her parts, nor in faciendis, matter of fact: nor credendis,
points of belief, dangerously. The Church Representative, true, and lawful,
never yet erred in Fundamentals; and therefore I see no cause but to vouch,
she cannot err in Fundamentals. Firmitas enim Fundamenti, cui totius
Ecclesiae superstruitur altitudo, nulla incumbentis sibi templi mole lassessit:
Soliditas enim illius fidei, quae in Principe Apostolorum est laudata perpetua
est. Et sicut permanet quod in Christo Petrus credidit, ita permanet, quod in
Petro Christus instituit: as well says Leo, Ser. 2. de Assump. sua. If this be
your opinion, look you: Let us see, if our Bibles be express against this.

Esaias 40. 21. My spirit that is upon thee, and my words which I have put into
thy mouth, shall not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth of thy
seed, nor out of the mouth of thy seeds seed, says the Lord, from
henceforth, and for ever. In which words, if we did defend the Thesis, as it is
proposed, that the Church could err; we might answer, this Text does not
perplex us. For where do we find, Church, or not err, in the Prophet? it is
but by illation at the most: The man bragged of express words; and can
perform no more but And consequently cannot err.
consequence: And that not necessary. For may not it be said; This is but a
Precept, not a Promise; as where it was said unto Joshua, and in him, unto the
Princes and Rulers of the People: The volume of the Law shall not depart from
them; they shall meditate therein day and night. This was an iniunction what
they ought to do, not a promise what they should perform; or at least but
Temporary and Conditional: for they departed from the Law, and the Law from
them. I^ so, what assurance of not erring? Thirdly, Gods promises have a
Condition, annexed or employed ever, to be performed by man; which if he
perform, God is bound: if he break, God is free. My words shall not depart,
is Gods promise: Man's promise reciprocal is, I will not depart from them. If I
depart, that is, if man fail; They may and shall depart, God is then free: Now
this supposed, what assurance is there for, my words shall not depart, etc? So
your first Text is mistaken peradventure in the meaning, but without
peradventure in the allegation: It is Esaias 5^. 21. not as you tender it from
your aduisers, 49. 21. And lastly, it is to be understood of the Church of the
Jews in particular converted unto Christ, as it seems by Saint Paul, Romans
11. 26. and not of the Church of the Christians already converted; and so you
misapply, as well as mistake. But more ridiculously in your second Text, John
14. 16. For have you read or heard, that ever any Protestant maintained, That
the holy Ghost can err? I suppose not. I believe you are not so much past
shame, to say so, and yet your conclusion is so: The spirit of truth cannot
err. For, having recited the Text of the Gospel, your illation is; Therefore
the spirit of truth has aboade for ever, and shall abide for ever with the
Church: and consequently, cannot err. What Sir, cannot err? To my
understanding, The Spirit of Truth cannot err; can you understand it
otherwise? But let your barbarismes go by: to the point I answer first, you
fail, and that confessedly, in your undertakings. It is but consequently, the
Church cannot err; therefore confessed, not expressly. Secondly, I answer out
of the Text it self. This promise is for comfort, not instruction; The
Comforter shall abide for ever: for Christ there spoke of affliction, which
should ensue. Thirdly, were it punctually for direction, we might reioyne: It
was a temporary promise, a personal privilege to the Apostles; you thought
we would say so, belike supposing we had no other shift; silly men like your
self: therefore you come in with, by way of prevention, But the Apostles
themselves could not abide for ever: poor fool, that know not, there is
duplex aeternum, frequent in Scripture; Gods ever, and man's ever. That, for
everlasting, as God is. This for the term of his being: so for ever is thus;
no more, then while you are: all the days of your life. But we seek no
advantage; we will not take it: we grant Gods Spirit eternally assistant to the
Catholic Church, then represented in the Apostles: and therefore we admit
that you belie us in your Proposition; The Church, can err; to be understood
of the Catholic Church, as is expressed.

The third Text in order, Esaias 35. 8. is so far from expressing the not
erring of the Church, that it is a question, though such a Nouice as you, know
it not, whether it be to be taken of the Church at all. Hierome in his Comments
expounds it of Christ, who says of himself, John 14. I am the way, the
truth, the life: An high way shall be there, and a way, and it shall be called
the way of holiness; the unclean shall not pass over it, but it shall be for
those. The way faring men, though fools shall not err therein. Who told you
that this way was the Church? why not the Scripture? which is also a way: and
called a way, as to my remembrance, the Church is not. Ibi erit semita, and via
mundissima, quae sancta vocabitur, etc. There shall be a path, says Hierome,
and a most clean way, which shall be called Holy; and which says of himself;
I am the way: by which way, the polluted cannot pass: where also we read it
spoken in the Psalm; Blessed are the undefiled in the way: And this way, that
is, our God, shall be unto us, so direct, so plain, so open, and champion,
that no wandering shall be there. Fools, and silly men may walk therein, unto
whom in the Proverbs wisdom speaks thus: If there be any little ones, let
them come unto me, and she has spoken unto the Fools, Come you, and eat of
my bread. Thus Hierome upon the place. Tertullian in 4. against Marcion, is
indifferent, for Christ the head of the Church: or Faith in Christ the life of
the Church. Your Worship, Sir Gagger, out of your authority, cast it merely
upon the Church. Satis pro Imperio, if you can out-beare it. Howsoever, it is
not express, as it should be. Not to purpose, if it were express: our
question is not, whether fools can err, but whether the Church can err. The
Church has often been compared to a Ship: and now at last by you made a Ship
of Fools. Content, so you be Pilot in that Ship, Sir Fool.

Once at length you rightly bid us go see more. See more John 16. 13.
For the Text of John 16. 13. is more express than all the former, He shall
lead you into all truth. But what if this text concern not truth upon Earth
but Truth in Heaven? What becomes then of your Not erring? Augustine, and
Bid, incline that way. What if it be personal, unto the Apostles alone, not
to the Church, or their successors? He will show you the things to come: and
I have many things to say unto you, but you cannot bear them now: these and
such like passages, do more than seem to conclude it unto them. What if he
meant but All things that were necessary and convenient for them to know? so
Theophylact, Euthymius, and others* In this sort the Church is eternally
directed: so the Church directed cannot err.

Matthew. 18. 17. It is commanded by authority: Tell the Church: and hear the
Church. No good proof, the Church cannot err. For the Scribes and Pharisees
were to be heard, and obeyed: yet had no assurance of infallibility. Kings and
Princes are to be obeyed: yet have they fallen into great enormities, Ephesians. 5.
27. the Church is said to be glorious without spot or wrinckle, or blame: which
is to be understood, de to^o integrato, of the parts in Heaven and earth: Of
the time to come, rather than present. Without blame, yet not without wrinckle,
even here: for error may be where blame is none, Esaias 9. 7. the Kingdom of
Christ is to be established with judgment and with justice for ever: and yet,
I know no such privilege annexed to judgment or justice, of infallibility. No
more then Ezech. 37. 26. to a Covenant of peace; an Everlasting covenant: to
multiplying of them: or placing Gods Sanctuary amongst them for ever.

Luke 22. 32. and Matthew. 23. 3. What correspondency have they one with another;
not to speak of reference unto the point? In the former, Peter's faith was
prayed for that it might not fail: and yet Peter denied Christ Jesus. If Peter
were not the Church: what makes this Text amongst the rabb^e? If Peter were,
the Church may err; as Peter failed: though not eternally, one or other. In
the latter, the Pharisees must be heard: And therefore will you say, they erred
not? If they erred, as doubtless they did, then, to what purpose are they
pretended for not erring of the Church? Much good may the Pharisees do your
Church, 1 Pet. 2. 9. The Church is styled, a chosen generation, a royal
Priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people: glorious titles: but nothing to
this, They cannot err. John 17. 17. Gods word is truth. I grant. But is Gods
Word ever in the mouth of man? The Apostles were sanctified, and that in Gods
truth, according unto Christ's Prayer. Yet after this Prayer, Peter went not
right when Saint Paul reproved him: he fell, and that foulely in denying
Christ. That which is sanctified is accepted, not ever so sanctified as without
spot. As for 1 Cor. 11. 25. if the Institution, or rather Commemoration of the
institution of the holy Communion, be a proof sufficient that the Church
cannot err, we yield the cause: if nothing to purpose; what meant this idle
pate to range it here? What the man would say in Psalm. 101. 23. 20. or
whether he would send us, after mistaking there, I cannot tell: and till then,
I cannot answer. For not so much as near thereabout, is ought to purpose of
not erring.

Ephesians. 2. 20. We read that they were built upon the foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets. And what then? Could they not err? Dare you say so?
They could: for they have; and are shaken off from that foundation: but so long
as they stood on, fast, they erred not; holding one Faith, one Lord, one
Baptism, Ephesians. 4. 5. which if you and we do, at this day, by your own
argument, (avoid it if you can) we err not. As for one heart, and one soul,
of the belieuers, Act. 4. 32. it is in reference of love one to another: not in
unity of Doctrine all with one another. And yet there were differences in that
union: for example sake, inter Paul, and Barnabas; and might be disproportion
in their Doctrine: as dissimilitude in the habitude and condition of those
sheep in one sheepe-fold, under one Shepherd: and yet all hear the
Shepherds voice, John 10. 16. and he that will not hear some of those
Sheep, Luc. 10. 16. be taxed for not regarding the Shepherd: when as yet for
all that, some of those Sheep be gone astray.

To conclude. The Church cannot err, neither collectiue, nor representative.
Thus your Masters distinguish the terms of this question, that go
workmanlike, and not like you, clutteringly to work. So they: so we. In the
largest extent, not err at all. Secondly, not err in points of Faith. For in
matters of fact, they confess error. Faith is fundamental or accessory.
There none is: here error may accrue. Fathers to be seen, you afford us none.
Not because there are none: but because your reading could supply none. Who
take up all upon retaile and credit, having so small store at home. The Church
cannot err, is most true: and the Church may err, is as true: each part
considered as it ought.

V.
That the Church has been hidden and invisible.

IT may be some private opinions have run upon inuifibility of the Church,
which are no doctrinall decisions: nor to be imputed unto the resolved Doctrine
of the Protestants, that are of another mind. Nunquam est quod nusquam
videtur. That which cannot be seen, if it be seeable, is no where at all, nor
in being. For as Saint Augustine well said, Quo modo confidimus, ex diuinis
liter is accepisse nos Christum manifestum, si non accepimus and Ecclesiam
manifestam? How is it possible we should hope to have Christ manifest in
Scripture, except we have likewise the Church manifest? Therefore on all hands
it is resolved, the Church has ever been visible, since there was a Church.
In England especially how can this fellow impute inuisibility to us, who claim
and prove a succession, and therefore needs a visibilitie from the time of the
Apostles? If any do think otherwise, or cannot do this, we undertake no
patronage at all of them.

The Church is a City, seated on a Hill, which is naturally visible: though in
a fogge, or mist, not discerned. There ever was and will be a Church unto whom
complaints may be made; though the Church does not ever hear complaints. Those
that have fell upon an inuisibility, may perhaps be tolerated, if well
interpreted and understood. For even the visible Church in her more noble
parts, may be said to be invisible: First, the Saints triumphant, and now
regnant with Christ, are parts of the Church in largest extent. Who being in
Heaven, are unknown; their persons, proprieties, and indowments. The Saints
militant, her more excellent parts on Earth, according to her more royal
indowments, the Elect according unto purpose of Grace, are known only unto
God alone, the searcher of secrets, and decipherer of thoughts. Such as be
secret, and occulto intus: are there not visible unto man.

In this sense, in regard of these parts, the Church is, and is esteemed
invisible: and so held even of the Papists themselves. Otherwise then so, we
do not speak of inuisibility: So that the man must fall foul with his own
part; or be at war with his own wits. Moderate men on both sides confess,
this controversy may cease. Et quamuis praesens haec Ecclesia Romana, non
parum in morum and disciplinae integritate, add etiam in doctrinae
sinceritate, ab antiqua illa, vnde orta and deriuata est, discesserit, tamen
eodem fundamento doctrinae, and sacramentorum a Deo institutorum firma semper
constitit: and communionem cum antiqua illa and indubitata Christi Ecclesia
agnoscit, and colit. Quare alia, and diuersa ab illa esse non potest, tametsi
multis in rebus dissimulis sit. Manet enim Christi Ecclesia and sponsa, quamuis
multis erroribus, and vitijs sponsum suum irritauerit, quamdiu a Christo suo
sponso non repudietur, tametsi multis f^agellis ab ipso castigetur. As for our
Gagger, he is interessed happily otherwise. In stands him in hand to uphold
and foment a faction: lest for insufficiency otherwise, he turn Host, and
sell Bottle-Ale. That mustie objection, as he calls it, of Elias, may do
him some pleasure at that time. I add no more touching this proposition,
because it is but lost labor.

VI.
That it is forbidden in holy Scripture, the public service of the Church to
be in a tongue not understood of all the Assistants.

NO doubt Contrary to our own Bibles: in such sort, that if the Protestants be
not gagged now, their mouths are wider than Gargantuaes: and their lips
somewhat like to Germans, that were nine mile asunder. Certes never so foiled
by texts of Scripture, since Luther went out, to this day. Therefore expedite
tabulas Chrysippei sophi: For here you have a singular piece of work indeed.

The Church of England, directed, not only by the light of Israel, the Word of
God, but also persuaded by common sense and reason, has, and has had her
Service, the public prayers and Liturgy of the Church, in a known tongue,
understood of all that are present there ordinarily. This is contrary to their
own Bibles: nay to the express words thereof, nedum consequents and
deductions, says this phantastique pamphleter, if we will believe him.

For why: mark express words, Luke 1. (...). 9. 10. Thus we read in our
English Bibles. It came to pass, that while he (Zachary) executed the Priests
office before God, in the order of his course, according to the custom of the
Priests office, his lot was to burn Incense in the Temple of the Lord: and the
whole multitude of people, were praying without, at the time of Incense: This
is a Text of the Protestants Bible: true: and expressly contrary to their own
doctrine. In what? Do the Protestants teach that Zachary did no such thing? or
that there was no such custom of executing the Priests office? or that the
multitude were not then without? or not at Prayer at the time of Incense? If
they teach or preach, or believe, or think all these, or any one of these,
then they are contrary to their own Bibles. Thus they do not: thus they are
not charged to do. What then? why they are charged to teach, that Divine
Service ought to be in a tongue understood of the assistants at the Service:
and this Text is contrary to that their opinion: For by this Text, it is
express that public Service ought to be in an unknown tongue peradventure,
because there is no mention of any tongue at all: of nothing there spoken or
said by the Priest at all: of the use of his tongue taken away from him: or
because Zachary offered Incense in his course, and incense was prayers in an
unknown tongue: or because the people were praying without when he was
offering Incense within: which they never did but in an unknown tongue.

Laugh Protestants, and lie down, if you be not gagged. Qui risistis and nunc
ridete, and qui nunquam risistis nunc ridete: This fellow means to make you
merry; was never heard such a giddy goose gagler. In other Texts of Scripture,
for other points, there is some face, or resemblance of a proof. Here, nec
vola nec vestigium: And if there were any, it would put for Hebrew, or
Syriacke, their mother tongue. For, the People were praying: not the Priest,
and the People; at least, most of them spoke but their mothers Language:
unless the fellow can prove, that the Jews had their service in a strange
tongue. So that our devout Catholics by this Doctrine, must either pray in
English their Mothers Tongue, or in Hebrew, wherein the People prayed then, and
there: The Latin is irregular, because then not used by the People, or
Zachary. For Zachary used no Language at all: They prayed for ought we know, in
the Tongue they spoke, as we do in English in our Service. This they could
pray in, and did without doubt: nor is it gaine-said; He could not pray in any
Tongue anon, his speech being taken from him.

How shall we come at last to see how contrary this is to our Bibles? why, out
with your Table-bookes, and Note; he bids you: If you do ask what you
shall Note. First, Note that this was the custom. This What? Of good
fellowship tell us, that we may note it. Was it the custom for the People to
pray? we doubt not of it: but to pray in what Tongue? in Hebrew? out upon it;
take heed of that: this Custom will cut the throat of Latin Service. For it
was in a known Tongue: But to execute the Priests Office, was, The Custom.
What is that to Service in an unknown Tongue? It is now a part of the Priests
Office to say Service; it was not then, but to offer Incense, or Sacrifice.
They had a custom. Speak man; what to do? what was their Custom? We have
many, so have you. Because the Jews had a Custom, to do, I cannot tell what:
must you needs have a Custom to have Latin Service? and to impose that
Custom upon us? Must their Custom to do, God knows what, put a Custom on
us to have our Service in Latin? What Baker would not bake that Codshead in his
Oven? or what Hostess not beat the pot about his ears, that in discoursing
with her of scoring, should reason, He would not pay his score, because the
Jews Had a Custom?

I, but note secondly, and that salueth all: The People were without, and the
Priest within; what of that? why, How then did they understand him? Saying
what? Praying what? He spoke nothing; he was not to speak, to use his hands;
not his lips: had he spoken, must it needs be they understood him not,
because there was a wall between? or because a wall between, and they could
not hear him speak; did he therefore speak the Ethiopian Tongue? I will put
a Case. Suppose A. Pe. or this fellow, were at Supper in Partridge Alley, at a
Bottle-Alewifes, or a Bakers House, with a brace of woodcockes beside himself;
his Hostess is in the Sollar, or in some outward removed room: he calls
unto her, for what you will: Sauce for the fools, say it be; He may call his
heart out, till his tongue ache, and not the near: for why, his Hostess
understands him not. Mark his own reason: He is within, she is without;
how then can she understand him? No more then if a Gypsy should cant unto her
in Pedlers French; because there is a wall or two, or some other partition that
divides her and him asunder: must it not be so? For Note. Mutatis mutandis,
Change but the terms, and the reason is all one. The People were without, the
Priest within, how then did they understand him? The man were best to take
heed of such reasons as this, least a worse thing betide him; then not being
understood: lest the Woman suppose he call her Whore: For why not in an
unknown tongue? and so crack his cockscombe for his labor. It were worth the
noting to have him so served. The Animal had but his just reward for such a
frothie reason as this; fitter for an Ale-wife than a Priest.

Praemonitus praemunitus; forewarned, halfe-armed: Peradventure by
advertisement he will prevent it: and so we leave him noted for that which he
is: The meaning of that place, nothing to purpose, either expressly, or by any
consequence, is this. In the Temple at Jerusalem, where this accident was, that
is thus remembered by Saint Luke; The Priests, both of the City and of the
Country, served by courses in their several months; not singular: for they
were many thousands, and had manifold employments in that service; but as they
were descended from the XXIIII Founders of so many several Courses, all of one
Lineage and Family in a Course. These several XXIIII Courses were first of all
instituted, as appears in the Scripture, by King David; and so continued till
the Captivity of Babylon: and after the Captivity, being restored, to the
desolation of the Jewish State. Zachary was of the course of Abia; in rank the
VIII. The Priests service in the Temple was diverse, and different every day;
who should perform what service in his course, was determined and assigned by
Lot. It fell to Zachary to burn Incense; as to others to offer Sacrifice: Now
the Temple of Jerusalem had diverse divisions; as we have in our Churches;
Isles, Chauncels, Reuestries: These were severed by Vayles, Trauerses, or
Walls. The first was the Sanctuary, or most holy Place: No People or Priest
went in thither at all, but only one, once a year; and no oftener then once
that one day, the high Priest, and no other man. The second was called the holy
Place; the Altar of Incense stood there, whereat the Priests offered Incense
unto God in their Courses, as Zachary here did, and nothing else; neither
reading the Law, nor expounding of it, nor teaching the People, nor praying
with them, nor saying any devotions for them: it was no Custom, or part of
Service there.

A third division was, atrium sacerdotum, the body of the Church, into which
none came, but only Priests; and they to offer Sacrifice only: The People
came not so high, but into a fourth Court, atrium populi, or mundorum, in which
they were praying at that present. So betwixt the place in which Zachary
offered Incense, which was severed by a veil, and that place in which the
People prayed, there was some distance: what marvel if the People could not
hear him? But as is touched, they needed not: for he was not to read, expound,
or say any part of Service within, but only to burn Incense, and no more.
There were that taught them beside, they did it in the place for the purpose;
in the Peoples Court, and in that tongue which the People understood. So our
Savior taught in the Synagogues, and in the Temple, being understood; and
Moses was read in the same form and Language, that every one understood. If it
had been added, that the People were praying in Latin, Greek, or in some
other exoticke Language, this Tale-teller had noted somewhat to purpose. This
which he says, and notes; i^ as much to purpose, as mother Bumly hitting a
Hen in the forehead.

Leuit. 16. 17. And there shall be no man in the Tabernacle Therefore it is not
forbidden in holy Scripture, the public service of the Church to be in a
tongue not understood by the Assistants.
of the Congregation, when he goes in to make an atonement in the holy place,
until he convent, and have made an atonement for himself, for his Household,
and for all the Congregation of Israel. Therefore: Conclude. Aron must go in
alone: For of Aron and his Successors is this spoken. When he goes, he must
go alone: Now what is this to purpose? Therefore it is not forbidden in holy
Scripture, that the public service of the Church should be in an unknown
tongue? A poke full a plummes: no foot nor foote-steps of such an inference;
at least let us have it with this exception, unless at one time only of the
year: for only once, what, the high Priest hither.

But to purpose. This Text is to no purpose. For there must be Assistants where
the Service is in an unknown tongue: and here Assistants are shut out of
doors. It is precise; There shall be no man in the Tabernacle, when he goes
in. If no man there; no seer, no hearer present: then what need we talk of
tongues either understood, or not understood? Secondly, the Textis to no
purpose: For it speaks but of a piece of Jewish service, and of such a piece,
as was performed by hands only, without lips or tongue: and then it was
private betwixt God and the Priest. Priests nor People were Agents or
Assistants at it. Let your morrow Massmungers when they mass it alone, use
Iaponian, or Mexico Language, if they list: and when they make private
intercession unto God, speak in any of the Dialects that were at Babel, but in
the public Service of the Church, Piety and Practice, reason and Religion
require a tongue that is understood of the Assistants, that they may say Amen,
to what is spoken.

It is a trick of vanity, an idle flourish; What shall I need to produce
authorities of Fathers, when the practice of the Christian World for many
hundred years together is contrary unto Protestants. A very strange practice,
of which there is no Constat: let but one Father say so, and I yield the
bucklers. Inopem te copia fecit: Such plenty you have as has made you poor.
If you name me one Father that thought so, or wrote so, I will go with you to
Mass to morrow, and acknowledge Pope Urban for absolute Monarch directly over
all the Earth: I can but laugh at your insolent and impudent folly, that blush
not to write; What need I produce authority of Fathers? I say again, do name
me but one that squinteth that way, nedum that says it positiuely; That the
service of the Church has been, or may be in a tongue unknown; and have with
you to Mass next morrow.

VII.
That Saint Peter was not first or chief amongst the Apostles, and that none
was greater or lesser amongst the twelve.

First or chief: how ignorantly spoken? as if two words of one signification:
First and Chief are not ever of equal extent. Ruben was the first; but Judah,
chief. First and Chief, in some things, are not ever so in all. Peter was
first; but John, chief, in respect of Christ's special and peculiar affection
to him above the rest of the Apostles. It is granted, Peter was first called
to be Now the names of the twelve Apostles are these: the first Simon, which is
called Peter. Therefore, etc.
an Apostle, though not first to be a Disciple. In rank and reckoning we
grant him first: As in your first Text of Matthew. 10. 2. No Protestant living
will deny this, nor fall so foul with their own Bible: persuade not your
self they will do so.

But this precedence will neither serve your turn, nor content you. Another
chiefedome must be cast upon, which you collect by sequel; for you have it not
express, out of Luke 22. 32. and 26. and yet at last you fleet back to his
first-ship in place, Peter is ever named first. Thus you are not resolved what
to have, and how can your Proselites tell in what to trust you, but that you
lead them hoodwinked, by the nose?

Luke 22. 26. The words, is greatest, is chief, do evidently show, that among
the twelve, one was indeed ter than another, and so accounted by Christ
himself. Prove that, by Christ himself. Those words insisted on, do not
prove it: for they may be an Irony, or a Concession: Admit there be greater or
lesser amongst you; yet he that is greatest, let him be thus or thus: He that
thinks so highly of himself, yet let him do thus. But let it be evident,
and granted, that one was greater than another amongst them, this greatness
yet is far short of that transcendent greatness given to Saint Peter. Let
Saint Peter be the man, invested with that greatness, yet, quousque? What
bounds and limitation had it; since the greatest greatness under Sun, is not
without some circumscription? It is not questioned whether Saint Peter were
great: whether the greatest among those great ones: We grant it: but the
controversy is about the extent and nature of his greatness. Hic Rhodus, hic
saltus. This is that you should have expressed out of our Bibles, or the
Fathers: In setting out his greatness otherwise, you do but trifle.

Have it he must first, and then practice it. Happily the execution will bound
it out. Let us see how far Luke 22. 32. And when thou art converted
strengthen thy Brethren. You read, you say, confirm: In good time; read so
still. Strengthen and confirm, no great ods in either, if it be showed what
his greatness was: and yet strengthen is more than to confirm: the Original
is (...), to stay and hold up from falling: to the purpose, and present case of
Peter, who And what other thing is it for Peter to confirm and strengthen his
brethren than to practice and exercise his greatness over them?
was to fall, and foulely, in denying Christ. Strengthen, or confirm, must
needs imply execution of greatness: for, to confirm and strengthen, what is
it, but to practice and execute his greatness over them? A poor practice; and
sorry greatness: not of sovereignty to which you drive, but of
superintendency at most, in his Pastoral charge: to plant, and to water, to
do no more. It is true, He that does strengthen and confirm, is greater than
he that is confirmed: but in that act only of confirming, not in universal
jurisdiction For he that does strengthen and confirm is greater: and they who
are strengthened, etc. are made thereby inferiors to him who does strengthen
and confirm them.
I hope. Your ghostly Father, if you were a Potentate, and at point to dye, as
his duty is and office, confirms you in your Faith: Because he confirms
you, and in that he confirms you, he is your better; will you take him for
your Lord and Sovereign therefore? Paul strengthened Peter, when he went not
aright to the Gospel. What was then become of Peter's headship, can your
sheepes-head tell? To confirm in faith, requires nor implies no supremacy in
power. No other confirmation is intended there: Go cast your Cap then at
Peter's Primacy from, confirming his Brethren.

See more proof of your folly, Mark. 3. 16. Where See more for proof hereof,
etc.
Saint Peter, in the list of the Apostles, is only named first: which does not
necessarily infer he was the chief: but we grant him a chief, a prime, a
first place. We acknowledge him the greatest amongst the Apostles, in many
respects. And what of this? No more but this: First, you belie us in your
position: Secondly, you cannot claim your Popes Monarchy from any greatness
that Saint Peter had, Act. 1. 1^. not the 13. He speaks first; proposes a
case: Will Pope Urban be contented to do no more? will he callenge no other
royalty? take it: use it? let him go as far as ever Saint Peter went, as a
Bishop, and not as an Apostle, and we will go along with him. Therefore, in
conclusion, your texts of Scripture are not to any purpose at all to prove
Peter's Primacy, but you a poppet.

Much less your Fathers, see them who list, for I See Fathers that affirm the
same. Theoph. in 22. Luk calls Peter, Prince of the Disciples. Eusebius in
Chron: First Bishop of Christians.
have seen them more times than I have fingers and toes, and could never see
any such regality in them. Theophilact calls him, Prince of the Disciples;
and so do I: as Aristotle, Prince of the Philosophers: and Virgil, Prince of
Poets: who had no command for all that either over Poets or Philosophers.
Eusebius in his Chronicle, calls Saint Peter, the first Bishop of Christians:
Admit he do: What then: First, is in respect of time, of place, order, and
authority. Eusebius expresses not how he means first: nay, does he call
him first at all, in any sense? In my Eusebius, I find no such matter. What is
in yours, I cannot tell. I read but this: Petrus Apostolus cum primus
Antiochenam Ecclesiam fundasset, Romam mittitur vbi Euangelium praedicans, xxv.
annis eiusdem vrbis Episcopus perseuerat: Where Romam mittitur, is not much for
his greatness, or that principality you give unto him: and preaching the
Gospel is less than that.

Cyril of Jerusalem calls him, Prince, and most S. Cyril of Hier. Cat. 2.
Prince, and most excellent of all the Apostles.
excellent of the Apostles. I add, the Greek Text is more for your advantage:
(...). He that stands before, and is head over the Apostles. And again, in
his xi. Catech: which belike you never read, no more, I guess, did you the
other, but took it up on credit by reta(...) (...). Peter Prince, as you call
him, of the Apostles, a principal Preacher of the Church. Titles of honor:
Quis negat? of great honor. I add such as never was any like unto it: but
honor and advancement, as it is confined, so is it designed, how far,
whereto, in what sense. He stood first, in rank: he was chief among: so was
Ioab over 30. but not King upon them: or Lord over them: There is an headship
which will not reach that illimited power given to the Pope, Our Lord, Vice-God
upon earth.

Saint Chrysostom, hom. 55. in Math. neither calls S. Chrysostom. hom. 55. in
Mat. Pastor, and Head of the Church.
him Pastor, nor head of the Church. Some well-willer of the cause, added the
words. In Greek we have but (...), a man that was a Fisher. But, admit both
Pastor and Caput too; what is it to purpose? We deny no titles given unto him:
we deny your inferences upon those titles. If you will thank me for it, I
will help you to ten times as many more titles as you have collected; as
transcendant as any of these: and when I have done, to as large and ample,
given to Saint Paul. Do you show me but one place of any one Father, that
gives him that power you challenge to the Pope, I except not Leo, nor yet
Gregory, and I will subscribe: viz. for, universality of jurisdiction,
infallibility of judgment, and power direct or indirect, over Kings, and
Kingdoms. This is your Helena: First, chief, great, or greatest will not
content you, nor satisfy ambition now in the russe. Undertake this: trifle not
out the time, in pleading so idly and vainly for Saint Peter's prerogatives,
which we the Church of England deny not.

VIII.
That Saint Peter's faith has failed.

ANd yet Saint Peter denied Christ. Dare you deny that? Belike, in your
opinion, and new divinity, a man may deny Christ, and his faith not fail:
Turn Turk, and his faith not fail: only, turn Protestant and his faith
fails. But we must hold it howsoever: for it is contrary to our own Bible,
Luke 22. 3. I have prayed for thee that thy faith fail not.

Your Proselites may know you are an Empostor: That propose it in these words,
so opposite to Scripture and event. That leave it so suspense, without
distinction. Saint Peter's faith failed, after this very prayer and assurance:
and yet Christ obtained what he did pray for. God heard him ever, how can you
reconcile this?

Your Masters consider Saint Peter two ways, even in this prayer made by our
Savior for him, as a private man, as a public person: or as they love to
speak, Head of the Church. As a private person, Christ did pray for him, that
though his faith fell totally for a time, it yet might not fail eternally, and
for ever; as Judas failed, and fell: and he was heard in that he prayed for.
Peter denied, but repented: he recovered after his fall, and perseuered unto
the end. Our Savior said not to him, thou shall not deny me; but, That thy
faith fail not: and that his faith did not eternally fail, it was out of his
special favor unto him, and care of him, says Chrysostom hom. 83. in Math.

This is the prime, true, and literal meaning of the Text, even in the opinion
of your own Partiaries: that Christ's prayer was personal for Saint Peter:
restrained unto Saint Peter alone: which being so first settled and
acknowledged, Peter may be said in a secondary sense, to sustain the person of
the whole Catholic Church: in which sense many, and they no Protestants, do
understand it. And so his Faith, that is the Faith of the Church, failed not
either totally or finally, no not in the greatest eclipse that ever was:
because Christ was ever heard in that which he prayed for: and he prayed for
the Church.

The refiners of Popery, the quintessense of villainy, the Jesuits, have
invented a third sense to fit the purpose more than the former. This promise
was made, say they, to Peter, not personally, but as Pope. And therein was
inferred, thereby assurance made that the Pope never did, never should, never
could maintain, decide, hold, believe any thing against Faith. A thing not
heard of but out of such mouths, a late days. False in event, for their faith
has failed; totally, finally, utterly for ever. False according to themselves,
and their other resolutions. For Peter was not Bishop, much less Pope, when
our Savior Christ prayed for him: insomuch as by inchoation: when he denied
Christ, says Bellarmine. And good reason for his saying so: lest his
successors might fall into the same predicament. His principality in and over
the Church, was not invested in him, until after our Saviors Resurrection.
Thus he, de Romans Pontif. 4. 8. therefore he did not pray for him as Pope.
Therefore Bellarmine contradicts himself: and is contrary to his companions.
Therefore this prater gagleth he knows not what, against his own rules, and
against his Masters.

As also out of Matthew. 16. 18. The gates of Hell shall not prevail against it.
It? What? Saint Peter's Faith. Was the Church therefore built upon Saint Peter's
Faith? Take heed of that. It, is the Church; not his Faith, nor his Person:
nor his Papacy. But let it, for once, be his Faith. I answer, there is a
twofold preuayling against. First, to overcome: So Joshua in fight, prevailed
against Amalec, by the sign of the Cross, rather than the sword. Secondly, a
preuayling against, to destroy. So did Saul prevail against the same Amalec.
The Gates of Hell did not prevail against Peter's Faith, to undo it. For being
lapsed, he recovered: and mightily prevailed against them. They did prevail
against it, to overcome him: For he forswore and denied his Master. The Faith
of Marcellinus and Liberius failed: but they recovered as Saint Peter did. The
Faith of Honorius, and John 12 failed: happily he recanted before his death:
and so his Faith did not fail finally: But John 12. lived and dyed in his
Faith; that is, in his Sin: and so Body and Soul went to the Devil. Saint
Peter's Faith failed only for a time: Of this speak the Protestants, His Faith
failed. Saint Peter's faith did not finally or irrecouerably fall. Thus intended
our Savior in that saying; I have prayed that thy Faith fail not. But, Sir,
it mattereth not much what became of his Faith: His Person is the thing to be
stood upon: his Power, Principality, Papal Prerogatives, seated therein; this,
I trow, is so clear in holy Scriptures, no great need to fortify it by or
from the Fathers: and yet I marvel why, if so clear, there, we have so few
Texts of holy Scriptures for it: only two Texts; nay scarcely that: For one of
these is clear for another thing. And again, whatsoever you vaunt of Fathers,
needelesse to be brought, it is more than presumption, you had not one Father
to fling at this Faith, not failing: For when you have them, you spare them not.

IX.
That a Woman may be supreme Gouernesse of the Church in all Causes, as well
Ecclesiastical, as Temporal, as Queen Elizabeth was.

QVeene Elizabeth was? With lie and all. No Protestant ever said so of Queen
Elizabeth: No Protestant ever thought so of any Woman. You shameless pens,
and brazen faces: You have often vouched Calvin against such Government: whom
you make the Patriarch, fondly, of our Profession, and yet you impute it to our
Doctrine. Liars in this, or in that, needs. Can you of your knowledge say,
this title was given unto Queen Elizabeth? Did she ever practice it actually?
or challenge it habitual; to her Person, or her State? And if it had been
challenged, or given in Her time, seeing that it is not at present, but
disclaimed by him that best may: and seeing it dyed, if yet it ever lived,
together with her, what means this quarreller to stir up a new allayed
strife, and trouble things settled, and well disposed of. The truth is, Queen
Elizabeth's style, was no other then, than King James is now, mutatis mutandis,
Over all persons, in all Causes, (not and all causes) as well Ecclesiastical
as Civil, in these her Majesty's Realms and Dominions, next under God,
supreme Governor. Can your small understanding put no difference, betwixt,
Over all; and In all? betwixt Persons and Causes? over all Persons, in all
Causes, is one thing; Over all Persons and all Causes, is far another thing:
Over Each: or over Causes, without Persons, looks your way. But Causes with
Persons, over the Parties in their proceedings, is no such exorbitances: no
Scripture express, none inferred against it to any purpose.

We do not profess, much less propose or propugne, that Princes are Heads,
or Governors, to any such intent; as to coin, or set abroad new Forms of
Faith: to determine what is defide, what not; as your side belyeth us, and
bears your Proselites in hand we do. We give no such authority to any
humane Power. They were of you that did it at Trent, that cast it upon your
Lord God the Pope: He was one of you, none of our side; Stephen Gardner by
name, who to flatter the Prince in state, and keep himself in those hurring
times in his favor, openly avouched, as Cardinal Poole relates; That the King
might take away the Cup from the Laity: Potestas enim sum est penes regem:
For the King has supreamest Power. Such aphorisms never came out of our
mouths. We say, Princes have supreme Power in Earth under God, over all
Persons, in all Causes whatsouer, within their Dominions; even in Causes
merely Ecclesiastical: to compel them to do their duties, by the Civil
Sword. Not over all Causes, to do as they will, to command, or change belief
or Faith. Will it relish better with you in Saint Augustines words? Then this
is our profession in his words: Kings serve God as Kings, if in their own
Realms they command good things; not alone, which concern the civil state of
men: but which do also touch Religion and Piety. Thus he, so we in our Cont.
Crescon. 3. 15.
Profession, over all persons, in all causes. Not, In all Causes alone and
singular, as you traduce us.

Hoc posito: Now see we your Texts of Scripture contrary to this in our own
Bibles. 1 Timothy 2. 11. Let the woman learn in silence, with all subjection:
Therefore a woman, heir, or otherwise, cannot be Governor in her Realms. Do
you think that the Lady Infanta, no Protestant Princess, will be so confinde;
because she may not say Mass, nor speak in the Congregation: therefore as
Duchess of Burgundy, or Countess of Flaunders, may she not meddle with the
State? Mark your own words: But I suffer not a woman to teach, nor to usurp
authority over the man. Therefore she cannot be supreme Gouernesse. Let
Catholic Ladies look to this. Such Fellows if they had their due, would
have their mouths gagged with an halter; I, their tongues cut out, and cast to
Dogs If this were intended by Saint Paul, I marvel why the Eunuch returning
home into Ethiopla, did not put down Candace from being Queen.

If you take it not as you speak it, (for Equiuocators say one thing, and
mean another) generally of all authority, nor yet of any subjection; but as
Saint Paul restrains it, only to Teaching and speaking in the Church; we
subscribe unto you: we are of the same mind with you; we say the same thing
that you do: but then we call your honesty into question, and affirm, you
deal perfidiously with us, in belying us, and falsely with your Proselites in
seducing them. Did ever any Allen, or Saunders, or Parsons, or Kellison, hear
Queen Elizabeth Preach? Did ever any see her administer the Sacraments, take
upon her to expound Scripture; appoint Faith, or denounce Excommunication? She
claimed, and might, and had authority commanding, coerciue, coactiue, over
Churchmen. Did she ever challenge, or use it, or was it given her in
Churchseruice; as Saint Tecla did, and Saint Katherine of Siena in your
Legends: as Pope Ioane did, if there sat such a strumpet in Saint Peter's
Chair; as Prioresses, and Abbesses have, and exercise by your Canon Law, or
with Dispensations. An Abbatesse may command the Priests that are subject to
her, to excommunicate her rebelling Nuns; and the Priests are bound to obey
her: So Tabiena, Armilla, Panormitane, Astensis. The Canonists are of this
mind, says Stephanus de Aluin, that the dignity of Prelacy, and excellency of
Office, may give to Ecclesiastical women, (therefore howsoever to women)
spiritual and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction; which they may enjoy, not only by
right delegated and committed unto them, but by ordinary also. Now good Sir
Gagger, how digest you this good Catholic Doctrine? gave we ever so much to
Queen Elizabeth? Is this according to your Bibles? or are your Bibles and ours
not the same?

That of 1 Cor. 14. 34. is not cited according to our Bibles of the last
Transation, which you yet pretend to follow: and howsoever cited, it is not to
purpose; only it discloseth your lewd demeanor. Saint Paul forbids women to
speak or teach in Churches: so do we. And in conuenticles also, you may see
it inquirable, presentable, punishable in our visitations, if any such presume
to expound or interpret Scripture in private Houses. You may sooner hear Pope
Urban preach, then any Woman with us to execute any function Ecclesiastical,
who with you do ordinarily baptize.

For satisfaction to poor misled Catholics in this point, if yet they will be
satisfied, take the resolution of our Church, Art. 37. The Queens Majesty (it
was made you know in Queen Elizabeth's time) has the chief power in this
Realm of England, and other her Dominions, unto whom the chief government of
all Estates of this Realm, whether they be Ecclesiastical or civil, in all
causes, does appertain; and is not, nor ought to be subject to any foreign
jurisdiction.

2. Where we attribute to the Queens Majesty, the chief government; by
which titles we understand the minds of some slanderous folk to be offended,
we give not to our Princes the ministering either of Gods Word, or of the
Sacraments: The which injunctions also lately set forth by Elizabeth our
Queen, do most plainly testify. But that only prerogative, which we see to
have been given always, to all godly Princes, in holy Scriptures, by God
himself; that is, that they should rule all estates and degrees committed unto
their charge by God, whether they be Ecclesiastical or temporal, and
restrain with the Civil Sword the stubborn and evil doers. This is all that
Queen Elizabeth had or challenged. Public Records, public notice, public
testimony of the State, and all that then lived, are of greater credit, I hope,
with all moderate and honest Romish Catholics, then the lewd lying aspersions
of a partial Factionist, such as this Fellow is; and many of his companions
are, who have taken up this course, as of inheritance and kind, to dare say
any thing in despite of honesty and truth, in ordine ad Deum; for the
Catholic cause.

X.
That Antichrist shall not be a particular man, and that the Pope is Antichrist.

THat Antichrist was to come, and so prophesied of, that he is called, That man
of sin; is in my Creed, and an Article of my Belief, as being plainly and
directly expressed such in Scripture: And this I know no Protestant but
believes. But whether he was to be One particular man; or a State, a
succession opposite to Christ; I know no Article, Canon, or Iniunction, that
tyeth me to believe. The Church of England leaves me to my opinion: Every man
may abound in his own sense, and believe it, or not believe it, as he will.
For who dares peremptorily define what God himself has not, but left at
liberty? The Fathers, I grant, run most upon one man: So do your Masters of
the Roman Church. The Protestant Writers, do most of them incline rather to a
Succession, and a state of men; but not all.

Not all so peremptorily, as not to incline notwithstanding, unto one man, who
more then any of his rank shall oppose himself to Christ in that state and
Succession Antichristian; unto whom all those marks and descriptions set down
in holy Scripture, shall perfectly agree: as Zanchius, and many others do
hold. For in point of Prophecy, and that so obscure as this, until plain
event do make it manifest, judgments do and may well, saving the peace of
the Church, vary: nor should we condemn or censure Dissenters any way from
our private opinions.

Whether the Pope be that Antichrist or not, the Church resolves not,
tendreth it not to be believed any way. Some I grant are very peremptory; too
peremptory indeed, that he is: He for instance, that wrote and printed it, I am
as sure that the Pope is Antichrist, that Antichrist spoken of in Scripture; as
that Jesus Christ is God: But they that are so resolute, peremptory, and
certain; let them answer for themselves, they are old enough: the Church is
not tied, nor any man that I know, to make good their private imaginations. Nor
can or ought the several fancies of men, to be imputed unto the authorized and
approved Doctrine of the Church: A fault more then ordinary with you Papists,
to charge the Church of England with every private opinion, that any man
holds in our Church, though he be singular and alone.

For my self; I profess ingenuously, I am not of opinion, that the Bishop of
Rome personally, is that Antichrist, that Urban the VIII: or Gregory the XV; or
Paul the V. were Antichrist: though Paul's name Borghesie, before he was Pope,
written in Greek, St John's Language, does make 666. the number of the Beast.
Nor yet that the Bishops of Rome Successively, are that Antichrist so spoken
of: An Antichrist I hold him, or them, carrying themselves as they do in the
Church; either as the word has hitherto been taken for, one that is (...),
against Christ: or according to the new trick and device of some; for (...),
in stead or place of Christ. Rather in this point I should incline unto that
opinion of many Protestant Divines, that for the State Antichristian, the Turk
and Pope together may seem to make it: and for the Person, some one notorious
varlet above the rest. Thus Zanchius, and others: so Melanthon, Draconites upon
Daniel, Oecolampadius upon the same; Hiperius upon the second Epistle to the
Thessalonians: Zanchius in Miscellan: Lambert in Apocal. Zegedynus in Locis:
Grynaeus in praefat. Eiusdem Libri: and a Disputation at Geneua, 1589. under
Faius. I say, rather this way, then the other; though for full resolution I
cannot resolve for either: but profess my ignorance in such mysteries, and
therefore as is fitting (...), and crave pardon.

But had I no greater cause to refrain from concluding then your wise
worshipful reasons, Sir Gagger, Contrary to their own Bible, 2 These 2. 3.
I should conclude as peremptorily as any; Papa est ipsissimus Antichristus:
Your Texts are not express, they are not euictiue, nor conuincing: 2 These. 2.
3. He is called, That man of sin, the son of perdition: Your inference is
hereupon thus. The words, Man of sin; and son of Perdition, being singular,
do plainly prove, that a succession of men, as the Popes are, cannot be this
man of sin. For so Saint Peter also should be Antichrist; for he was Pope,
and the very first of all the Popes. So your good Gossips long since reasoned
in this point, but idely all, and you more: Though the words be singular and
personal; Man of sin: and Son of Perdition: yet follows not, that the
subject is one Person; they may denote a body: For any Corporation, though
collected out of Pluralities, is a totum, and so but one, and so singular in it
self. The Prophecies of Jacob for Judah, and his other Sons, runs
precisely in singular and personal terms; yet your self, I think, are not
so senseless, as to fasten them all unto the Persons of the Patriarchs. The
Man of sin, is personal in terms, I grant, but the designation may be a
collectiue unity; a Corporation, a Succession. A sinful man, a wicked
generation; an impious body, and an Antichristian State. You have read in the
Psalms, That the man of the Earth be no more exalted against them: And again;
For man goes about to devour me. Some private man the Prophet meant by your
reason; no Company, combination, or society of men: For, The words Man, and Man
of the Earth, being singular, do plainly prove, that he could not intend any
private man: this is your reason for the Pope.

As for Saint Peter's being then a limb of Antichrist, because he was Pope, and
the first of Popes; I answer, For so Saint Peter should then be Antichrist:
for he was Pope, and the very first of Popes.
that he was none of Antichrists members, because he was first: For the Spring
is good and wholesome, where the stream is muddy, bitter, or unwholesome; the
foundation good, where the building is ruinous: the first most regular, where
Succession is not. Those that hold the Pope Antichrist, never imagined all
Popes to be so: but the defection of Popes; since the falling away either from
the Faith; or from the Roman Empire; or rather indeed, from both. So that
Saint Peter, though Bishop of Rome, and a Pope, and many other succeeding him
in that See, cannot be included within the pale of Antichrist, although it be
pleaded that the Pope is Antichrist, and resolved so.

Revel. 13. 18. The holy Spirit gives both you and others good advise, Qui
operta sacri supparo silentij irrumpere audent; Let him that has
understanding, count the number of the Beast: for it is the number of a man. I
cannot tell certainly what is meant by that number of a man. You can, it
should seem: but this I can tell, as I have told you already, that a man does
not ever and necessarily imply a particular and singular man. For the name of
Christ, is as particular, rather more singular than the name of man: and yet
your own directors acknowledge, it is attributed unto any, and all that have
any similitude or resemblance unto him, as Prophets, Kings, Priests. And your
last Therefore the great Antichrist shall be a particular man.
Text to be seen, is, 1 John 2. 22. where he is a liar, that denies Jesus;
that denies the Father and the Son, is Antichrist; and yet I hope no
singular man necessarily. Therefore the great Antichrist may not be a
particular man.

XI.
That none but God can forgive or retain Sins.

Sins are forgiven two ways: by power original, and authority: by derived
power, and delegation. God alone, and none but God, does or can forgive sins
the first way; against whom only sins are committed, Psalm. 51. Against thee
only have I sinned: and therefore Esaias 43. 25. I am he that blotteth out
iniquities for my self. In this sense the Pharisees did not err, Luke 5. Who
can forgive sins but God alone? In this sense it is true, and truly
maintained, None but GOD can forgive, or retain sins. Verum dicunt Scribae:
The Scribes say true, faith venerable Bede, No man can forgive sins but God
alone. And he does forgive them by the ministry of those men to whom he has
given power to forgive them; by active delegation.

He has given power unto men to do that: we profess and maintain; The
Priest has power and authority from God, to forgive sins, in as ample
manner, as he can receive it. So your Fathers and Scriptures may well be
spared, and have been kept by you in store against a dearer time. Your own
director, Controu. 9. has these words, to our advantage and acquittall, and
your confusion. Hereunto is also pertinent the doctrine of those Protestants,
who hold; That Priests have power not only to pronounce, but to give remission
of sins. That hold most of the forenamed authors, and others very many. Yes,
it seems to be the doctrine of the Communion Book, in the visitation of the
sick; where the Priest says: And by his authority committed unto me, I
absolu^ thee from all thy sins.

If this be acknowledged the Doctrine of our Communion Book, and practice of
our Church accordingly, as it is, injurious are those opposites unto truth, and
liars against their own knowledge, that impute it to us, which we are
confessed to deny, That none but God can forgive sins. This must proceed out
of faction, Contrary to express words of their own Bible.
or that which is worse: But this fellow proceeds upon a further extremity,
to strengthen a truth in it self, with a lie made by himself, that our
Doctrine is contrary to our Bibles.

Matthew. 9. 3. 8. To prove against us that which we deny not, viz. this power
delegated unto Priesthood, thus you allege: But when the multitude saw it,
they maruailed, and glorified God, who had given such power unto men, as to
forgive sins. Which words, As to forgive sins, are not in our Bibles, out of
which you undertake to prove your Assertion: Nor in your own Bibles, follow
which you will. You have added them out of your store, to serve your own
turn, contrary to Scripture; and further, contrary to sense. Because that
thing which amazed them then, for which they glorified God, was a thing
sensible, visible, apprehended of all: When they saw it. Now, see sins
forgiven they could not: hear it pronounced; believe it, they might. Secondly,
the power there given, is not ordinary, as that of absolution is: but
extraordinary, and miraculous, to heal the sick. Peter, and his Successor
had that: but very few or none had this. You know, it was answered a Pope once,
when he showed a mass of Gold and Silver to one, and added, The Church could
not say now, Silver and Gold have I none; No, quoth the other, Nor can it say;
Arise and walk. This is that power there mentioned, could you see it, not that
of Absolution ordinary.

That of Ioh. 20. 21. Matthew. 16. 19. Give that power unto the Apostles to
forgive sins: But may it not See more, Mat. 16. 19.
be excepted, it was a personal privilege? I answer, not so: for I believe
it not. The collation was original, to them, as to those from whom it was to
be conveyed unto others. But some are happily of that opinion: and it may seem
probable unto others: you should have cleared the Texts of that objection, and
then your performance had been to purpose.

Matthew. 16. 19. May be understood you mean of sins forgiven, but yet only
secondarily: for thesi secunda: Because we read in the Evangelist, whatsoever,
and not whomsoever; this place is to be understood of any knot whatsoever:
indeed rather of the power of the sword, than of the keys. And it seems
that if this place be not personal to Peter, and his successors, as by this
allegation for forgiving, it neither is, nor can be, then our most holy Father
has lost a maine pillar of his Papacy, peculiar to Saint Peter, and his
successors: So these Madianites sheath their swords one in another sides; and
cross themselves in their own positions.

In Matthew. 18. 18. The Text is so express to the purpose, that Origin,
Chrysostom, Theophilact, and Anastasius, understand it of all Christians
whomsoever: that sundry Roman Catholics, if Maldonate deceive us not,
understand it of no more than civil policy. Go take it, Whatsoever you bind
on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, and whatsoever you loose in Earth, it shall
be loosed in Heaven: as your selves will for the power and execution of the
keys. We deny not in any sort, that power is given unto mortal men to
forgive sins on earth, nor to bind by excommunication, which is frequently
practiced, and peradventure too frequently amongst us. Unto that, 1 Cor. 5. 5.
Artic. 33. thus we subscribe, That person, who by open denunciation of the
Church, is rightly cut off from the unity of the Church, and excommunicated,
ought to be avoided, and to be taken of the whole multitude of the faithful,
as an Heathen, and a Publican, until he be openly reconciled by penance, and
received into the Church by a Judge that has authority thereunto. And in this
sort Saint Paul delivered Hymenaeus, and Alexander, 1 Timoth. 1. 20. and
forgave the incestuous Corinthian, 2 Cor. 2. 10. Which places by your direction
we have seen, and find the Article agreeing with them. As for 2 Cor. 5. 19.
It is not to purpose of forgiving sins by delegated authority unto a Priest,
but of Reconciling by the whole office and function of the ministry. God was in
Christ, says the Apostle, and reconciled the world unto himself, not imputing
their sins unto them, and has committed to us the word of reconciliation. So
we have seen either, nothing at all to purpose: or else that of which we
made no question, nor yet do any at all.

As little in Fathers that affirm the same. Irenaeus See Fathers that affirm
the same.
Lib. 5. cap. 14. says, the raising of Lazarus from death to life, was a
Symbol or figure of our Resurrection from Sin to God. He says no more that
I can see or find. Ambrose Lib. 1. it should be de paenitent. cap. 7. Nor
August. Tract. 49. in John: Nor Gregor. hom. 26. in Euangel. if we may believe
Bellarmine, Lib. 3. de paenitent. cap. 3. from whom you transcribed these
testimonies, without considering of these Fathers, in their own works: but so
carelessely, that if you were a Schoole-Boy, lures in corpore: for you refer
us to Gregor. hom. 26. in Euangel. Whereas Bellarmine has it 6. and to
Ambrose, Lib. de paenitentia: as if Saint Ambrose had written but one Book of
that Argument, not divided into Chapters, whereas Bellarmine directed you
aright to the seventh Chapter of his 1. Book. Was this security, stupiditie,
or insolency in you? or what was it?

XII.
That we must not confess our Sins but only unto God.

THat we must not, implies a flat negative, or iniunction rather, unto the
contrary: Show me any such inhibition, and I will say, which I believe you
never will deserve at any Protestants hands, you are a true dealing, and an
honest man. Otherwise, you are that you are, and so will be still.

The most that has been said, is, that private confession is free, not tied:
and therefore suus positiui, not diuini: Therefore, happily of conueniency, not
of absolute necessity. That in a private Confession unto a Priest, a peculiar
enumeration of all Sins, both of commission and omission, with all
circumstances, and accidents, is never necessary necessarily: most an end not
expedient, nor yet, all things considered, required. It is confessed that all
Priests, and none but Priests, have power to forgive sins: It is confessed,
that private Confession unto a Priest^ is of very ancient practice in the
Church: of excellent use and practice, being discreetly handled. We refuse it
to none, if men require it, if need be to have it. We urge it and persuade it
in extremes: We require it in case of perplexity, for the quieting of men
disturbed, and their consciences. It has been so acknowledged by your
fellows, that in the visitation of the sick, it is required by the Communion
Book: That the sick person make a special Confession, if he feel his
Conscience troubled with any weighty matter: And likewise before the receiving
of the Lords Supper, according to which doctrine and iniunction, our Bishops
do, or should enquire in their Visitations, touching the use and neglect of
this so good an order: as did that right learned and reverend Bishop of
Norwich, Dr. Oueral, of late: A man for admirable learning, and yet as strange
humility, in communicating his knowledge unto any poor Scholar, hardly
equalled, sure outgone by none since the world had him. The 21. Article
enquired of in his Visitation 1619. concerning Ministers, is: Whether does your
Minister before the several times of the administration of the Lords Supper,
admonish and exhort his Parishioners, if they have their Consciences troubled
and disquieted, to resort unto him, or some other learned Minister, and open
his grief, that he may receive such ghostly counsel and comfort, as his
Conscience may be relieved, and by the Minister he may receive the benefit of
Absolution, to the quiet of his conscience, and avoiding of scruple. And if any
man confess his secret and hidden sins, being sick, or whole, to the
Minister, for the vnburthening of his Conscience, and receiving such spiritual
consolation, does or has the said Minister at any time, revealed and made
known to any person whomsoever, any crime or offense so committed to his
trust, contrary to the 113. Canon? that he might be punished accordingly.
Which is not like the iniunction of those that hold, We must confess our
Sins but only unto God. Our people happily are negligent in performing this
most behoofefull use and practice of the Church, but the judgment and
resolution of the Church, is not auerse from it, as you belie us: much less is
it our decision. We must not confess our Sins, but only unto God.

The words of our Bible, Matthew. 3. 5. 6. are express Contrary to the express
words of your own Bible.
for confessing. I grant: and for confessing of Sins too: But not express
for public or private confessing: not for confessing unto whom, to man or
unto God: not, whether in general, they confessed themselves sinners; or,
descended to some particulars there more ordinary, direct, and enormious
sins. These are not instanced, discerned, nor determined; Writers are divided
in opinion. You know it not: only because there was confessing of Sins, it
must needs be such confession of such Sins, as you imagined. Have you read
what Maldonate that learned Jesuit has said of such bold Bayards, as your
self, Quis vnquam Catholicus tam indoctus fuit, vt ex hoc loco Confessionis
probaret Sacramentum? Was there ever any Catholic such a block, as would go
about to prove out of this place the Sacrament of Confession? Not in his time,
or before peradventure. Maldonate could not prophecy, nor foresee therefore,
that such an unlettered Dolt would rise up after him. I do speak but in his
Language: Indoctus, is as much in effect. If you meant not of sacramental
Confession: bucus, blennus es. What other Confession could you speak of? If of
Confession sacramental; in Maldonates judgment, bardus es: howsoever, fungus,
fatuus es: For, if all those that went out unto John Baptist, came to him for
shrift; he had shriuing work enough for seven years. I add. It is happily
intended, They confessed unto God: For it is not said, they confessed unto
John. And then, what is become of your, Therefore Therefore sins may be
confessed unto man.
sins may be confessed unto man? Secondly, your tenet is of must be, not may
be. They did it voluntarily, once: therefore, often, and again. We must
necessarily do. Thirdly, they did it once in all their life: and that on
occasion, and time extraordinary; at their Baptism: not again, for any thing
that we know. Your Confession is penitential, flat opposite unto this in
Baptism You may as well infer out of this Text, reiteration of Baptism: as
reiteration of Confession: Baptism in Jordan, necessarily, as Confession of
Sins necessarily: So many encumbrances are in the words: so many Non
sequiturs unto the maine.

That of Act. 19. 18. I grant is more proper: and as Bellarmine observes, in
some sort it is true, that the words are of special Confession: but yet they
come not home unto Auricular; Confession in private into the Priests ear.
Again, it was not of inforcement or necessity, but of voluntary motion. Nor
is it expressed, which is most material: whether it were made only unto God,
or also unto man. If you be put to prove it, what proof or evidence can you
make for it? The Text has, (...), Confessing and declaring openly what they
had done: Before men, not unto Paul, or any Priestin private, but unto God,
before men; that all the Assembly might take notice of it, and understand it.

That of Numb. 5. 6. is for Confession unto, at least before the Priest: but is
your judgment so crased, to award us the iniunction and practice of this
Jewish Ceremony, for a ground of Confession Sacramental? If so, your brains
are rather to be purged, then your error refuted. If you take it but for
typical, as you must and will, if you understand your self: then such
Propositions are not argumentatiue. Nor was there here enjoined any particular
enumeration of their sins in kind, but only of that one sin for which the
Sin-offering was brought: for which an atonement was sought, and to be
procured by the Priest. Peccatum illud quod feceram, is Bellarmines
observation: and so, no way for the point in Controversy; Confession Auricular
unto the Priest, unless only by way of equality and conueniencie, as left
unto us free, and not upon obligation as to them, which help you not.

Thus we have no great satisfaction out of Scripture, Go and see Fathers that
affirm as little: Irenaeus lib. 1. cap. 9. speaking of some silly women, one
or two, seduced by Marcus, a Sorcerer and Gnostique Heretic, relates thus
much, that being reconciled and regained to the Catholic Church, they
confessed, Marcus had abused them carnally; which nothing promoteth their
Catholic Cause, unless their ghostly Fathers should shriue them in secret as
Marcus did: They might confess that before a temporal ludge, unto some
Neighbor or friends of their own. To a Priest: some Priests; and yet not in
aurem: or if so, yet not by special enumeration of all the circumstances, or
relation of their other sins. It might be in the face of the Church in
general. Irenaeus words are not confined: Hae saepissime conuersae ad
Ecclesiam Dei, confessae sunt, and secundum corpus exterminatas se ab eo velut
Cupidine, and inflammatas valde se illum dilexisse. They confessed it often,
unto many, what Magical enchantments he used to besot them: Therefore not
likely in Sacramental Confession, where having received absolution of the
Priest, it were but idle to confess it again; unless the man imagined the
Protestants denied and took away all Confession, upon any terms, what need
we go see in Irenaeus?

Or in Tertullian; who in his Book de poenitentia, (I must supply the Chapter,
you had forgot it, or else could not tell it) Cap. 4. blames some that through
bashfulnesse would not confess: but where, or to whom he tells not. Happily
he meant it of Confession unto God. For almost instantly before he has these
words; Qua delictum nostrum Domino confitemur: To God, notto man; and Delictum,
the sin that lies close, that presses down, that disquieteth us in
Conscience: not Delicta, our sins by enumeration. But pass it for private
Confession to a Priest. Tertullian urges it no farther, then for conueniency;
and draws it up no higher then Delictum. Every way conspiring with the
Protestants, who mislike not Confession, nay, approve it unto men: who condemn
not Absolution, but approve it, enjoin it, though not with that rigor as
Romanists do; and approve Saint Ambrose counsel well: Confess freely unto
the Priest, the hidden secrets of thy soul. If yet it be the counsel of Saint
Ambrose. For Plagiary as you be, did you not here mistake your Author: and
Father that ignorantly upon Saint Ambrose, which Bellarmine tells you was the advice of Gregory Nyssen, Orat: in mulierem peccatricem? Such gross
Bayardismes in so insolent a Bard, are intolerable: Saint Ambrose has no such
Book, de muliere peccatrice. 2: de paenitent. 6. He exhorts to repentance,
but not a word of Confession unto a Priest: many confessing unto God.

XIII.
That Pardons and Indulgences were not in use in the Apostles times.

IN the Apostles times? no, nor yet many hundreds of years since their times.
Such Pardons as commence in the Apostolical Chauncery; such as Tecelius
dispersed in Germany: others in other Countries: are impious, irreligious,
profane, and sacrilegious coosnage; an imposture of Merchants that trade for
the Devil; that chaffer Heaven and happiness, for the reward of iniquity. The
first moving cause of Luthers rising up, and taking Arms against the Church of
Rome. Bellarmine and Baronius, those grand Dictators, and undertakers for the
Papacy, fail in proofs of this nouelty; and what can such a puny as this
fellow perform? Yet let us see his best endeauours, and fairest shows;
because with Catholics every Pismire is a Potentate: as every Goose a Swan.
Contrary no doubt to our own Bibles, we deny them. For 2 Cor. 2. 10. S. Paul
remembers them thus; To whom you forgive any thing, I forgive also, etc. You
must know, that are to learn: The Corinthian that had married his Fathers
wife, was for his incest Excommunicated, and put to penance by the Apostle; as
appears, 1 Cor. 5. 3. Well, what when? why here he gives order for his
Pardon. This is not denied upon any hand. The Protestants believe the
Scriptures more then Papists will do. Why, but these two places compared, are
a plain proof of the Apostles power of punishing and of pardoning. They are,
it is granted: Therefore Pardons were in use in the Apostles time. Is any Ass
so ignorant as to say nay? Long before the Apostles time they were in use. Long
before Moses, or Abraham's days. Can a man with patience here this Animal thus
bray? I suppose there is no Roman Catholic beside himself so senseless; as
to imagine, Protestants believe or teach, That no offender was pardoned in the
Apostles times: That the Apostles had no power, or wanted will to accept any
Contrite, and Penitent into the Church. Ingenuous Roman Catholics, can you
brook the wittall thus to babble? Pardons were in use, then, after, before:
but Pardons no more like the Pardons he means, or should maintain, then
Simon the Sorcerer was to Simon the Tanner, or Stephen the Deacon, to Stephen
Gardener; or this goose gagger unto an honest man.

2 Cor. 2. 6. In the same case, upon the same person, the Apostle says;
Sufficient to such a ma(...) his punishment: And therefore he forgave what
remained of his punishment, not yet fulfilled. So that there passed an
Indulgence for his farther durance. There did no doubt. We willingly yield it;
and take it for a warrant against Nouatian Puritanisme: for a ground unto the
Discipline of the Church; whose practice in Discipline is established. Art. 33.
It is in the hands of the spiritual Magistrates to measure the time of such
punishment or penance imposed. Let your Pardons be no otherwise, and we
quarrel them not: Let them stay upon the living in foro fori, and not meddle
with pardoning the dead for money: nor yet coosen the living, by false Coins,
out of the supposed Treasures of the Church; and no opposition will be unto
Pardons granted, no, though sold in external Courts abroad. For the faults of
men shall not be imputed unto the Discipline by us, if that were rectified as
it ought to be. But the man is conscious to the foulness of his Cause, and
profane Roman marting; and therefore attireth a prostituted Strumpet, in the
habit of a grave Matron. Popish pardons and Indulgences, so profane and
enormious, are passed under the names of those things, with which they have no
more affinity then in name: which the Prince of the Apostles of the Lamb, had
with the first begotten of the Devil. Pardons, and Pardons: Simon and Simon,
homonym(...)s. For, the Doctrine and Practice of the Church for Repentance, in
Excommunication, Contrition, Confession, Satisfaction, Restitution, Absolution,
is according unto Piety, and the rule of Faith, in those that have sinned, and
are restored: but in the Church of Rome, thus it goes. They imagine a treasure
in the Church, compounded together, out of the satisfactions of Christ, and his
Saints: which Treasure so composed, is in the hands, say they, of the Pope, and
other Prelates, under lock and key, safe enough from purloining, to be
disposed and dispensed as they shall think good, to whom they will open and
communicate it, more or less, which is ever Danti, (for Giff-gaff is a good
fellow) to none else; and answerable to his purchase much or little, Plus, or
minus danti, as his means are.

For in every good work, there is Merit and Satisfaction. Merit is Personal,
not Transitiue, nor yet Communicable: but Satisfaction is and may be imparted.
Because Satisfaction is only for a Temporary pain; which is often more, and
greater then Justice, or right for the offense exacteth. So that God in Justice
requiring but Proportion, the ouer-plus in remainder is laid up in store
against time of need, and drawn forth for use, when men's purses are flush;
then, and not till then, to be soueraignly applied unto the purchaser, not
payer.

This premised, to your Scriptures and ancient Fathers: Find you any such
Pardon in Saint Paul foreprised? or Indulgence imparted upon those terms? The
Corinthian was restored, without a Bull: a Bishops Seal; a Commissaries
direction unto the Parson. He paid no rate, nor fees for Restitution, or
standing rectus in Curia: No Treasure of the Church was applied unto him. Upon
his hearty repentance, and hearty satisfaction, he was restored. Satisfaction,
not to God, but to the Church; whom he had scandalized by his fall. Go along
with Saint Paul, and the Primitive times; no man will ever say, Black is your
Eye.

We have seen, Matthew 18. 18. and 16. 19. once and again, to as little
purpose then, as now; and now, as then. The name, Pardons; and the thing, your
Pardons, are two things much differing every way: and yet in neither place
auonched is the Name, as by your undertaking for Express, it should be. The
thing as much differing as white and black. Power to bind and loose we deny
not: we maintain and practice it in our Church. We may differ in the
Execution; but Circumstances alter not Nature: your proofs may vouch the
Thing, the right, the use, the being; but manner, fashion, execution, only
doubted of, and to be proved, that you touch not.

See Fathers that list, and like to loose their labor. See the Fathers, who
affirm the same: Tertul. lib. ad Mart. ca. 1.
In Tertullian I am sure nothing, either in the first Chapter of his Book, ad
Martyrs, remembered by some other of your Gossips, nor in his fifth, which is
supplied out of your store: His Book ad Martyrs, is very ^^ort. Find me
Pardons and Indulgences there mentioned, and I will purchase a Bull from Rome
my self, whatsoever it cost me: dear enough, without doubt. That which you
have a mind unto by direction of others, is this, as I guess, Quam pa^em,
quidam in Ecclesia non habentes, a Martyribus in carcere exorare consueuere:
Which Peace some not enjoying within the Church, have been accustomed to
entreat the Martyrs in Prison for it. Peace there is Pardon, after the African
phrase of Tertullian, and Saint Cyprian, whom you make your second Father to be
seen; and whose testimony is almost idem numero with Tertullians. The meaning
of both, as Pamelius, no Protestant, may inform you, was this. Those that had
fallen in time of persecution: to avoid or eleuate the censure of the Church,
through their great suite and importunity, often procured letters deprecatory
to the Bishop and Clergy, whereto they were liable, from Consessors, such as
were emprisoned for the truth, whom those Fathers call Martyrs, that so at
their entreaty, and for their confessions famous in the Church, the rigor of
discipline might be suspended, mitigated, or determined, and they without more
ado, be restored unto the Church. Against this custom in breach of
discipline, Tertullian, and especially Cyprian, inueigh most bitterly. So then,
take your choice, either these Fathers cannot be seen to affirm for your
purpose: or if so, avoid it if you can your pardons at the first arising up in
the Church were but abuses, and as such, resisted, exclaimed on, condemned as
irregular, and as impious, by the Fathers of those times, Tertullian, and
especially Cyprian: and so you have spun a fair thread either way.

As for Pope Urban the second, make you merry Pope Urban the second, granted a
plenary Indulgence to such as would go to the Holy-Wars, An. Christi. 160.
with him: much good may his plenary indulgence for the Holy Land war and
voyage do you. Ask my fellow if I be a thief, Urban granted such Indulgence
I confess: So did Gregory the seventh his next Predecessor but one, first
take upon him to depose Princes, and dispose of their Kingdoms, by
Apostaticall authority. No man heard of the one before Gregory: nor of the
other before Urban. The eldest above 1000. years after Christ. Urban the
eight, that now Popeth it, may proclaim a Croisado if he will, and justify
his fact as well as any other: but the true reason holds not now: The World
is grown wiser, and men love money too well to be so cheated of it, as their
fore fathers were: to empty their own, and fill the Popes Coffers by Croisado
cousonages.

But what a Bayard is this, to show such blockish Ignorance, being an
undertaker, and that with some contumely against the whole Nation of
Protestants? We are told it was Anno Christi 160. as if there were any Holy
wars in those times, when as Urban the first, (if he were then borne,) yet
certainly was not Pope many years after, till 224. above 60. years between.
As for Urban the second, he sat in Anno 1088. A foul over sight in such an
undertaker, for the gagging of all Protestants mouths for ever. But somewhat
there was in it, that the Cat wincked, when both her eyes were out. Some wiser,
more learned, and skillful than himself, had observed, it seems, that Urban
the second, Founder of these pardons, was the 160. Pope in order from Saint
Peter: and this poor Ignaro, meaning well to the Cause, to advance the credit
thereof by antique use, thought it had bin a thing so ancient as the year
160. at least, best to use a Catholic trick of piae fraudis, to let it go
so. For, honest good Catholics must believe what their Instructors say,
though they teach that the Snow is black: so are they hood-wincked in
implicit Faith. And as for Heretics, no matter if they spy it: or what they
say: poor misled Proselites, either read not their answers, good cause why;
or if they read them, will not believe them, though never so plain and
evident: Therefore Quicquid in buccam, these men may say and write any thing;
no matter what.

XIIII.
That the Actions and Passions of Saints do serve for nothing unto the Church.

MEntiris furcifer: a leude lie: in imputation of flat impiety. They serve for
nothing? those worthies of David? those mighty men of War? Holy Saint
Stephen and his Arriere-ban of valiant Adventurers in the cause of Christ
Jesus, that in life and death have so glorified God: and set up that bloody
banner of our Redemption, displayed on the battlements of Death and Hell!
(...): Indeed this was the power of that omnipotent God, not to be uttered by
the tongue of men, which did so enable them unto such performings, says
Iustine himself, one of that Society. They are our Crown, and our exceeding
great rejoicing. We boast of them, and of their noble acts: we commemorate
their worths in our common service. (...), said Nazianzen, I take it, or Basil,
one of the two, and we take up that saying, whose soever it was. In doing them
honor we delight exceedingly. We triumph in the blood they have shed for our
Savior. Their acts were recorded for imitation; that considering their
Precedents, and worthy performings, we might be encouraged to follow their
example, (...). As springing Wels they supply us continually, says Clemens
Alexandrinus; What do they supply us with all? (...), with commonifaction to
show our selves religious lovers of God, though with shedding of our blood. To
show forth our Faith, with loss of our lives. Witnesses they are: so is their
name. Martyrs, for (...) is to witness. Credendorum: agendorum:
sustinendorum, recipiendorum: Of things to be believed, performed, endured,
received, says Bonauenture. And are these for nothing unto the Church? Did
ever any Protestant say or think so of these Holy Saints of God? For shame
speak truth, and shame the Devil, the Father of lies, and such lying
Libellers as our Gagger.

But belike it is for nothing, which is not for your purpose. And therefore,
whatsoever Protestants do think, and teach, and esteem of the life and
actions; the death and Passions of those holy Saints of Christ, it is nothing,
because that they build not up thence a Magazin, nor storehouse for the
Church, nor supply other men's defects, by their superfluities: that the Holy
Father may thereby mugle men, and fill his (...) coffers by lifting law. A
thing so improbable for that fained treasury, that as Bellarmine confesses,
some of the Schoolmen, as Maironis and Durand have not approved it: Which they
durst not have done, had Saint Paul been of that mind, and tendered that,
Doctrine, Colos. 1. 24. I rejoice in my sufferings for you, and fill up that
which is behind: you read wanting, (and read so, if you list) of the
afflictions of Christ in my flesh, for his bodies sake, which is the Church:
Hence has the ground of Indulgences been always taken: but more principally
from the super abundant merit of Jesus Christ.
Whence, if you say true, the ground of Indulgences has ever been.

And you mean since there were Indulgences heard off: For the time was, in the
Protestants opinion at least, that no such thing was in being: which yet I
marvel much it so should be: and that many writing of that argument, have not
so much as dreamed thereof: and many, no Protestants, expound it otherwise.
Osorius a Jesuit, in his Sermons, says, Quid deest passioni Christi, nisi vt
nos similia patiamur: What can be wanting to the suffering of Christ, but only
this, that we in like sort suffer with him? Paul suffered much; endured much;
yet was he not perfect, if himself say true: and for the Church of Christ, to
give them example, to strengthen and confirm them in what they had received
from him, filled up the measure appointed for him in conformity to the
sufferings of Christ Jesus. Barradas, another of that same Society, Tom. 3.
upon the Gospels. Quod ad sufficientiam attinet nihil deerat passioni, and
Cruci Christi: The Cross and sufferings of Christ were all sufficiency: and
that way naught wanted unto his passion. Vt tamen efficax es^et Crux
app(...)tio, and praedicatio laboribus plena deerat. Ideo Paulus ^it, se
adimplere, quae desunt passionum Christi, quia per multos labores Euangelium
gentibus praedicabat. And yet to make the Cross and sufferings of Christ
effectual, there wanted application of it, by Preaching: A thing laborious,
and exceeding painful: For which cause Paul says, that he fills up, or
supplyeth, if you will, that which was wanting unto the sufferings of Christ,
for as much as, with great pains he preached the Gospel unto the Gentiles.

Differences there may be amongst Interpreters: but none, not partialists take
it so, as to make up a Storehouse for the Church, out of Christ's sufferings
supplied by Saint Paul: For so it must be: admit this Magazin, and we must
admit a supply: a supply is not but upon insufficiency. Can a man without
blasphemy babble thus? Christ's imperfect, a d insufficient sufferings, were
made up and supplied by Saint Paul? In the merits of Christ, there are no
(...), coming short, remains, or as you will call them, wants: For if so: I
say no more, but how can your self call them superabundant as you do, and as
they are? The Text should speak expressly, if you kept your woe(...) for
making up a store for the Church in time of need: which is so far from
expressly doing that, as that not obscurely it insinuates what you pretend:
no not in the interpretations of no Babes, upon your own party, Jesuits of
note and learning.

Philip. 2. 30. Because for the work of Christ he was nigh unto death, not
regarding his own life to supply your lack. Epaphroditus is the man there
spoken of: a faithful servant of Christ in the work of the ministry: who
with the hazard of his own life puts himself to do service unto the Church
of God. This is the commendation Saint Paul gives of him. Your inference is:
He did more than he needed to have done: for who required any such service at
his hand as this? He might have kept himself close, and warm at home: and
have slept if he would, in an whole skin. This is your good wholesome
Catholic Doctrine: For the benefit accruing out of the actions and Passions
of Saints, is to make up the treasure of the Church, out of works
supererogated by them, when they do more than God requires. As for instance,
when the Virgin Mary, without not only actual sins, mortal, venial, in
your opinion, but also original, as not conceived in them, suffered yet much,
which was not due to her: because all sufferings are the wages of Sin: as
when martyrs suffer more, or greater torments, than can in justice be exacted
of them, though God should enter into judgment with them, and deal with them
in the rigor of his justice. So, Epaphroditus, sick unto death, indu(...)
that which in no case was his deserving, or due unto him: he endured it
therefore for the Philippians sake, that through his sufferings they might be
saved, and have supply of that which was wanting in the reckoning to the
sufferings of Christ: as good blasphemy as ever was uttered by any enemy of the
Grace of Christ, I will abide by it.

Secondly, admit it, good Catholic truth; yet is it not to purpose true: for
Epaphroditus was then alive; and upon recovery, aliues-like. They are, and must
be dead, that bring in their shot, to make up that mass of treasure for the
Church; and good cause why: For though then at present he had enough at home,
and also spare to serve others turns, yet wisdom would he should not be too
lavish or profuse; for happily he might have need thereof himself: For your
Doctrine also is, He that stands may fall. No man is sure of his Salvation:
therefore, well is it provided, though you regard it not, or know it not, that
your store is not to be augmented till men are dead. Thirdly, in your own
construction and learning, this Text of Saint Paul will do you no good: For in
point of supply, for Pardons and Indulgences from the Actions and Passions of
Saints, you admit not of merits, but only satisfactions Now this text serves,
if at all, for any thing to any purpose, for merit, and not for satisfaction.

Lastly, you play the Catholic knave in plain terms: a man may call a spade
a spade, and him a knave that so deserves it. For you will convict us by our
own Bibles. Now in our Bibles we read thus, Because for the work of Christ
he was nigh unto death, not regarding his life, to supply your lack of
service toward me. You cut off these words of service toward me; and set up
your rest upon, to supply your lack: as if the defects of the Philippians
toward God, had been supplied by the store of Epaphroditus: whereas the defect
was temporary, toward St. Paul, to supply which, Epaphroditus did venture his
life. Such legerdemaine befitteth well your cause, not to be vpholden but by
collusion. Now go and infer your conclusion thus; Therefore the passions of
the servants of God, may be imparted; and serve to good purpose to the Church:
which no man but like you, will deny: but is not the thing in question, or to
be proved. And how comes halting in the close, Roman. 9. 3. where Saint Paul
remonstrateth his fervent love indeed unto his Brethren the jews, in wishing
to be separated from Christ for them? Go you and do so, (and you shall have a
better treasure in Heaven) for us Protestants your Brethren in the same alloy,
I wonder we hear of no Fathers here: nor any brag of their abundance, at
least such a Catholic verity as this is, can afford whole thraues of Fathers
I need not doubt. But Roscius noster, noluit agere, aut crudior fuit. We must
be feign to be without them, whom he cannot name: neither here, nor for works
of Supererogation. No marvel; for Causa est conclamata.

XV.
That no man can do any works of Supererrogation.

WHat is meant by works of Supererrogation we may collect out of the Texts of
Scripture cited, viz. that man in the state of Grace, and assisted by Gods
grace, may do some things councelled, and not commanded or exacted in rigor.
Many particulars are produced: it is commonly instanced, in virginity, and
wilful poverty. For my part I know no Doctrine of our English Church against
Evangelical Counsels. Private resolutions this way or that way, are but
opinions, and may as well be rejected as admitted: I willingly subscribe unto
antiquity for the point of Counsels Evangelical: For, Quod ex voluntate est,
laudis est amplioris, says Philastrius. God puts the yoke of Virginity
upon no man, but leaves it to those that can and will undergo it: Therefore
Nazianzen well resolved; We have Laws amongst us, that bind of necessity:
others, which be left unto our free-choyce, to keep them or not: so as if we
keep them, we shall be rewarded: if we keep them not, no fear of punishment
or danger to be undergone therefore.

But I deny thereupon works of Supererrogation, to be laid up in store for
employments: such indeed you call works of Supererrogation: not the things
only done by assistance of Gods grace, as councelled only, and not commanded.
Which were it so, and no otherwise, Whence it appears, that man by assistance
of Gods grace, may do some things counseled. And these we call works of
supererogation.
I would not contend with you: but then your Magazin would be empty enough of
Churchtreasure. The truth is, as faitors use, you play fast and loose: For
although a man in some one point may do more than is exacted, in many other
things he does much less than he should do. A man professes continency and
single life, he must precisely keep it. He chastises and brings under his
body, with fasting, praying, lying on the ground, etc. the better to keep it:
as those ancient Ascetae and Anachorites did, in their marvelous and admirable
Scleragogie; This was more than they needed to have done, out of strict
command: But were they not defective? Came they home, think we, in many
other things commanded, required under that fearful dictate, Do this, and
live? Now, set the Hares head against the Goose giblets; let one score pay
another, and then much will not be left to satisfy for others: well for him
that can answer for one. If a man could in all things keep the whole Law, and
have no need at all to say, Forgive me my trespasses, then he might happily
Supererogate: as in opinion of the Adversary, the blessed Virgin may: till
then, that we meet with such perfect livers, we may conclude rather for
subtererogation, than supererogation any way. So this is your Doctrine of
Supererogation unto the Law: that of Counsels Evangelical, is but of pretense
to extenuate and palliate the enormitie of the other.

Matthew 19. 21. In our own Bibles our Doctrine is crossed thus. If thou will
be perfect, go and sell that thou have, and give to the poor, and thou shall
have treasure in Heaven: then come and follow me. A Council I grant: no
Imperious form of Precept. If thou will; not, Do this: Left to choice and
liberty, to do, or not. Christ tyeth no man, but leaves him to do, or not
do. But does Christ say; When thou have so done, thou shall have enough
remaining in store, to make satisfaction for another? No. He goes no farther
then merit, in their own Language, thus: Thou shall have treasure laid up for
thee in Heaven. For thee: Not, by thee, for thine own use and employment,
against thy need: Not for others, borrowing out of thy store: viz. Thou shall
have it; in effect for thy self; appropriated to thee: not to confer or
bestow it upon other that need. Far short of your supererogation.

1 Cor. 7. 25. 28. Now concerning Virgins, 1 have no commandment of the Lord,
yet I give my judgment; you read Council, as one that has obtained mercy of
the Lord, to be faithful: He that gives her in marriage, does well; but he
that gives her not in marriage, does better. This hoe advised, and gave his
counsel as you will have it, and so let it be: Man to keep himself single
and alone, especially as those times then went, and as the times succeeding
were to be: But so to do, was a work of supererogation: More I grant, then
they were tied unto by any Law of God, which leaves them at liberty, and to
themselves: but let me see, if Saint Paul has any such inference, as, out of
this same work they could satisfy for their own offenses otherwise
committed; or other men's offenses beside their own, or out of their
supernumerary perfections, add any thing else unto the Churches Stock. He
that is able to receive this counsel, let him receive and follow it all he
can; and when as he has so done, he shall benefit his own Soul: no profit
will thence out, more then exemplary accrue unto another. These are indeed the
works of Supererogation, which you mean: The other are only ti^ular, and do
but half it. So you wholly abuse and circumuent your Proselites, in pleading
for one, and p^inting out another.

Matthew 19. 12. is of the former stamp; He that is able to receive it, let him
receive it: leaves it at liberty without tie or precept. (...). He ordained
this course for them that could receive it; as says Eusebius. This may
suffice: for Luke 10. 25. thou shall find nothing unto purpose.

Fathers for the point we may look after, but not See one Father for the
same, in stead of many I could produce.
see. It is a vain and false brag; you could produce many: All that you had
heard of by relation of your Informers (for poor man your self are not guilty
of them) we shall find in the case of keeping the Law. Saint Chrysostom
should have gone amongst them there: For so C. W. B. quoted them unto your
hand: all that you could do, was to part him from the Fellowship, and bring
him in alone in this particular. And yet he has nothing for supererogation:
His plea is for possibility to keep the Law, (of which in due place.) Now
keeping of the Law reflecteth upon Precept. Precepts and Counsels, in your own
Learning, by your own Confession, are two distinct seuerals: Your prooses out
of Scripture, were all for Counsels, not Precepts: and now Saint Chrysostom is
summoned to speak for Precepts: the possibility of keeping them. So, What
would this man have? what would he say? who floateth betwixt Counsels and
Precepts thus uncertain, up and down he knows not whether.

XVI.
That by the fall of Adam, we have lost all our free will: and that it is not
in our own power either to choose good or evil.

AQuestion of obscurity, which better might have been ouer-passed in silence;
fitting rather Schools, then popular ears: especially the differences hanging
on such niceties; and the controuerted particulars of no great moment in fine,
upon due examination. For it is confessed that free will is a Power of the
reasonable Soul; and peculiar under Heaven to man, which is endued with
freedom to do, or not to do: whereby they make choice of one end rather then
of another, and of some means rather then of other, upon advice and
deliberation of the understanding, chief Councellor to the will.

This Power was conferred upon man at first, in the day of his Creat on, when
he was made a living Soul. In state of Nature entire, a natural faculty, not
any supernatural endowment at all: whereby most freely and absolutely he was
Lord of his own actions, and could do or not do what he pleased and would.
That liberty was much empaired by sin, not extinct, or amolished in corrupted
Nature, such as now it is. The Council of Trent rightly so defines it, Sess.
6. Cant. 5. And we profess, Non amissimus Naturam sed gratiam. As rightly is
it by that Counsel determined, Liberum arbitrium non quidem extinctum esse,
sed viribus attenuatum. The question is all of these vires remaining, and
quatenus attenuatum liberum arbitrium: The Church of England, Artic. 10.
concludes thus. The condition of man after the fall of Adam, is such, that he
cannot turn nor prepare himself by his own natural strength, and good
works, to faith and calling upon God: Wherefore we have no power to do good
works, pleasant and acceptable unto God, without the grace of God by Christ
preventing us, that we may have a good will and working with us, when we have
that good will. Man is here considered in a twofold state, of Nature depraved,
and restored. In that, Free Will is denied unto man, for works of
righteousness before conversion; not for works of Nature, or of Morality. In
the second, Free Will is granted unto man, When we have that good will, what is
it else? and By our Free Will, assisted by Grace, work out our salvation unto
the end. This is not that opinion condemned in the Council of Trent: Sess 6.
Can. 5. which takes away free will from man after preventing Grace, in
cooperation unto increase of Grace; for it is said, that Grace, infused first,
and had, works together with our good will.

So it is not denied, but free will is, In us, subsisting, not in title only.
It is not said, that by the ^all of Adam we have utterly lost all of us our
free will, as if the Soul were clean defeated and disfurnished of that Power:
So that this blunderer stumbleth at a straw, and impudently belyeth our
Profession. What some have thought or taught, is nothing to us. No Church is to
be charged with private opinions. Man in state of Corruption, has freedom of
will in Actions Natural and Civil: Secondly, Man in state of Corruption, has
free will in matters Moral. Thirdly, Man has free will in Actions of Piety,
and such as belong unto his salvation: But quatenus, and quale, is the
Question, as much amongst your selves, as with us. For the concurrence of Grace
assisting, with Free Will: The correspondency of Free well, with Prescience,
Providence, and Predestination, is much debated in your own Schools.
Intricate Disputes are hereupon inferred: Questions almost inextricable; such,
as Armachanus studied twenty years to resolve one of them, and was feign to
give it over without an (...), I have found it. We resolve thus far. First,
with Saint Augustine, Lib. 1. cont. 2. Epistolas Pelagianorum cap. 2. Quis
nostrum dicit, quod primi hominis peccato perierit arbitrium de humano genere?
Libertas quidem perijt per peccatum: sed illa quae in Paradiso fuit habendi
plena^ cum immortalitate iustitiam: Does any of us affirm, that Freewill is
perished utterly from man by the fall of Adam? Freedom is perished, I grant by
sin: but that freedom which was in Paradise, of having righteousness with
immortality. Again, we confess with the same Saint Augustine, Man is not
merely passive in all works of Grace, to glory: For, Qui creauit te sine te,
non saluabit te si^e te. He that made thee alone without thy help, will not
save thee alone without thy concurrance. Man is to work, that will have reward.

In Conclusion, the Condition of Man since the fall of Adam, is such, that he
cannot turn, nor prepare himself to God, by, or through his own natural or
humane power and strength. This is the Doctrine of the Church of England.
Prevented by Grace, and assisted therewith, he then puts to his hand to
procure augmentation of that Grace, and continuance unto the end. No man
comes to God, but he is drawn. Drawn, he runs or walks, as his
assistance is, and his own agility and disposition to the end. This is enough:
And the wisdom of the Church has not ventured far, to put a tie of
Obedience upon men's belief, in points of inextricable obscurity almost, of the
concordance in working of Grace, and Predestination with Free Will. Moderate
spirits would well and wisely sit them down by temperate courses, and not
clamor without rage, where is no cause; nor delight to set the Peace of the
Church on hurres, only for faction, and some private sinister indirect ends of
their own.

Contrary to our own Bibles, it is not which we read, 1 Cor. 7. 37. He that
stands sted fast in his heart, having no necessity, but has power over his
own will, and has so decreed, that he will keep his Virgin, does well. So it
is confessed he does, and that he may have power so to do: For, it is not
absolute, as if every one had such Power, but Conditional: If any have such
Power. The Apostic says; That man has Power, if he be not tied: which Text
may as well demolish, as build up Free Will. For here is supposed, at least
some time, an ouer-awing, and ouer-commanding; Necessity, or Coaction. Again,
this Freedom specified here, is but in bono morali, and no more. It may tend
to Piety, I grant: but it is not intention prima; and directly it is only
occasionally, as elsewhere, 1 Cor. 9. Am I not free? or Acts 5. Was it not in
thy Power? That of Deuter. 30. 19. is more to purpose. I call Heaven and Earth
this day to record against you, that I have set before you life and death,
blessing and cursing; therefore choose life, that both thou and thy seed may
live. For this is directly in point of Piety, and performance of duty immediate
unto God. Neither was it spoken to men according to general notion of them,
and their general state, in case of alienation from God; in state of Nature
only, and Natural endowments: of which it is consented, I think, They cannot
choose life; but to men prevented by Grace, called to Life, assisted with much
and many concurrances of Grace: This is not contrary to our Tenent, as is
plain in the Article before alleged.

That of Joshua 24. 15. is to the same purpose, almost in the very same words:
one answer will serve to both. The Article denies free will quoad points of
Piety, to mere natural men only, in the state of deprauation: but avouches
it in state of Grace, with See more: Eccles. 15. 14.
concurrence of Assistance Ecclesiasticus 15. 14. is not to purpose. The wise
man speaks of what was; not what is: in the state of innocence before the
fall; not of deprauation being fallen. God from the beginning made man, and left
him in the hand of his own counsel. In 2 Samuel 12. I find not for freewill,
but only this Verse 17. that David would not eat meat, but refused it: which
place, if ignorantly alleged, proves this fellow, as he has been
discovered often, a plain blunderer: if with advise; a shameless slanderer,
that would impute unto Protestants such a senseless assertion, that man had
not free will to eat if he would, for such is the inference upon that
allegation.

In Matthew. 23. 37. There is an opposition of man's wilfulness unto Gods will.
God would have called Judah: Judah would not: therefore freely men renounce the
calling of Grace: and freely run themselves, without any absolute
irreuersible decree, upon Perdition: which I grant; being the purpose and
intent of those succeeding Texts of Scripture, with many more to purpose in Gods
Book. How this is done; how far it extends, I list not to dispute. It is
for Schools, not for Pulpits; searching wits are at stand therein: common
capacities must not be surcharged with it. It is wilfulness, or more, to deny
free will: and it is wisdom and truth to deny free will: To deny Is it not
then plain wilfulness to deny Freewill?
the being, is so. And I wish with Scotus in 1. did. 39. that a man so wilful
were well cudgelled, until he confessed, it stood in man's power to desist
from beating him: But to give such an absolute sway to free will, as many do,
is little less than flat impiety against God; against Saint Paul I am sure; It
is not of him that wills, or him that runs. Truth is in the middle betwixt
two extremes, evermore, and here also.

What the Fathers teach we know: and where See Fathers that affirm the same.
S. Iren. Lib. 4. cap. 7.
they exceed, interpret them gently as you also do. For take them at large,
and they lavish so far sometime, that your greatest Patrons of free will dare
not join issue with them: not as if those worthy lights did any way fail, or
darkness possessed their clear understandings: but being to deal against
fatal necessity of the Pagans: against impieties of the Manichees, to clear
that imputation of believing, without further enquiry of resolution; they
extended the power of freewill to the utmost; especially, having then no cause
to fear, ante mota certamina Pelagiana; there being no Pelagius yet risen up
in the world, an enemy of Grace, and aduauncer of Nature beyond degrees of
power or possibility. Thus your selves acknowledge as well as we, and
therefore to Irenaeus, Tertullian, Cyprian, Epiphanius, and (who has much more
to purpose than all the rest together) Chrysostom, though you name him not,
because you knew it not: and to Augustine also in his former writings, it might
so be answered, that they spoke of free will, not in respect of Grace, but of
Nature; yet I will particularly fall in with you, to each several Father in
his order.

Irenaeus Lib. 4. cap. 7. has these words, as your Informer C. W. B. sets
them down. Almighty God has put in man a power of Election, as well as he
has done in the Angels. And again, cap. 72. If it were not in our power to
do or not to do these things, what cause had the Apostle, and long before
that, our Lord himself, to give us counsel what to do, and from what to
abstain. This latter testimony is not in the Gagger: His Master has it: and I
allege it, to let all Catholics see, what an Idiot this poor animal is. C.
W. B. having produced these two Texts of Irenaeus, cited in his Margin lib. 4.
cap. 7. and ibid. cap. 72. This goose, because he would not gagge us too much,
made choice of one, and wisely too; for, by error of the Printer, it was put
cap. 7. in which Chapter is nothing to purpose; not a word of Angels, or of
freewill: whereas it should have been cap. 71. Which he not knowing, because
he has all by retaile: a poor fellow, that (I think) knows not who
Irenaeus was, followed the error of the Printer, and so sent us to see nothing
there. But let him pass: To the place I answer. Irenaeus attributes unto
man, as he may, free will, before and after his fall: but so, after, as with
Grace, to men in state of Grace. The discourse is long, and to purpose; but
mis-alledged here, and mis-applyed by the Gagger.

Epiphanius, how comes he in betwixt Irenaeus and Tertullian? being so much
younger than either of them: especially, rightly disposed in the Instructor.
Howsoever, I answer, that he there disputes against the Pharisees: one of
whose opinions was, that all things came to pass through fatal necessity.
Which being so, there can be no choice, nor free will. But experience shows,
and Scripture clears it, there is free will: therefore fatal necessity is
not at all. As true as Gospel: Nothing touching us, who grant it as much as
themselves do, that object thus unto us.

Tertullian in his second Book against Marcion: the Chapter you knew not,
because you were not told; for your Instructor had it not. It is Chapter V.
discourses thus. He proves against Marcion, that God created all things out
of goodness, because he was good. Nor was the fall of man any work of his at
all, but to be imputed unto free will. A power and faculty originally in man,
according to Gods goodness, and man's nature and condition. Who could not have
deserved well or ill: nor have been punished or rewarded, except he had been
left unto his own choice, and not necessitated unto either. Thus he, at large;
and thus also we. Contenting himself with the general being, working, and
concurring of Free Will, which we deny not, with Gods grace.

Not to trouble the Reader with any more. This is enough that which is
questioned, is as well questioned at home with the Church of Rome themselves,
as with and betwixt us: that which here is proved, is not questioned: Homini
dedit Deus eligendi arbitrium quod sequatur. Ante hominem vita and mors: si
deliqueris, non Natura in culpa est, sed defectus eligentis. We believe it,
(as well as the Author of the Hypognosticon, under Saint Austines name) with
the certainty of our faith, and preach it as an undoubted verity, that in man
there is free will. And with Saint Augustine himself, Lib. 1. de Ciuit. We
are no way enforced, either by admitting Gods prescience, to take away the
freedom of man's will: or by admitting the freedom of man's will to deny, which
were an heinous matter, Gods foreknowledge of the things to come: but both we
embrace, both me freely and faithfully confess. Thus that judicious Father in
C. W. B. though we can hardly explicate the concurrence of both: and think it
not fit to discourse unto vulgar capacities of such mystical points. Will it
content you? Our conclusion and yours is all one. We cannot deny freedom of
will: which who-so does, is no Catholic: no nor Protestant.

XVII.
That it is impossible to keep the Commandments of God, though assisted with
his Grace, and the holy Ghost.

THe Commandments of God are perfect, even as himself is perfect: and
therefore the rule of our life and actions, in ordine ad Deum, for the
attaining of eternal happiness in Heaven: all of them tendered unto us under
that condition, and high commanding form, Do this and live for ever, the
style, in ordinary, unto the Law of the highest: a condition so requisite in
every part, that the Delinquent but in one, is guilty of all, and liable unto
punishment for breach of all.

Humane Laws are commonly but upon misdemeanors precedent, to be corrected and
prevented: For, ex malis moribus bonae Leges: good Laws come from evil lines:
as Physic is (...), Restoratiue, to repair empayrings in the outward man.
But Gods Law, as all his ways are said to be, was of another fashion; elder
than transgression; was Do this and live: as Physic is also (...)
preservative, to prevent the disease before it break out: to keep off
transgression not yet in being, God gave the Law.

When it was first said to man, Do this and live, there was no question of
possibility to do it. God at the first made man right, says the son of
Syrach, and left him in the hands of his own counsel. He might not have
eaten, God did not compel or necessitate him ot it: which if he had done, he
had lived for ever. Such was his case, his state, and his ability in his
original being. The Law was then verbum abbreuiatum; Thou shall not eat. One
word, not ten words, as anon afterward. The annexum then the same which
afterward: If thou eat, thou shall dye the death. The commandment enlarged
unto more particulars, as Sin increased: but the condition still the same,
live, or dic: so that the Law was elder than transgression, and had respect,
not to weakness as it is now, but to power and possibility; which man then
had, when as first the commandment Do this, went forth to be observed.

Then it was possible to keep the Law. God commanded that which man might
have done. The question is of possibility since, whether or no it be now
possible which was then. Touching which possibility, and impossibility, I
answer out of your own school learning with Durand. Lib. 1. did. 42. qu. 2.
There is a twofold possibilitiy and impossibility. First, a thing is possible
in respect of active or passive power and capabilitie incident naturally. As
thus. It is possible that the fire should heat and warm me actiuely: and I
be warmed of the fire passiuely: because there is that natural active power in
the fire to do it: and that natural passive capability in me to receive it.
So that is said to be impossible, as many ways, where there is no such power
nor capability in the creature, as, viz. for a man to fly, or a worm to walk.

Secondly, a thing is possible, when there is a certain habitude, reference,
proportion, and correspondency betwixt the terms: as betwixt a man and a
living creature: the one has an habitude unto the other. Impossible is, where
no such habitude is: as even and odd; two and three: It is not possible, that
what is even should be odd: or what is odd should be even: that two should be
three: or three become two. Here is employed a contradiction: as in this, Truth
to be false: God deny himself. Thus contradictorily, it is possible, not
impossible to keep Gods commandment: For there is no contradiction implied
here. There is an habitude betwixt the terms. For there was in man created, as
he came forth of the hands of his Maker, an active power to observe them: and
in them, when they were tendered, a passive possibility to be observed; which
one day shall come again into act, namely, in that state of perfection in
Heaven. But at present, as the state now stands, this capability is not
answered: this possibility is not brought into act, in regard of fore-staling
hindrances and impeachments. And so our answer is unto that question, Whether
it be possible for a man to keep the Law and Commandments of God, Negative:
It is not possible for a man in ordinary course of Nature, stantibus vt nunc,
to attain to that perfection in this life, to keep the Commandments
precisely.

I say in ordinary course it is not possible, because of impeachments. But
simply it is not impossible for God, because there is an habitude betwixt the
terms, to advance man in nature, by a special and peculiar assistance of
Grace, to that height of perfection, to keep all the Commandments of God. It
is not impossible: for the power: yet for act, set Christ Jesus aside, it was
never done since the fall of Adam. Nor standing the ordinary course of Nature,
and dispensation of Grace, shall ever be done in this world. For to keep the
Commandments, is to be without sin, to keep them all, and singular, in all
points, at all times: not in some things only at all times. Nor in all things
at sometimes only.

Thus then, that is possible which man can do: that falls within the verge
of his Power to do. Either merely of himself, or else by assistance of some
concurrent. It is confessed, I suppose, that no man of himself, in himself
considered, can possibly now keep all Gods Commandemenrs. For there being two
originals of Actions in Agents, Power and Will; a man may have power to do,
but no will. As Dives had to relieve Lazarus. A man may have will, and no
power; as Agar had to relieve her son Ismael almost affamished. To an Act
consummate, both Power and Will must concur. Et Non caret effectu quod
voluere duo: Either man's will is wanting to do what he can; or his power not
sufficient to do what he would. Now for Assistance, where man fails of
himself, he must have recourse unto some abetting hability. As the man in
prison, that cannot help himself, must be relieved by some other. God must
here do it, or none else: for, of him is all our sufficiency and might. God
can by his Power, which is illimited, advance any thing so far unto
perfection, as he will not do it, in regard of his own purpose and decree:
in regard of order, and course in Nature. He can make Nature now altogether
pure, as he did at first by supernatural endowments; and as he will do at
last in confirmed state of Glory: But things standing as they do, and must, he
will not do it; and so it is impossible for man to attain it, but only by
some dispensation, and peculiar elevation: but in such cases of singularity, it
must Constare what God will do. If it be a word gone out of his mouth, it is
not impossible: if he have said it, it is impossible. Take here heed then least
we iustle his will and power together; which doing, we shall fasten many
incongruities, absurdities, and inconveniences upon his Courses, and
Dispensations in the World.

Again, Man as he is patient, in respect of God assisting, though Agent in
himself, and his performing, must be considered three ways; in a threefold
state, for a threefold time, as has already been touched: Of Nature, Grace,
and Glory. And that of Nature, two ways: Made by God, with all sufficiency;
depraved by the Devil, to all dissability: As once it was, as now it is. The
Question is not meant of Natural state, at all; what then man could do: Any
thing then, what now he can do: Nothing at all now. Nor is it intended of the
State of Glory, what he shall be able then to do. It is a state of perfection
confessed upon all hands; of Perfection, without any Imperfections: And
therefore performable every way of all Gods Commandments, in all points, and
at all times: but the question is, of ordinary Grace in Regeneration, how far
it does or may enable him now in this World.

Thirdly, that to keep Gods Commandments, is to observe and do what God
commands to be done. Not only in part, as to keep precisely and to an
hair, some of the Statutes; or some branches, or clauses of those Statutes: or
at sometimes only, but for ever; in all parts: of any one, and every
Commandment, all points must be kept and observed.

Fourthly, we consider what they command, and how: which is comprehended in
two heads. Spiritual Obedience, from and with the Heart: Perfect Obedience,
with all the Heart. For, as God is a Spirit, so those that worship him, must
worship him in spirit and in truth: not only externally, with cap and knee.
God is perfect, and accordingly the rule is; Be you perfect, as I am perfect.
Such as he is, such be his Laws; and such obedience unto his Laws is required
of him that serves God: But still seruatis subiecti proprietatibus, as the
subject is capable of perfection. For nothing can be perfect, as God is
perfect: that is, in the selfsame degree of Perfection; for so it should be
God; but respectively perfect, in conformation like unto him, as humane
perfections can be enabled, not in just proportion.

God requires not perfection as himself has it, nor yet perfection exceeding
the proportion of the Subject. Not the same here, which is required in Heaven;
nor here of all men alike: but as he scatters, so he requires; as he has
conferred two Talents, or five, so he exacteth. So that, at last to add limits
to this rouing Proposition, I resolve it thus: No man in the state of Grace
regenerate, by any ordinary course or assistance of Grace, ever did or can
observe all the Commandments of God, in every part; no, not in that degree
which God has fitted him unto, and requires of him, at all times: At some
time he may, in some particulars; or peradventure in all particulars in some
time, or some particulars in all time. Now let us see how the Texts contrary
this: or how the Fathers are of another opinion.

Philip. 4. 13. I can do all things in Christ that enableth Contrary to
express words of their own Bible.
me. Therefore keep the Commandments of God. Therefore any man may do it:
Therefore every man may keep them. As if whatsoever Saint Paul could do,
might have been performed by any ordinary Christian: As if Saint Paul were not
a man alone, of transcendent endowments, beyond ordinary alloy; who says of
himself, He was in sufferings beyond them all: who faith of himself, He was
rapt up into the third Heaven, and heard things that never man heard. Secondly,
what All things could he do? He that says, All, ex^mpteth none; and so you
take it at a large extent. Could he make Contradictions true? could he
Prophecy, or speak with Tongues, where, and when he would? Could he walk on
the Waters, or in the Air at pleasure? And yet he says; I can do all things.
All things extended, includes these things. Otherwise, Quo warranto does it
follow, that amongst those All things, which Saint Paul could do, the keeping
of Gods Commandments should be ranked? If it be reioyned, That must be
included. I reply, it is the Question: and so ought to be proved, not begged.

Again, I answer; Paul's performing, goes no farther then Christ's enabling: I
can do all things. But how? In Christ inabling me. That is, so far as Christ
should or did enable him: but how appears that this is one of those things,
in which, or whereto Christ would enable him? So again, this is the question,
and must be proved, not begged; beside, Christ might enable him now, and not
anon: many times, but not ever; in some things enable him, not in all.

And yet farther, that All, has a limitation. All those things he could do,
of the which he spoke, viz. want, and abound; suffer and endure prosperity and
adversity alike, through the Grace of Christ Jesus which did assist him. So
Chrysostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius, Lombard, Thomas, Lyra, Caietan: So the Text
it self to any man that shall but view it, Saint Paul meant nothing less,
then that in the whole course of his life, he was able to keep the entire Law
of GOD, in every point, which is the state to be made good, and yet was Saint
Paul able to do and perform as much, as any other man could perform.

1 John 5. 3. This is the love of God, that we keep his Commandments. It is
so: and what of that? Herein we show our love to God, that we keep his
Commandments: That is, in effect, as we love him, so we keep his
Commandments; and as we keep his Commandments, so we love him. Perfect or
imperfect: in all or in part it is not said. Indeed, we love in part, not as
we should; we keep his Commandments in part, not as we should, or would in
all.

But his Commandments are not grievous. What of that? Therefore possible to be
kept in every point, at all times, by any man? I deny that. For, I see no such
sequel to be inferred. Grievous, is simply or respectively. In regard of those
many encumbrances of Moses Law, the Law of Christ Jesus was not grievous.
Again, a thing may be weighty, and yet not in reputation or esteem, unto some
men; who will run with that weight easily, or undergo that burden
willingly. For to a willing mind, what is grievous, though it be impregnable,
inexpugnable, impossible? The Heathen man could tell us, that the Roman
Legions went often with alacrity upon that piece of Service, from whence they
knew and were assured, they should never come off with life. Weighty and
insupportable are two things. Weighty and grievous, are two things. To those
that love God, nothing is heavy for God: not for the thing it self, but
because of Love; which makes that seem light, which indeed is heavy, and
gives men, if not actiuity beyond power, yet will beyond possibility of Power
to do.

See more. But first hear a reason, that interlopeth betwixt these testimonies
of holy Writ. A reason or two: for so it is. The first, A man is not bound to
impossibilities: but a man is bound to keep the Commandments, Briefly, if the
Commandments were impossible, they could bind no man: For it is not to be
conceived, how one should sin, in a thing which he could not possibly avoid.
and is liable to punishment for breach of them. I answer: It is true, no man
is tied to simple Impossibilities, where there is no habitude betwixt the
terms. As to be immortal in this life; to fly, or walk in the Air, or on
the Waters. Such impossibility is not betwixt the Law of God, and man's
performance. Secondly, when the Commandments were given, there was not only a
possibility, but ability and sufficiency in man to keep Gods Law: For in
effect and substance it was all one, Eat and dye, with Do this and live. The
particulars were explained in time, the Nature of Obligation altered not: If
since there has accrued an impossibility of Consequence, what is this to that
sufficiency which was before, when the Law was first given; and man tied to
Obedience, as Adam was?

Again, it is confessed with Saint Augustine, that It is not to be conceived
how one should sin in a thing which he could not possibly avoid.
sin is not sin, except it be voluntary He that cannot possibly avoid
necessity of sinning, is injuriously dealt withal, if he be punished for
sinning: But no man is so necessitated, either actiuely in regard of the
ouer-awing and determining decree of God, unavoidable, irresistable. No man is
so necessitated passiuely. For, as has been said, betwixt man's Active
possibility, and the Passive possibility of Gods Law, there was at first,
naturally is, and finally shall be, a Correspondency. If interim, stantibus vt
nunc, impediments, encumbrances make it impossible, man may thank himself
that has lost his power of performing.

Now see more, and see as little. Ecclus. 15. 15. a place twice or thrice
alleged by this Trifler against the Protestants, whom he knows not to
receive the Book as Canonical: and therefore not bound to stand unto the
authority of the same, or subscribe unto the assertion. But I quarrel it not:
I accept the authority, and answer it out of the Text. They observe his
Commandments so far, as to do their best, and testify their good will.
Which proves, in his opinion, rather a defect, then any possibility of
perfection. If thou will, thou shall observe the Commandments, and testify
thy good will.

Ezech. 36. 27. I will put my spirit in the midst of you, and will make you
to walk in my statutes. It is the effect and operation of Gods Spirit to do
this. But the Prophet does not say; They shall not stumble, nor fall, as many
walkers do, who yet attain their iournies end in peace, and go on in their
course with commendation. The Prophet adds: And you shall keep my
Judgments, and do them. I will take no advantage upon the word Judgments;
Let it go for the moral Law of God. He keeps the Law, that does what he
can: and has defects and infirmities pardoned him. As David is said to have
done, who yet fell foul more times then one.

Matthew 11. 30. speaks of a yoke, the same in effect with 1 John 5. 3. That
which is not heavy to be borne, is not impossible to be kept: but Gods
Commandments are not heavy: for they are the yoke, which Christ says, is
easy. I answer, Christ speaks not primarily of Gods Commandments there,
but of the Polity of Grace in the Gospel of Peace, in regard of the Polity of
the Law, to which he prefers it as easier, and less cumbersome, for causes
well collected and observed by Maldonate out of the Fathers. You may see other
expositions in Iansenius: but nothing for your dream of perfection.

Again, in this argumentation, that which is not heavy to be borne, is not
impossible to be kept; the Proposition is absolutely false. For it is iugum,
though dulce: as feathers are onus, though alleuians: as wheels, though cause
of motion, unto a Coach.

Matthew 19. 17. Is not to purpose. The question is not, whether To keep Gods
Commandments be the ready way and means to enter into life: that Scripture
says so, and Protestants approve it, for them that can do it. But whether no
man otherwise enters into life: whether every one that enters into life, has
personally kept Gods Commandments: whether it be possible for them to do it,
This Protestants deny. This that Scripture says not. Again, it is not here
proposed as a condition unto him, but as a Conviction; who came in the vanity
of his mind, trusting in his own worth. And is proposed as a necessary
implication of the Law unto him, who was a Lawyer by Profession, and proposed
his question only De faciendis, the Tenor of the Law: not de credendis, the
Tenet of the Gospel. And doubtless if Salvation be sought by only doing, the
works of the Law must needs be done. But how does this follow, if those that
seek Salvation by their own work, must be put over to perform the works of
the Law, therefore all men must precisely keep the law? the foolish
presumption of some fool hardy undertaker, is no prejudice unto wiser men. Nor
tie for them to venture on the same follies.

John 14. 15. If you love me keep my Commandments. And add if you will in
the same Chapter, If any man love me he will keep my word. And Chapter 15.
If you keep my Commandments, you abide in my love. All which, and others of
that Nature, prove this, Gods Commandments must be kept: they conclude not the
manner and measure of the thing, How, wherein, how far they may be kept.
Secondly, I answer out of Iansenius, Christ does not understand the whole Law
of God; but some part of the Law of the New Testament: ea scilicet quae modo
tradidi, of Faith in me: and Love amongst your selves. Nor does our Savior
here promise any ability to do it: or specify any performance of it: but
exhorts them rather to show their love unto him, by striving to do what he
gave them in charge, rather than to weep and take-on for his departure. Thus
Iansenius one of your own side.

Romans 13. 8. He that has charity has fulfilled the Law. True, he that has
it in gradu summo: but every Regenerate man has charity. True, at least in
remiss degrees. Saint Paul speaks of the Perfection of Charity; and of
perfect fulfilling of the Law; or else of Charity with imperfections: and so of
answerable fulfilling of the Law. Every true regenerate man has Charity. True:
and so fulfilleth the Law in having it. But sometime more, sometime less: and
so accordingly fulfilleth the Law. Again, the Apostle says by way of
supposition, He that has charity: he does not avouch that any man has it, so
as is sufficient totally to fulfill the Law. So that at least, the text cited
is not to purpose. Beside, Saint Paul infers it by way of exhortation,
Because it is the fulfilling of the Law. And the nearer a man comes unto
perfect love, the nearer he is to fulfill the Law. Now in Exhortations to
performance, we use to aim at the highest, and set up the best, for marks and
objects. Which the Apostle did: not as persuaded all men would attain, or
could attain unto it, but to incite them to endeavor utterly.

Joshua 11. 15. 22. 5. Psalm. 17. 3. Luke 1. 6. are examples of men that are
remembered to have walked in Gods Commandments, and kept his Laws. A thing
done; therefore not impossible to be done. To which I answer, first, as this
Rouer shoots his bolt at them, there is no consequence: Some men have done
it, therefore every man, or any man, may do it: For they happily might do it
by extraordinary assistance; and by miraculous grace: but the Proposition is of
ordinary course. Secondly, it is no where said that these holy men, all of
them, at all times, did keep all the Commandments of God. They did their
best, and it was accepted by God.

That of Joshua is to be taken and understood, only of one particular kind;
Namely the execution of Gods justice upon the Cananites, and the Inhabitants of
the Land of Canaan: And yet he failed even in that, and kept not all, as is
clear in the case of the Gibeonites. The man as well might have brought out
Moses and Aron, whose commendation is, That, as the Lord commanded, so did
they. And yet we know there were some things, in which they failed both: for
which cause they entered not into the Land of Canaan over Jordan.

David says, Psalm. 17. 3. That there was no iniquity in him. Which if you
take at full extent, you must answer your Proselites unto this Question, What
was the Case of Vriah and his Wife, if he kept all the Commandments of God:
and no iniquity was found in him? Sure we must take it of the time before his
fall. And suppose the Psalm to have been made before that. For in that action
he cannot be excused. He notoriously broke the Law in two enormious sins, of
Murder and Adultery at one time: Then, there was iniquity in his hands; at
least.

That of Zachary and Elizabeth, is of more importance, Luke 1. For it is said,
They walked in all the Commandments of God without blame. But first one
singular example is not concluding for all, or for a common course. It never
was denied, but God might, extraordinarily, advance some one or other unto such
an height of Perfection, as fully and perfectly to keep all his commandments
point per point. God might have done it: but he never did it. Never man
attained such a pitch. Secondly, it is not said, that They kept the
commandments of God, which was this man's undertaking. But they walked in them:
in which course they might have rubbes, diuersions, pulbackes, slidings, falls.
Then, they walked in them, vntaxable, unblameable, not complained of. Not that
God could find no fault with them, but that men could not blame them; nor say,
black is their eye. Gods eyes are ten thousand times brighter than the
Sun, and can discry blemishes where men cannot. The keeping his
Commandments must not be according to the view and censure of men, but after
the estimate of God. But they were just before him too. So they might be, and
yet not keep all his Commandments. For even the just man falls seven times
a day. Perfection is threefold, in different degrees: Actual ever, and in
being: incident only to the Saints in glory. Actual not in-being, but desire:
referring all evermore unto God, by consecrating all unto his Glory. And
Habitual, when in purpose a man loves God above all, and is ready to leave
all other things for Gods sake. This man is unblameable even before God: not
because he cannot be reprehended: but because he is not reprehended; God in
mercy accepting his will and desire, for his deed. Thus Bellarmine himself
has answered the place, being to oppose the Pelagians. Many more places might
be alleged, to as little purpose, which either prove that which is not denied:
or prove it in part, and so are defective. Now Fathers we may see, to as
little purpose, some few here remembered. His good Master C. W. B. could have
afforded him more. The first is, Origin hom. 9. in Joshua. But what he says,
the good simple man knows not, because his instructor did not let him
understand, as being not fully informed from Bellarmine, himself. But thus it
stands. Origin, figuratively, as his manner is, makes these sorts of men in
the Church: Viros, mulieres, infantes, proselytos. Those whom he compares
unto Women, he exhorts, to strive what they may, to attain to perfection of
Men in christianity. Now he calls them Mulieres, comparing them to Women,
who say, I cannot do as it is written; Go sell all, and give it to the poor:
nor yet turn to him my other cheek that strikes me upon one: nor bless him
that curses me. Caetera similia quae mandantur, qui dicit implere non possum,
quid tibi videtur aliud, quam inter mulieres, quae nihil virile possunt, esse
numerandus? He that faith, I cannot do these, and such other things as these,
which be commanded, seems he not worthily to be accounted amongst women?
Origin here speaks of Perfection, and degrees of Proficiency. Who
questioneth it? and insinuates that a man might keep those Precepts of the
Gospel. Who Doubts of it? but does Origin say it is possible, for a man to
keep all the Commandments of God? Show me that, and I have done.

Cyril Lib. 4. contra Julian: So your director told you; perhaps through error
of the Printer. And you good Innocent, believed him. But go consult with Cyril,
and you shall find it in his third Book, about the middle, as Bellarmine
directed your Director. In the Law it was written, as says Cyril there, Thou
shall not covet. It is possible, to keep this Commandment, says Bellarmine,
through assistance of Grace, and so, not to covet at all. Which thing, if St.
Cyryl said, he said not only more than he can make good, but more also than
is required. More than Bellarmine would have him say, or does desire at his
hands. Nay more than he would approve in him, or make good, if he should say
it. For Non concupiscec, thou shall not covet, goes on so far, as to
exclude, even venial sins. Which needs not. For our Masters yield unto
them, and exclude no more but mortal sins. It is possible to fulfill the
Law. Why? Because the Law forbids and condemns only mortal sins. But a
man cannot possibly avoid venial sins. Those therefore the Law forbids
not. They may be Praeter, beside the intent of the Law: They are not contra
against the Law. Again, Non concupisces, pricketh up to that fomes peccati,
the sourse, nurse, and fomentation of sin, which our Masters confess, is not
extinct, cannot cease in the Regenerate. If Saint Cyril said, that Non
concupisces, may be performed: that is, that the sustentation of Sin may
cease, he said that which Bellarmine will not defend. And you, Sir Puny, what
are you? For in this life, that fomes peccati cease not; which your men
maintain against Prosper Dys^deus, or Faustus Socinus, and such impes of
Satan.

But indeed, nor so, nor so, Cyril restrayneth Non concupisces, thou shall not
covet or desire, unto one particular Act, obiectiuely, the not-lusting after or
desiring of a Woman. This Christ forb^d beyond the Law: which at least was
taken by them to inhibite no more but the outward act. And this may be done:
many have done it, I make no question. As for Concupiscence in general, it is
apparent he held it not, as is imagined: and held it altogether vnmasterable;
for he says, Res est, vt opinor, ad quam pertingi nequeat: It is in my
opinion of that condition, as no man can attain unto, vtpote
incomprehensibilis and quodam modo supra naturam, as being out of man's reach,
and compass altogether, and in a sort above the assise of Nature. Thus Cyril,
albeit he names Concupiscence, yet takes it not so, as the adversary
pretends, for any Concupiscence, in large extent, but only in specie for
that kind of Concupiscence, and no more, which is in carnal affection to a
Woman. Many have attained unto this perfection: never any unto that, but Jesus
Christ, in one flesh, without sin. Saint Hilary upon Psalm. 118. says
somewhat, it seems, but not that which you would have him say. It is not
hard, are his words, if our will be but present to fulfill the Commandment of
God. Thus your Master C W. B. out of Bellarmine, jugler as he was: and thus
you, as false a Traitor as he As if it had been Saint Hilaries mind, A man
that will may easily keep the Commandments; and whole Law of God, who nor
said it, nor yet thought it: For he upon these words, of the 119. Psalm. Thy
Commandment is exceeding large, expounds large in a two fold sense. First,
because the knowledge of Gods Law does infinitely extend and advance the
understanding of man's Ignorance: that is, Make ignorant men to understand and
know very much: Or else, because there are many parts of it: many duties
required in it: so that he which cannot keep one, may keep another: and
please God in one, as he may displease him in another. It neither being
required of any man to perform all: nor possible for any man, to perform all.
How like you this Doctrine Sir? This is Hilaries resolution? thus and no other
way he concludes, that it i^ possible to keep the Law. You shall have his
words at large: not, as they are curtailed by false knaves, to deceive men.
Latum plaue est, sieve quod in infinitum cognitionem humanae ignorantiae
extendit: Sieve quod multa sunt in quib us Dei praecept is obtemperatur atque
placetur, secundum diuisiones and munera gratiarum. Non enim abomnibus omnia
expectantur: neque vniuersi vniuersa ad summam placendi implere possunt. Alius
(...)nio placet: Simplicitate fidei promeretur alius: alius vitia eleemosynis
redimit, etc. Latum igitur mandatum Dei est, and in omnia spei nostrae genera
diffunditur, vt non difficile sit praecepto Domini obtemperare, cum latum and
diffusum sit ad placendum officiosae religionis varietate. It is then
particular obedience which he speaks of, to any one point or precept of the
Law. Hilary to that purpose sets it down praecepto, not praeceptis, not unto
the whole Law, as is pretended. So that much collusion has been in this
Testimony. First by Bellarmine, who takes it by halfes for his advantage. Then
by our English Succedor, who geldeth it more, to make it serve as an Eunuch,
the Babylonian turns.

Next Saint Basil pronounces it an impiety to say, Lastly, Saint Basil who
says it is an impious thing to say, that the commandments of God are
impossible.
Impossibilia esse spiritus sancti praecepta. Our English Iugler represents
it. That the Commandments of God are impossible. Of God. For of the Spirit.
Why? what material difference? The Spirit is God: and God is a Spirit. Yet a
difference betwixt the Commandments of God, and, Commandments of the Spirit.
For mark. Saint Basil explaining those words, Attend tibi, says, they may be
conceived of two ways. Corporally: look to thy Body, and the things thereof.
Spiritually; and that which appertains unto the state of thy Soul. And he
adds, they must be taken for the things of the soul: because, that which God
commands, as you will have it, or as he speaks, The Commandments of the
Spirit, are not impossible. But to attend a man's body corporally, is
impossible: For it cannot be, that every part of a man's body should be so
perpetually in his Eye, as that attendance be still upon it. The Eye cannot
discern it self, nor yet any part of the head, the back, or inward parts.
This is impossible: therefore this is not the meaning. For the Spirit would not
command things impossible: that is, impossible in themselves, where there is an
impossibility betwixt the terms. So that in Saint Basil, impossibility, is
that impossibility which is not actionis susceptiua. For as Halensis observes;
the Irrefragable Doctor. Possibility is of two kinds. Actiua, and Actionis
susceptiua. Par. 3. memb. 5. art. 1. Now no man says it is impossible to keep
any, or all Gods Commandments; because in, and of themselves, they are not
keepeable. The Eye is not susceptiua actionis, to behold or see the things
behind. But that which the Spirit there commands, is in it self possible to
be done. So Basil says as little to the purpose, as any other Writer does
whatsoever; being arightly understood, and not perverted in his meaning. See
Basil, and if this be not his meaning, let me be held as honest as this Gagger,
that peruerteth his sense a contrary way, that is, a false knave.

Hierome lastly, in his third Book against the Pelagians, who pleaded then, as
our Roman Catholics do now, has these words: God has commanded, things
possible. No man doubts. Possible in themselves, absolutely: though not to
us, as the Case now stands respectively. Possible unto us, when they were
first commanded: though not so possible, since the commandment. For God made
man right, and gave him a Law: Since that he has entangled himself many
ways. Possible now in part, though not in all: to some men, albeit not
generally unto all. It plainly appears what Hierome meant: for he adds, Sed
quia homines possibilia non faciunt, idcirco omnis mundus subditus est Deo, and
indiget misericordia eius. But because men do not that which of it self is
possible, therefore all the World is subjected unto God, and stands in need
of his mercy. So that he explaineth his own meaning: They were possible in
themselves, though not possible unto man. Secondly, some things possible at
some time, to some men, though not to all men at all times. And so is that to
be understood which Bellarmine has out of the same Hierome in Mat. 5. omitted
by this Collector; because not found in his good Founder C. W. B. Multi
praecepta Dei, imbecillitate sua, non Sanctorum viribus aestimantes, putant
esse impossibilia, quae praecepta sunt; to wit, those Precepts explained upon
the Law, Love your enemies, Do good to those that hate you: Et dicunt
sufficere virtutibus, non edisse inimicos. Caeterum Diligere plus praecipi,
quam humana Natura patiatur: Sciendum est ergo Christum non impossibilia
praecipere, sed perfecta. Quae fecit David in Saul and Absolon. Stephanus
quoque Martyr, pro inimicis lapidantibus deprecatus est. Many men, measuring
the Commandments of God, not by the performings of Saints, but their own
weakness, account things impossible, by God commanded, and account it enough
for a virtuous man, not to hate his enemies: As for that, To love them, it is a
Precept beyond humane possibility. But we must know, Christ commanded not
impossible, but perfect things. Such as David did in Saul, and toward Absolon.
And that blessed Martyr Stephen, prayed for them that stoned him. So it is not
obscure what the Fathers meant by that, It is possible to keep the L^w. In it
self not impossible. At some times not impossible. In part not impossible,
they never came to this presumption. Any man: at any time: All the Law.

Therefore Iustine Martyr against Tryphon says, upon that Text, Cursed is
every one that does not observe all the Precepts of the Law to do them. (...).
Your selves dare not say it, (and what the Jews durst not say, you dare
swear;) that any man has perfectly kept them all. But there are that have
observed some more, some less, in those things that were commanded. I grant
with Hierome, Lib. 2. c. Pelagian: That many men have lived just and righteous.
But I do not grant that ever any man was without sin: Sine omni autem
peccato fuisse, omnino non assentior. If any man imagine he has obtained that
perfection, Aut superbus aut stultus est, He is no letter then a proud fool.
All that I can challenge in the height of my perfection, is, but only that of
Saint Augustine, Meritum meum, misericordia Domini; The mercies of the most
high, are my merits. Therefore we profess with earnest deprecation, Enter not
into judgment with thy servants O Lord: For in thy sight shall no flesh be
justified. And, If thou shall be severe to mark what is done amiss, who, O
Lord, shall endure it?

Job never advanced his perfection, to the fulfilling of all that God
commanded, though 27. 6. he uses those words in your Translation, Non
reprehendit me Cor meum. My heart has not reproved me, all my days. For his
meaning is, As long as I live I will maintain my Innocence, that I have not
dissembled in my heart. This I will stand to everlastingly, and not betray my
own Cause. Otherwise as Saint Gregory has observed here, Se pe^cesse superius
accusat. He has formerly accused himself of sin. Nor does God excuse him
from all breach of the Commandment, who gives him that Testimony, 1. 22. Ioh
did not sin. For it is limited, In all this: and yet not sin in that sort,
as to Charge God with injustice. Sciendum est: We are to know, says Gregory,
that there are some kind of sins which the righteous men canauoid: and there
are sins which the most righteous cannot avoid. If sins: then needs against
some Commandment. For no Sin, but is a Transgression of the Law. If against
the Law: then the Law is not kept in doing them: and if the most Righteous
cannot but do them, surely the most Righteous cannot keep the Law. This was
once the Doctrine of the Roman Church: For Gregory has it, that was Bishop of
Rome; in his Morals, Lib. 27. and 7 Chapter upon Job. Has that Church then
left her ancient Faith?

XVII.
That only Faith justifies: and that good works are not absolutely necessary
to Salvation.

Controversies are sometime multiplied unnecessarily, by these Romance
Catholics; to iangle the more: and sometime hudled up by confounding many, to
deceive the more: as in this present Question of Faith justifying: a great
Controversy: And works concurring: as maine a diversity, unto Salvation.
Though distinction of parts be fit to teach, and gives life and luster unto
discourse; yet seeing it has pleased this fellow to confound these two, we
must go on with him in his wild-goose race up and down.

To justify is a word of Christian learning only: yet taken and derived from
external Courts, and judiciary proceedings in Cases of Accusation and Defense.
In which regard it has a threefold extent, upon a threefold several act:
First to make just and righteous. Secondly, to make more just and righteous.
Thirdly, to declare and pronounce just and righteous. Not exactly observed in
humane Courts I grant: For no Judge can make a man what he is not: he can find
him what he is, and make him appear so more and more by evidence; and at last
declare him, and pronounce him so by public sentence of absolution. But for
those three several acts, in the justification of a Sinner, the Scripture
plainly (it cannot be denied) does distinguish them thus.

Romans 4. 5. He that belieueth in him that justifies the ungodly. Augustine
upon the 30. Psalm expounds it thus. Who is it that justifies the Wicked?
He that of a wicked man makes a righteous. So, Romans 3. 20. 24. and 1 Cor. 6.
11. For there is a twofold state of man in this world: The one Original; as
he is conceived and borne in sin, and accordingly produces in life and
actions, the cursed works of a bitter root: The other Acquisite, renewed
according to the Spirit, unto the state of perfection with God. Of Nature,
wherein: Of Grace, whereto. In Nature, there is nothing clean, or pure, that
can please God, or be accepted of him: He is not just that is in this state.
In that of Grace, a man is just when he is changed: which must have
concurrence of two things. Privation of being to that which was; the Body of
sin. A new constitution unto God, in another state. In which, he that is
altered in state: changed in condition: transformed in mind: renewed in soul:
regenerate and borne a new to God by Grace, is just: in the state of
justification: ceasing to be what he was: becoming what he was not before.

Thus to be changed, is to be a new Creature. The act is said by David, Psalm.
51. To create: Which being a work of Omnipotent power, exceeds the indowment
of any Creature. It is not therefore of our selves, from, or by our selves. But
this change is, the work of the right hand of the most high, operating
powerfully, as he can: and actiuely, as he will. Wrought it is by God: by God
alone: Man, or Man's free will is not author hereof. Therefore no merit
interveneth: therefore not to be ascribed to our selves. None here but Christ
preventing us: the Author of our integrity: crown of our felicity: and
consummator of our glory.

Secondly, to justify, is to give increase, and augmentation unto that first
Article, as to be more just in process and profectu: by increase of Grace, and
the fruit of that Spirit, by which they are renewed in the inner man. In
natural action and passion it plainly appears. Cold water is made warm
upon the fire: here is an alteration of the property. Warm water is made
hotter by continuing on the fire, with an augmentation and access of that
heat. So I understand it, Apoc. 22. Qui iustus est, iustificetur adhuc. He
that is just, let him become more just, by access of Gods Grace ever, day by
day.

Thirdly, to justify is to declare and pronounce one just. as, Prou. 8. He
that justifies the wicked, and condemns the righteous, is alike abominable
before the Lord. So again in the 50. Psalm, That thou may be justified in
thy sayings, and clear when thou art judged. God is not otherwise justified,
but by being known, acknowledged, and confessed just in all his ways. As he
is said to be magnified, when his noble acts are made known, and men do
praise him for his mercy, goodness, and salvation.

Justification properly is in the first acceptance. A Sinner is then justified
when he is made just: that is, translated from state of Nature, to state of
Grace, as Colos. 1. 13. Who has delivered us from the power of darkness, and
has translated us into the Kingdom of his dear Son. Which is motion, as
they say, betwixt two terms, and consists in forgiveness of sins
primarily; and Grace infused secondarily: Both the act of Gods Spirit in man,
but applied, or rather obtained through Faith: which represents first God
willing, and ready to forgive and renew. Draws near unto him: closes in
fast with him. Adhereth unto him inseparab^y, with, I will not let thee go,
except thou bless. And God does return, I will bless thee: pardon thy sins
for my names sake, and accept thee as mineowne in Christ my son, whose Blood
has made atonement for Man. So that properly to speak, God only justifies,
who alone imputes not, but pardons sin: Who only can and does translate
us from death unto life, renueth a right Spirit: and creates a new heart
within us. Causally, and actiuely God does it. But because God was drawn
thereto by our Faith, which laying hands upon his mercy, in Christ, obtayneth
this Freedom, and newness, and renewing from him, Faith is said to justify
instrumentally. And Faith alone to do it without copartners in the act: which
is in instanti, as Gods immediate works are all done; and not long adoing, as
we know. The Soul of man is the subject of this act: In which, unto which,
are necessarily required certain preparations, and preuious d^spositions to
the purpose. As knowledge of God, our selves, his Law, his justice, jealousy,
judgment, etc. Fear, Hope, Contrition, Love, desire of, purpose for, a new
life, and such like. But these are all with, and from Faith: which in the very
act of justification, are not active, though habitually there, then, before,
and after: at least, some of them, perhaps not all. Justification is not but in
the Church: Faith is the life and original of the Church: as appears by the
Scriptures, by the Subject, and performance of Faith. So that worthily may the
principal indowment of Grace, be ascribed unto the root and original of
Christian Piety, Faith. Fides prima datur, says Saint Augustine: ex qua
caetera impetrantur. In the first signification then of justification, the
which properly is justification, we acknowledge instrumentally Faith alone,
and Causally God alone. In the second and third, beside God and Faith, we
yield to Hope, and Holiness, and Sanctification, and the fruits of the Spirit
in good works. But both these are not Justification: rather Fruits, and
Consequents, and effects, and appendants of Justification; then Justification,
which is a solitary act.

So that well, and truly, and according to the tenet of Antiquity, is it
resolved by our Church, Artic. 11. We are accounted righteous before God, only
for the merit of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, by faith, and not for our
own works or deserving. Our Justification, in the act thereof, is only the
work of God, for Christ's sake: whose death and Passion apprehended by Faith,
which is the sole peculiar work of Faith to do, as it has made an atonement
betwixt God and us, so has it procured remission of our Sins at his hands,
and thereupon a new state of Grace: not for any merit, or deserving of our own,
which is utterly excluded in this Act. Thus Thomas 1. 2. q. 114. ar. 7. Nullo
modo aliquis potest sibi mereri reparationem post lapsum. Restoration after
fall, that is Justification of a sinner, no man can procure, or deserve unto
himself. To whom agrees the Council of Trent Sess. vi. can. viij. and your
own men confess it is gratuita. And therefore, as our Article says, not for
our own works or deseruings. Further our Church proceeds not, to the
augmentation, or declaration, of justification there. But infers: Wherefore,
that we are justified by faith alone, is a most wholesome Doctrine, and very
full of comfort: as it is indeed: and your long disputes may entangle the
simple, but not infringe the truth, nor indeed descent from it. Fides non
absoluit iustificationem, (says Casalius, and we admit it) but sola
iustificat; and he admits that: For so have antiquity avouched generally,
as himself and Cassander do confess, Origin, Hilary, and many others, to
have resolved so.

But this is contrary unto our Bible, 1 Corinthians. 13. 2. Though I have all
faith, so that I could remove mountains, and have no charity, I am nothing.
Therefore only faith does not justify. Why? because Faith without Charity does
not justify: for the greatest Faith that can be, without it, is nothing. As if
it were not in every Protestants mouth: and confessed by these opposers, that
howbeit Faith alone does justify, yet, not that Faith which is alone does
justify: Fides sola, but not solitaria. Faith that is without Charity does
not justify: but Faith may yet justify without Charity. They have their
several distinct acts; and the act of Faith is to justify: though both are
virtues incident to a just man. As if the Protestants that affirm only Faith
does justify, did withal maintain that all Faith did justify: or as, if he
that proposes a thing conditionally, must needs imply the condition to be
real and true. It is a supposition, if I had all Faith, etc. but a supposition
of impossibility: For it is impossible that all Faith, should be without
Charity; though some may be, and is without it. Beside, I can answer, that
the Faith which justified, when it did justify, (to admit the Supposition of
possibility) was not then without Charity, though afterward it was. For, in
your opinion, justifying Faith may diminish, and abolish, and be lost. Now
justification being in an instant; may eftsoons be lost again: Why not? and
so a separation of Faith, and Love. Secondly, it is contrary to Iam. 2. 24. You
see then how that by works a man is justified, and not by Faith only. In this
point of Justification, as mine and thine, are the common barretters of the
World, so Faith and good Works have broken the peace. It is the error of the
Protestants, say the Papists, that Faith only justifies. It is the error of
the Papists, say the Protestants, that Works do justify. Flat ad oppositum,
at least in tormes. And whether should a man believe? Nay more, this difference
seems very ancient, and in being when those names of opposition, Protestants
and Papists, were not heard of in the world. For Saint Paul says: By Faith,
without the works of the Law. And Saint James says, as positiuely, by Works,
and not alone by Faith. Scripture against Scripture; Apostle against Apostle;
Paul against James; James against Paul. Is Christ divided? or the Spirit
irresolued? or at odds? God forbid. At odds they were then, as we are now. I
would that we were at no more odds now, than they then were: Controversies
soon might be at an end, and Christ's Coat divided, soon made up again,
which is dismantled with new rentts daily.

Saint Paul had great contentions, all days of his life, in the whole course
of his ministry; with halfe-Christians, false-Christians, those of Concision,
as he terms them. That neged as necessary unto Salvation, works, and
observing of the Law. As if Christ without them did not profit any thing:
against these he aduaunceth the excellency and worth of Faith: and depresseth
the condition of any or all those works of the Law, whereupon they insisted; on
which they relied: whereof they gloried Saint James on the other side, opposes
as much Simon Magus, Menander, their adherents, and that damnable Sect of the
Gnostics, that living in all brothelry, and horrid impieties; cast off all
care and opinion, and account of good works: as being for imperfect ones, for
simple ones, and beginners in Christianity, not to be regarded, or insued of,
by themselves, who would be counted perfect men in their Generations; and
through Faith alone, as they pretended, of neete acquaintance and alliance with
God. Against these Saint James opposes the necessity of works. But neither
does Saint Paul deny works, to the Regenerate: nor Saint James deny the act of
Faith. Secondly, I answer here, that Saint Paul speaks of Justification in
attaining it: which in respect of man, is confessed to be the act of Faith.
Saint James, of Justification now obtained: which necessarily is not separate
from works. Iustus factus, through the Grace of Christ: is Iustus declaratus,
by his holy life and conversation. And so Saint James is expounded by your
selves: or else has access of Justification: as it is also taught by your
own men.

James 2. 14. What does it profit though a man says he has faith, and has
no works? Can faith save him? Nothing at all. Not at all. For a better says
then that which Saint James meant, the Faith of the Gnostiques, the Devils had.
Beside, it is a faith only supposed, presumed, and in opinion. If a man (say
he) has faith. A manifest insinuation it was not real. A Faith boasted of,
but not had. So that this Faith, and that other of the Protestants, Caelo and
solo disparantur. Nor can they be compared as they are. For the Faith of the
Protestants (general or special, I dispute not now) is a Faith wrought and
infused by God, through the Grace of Christ: Living: lively: active: fruitful:
declaring the root by the good fruit: they never separate them in their
Doctrine. And your men do blame them, because they never separate, the Spring
and watercourse, Faith and good works, but they profess it must and does
work by Love. And therefore it is a lying imputation, that good works, are
not necessary to Salvation. All Writers, old and new, as Cassander says in
general, do with joint consent teach, that Faith must bring forth the fruit
of good works. Otherwise, It is a dead faith without works. And he produces
the Confession of the Protestants thus: Fatendum est, haec opera quae a
iustificatis fiunt, ad salutem; id est regnum Dei and vitam aeternam
consequendam, esse necessaria, iuxta illud, si vis ad vitam ingredi, serua
mandata: It must be confessed, that the works which are done of justified men,
are necessary to obtain Salvation: that is, to purchase the Kingdom of God,
a^deternall life: according unto that, If thou will enter into life, keep the
Commandments. And the Church of England expressly teaches, Artic. 12. Albeit
that good works, which are the fruits of faith, and follow after
Justification, cannot put away sins, and endure the severity of Gods
judgment, yet are they pleasing and acceptable to God in Christ, and do
necessarily spring out from a true and lively Faith. Insomuch, as that by them
a true and lively faith, may as evidently be known, as a Tree is discerned by
the fruit. I add, as this man's Spirit is discerned by his lying. That of
Matthew. 7. 22. is so far from being express in the point, that it is far
from being to purpose. It is not for justifying of a sinner by works, but
rather for relapsing of one justified by Grace.

See Fathers that affirm the same. Namely, that which we do teach: that
Faith alone justifies: For so all these three named do: Origin, Hilary, and
Ambrose. Origin, says Cassander, clearly declares, in his Commentaries upon
the Epistle to the Romans, Sola fide, absque operibus, aliquos fuisse
iustificatos: That some have been justified by Faith alone, without any works
at all. The Thief upon the Cross was not saved by works, which he had not.
Faith alone saved him, in the mercies of Christ: but this being special, and
therefore extraordinary, may admit an exception for common use. Therefore in
Romans 3. he speaks plain, in general, not with that limitation of some.
Justification of Faith alone suffices: albeit a man has not done any works.
As direct a Protestant as ever wrote, Calvin, or Chemnitius could say no more.
But in Romans 5. he is otherwise minded. If so: what, why urge you the witness
of him, that says and vnsaith the same thing? But it is not so. Origin is
wronged by you. His words are: Faith cannot be reputed unto Justice to such, as
believe Christ, and yet put not off the old man, with his Acts. Do Protestants
say it can be? We distinguish Historical, and Justifying Faith. You do
difference Faith in Degree, if in nothing else. Belief, may be before, without
Justification; a general assent, without application, or adhesion. Origin is
in this also, a perfect Protestant. It is their Doctrine, That there is a Faith
which justifies not. It is Origens Doctrine absolutely. Origin says; Which
believes Christ: He does not say, Which believes in Christ. Thus per omnia,
in all points he sideth with the Protestants in their Faith, concerning Faith
as you propose it. Secondly, see Hilary upon Math. 7. And do: See him
Protestant, to thy confirmation. See him Papist to thy confusion. The salvation
of Nations, are his words, is through faith: and in the Precepts of the Lord,
the life of all men. Does this man speak against the Justification of a man by
Faith, that ascribes salvation unto Faith? And Can. 8. in Math. unto only
Faith. And elsewhere as he is cited by Cassander. A Christo per fidem remissio
est, quod lex laxare non poterat. Fides enim sola Iustificat. Remission of
sins is from Christ: which could not be released by the Law. For only Faith
justifies. Saint Ambrose runs the same way with Origin and Hilary in
Comment. upon the Epistle to the Romans. Hoc etiam constitutum est a Deo, vt
qui credit in Christum, saluus sit, sine opere, sola fide, gratis accipiens
remissionem peccatorum. It is so ordained by God, that whosoever believes in
Christ, is made partaker of salvation, by faith alone, without works,
receiving forgiveness of sins. In conclusion, it is confessed upon all
hands, by the most learned in the Church of Rome, that many of the ancient
Fathers, ascribe Justification unto Faith alone. Casalius in his second Book,
and 16. Chapter, allayeth their saying, and we approve it, but implyedly he
gives to understand, that Doctores Sancti, do affirm, that sola fides
iustificat; Faith alone is that which justifies. No new Gospel therefore, as
this Goose gagleth.

XIX.
That no good works are meritorious.

IN the former Proposition the Protestants were belyed in the Case of good
works, as excluding their necessity unto Salvation. For, though Faith alone
acted in the act of Justification, yet there necessarily followed in ordinary
course, an harvest of good works. Now the value of those works is next to be
questioned, in the point concerning merit, and desert, wherein this Gagger, as
elsewhere, lies out aloof in ambiguities: for he distinguishes not of
works, nor merit; nor the terms how far they are meritorious: nor how they
deserve what they have.

Works are considered before or after Justification: In the state of Nature or
of Grace, works are not all of one kind. There are some good, and so far
good, as that they cannot be done to any evil end. Such as are directed unto
God immediately, to honor him, to love him, and to fear him. Others so evil,
that no intent or purpose can make them good: to commit Adultery, do murder,
blaspheme God. Others good in themselves, and in a generality, which may yet be
done to an ill intent and purpose; to give Alms to be seen of men; evil in a
general notion, as to go to the Stews: yet good in the designment, to
convert a sinner. Others indifferent every way. Now in the Proposition, not any
of these are meritorious, according to the Doctrine of the Protestants, says
the Gagger generally: Not meritorious: what is that? Your Schools assign us a
twofold merit of Congruity, of Condignity: that, where Retribution, or reward
is not due, yet conueniency requires recompensation: this, where reward is
rightly due, and the denying thereof is injustice and wrong unto the party.
Here is no distinction of merit at all. We are not given to understand, whether
is intended Merit of Condignity or Congruity. We know that in the Doctrine of
the Roman Schools (and unless we did know it otherwise, this fellow would
not tell us.) Merit of Congruity is not commonly meant, as scarce vouchsafed
the name of Merit. Good works therefore said to be meritorious, are so
understood to be, ex condigno; which that a work may so be, these Conditions
are required. That it be morally good: Freely wrought: by man in this life: In
the state of Grace, and friendship with God; which has annexed Gods Promise of
Reward. All which Conditions, I cannot conceive that any Protestant does deny
unto good works, the fruits of Faith, lively and living. For first, evil
works are rewardable, but with due desert: that is, Gods wrath, and second
death. Work, s secondly, of compulsion, are not worth Gramercy. 1 Cor. 9. 17.
and thirdly, after death, working does cease. In the state of Grace to be
wrought, is the Protestants Tenent, that precisely hold; first, Faith is
necessary, before good works can be acceptable to God: For God had first
respect to Abel, say they, and afterward unto his Sacrifice. Deus non habet
gratum offerentem propter munera, sed munera propter offerentem, says Gregor.
hom. 9. in Ezech. and then they maintain, that as God does Crown his own
works in us, so he does it, having promised so to do. This is your own
Doctrine in the Roman Schools: And so far the Protestants, for these
Conditions, go along with you.

Now if your Texts do contrary this, expressly, or obliquely, look you to it:
it concerns you as much as us. First, Math. 5. 12. Rejoice, and be exceeding
glad, for great is your reward in Heaven. Reward, you say, is due debt; and
debt is upon desert. But this desert, whence came it? and what is it? Ex gratia
ipsius, says Tertullian, non proprietate nostra. In the state of Grace men
only merit, your selves teach: then all their merit is of Grace; As of Grace,
so ex compacto, God has promised, therefore due, to be required. This is your
fifth and last Condition unto merit. Reward in Heaven, no man denies: Reward
appointed for our good works, all confess: If this be your merit, we
contradict See more, 1 Cor. 9. etc.
it not. And this is your merit that you plead for. All your Texts of
Scripture, Math. 10. 42. 2 Cor. 5. 10. 1 Cor. 9. 17. 18. 25. Heb. 11. 26. Psalm.
18. 20. and many more in the same course and kind, speak directly this way,
and no other; so that the man fights with his shadow, and takes a fern bush
for a Fox to hunt.

As idle in allegation of his Fathers, as impertinent See Fathers that affirm
the same, S. Ambrose, de Apolog. David, ca. 6. S. Hier. lib. 3. cont. Pelag. S.
Aug. de spirit, and lit. cap. vlt.
in his Texts of Scripture. For these places of August. Hierome, and Ambrose,
produced by this iugler, to be seen, are merely for another matter: and so to
that end recited by his instructor C. W. B. a man of more learning, and better
judgment to prove that all the best works of the righteous are not sins,
but truly good works, as proceeding out of a good root. That man, had this
fellow been but a gagler, would have afforded him Fathers enough from Ignatius
along for many ages, to purpose as is specified, in this point. And yet
Ignatius wrote in Greek, and could not understand merit: and those that wrote
in Latin, did use the word, but with no such intent as is supposed, nor as is
put upon them by these later Tormentors of other men's meaning. The Fathers who
use it, took up the word, as they found it, in ordinary use and custom with
men in those times, not for to deserve, which in our Language, implies merit
ex condigno: but to incur, to procure, to purchase: as Tacitus has it in the
life of Agricola; Iijs virtutibus iram Caij Caesaris meritus est: By these
virtues he incurred the anger of Caius Caesar. Which use of the Tongue, the
inferior Ages mistaking, have built up I know not what great Towers of Babel
unto themselves, in contestation with, and presumption against GOD, which the
ancient Fathers never dreamed of, whose joint vnaminous and orthodoxall
Doctrine is, that which we will remember in Leoes words, Non de qualitate
nostrorum operum pendet coelestium mensura donorum.

In conclusion, touching good works, the Church of England considers them
two ways, Artic. 12. 13. First as they are, or may be done before
Justification had and obtained; done by men merely natural, and in the state
of alienation from God: and then as they are done after Regeneration, by the
inspiration and assistance of Gods Spirit. Concerning the first, Works done
before the grace of Christ, says Artic. 13. and the inspiration of his Spirit,
are not pleasing unto God: for as much as they spring not of Faith in Jesus
Christ, neither do they make men meet to receive Grace: or as the School
Authors say, deserve Grace of congruity. Yea, rather for that they are not done
as God has willed and commanded them to be done; we doubt not but they have
the nature of sin. And so our Conclusion is, Good works thus, and in this
sort, merit not at all, unless you mean Hell, and Gods wrath.

For good works done after Justification, which only and alone are indeed
good works: The Church of England in the 12 Artic. concludes thus, 1. They
spring from a true and lively Faith. 2. They declare a true and lively Faith.
3. They are pleasing and acceptable to God. 4. They cannot put away our sins,
nor endure the severity of Gods judgment, to wit, not of themselves:
considered in themselves: no, not as issuing from their Fountain, Faith:
because Rem(...)ssion is in Christ, gratuitum: and pardon must preceede before
that they can succeed. Touching their merit and desert, here is concluded
nothing: but the meaning of the Church in the Doctrine of her Schools, is
directly this: That the works of Gods Saints, in Faith and Charity, are
rewardable here, and in the World to come; both in general, as good works:
and in particular, as such good works, some more, some less, according to
measure, and proportion: it being a rule in Nature and Grace both, that
whatsoever is received, is received, as the Donce can receive it, not as the
Donor can confer it. Which procuring of reward at Gods hand, both for things
Temporal and Eternal, the phrase of Antiquity has called merit, upon the use
of the Tongue in those days, and no otherwise, though much mistaken afterward.

XX.
That faith once had cannot be lost.

THere is no such Conclusion or Article tendered unto the Church of England: or
resolved of, unto us as of Faith. Opinions have varied, and may keep at large:
each one contenting himself with his own private: sobeit he disturb not the
peace of the Church: nor impose his private judgment, to be held of all. It is
held by some I grant, that justifying Faith, that excellent gift of God, is not
conferred unto any but to the Elect and predestined unto life. The wicked
that perish eternally from God, as they never were in the state of Grace, so
never were they endued with true Faith. Secondly, as consequent hereunto, that
Faith once had cannot be lost, or shaken out or off wholly from man, but
continues inextinguible, indefeisable. And therefore thirdly, those that once
have been endowed with that Transcendent gift, are sure to be saved eternally;
nor cease to be, and stand ^ustified before God. These are opinions, and
defended, but not of all Protestants, not of the Church of England, but opposed
and refelled at home, abroad, as this fellow cannot but know, if he know any
thing in these points: which for the mayor part are fitter for Schools then
popular discourses: and may be held or not held, without heresy either way.

That Faith once had (the propounded Conclusion) cannot be lost, may be
interpreted, and is, more ways then one. Whether not lost at all: whether
totally or finally lost. Men are divided in this Tenent. Some suppose neither
totally nor finally: Some totally, but not finally: Some both totally and
finally. Which is indeed the assertion of Antiquity, and your School. Some
perceiving the current of judgments for the loss thereof totally and finally;
and considering also at least probability, of Scripture consenting, put in a
new distinction, of God, and Man: of the first and second causes of Faith and
Justification. In regard of Man, his weakness, insufficiency, and opposition
against him: in respect of second causes concurring in this action, Faith once
had, may be lost they say. But in regard of God, considering his counsel and
purpose unchangeable, reflecting on his absolute decree irreuersable, faith
once had cannot totally or finally be lost, nor they perish eternally that were
endowed therewith. Now, which of all these ways will you understand the
position, Faith had may be lost? For my part, I know your meaning well enough:
but you should have explayned it, and not have covertly rested in ambiguities.
You mean, it may be lost totally, and finally: in regard of God, who made no
such absolute irreuersable decree: as also in respect of second causes in man,
both without him, and about him, and against him. I determine nothing in this
Question positiuely, which the Church of England leaves at liberty unto us,
though the learned in the Church of England assent unto Antiquity in their
Tenent: which the Protestants of Germany maintain at this day: having assented
therein unto the Church of Rome, in the Diot at Ralisbone, by Bucer and others,
upon these grounds. First Ezech. 18. 24. 26. If the righteous turn away from
his righteousness, and commit iniquity: and do according unto all the
abominations that the wicked man does, shall he live? all his righteousness
that he has done shall not be remembered: but in his transgression that he
has committed, and in his sin that he has sinned, in them shall he die.
And again, repeated with like asseueration, and reduplication: verse. 26.
again, Ezech. 33. 12. The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver
him, in the day of his transgression. And again, The wickedness of the wicked
shall not cause him to fall, in the day that he returns from his
wickedness: neither shall the righteous live for his righteousness, in the
day that he sins. And verse 13. If he commit iniquity, all his
righteousness shall be no more remembered, but for his iniquity that he has
committed, he shall die for the same. Which again is repeated verse 18.
Therefore the righteous may lose his righteousness, abandon his faith, dye in
his sins; and receive the reward of his Transgressions in his auersion from
God, hell fire.

Again, Matthew. 12. 44. The unclean spirit eiected, returns unto his former
residence, enters, possedeth his former state, and the case of that man is
worse than the beginning. Satan is not eiected, but where the party is in the
state of Grace with God: being regenerate by faith. Reposseding is not but by
relapse into sin: nor a worse state, but where a man dies in sin, Luke 8.
13. They on the rock, are they who when they hear, receive the word with joy,
who for a while believe, and in time of temptation fall away. John 15. 2. Every
branch that bears not fruit in me, he takes away. Matthew 24. 12. Because
iniquity shall be increased, the charity of many shall grow cold. Surely it
was hot, that grows cold: and charity enlarged, is not but the fruit of a
living faith, which if it continued in statu quo, the charity of many could
not wax cold. Therefore once had, may be lost, say they.

Again, Romans 11. 20. 21. Thou stand by Faith, be not high-minded, but
fear: and fear is not but where change may be. Here change may be: or why
does it follow? Take heed least he also spare not thee. The reason is, Any
man may have that which another had. Now 1 Timoth. 6. 20. Some have erred
concerning faith. And 1 Timoth. 1. 18. 19. holding faith and a good conscience,
which some having put away concerning faith, have made shipwreck: Nor was it
only for those times, but foretold of succeeding ages, 1 Timoth. 4. In the
latter days some shall depart from the faith, Gal. 5. 4. Saint Paul spoke not
upon supposition of impossibility, Ye are abolished from Christ, whosoever are
justified by the Law, ye are fallen from Grace. For many were so, that having
believed, and being baptized, did euacuate Christ by their own righteousness
in the Law. Of whom Saint Paul complayneth in all that Epistle to the
Galathians, and elsewhere. Nor in point of only Heresy was Faith by them
lost, but also of good living, and conversation, 2 Pet. 2. 20. Where those that
had escaped the filthiness of the World; therefore washed and made clean,
through the knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ: Therefore justified
truly by Faith: are yet entangled again therein, and overcome. Therefore
lapsed from Faith: as is expressed verse. 21. and 22. ensuing.

Infinite are the testimonies of Scriptures to this purpose, insisted upon by
the auouchers. I add but one of them. Heb. 6. 4. It is impossible, that they
which were once enlightened, and have tasted of the heavenly gift, and were made
partakers of the holy Ghost, and have tasted of the good word of God, and of
the power of the world to come, (if these were not justified, they know not who
were: if these had not faith, where was it to be found) if they fall away,
should be renewed again by repentance: seeing they crucify again the Son of
God unto themselves, and make a mock of him.

Thus Scripture speaks plain. Their Reasons from 1.
Scripture are evident. Man is not likely in state of Grace to be of an higher
alloy then Angels were in state of Glory: than Adam was in state of Innocence:
For Grace is but a conformity thereto, and no conformity exceeds the
Architype: At most it is but an equality thereto: and equals are of the same
proportion. Now if Adam in Paradise, and Lucifer in Heaven, did fall and loose
their original state, the one totally, the other eternally, what greater
assurance has any man in state of Proficiency, not of Consummation?

Again, Faith must needs be lost, where it cannot 2.
consist. It cannot consist where God will not abide. God will not abide, where
he is disobeyed: he is disobeyed, where mortal sin is committed: the most
righteous man living upon the face of the earth, continually does or may in
this sort transgress: Who can tell how often he offends? Cleanse thy servant
from presumptuous sins. Thou will have no fellowship at all with the
deceitful; Nor shall any evil dwell with thee.

Saul was at first the Child of God: called according to the election of
Grace: not only temporal, 3.
for the Kingdom of Israel, but also eternal for the heavenly Kingdom. In
opinion of Antiquity thus he was: and yet afterward he fell, it is
confessed; totally all say: Eternally these say, that maintain justifying
Faith cannot be lost. But if Saul were not of Gods Children in grace, inducd
with Faith, and the holy Spirit: yet Solomon was, there is no question with
them, because he was a Writer of holy writ, and wrote as he was enspired by
God. If they did not grant it, the Scripture would euict it. For 2 Samuel 7.
God speaks of him literally: though of Christ Jesus, intentionally, I will be
his father, and he shall be my son: And in the 12. Chapter of the same Book,
He called his name Solomon, and the Lord loved him: and sent by the hand of
Nathan the Prophet, and called his name beloved of the Lord, because the Lord
loved him indeed: Yet Sal^mon fell, as Saint Augustine and Saint Chrysostom
are clear for it, at least temporally, and totally too, when he went and
served other gods. If Solomon were never the Child of God, yet David was
without contradiction: and Saint Peter without nay: Yet David fell foul in
that act of murder and adultery, and lost his Faith and present state of
Grace: if David had perished in that his Sin, what had become of his Soul
for ever? It was not possible he should, in regard of the purpose of Grace;
but had it been so, where had he bin? Surely he that desired a new heart to
be created, had not that heart which he had before his fall: For Creation is
production from not being, unto being. Saint Peter was a chosen vessel of
Christ Jesus, and if ever was any, the Child of God. Yet he denied Jesus
Christ with an oath, which was peccatum lethale, as Saint Augustine proves in
his 66. Tractat. upon Saint John. Chirst prayed for him, that his faith might
not fail: But his Prayer was, for the end, not the act. That he might not
fall finally, and he did not: but not that not totally, for so he did. His
infirmity appeared in his fall: Gods mercy was seen in his restoration.

Simon Magus was an Heretic, an Arch-heretique, the father of Heretics, and
first begotten of the Devil: yet Simon Magus was a Christian once, and
baptized, and believed, and brought forth fruits of new life, and followed
Philip a certain time. He believed, it is said, but not truly. It is not
said, he believed not truly. Saint Luke says he believed, in the same
terms, with the same words, to the same intent and purpose, that he speaks
of others, that believed truly, and constantly: Where the Holy Ghost puts
no difference, what man has any warrant to distinguish? The Scripture does not
so much as insinuate the hypocrisy of Simon Magus then: and what is he, that
would have his nay believed, before Saint Lukes yea? Judas was a Reprobate, and
cast away for ever. Our Savior calls him the Son of perdition, and says
it had been good he had never been borne: Yet Judas was numbered with the
twelve Apostles: had all the Prerogatives which they enjoyed. God gave him to
Christ as well as Peter or John. And if he perished only in the number of
them that were given unto Christ, doubtless he was first ranked in that
number: and perishing, ceased to be of that number, as ceasing to be of that
number he perished.

Beside, if Faith had cannot be lost, the Dog cannot be said, to return unto
his vomit: nor the Swine to wallowing in the mire. If righteousness had cannot
be lost, why do we pray continually against that, Lead us not into
temptation? Why did the Apostle chastise and bring under his body, least he
should become a castaway? Why should he admonish as he does, He that
stands, let him take heed lest he fall? And Work out your Salvation with
fear and trembling. Again, say they, totally it may be lost; for Faith is an
adhesion unto God. Sin seperateth man from God: and makes a division in that
first Conjunction: but by repentance it is again restored, and recovery gained
after fall. Totally lost, is not then ever finally, eternally, nor ineuitably
lost; For yet will thou return and refresh me, and bring up my life from the
gates of death again. And as the Tree that is cut down at the stem, so long
as the stock remains in the ground, yet by the sent of waters it will
recover, (says Job,) and again, show forth the branches: So, so long as men
in the Church have means in Christ, it is possible to be renewed by Repentance.
Possible they say. Necessary say some, because of that necessitating purpose of
God, whereby he is saved, and could not perish, that was appointed unto life
unchangeably. So then they teach, that are thus persuaded, Faith totally may be
lost. Faith totally lost, may eternally be lost: and also not be lost
eternally, though totally for a time. Because God again will restore them to
Grace: and except he would do so, they could not rise to Grace: but because
his will is not put into practice by his power, he necessitateth no man so
irreuersably unto life nor death, those that have lapsed totally, may also
perish finally. It will be urged by them, which is here said by you, What
needs there any further proof, where holy Scripture is so plain? and they
grant in a case so fully cleared and resolved in Scripture, no further proof
needs as necessarily required: yet for illustration, and assurance, a
concurring assent of many is requisite of congruitie. Wherefore they bring
Fathers for their purpose. Ignatius, the ancientest this day extant: of whose
writings there is little or no question, in his Epistle to the Magnesians, page
26. divides mankind into two sorts of Coins, as he speaks there: and
explicating his meaning, says, he does not so intend it, as if he meant two
distinct Natures in man, (...) etc. That one and the same man, is, sometime the
Child of God, and again the Child of the Devil. If he live godly, he is a
man of God: if wickedly, the Child of the Devil: not so by Nature, but from
his own depraved will. And speaking elsewhere of constancy in persecution,
says; Albeit I am exceedingly strengthened in God, yet ought I to fear so
much the rather. And again, (...). I do not know whether I am worthy or not.

Clement in his Constitutions, 5. 26. (...), etc. The Holy Spirit is
continually assistant with those that possess him, so long as they are worthy
so to have him. From whomsoever this holy Spirit is divided, He leaves them
destitute and forsaken, and delivered up unto the wicked Spirit. I know the
Author is questioned upon his honesty; at least he is ancient: but I hold him
honest, and persuade my self I can prove him so to be, as he seems, for my
part: Tertullian, in de praescript. Cap. iij. Et hoc mirum opinor, vt probatus
aliquis retro postea excidat? Saul bonus prae ceteris liuore postea euertitue.
David vir bonus secundum cor Domini: postea caedis and stupri reus. Solomon
omni gratia and sapientia donatus a Domino, ad Idololatriam a mulieribus
inducitur. Soli enim dei filio seruabatur sine delicto permanere. As if it were
a thing so strange that any Man approved by God, should afterward relapse from
Grace. Saul, a man better then the rest, was overtaken and undone at length
through Envy. David was a good man, and according unto the Lords heart: yet
afterward guilty of murder and adultery. Solomon inducd with all grace and
wisdom from the Lord, was by women brought over unto Idolatry. For why, it
was reserved to the Son of God alone to be without sin. What then, if a
Bishop, a Deacon, a Virgin, a Widow, a Teacher, a Martyr, have swarued from his
rule, shall Heresy therefore have the better of Truth? Do we estimate and
approve Faith by Men's Persons, or not rather Persons by Faith? Only the
faithful man is a wiseman: Only a Christian man is of account: No man is a
Christian, but he that continues unto the end. Thus far he.

Cyprian is through for the point, Epist. 7. Parum est adipisci potuisse
aliquid. Plus est quod adeptus es posse seruare, sicut and fides ipsa, and
Natiuitas salutaris, non accepta sed custodita viuisicat. Nec statim
consecutio, sed consummatio, hominem Deo seruat. Dominus hoc magisterio suo
docuit dicens, Ecce sanus factus es, sani noli peccare, nequid tibi deteriu^:
fiat. Puta hoc illum and Confessori suo dicere, Ecce Confessor factus es, sani
noli peccare, nequid(...) deterius fiat. Solomon denique and Saul, and caeteri
multi, quam diu in vijs Domini ambulauerunt, datam sibi gratiam tenere
potuerunt, recedente ab ijs disciplina Dominica recessit and gratia. Goulartius
here talks to no purpose, in the Clouds, totally or finally it skilleth not,
the Grace of God departed away from them; therefore they lost their Faith in
Saint Cyprians judgment, by which they stood at first in Gods favor.

And in Nazianzens too, who writes thus of Saul, in his Apology unto his
Father, Page 37. (...). Anointed he was, and made partaker of the holy
Spirit: and then at that time was Spiritual. I dare not speak otherwise of
him. Nay, more then so, he prophesied. And yet for all that, because he
suffered not himself to be wholly and entirely directed by the Spirit, nor
became perfectly and sincerely another man, what need I relate the Tragical
end, which he underwent? Saint Hierome forsakes not his Masters direction,
Lib. 2. aduersus Pelagianos. Ne beatum dixeris, quempiam ante mortem. Quamdiu
enim viuimus in certamine sumus: quamdiu in certamine, nulla est certa
victoria. Call no man happy until he be dead. So long as we live, we are to
strive and contend: so long as there is opposition against us, so long we are
not assured of the victory. And elsewhere against Iouinian, he teaches, that
until a man repent, Faith is cast off by sin, and the party in disfavor
with God.

Saint Augustine proposes it as an Article of his Creed, de Corrept. and
gratia. 13. Credendum est quosdam de filijs perditionis non accepto dono
persevere andi vsque in finem, in fide quae per dilectionem operatur incipere
viuere: and aliquandiu fideliter and just viuere, and postea cadere neque de
hac vita priusquam eis id contingat auferri. And again, Ad quam vocationem
pertinere nullus est homo, ab hominibus certa asseueratione dicendus, nisi cum
de hoc saecule exierit. In hac autem vita humana quae tentatio est super
terram, qui videtur stare videat ne cadat.

And lastly, Gregory Lib. 6. in primum Regum. Quia Iudicium omnipotentis Dei
imperscrutabile est, vnde veniat, and quo vadat homo, nescit: quia sciri non
potest, an quis in gratia quam recepit perseuerare in perpetuum debeat. Because
the Judgments of GOD Almighty are unsearchable, man does not know either
whence he comes, or whether he goes; because it cannot be known, whether
a man shall ever stand without falling in that Grace, which he has received.

It was a Stoicall paradox grounded upon their fatal necessity and
concatenation of Causes, that virtues once had, cannot be lost at all. Seneca
thus in his 50 Epistle. Semel tradidi boni possessio perpetua est. Non
dediscitur virtus. Fideliter sedent quae in locum suum veniunt. Good once had,
is held for ever in possession. Virtue is not again to be learned. For what
thing soever has obtained the proper place, rests therein without
alteration. If any such necessity be inferred by any, it is but opinion, not
decision; private opinion, not public resolution, which a man may follow or
abandon at pleasure, not to be blamed for resolution. So, or so.

In course of Christianity, and service of God. Finis coronat actus: It is the
end that crowns the Act. In man's profession of Love, Fear, and Obedience of
God. Nil^praesumitur esse actum dum restat aliquid ad agendum. The Law
presumes nothing at all is done, so long as rests any thing to be done. Non
quid egeris, sed quid supersit curandum: si dixisti Sufficit, Defecisti. It is
not respected what is already performed by them, but what remains yet
unfinished. If thou say it is enough, thou art fallen off, and faintest. For
Leuit. 22. Ever the tail of the whole burnt Offering was offered. Many begin
to build, but do not all set up the roof. Many thousands came out of Egypt,
but few of them passed over Jordan. Asa was good till the go^te vexed him.
Jonathan followed the Chase till he met with Honey. Many are good till they
have cause to be badde, and then vertunt omnia ad extremum: They end in the
flesh, that begun in the Spirit. The Conclusion of all is, (...). A man is not
happy so long as he lives, because it is uncertain what shall become of him,
says Saint Basil upon the first Psalm. These are the resolutions of many, if
not most Protestant Divines: as private men of Protestant Churches, in their
Decisions; and Resolutions. I am sure, the Church of England, does not tender
it to be taught or believed, that Faith had, cannot be lost again. Private
opinions of men. are no Gospels of the Church. I am of this opinion, another is
of that. I maintain Faith cannot be lost totally or finally: another verily
persuades himself it may be lost, both totally and finally. He that once
was, in regard of justifying Faith, and Grace, the Child of God, may become
the Child of Sin, Wrath, Death, Hell, and Destruction. to neither of these,
do I subscribe, as de fide, being undecided, undetermined, in the Church: Lei
every man abound in his own sense and understanding, what is it to me, so be
it he keep Faith, Peace. Charity, and a good Conscience? The very Church of
Geneua it self, as I was told by one of the chief Ministers thereof, does not
maintain these private opinions of the principal Pastors of that Church. So
that, what honesty can there be in this rambling Companion, who ranketh it with
the Errors of the Protestants, That Faith had cannot be lost. Which, if it
were an error, as I dispute not that, is as much or more opposed by
Protestants, as propugned. As much refelled by Protestants, as Papists. Sir
Gagger, to let the World see your ignorance, or impudency, or both, I have
laid these parts together out of Protestant Divines. I justify no private
opinions. Those that hold the one or other, are old enough; let them answer
for themselves. And so I proceed.

XXI.
That God, by his will and inevitable decree, has ordained from all eternity,
who shall be damned, and who saved.

DAmned and Saved divide Mankind. Not any has come forth of the loins of
Adam, but, as this Gaggler will himself confess, is necessarily ranged in one
of these Ranks; either with the Damned or the Saved, Sheep or Goats, upon the
left hand or the right.

But he, whosoever, that is e censa damnandorum vel saluandorum, finally and
eternally damned or saved, as one day actiuely all shall be, is so damned or
saved, not without God's will, according to the purpose of his decree, at least
consequent, though not antecedent; who does whatsoever he will in heaven and
earth; who works all things according to the counsel of his will, the
highest Rule, supremest Law; nothing beyond it, against it, without it. So
Damned or Saved, are so ordained by God.

Whatsoever God wills, comes to pass: and whatsoever comes to pass,
comes so to pass, because God has said, So, and not otherwise, it shall
come to pass; either positiuely, by disposing it; or else permissiuely, by
giving way, and suffering it so to come to pass, as it does come to pass.
This his will, as nor himself, began not in time: it is and was eternal, as he
is: ever, I am; not, I will be or have bin. Whatsoever is done in process of
time, was so seen, so disposed of, and ordered before all Time: for, he is not
measured but by Eternity, which is Tota simul, and perfecta possessio sui; The
total and perfect possession of it self.

If then there be Damned and Saved, as there are, God's eternal will did so
determine of them and their final estate, from all Eternity: and, after that
determination of God, they are damned or saved ineuitably; not only according
unto Prescience, but also according to Predestination, say the Roman schools;
in which, this Fellow would seem to have sent some idle hours after their
fleeing Predecessors.

What then? Why, surely the poor man meant well to the Catholic Cause, and
would say somewhat, though no matter what, which he did not understand, nor
could utter. He thought well, though he could not handsomely tell his Tale;
which should have been marshald thus: That God, by his sole will and absolute
decree, has irrespectiuely resolved, and ineuitably decreed, some to be saved,
some to be damned, from all Eternity.



Man, in curiosity, has presumed far upon, and waded deep into the hidden
Secrets of the Almighty; nowhere more, or with greater Presumption, than where
that grand Apostle stood at gaze, with O the depth! and in consideration cried
out, How unsearchable are his ways! who yet was admitted into Council of
State, and rapt up into the third heaven.

In the point of Election for Life, and Reprobation unto Death, Protestants and
Papists are many ways at odds in opposition, and each divided at home amongst
themselves; not for the Thing, which all resolve, but for the Manner, in which
they differ; agreeing in the Main, that It is so; disagreeing on the By, How it
comes so? as if God meant to reserve no Secrets unto himself, but impart them
all to men; as if it were not enough to save some, and cast others off, but he
must give account of doing so.

Some Protestants, and no mo but some, have considered God, for this effect of
his will, in reference to Peter and Judas, thus; that Peter was saved, because
that God would have him saved absolutely; and resolved to save him necessarily,
because he wo^ld so, and no further; that Judas was damned as necessarily,
because that God, as absolute to decree, as om(...)ipotent to effect, did
primarily so resolve concerni^g him, and so determine touching him, without
respect of any thing but his own will: insomuch that Peter could not perish,
though he would; nor Judas be saved, do what he could.

This is not the doctrine of the Protestants: the Lutherans in Germany detest
and abhor it. It is the private fancy of some men, I grant: but what are
Opinions, unto Decisions? private Opinions, unto received and decided
doctrines? The Church of England has not taught it, does not believe it, has
opposed it; wisely contenting herself with this Quousque and Limitation, Art.
17. We must receive God's promises in such wise as they be generally set forth
to us in holy scripture; and not presuming to determine of When, How, Wherefore,
or Whom; Secrets reserved to God alone. So this Goose the Gagger may put his
Gag into the Bills of many of his own Gaggle, as well as into others Lagges;
who presume as far, and wander as wide, sometime as they do, though more
covertly in their terms.

Our Bible, in express words, says what we believe: it teaches not contrary
to that which is resolved in Contrary to the express words of their own Bible.
the Church of England: the positive doctrine whereof is no other, but what this
Wittall confirms out of Scripture; that God at the beginning made not death,
as Wisd. 1. 13. because she has learned out of S. Paul, that Through sin,
death came into the world: whereof God was neither Aurthor nor Abettor; but
He, the Father of lies, a Lier, a Murderer from the beginning, in procuring
the Fall of man.

Sin being entered, and by sin death, and so all mankind in the Mass of
perdition, God fitted and prepared a Restorer, a Mediator, the Man Christ
Jesus; that so, Whosoever believed in him, should not perish, but have ever
lasting life, out of his mercy both free and mere, because he was not willing,
that any should perish, but all should come unto Repentance, as 2. Pet. 3. 9.
and be saved.

So large was his Mercy, so enlarged his Love, that out of his good pleasure it
was his will, All men to be saved, and to come to knowledge of the Truth. Show
a contrary resolution of the Church of England, and gag up my mouth, Sir Goose,
for ever: else go gaggle on the Green.

For particular opinions, So or so, aetatem habent; let them speak for
themselves: and so be it they rent not the peace of the Church, let them abound
in their private senses. I nor teach nor believe any such Paradox; nor the
Church whereof I am, and you should be, a Member, positiuely.

We need see no more, except to more purpose: See more Ose 13. 9, etc.
the places are adrem, but touch not us. They speak home, and to purpose, which
they should declare: but we are not interest in opposition. Urge them against
those who do undertake to maintain, that men are damned necessarily.

See Fathers we may, but we shall not need: we See Fathers, that affirm the
same.
believe what they should say, and go hand in hand with what they do say
dogmatically: but see them all we cannot if we would, unless we would go seek
when we need not; and if we would, might blow the seek for some of them, and
after long search be never the near in finding them.

For Saint Augustine; what or where will you tell S. Aug. lib. 1. ciuit.
us, or are you able to inform us, that he affirms? You mean, he affirms
somewhat in his first Book of the City of God: and I know he does, more by
much than you can report me. You have had some acquaintance with some
Particulars there, as you met them by chance in your perambulation of some
trans-scripts of other men's Notes, and have now forgotten where, and what.
Else, what man, but such a Scribbler, would so loosely, in a point of
opposition, and therefore like enough of examination, have referred us to Saint
Austen, in his first Book de Dei Ciuitate? Something you would say, I know not
what: and therefore till you let me know, I say nothing to what you have said,
I cannot tell how.

I have seen and read Tertullian, in that place remembered, Tert. de Orat. cap.
8.
expounding that Petition in our Lords Prayer, Lead us not into temptation; who
proposes it resolved and de fide: and I know no man that doubts of it, that
God tempts no man, Quasi aut ignoret fidem cuiusque, aut deijcere sit
consentiens, as out of Ignorance what he can perform, or as consenting to
undo him. But this passage, there is nothing in Tertullian that I can guess
at, that we should see. And Sir, does this passage come home to purpose, of
decree unto life or death? Or know you any Protestant not so persuaded? No,
thou forehead of brass, and tongue of Say, we are fully resolved with
Tertullian, that Diaboli est infirmitas et malitia; being taught by the
Prophet to profess, Our destruction is of our selves, our salvation of the
Lord.

S. Cyprian they may see, that think it worth their S. Cyprian Lib. 4. Epist. 2.
labor, Lib. 4. Epist. 2. or as other Editions have it, Epist. 52. and there
is nothing to purpose, but by consequence; having cited that saying, even now
remembered, Wisd. 1. 13. God made not death, thus he infers against the
Nouatians, rigorous men, that denied repentance to lapsed Christians after
Baptism: Vtique qui neminem vult perire, cupit peccatores poenitentiam agere,
et per poenitentiam denuo ad vitam redire: Because he would not that any should
perish, his desire is that Sinners should repent, and by Repentance reuert to
life again. Do Protestants deny Return of the Laps^d unto God? or Grace to
Repentants after Fall? If we do, this testimony may gagge our mouths; if not,
as we do not, then gaggeth it your own mouth, Sir Goose.

Saint Ambrose will not, nor Saint Augustine, nor S. Ambrose Lib. 2. de Cain et
Abel will not that we refer unto God the preuarication of Adam, or treason of
Judas, though he knew the sin before it was committed.
any else, whose brains are his own, as yours are not. God fore-sawe it in
Adam, and in Judas: but Prescience infers not Predestination. For, not
because foreseen, therefore effected; but because effected, therefore
foreseen. The Treason of Judas, the Fall of Adam, God fore-sawe, and suffered;
this is certain: God was Author of neither Positiuely. That Good which they
had, they had from God: this Woe and Unhappiness came from themselves. Private
opinions we undertake not: you should not in discretion, much less in honesty,
impute it unto us. Your aim is against the Church of England. Quarrel that if
you can: undertake against it, if you dare. For what my word is past, I will
make it good against all your Bandogges of Beelzebub whatsoever; That Church
maintains nothing against the Faith of the ancient Church of Christ, resolved
on for 500 years.

XXII.
That every one ought infallibly to assure himself of his salvation; and to
hold, that he is of the number of the Predestinate.

NOw you ramble indeed: your pen runs too fast: your malice sent your wit, I
suppose, on wooll-gathering. Where find you this conclusion in the Church of
England? where in any man's mouth or writings in the Church of England; that
Every one ought so to assure himself. He that says Every one, excepteth
none, not genera singulorum, any kind of men; not singulos generum, no
particular man. Be you well in your wits to belly your self in belying of us,
and so soon to forget what you said but now?

For those that maintain, as you say the Protestants do, that some are
damned, and some are saved by an inevitable decree, cannot be of opinion,
except their brains were made like yours, of the pap of an apple, that Every
one ought infallibly to assure himself of his salvation; which implies a
contradiction unto that other Tenet. So that in one of these two, avoid it if
you can, you have belyed your self, to belly us.

And belly us you do. For, where do you find it thus concluded by the Church of
England? Answer on your Honesty, if you can: nay, belly them you do, that come
somewhat to your purpose; whose private opinions you make public decisions of
Faith. Bellarmine, your grand Dictator of controversies, from whose tables you
or your Informers have swept together all these scrappes and fragments, in your
bare abbridgement, proposes the assertion, honestly and truly in restrained
terms, of Vere fidelis and Iustificatus; That, not Every one, but Every true
believer, ought so to be assured; that no man is or can be so assured, but the
man that is justified before God. And that is not every one, as you belly them:
They teach not; that every man is justified.

This opinion is an inference upon that former, of Necessity of Election unto
life; and therefore those Protestants, who make not the former an Article of
their Creed, build upon no such infallibility unto themselves, nor prescribe it
to be believed of others: And those that so do, are not peradventure so
forlorn, as such a simple man as you may imagine, having Papists of reckoning
to bear them company, and Fathers, Reasons, and Scriptures therefore.

Ambrose Catharine was no Baby, as great a Stickler as any in the Council of
Trent; in his own opinion, superior to most; in all men's judgment, inferior
to none: who, for ought I know, went as far as any, in particular and
ordinary assurance of salvation, Before, In, After the Council of Trent,
against Dominicus a Soto, that maintained the contrary.

Silly man as you are, you can play in ambiguities, and talk at random freely,
when no man is near to oppose or contradict you. Your Masters can teach you,
that Assurance is twofold in this discourse: In respect of the Object, known,
believed; in regard of the Subject, believing, knowing: As man relieth upon his
Evidence; or as is his Evidence to rely upon. Evidence is divine or humane,
from God or Man. Evidence divine, if apprehended, is ever certain, and
infallible, both for the necessity of our object, God, in whom is nor change
nor shadow of change; as also for the manner of determining the Evidence,
whereby that is certain and necessary for effect, which is but contingent
otherwise in it self.

Evidence most clear, assurance most certain in it self, is contingent,
uncertain, as we may both use it or dispose it, that are here and there, of
and on: because man is irresolute in his ways, and unconstant in his works.
God is to us, as we are to him; known, as far as we can reach to apprehend
him.

Thus then for those men that assert infallibility of assurance: Their meaning
may be, for ought you know, I am sure, for ought you have said to the
contrary, that in regard of God, faithful and true; in respect of his
promises, Yea and Amen, every Child of God, renewed by Grace, may and ought
infallibly assure himself of his own Salvation procured in Christ: who yet,
in regard of his own Infirmity and Inconstancy, cannot choose but waver in his
assurance, and fear the worst, though he hope the best.

This was Austens resolution, if Bellarmine say right: Ex promissione Christi
potest vnusquisque, vt S. Augustinus recte docet, colligere se transusse a
morte ad vitam, et in iudicium non ventre: Every man may collect thus out of
the promise of Christ; but with what assurance, the question is: thereto Saint
Augustine does not proceed. Weresolue, says he there, that a man may collect
it by infallible assurance, and divine, if we look into the faithfulness of
him that promises: but if we consider our own disposition, we assign no
more but probable and coniectural assurance. This Bellarmine assigns. This is
enough. Faction may transport a man to wrangle for more; but when once they
join issue, the difference will not be much.

Much or little, great or small, thus or so, the Church of England is not
touched, that designeth neither. Ungrateful Colt you are, that spurn with
your heels at the breasts that gave you life; if not to God, yet to nature; and
impute more unto her, then she meant or intended to determine or maintain.

Indeed, contrary, as you belly them; consonant, Contrary to their own Bible.
agreeing, as they believe and maintain: They never went against these words
of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 9. 27. Lest, by any means, when I preached to others, I
my self should be a Castaway: But they say you mistake, and mis-apply those
words, and therein go against your own Directors. For, their Tenet is, that
Saint Paul was assured of his salvation: whether by ordinary divine Faith, or
extraordinary divine Revelation, I enquire not at present, nor much care. I
take, which you ignorantly do contradict, or unlearnedly do oppose. Secondly,
you oppose plain Scripture, in your Bibles: for, Saint Paul, a Jew by birth, as
Bellarmine resolves, semper se in numero Electorum point, cum de
Praedestinatione loquitur, Romans 8. 9, 11. and Ephesians. 1. accounts himself ever
in the Roll of Elect, wheresoever he mentions Predestination, as in the 8. 9,
11. chapters to the Romans, and 1. to the Ephesians. And yet say Therefore S.
Paul himself was not assured infallibly.
you, He was not assured infallibly. He dissembled therefore; thought one thing,
said another. So much is That Apostle beholding to you.

They never went against him that you intend, in those other two Texts of Romans
11. 20. Philip. 2. 12. For to him that continues faithful unto the end, is
appointed the reward of eternal life. And yet it is possible, and I could do
it, to puzzle such a Lozzell as your self, with expositions of those Texts that
might well put off your application: but I undertake no private opinions or
peculiar interest. I justify no man but the Church of England. That I can do
against your Betters: that I will perform against your self.

A cleanly Put-off, but too common, and therefore A point of doctrine so
improbable, that we will not labor to overthrow it by any further proof of
Fathers.
to be smiled-at for your poverty. You will not labor to overthrow it by
proof of Fathers. For why? Your good Patrons were themselves to-seek: and you
have but reuersions from other me^^ trenchers. If it were so improbable, as you
would have us suppose it, Catharine could not have maintained it as he has
done; nor put Dominicus a Soto, no Baby, so to it, as I know he has; nor
backed it with authorities of Austen and others. If so improbable, I marvel,
the Council of Trent did so hardly pass it: and two Legates of three, or
four at most, profess, it went too soon out of their fingers, and came to
resolution, before it had thoroughly been decided. What Spirit directed that
Council in this, where the Principal, in a sort, complains of surreption?
This I have from no Heretic: Catharine related it from their mouths. He, you
have heard, was an Archbishop of great name, and as learned as many were in
Trent. But I proceed.

XXIII.
That every one has not his Angell-keeper.

THis fellow, it seems, had but little emploiment, when he undertook to
abridge our Controversies; he is so apt and disposed to enlarge them, and set
them at odds, who would willingly have been quiet. Such Boutifeus as he is,
hinc ad malam crucem: quibus quieta mo^ere magna merces, that love to see the
waters troubled; and take the very questioning of things that might rest; a
sufficient hire to set them on work, that the Father of Division may applaude
them, and cry; Oh, well done. For, concerning Angell-keepers, what needed this
Thesis? A thing not defined in any Council; no not in that last Conuenticle of
Trent, because free, and in Opinion every way. The most that can be said
against Opposers, is that of Vasques, disputing this Divinity problem, Sine
graui temeritatis nota negare non licet: We cannot deny without very great
rashness, that every man has his Angell-keeper.

To this I subscribe with all my heart: so does the Church of England, for
ought I know. Indeed I do not find Decision or Resolution one way or other
in the Confession public of our Church. No more do I in any Council general
or particular to my remembrance, in any age. The reason is; no man did question
it, all held it a truth: and what needed decision where no scruple was? The
opinion of the ancient School, (the Fathers of the Church), is positive and
affi^matiue for Angel-Keepers: the saying of Saint Augustine is well known,
Parum est fecisse Angelos tuos, fecisti et custodes par^ulorum. It sufficed
not; my God, that thou made them thine Angels; thou createdst them keepers of
the little ones. The later School runs mightily the same way, though both
with some differences, How, and To Whom, and when deputed.

Before Origens time, (and he lived long within 300 years after Christ) as
himself relates, Tract. 5. upon Saint Matthew, there were two different
opinions in the Church: The former maintained, that only those had
Angell-keepers deputed unto them, who were of the number of Gods elect, from
the first instant of their Nativity: The other, that none but such holy men
indeed had Angel-guardians, but from the day of their Baptism and new Birth in
Christ, assigned them, not before, or from their Nativity.

This was the opinion of Antiquity, and no more; not as the Church of Rome
has enlarged it, that Every man living, good and bad, from the very first
instant of life, to the last gasp, has an Angel-guardian deputed unto him, as
I could make manifest, if need were: and Basil is punctual and express upon
the 33. Psalm. page 221. and the 48. Psalm. page 247. Nor does the Master of
Sentences otherwise conceive it then, Vt quisque Electorum habeat Angelum ad
sui protectum atque custodiam specialiter deputatum. In 2. d. 11. So that, hic
Magister non tenetur: our Roman Undertakers have forsaken not alone the
Fathers, but their own Doctor Peter Lumbard, to enlarge the point.

And yet this giddy Goose-gaggler must prate, he knows not what, against the
Church of England, concerning Angell-keepers in this point: who with as good
reason, and to as great purpose, might have stirred touching Guardians of
Kingdoms, Cities, Corporations, Elements, and ordering of the world; touching
the time when, the manner how, the extent how far, and many other like
speculations, all disputed of among Divines in the Church, none resolved of as
de fide by Divines for the Church. So that had we denied it, no such great
matter: for, salus Ecclesiae non vertitur in istis: the Church may subsist and
prosper without any such determined resolution. But, seeing we believe and
profess it too, his lips would be gagged, and his idle brains garbled at the
least, for charging us with such an untroth.

What is so contrary, can you tell, to the express words of our own Bible?
Not well, (...) wis. Yes, th^^ Contrary to express words of their own Bible,
Mat. 18. 10
they had not their Angell-keeper. For, Mat. 18. 10. we read the contrary; not
to that which we deny: for, we deny it not. If we should deny it, yet this
Text, thus cited, would not convince us: for, do you find Angelus cus^^s,
Keeper or Guardian there? Put on your considering Cap some what closer to your
Cockscomb. Angel I find, and their Angels I find; In Heaven their Angels
always behold the face of my Father which is in Heaven: but Angels and
Angell-keeper are two several words, importing several offices in those
heavenly Subsistences, as I conceive it. And therefore That cannot enforce
This, except there were no Angels, but Angels-Guardians in Heaven. Again, I
find Their Angels, by appropriation: but appropriation is in more respects than
one. Their friends and well-willers they might well be, though not Guardians
to attend them; their Guardians sometime, upon special imploiments; their
Patrones assigned extraordinarily in Acts of Gods providence, so many, so
diverse, especially on parties of their allotment.

But I take not advantage as I might: for, I admit the Tenet concerning
Keeping-Angels, though untowardly maintained by this poor Catholic Companion.
This I question; the Object of Protection, Therefore they had their
Angellkeeper.
at randon specified in the Gag. Their and They, who were those They? Every
one, say you, if you say what you should. So teach your new Masters, that never
so learned it of their Forefathers. In the now Doctrine of the Roman
Schools, Every man living has his Angell-keeper, Jew, Gentile, Turk,
Christian, Pagan, Epicure, Atheist, Antichrist himself, and peradventure
devil and all. For Every one, in your opinion, has his Angell-keeper, without
restraint, or limitation. Are the words of our Bible express for this? I
cannot find it in any of mine; the contrary rather. They are Little-ones who
have this Guard assigned. Their Angels puts us back to them, formerly
mentioned and infisted upon. If Little ones; then not Greatones, then not all;
and certainly not all, though Great ones: for these Little ones are Great
indeed. Great with God, high in his books, though Little in the world, two
ways; through contempt of others, and their own account, out of Humility and
Opinion. Therefore now what? Every man has his Angell-keeper? No, some have,
and not all. Therefore you are a blunderer in this Text, of as little
understanding or less in that which follows.

Psalm. 91. 11, 12. The Prophet assures thus from God: He shall give his
Angels charge concerning thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. They shall bear
thee up in their hands, lest thou dash thy foot against a stone. But this Text
will not reach unto every man, Simon Magus, Mahomet, or such like, but either
restrainedly unto Christ Jesus incarnate in our flesh, in all things, sin
only excepted; tempted as we are, and subject to infirmities: and so Irenaeus,
Eusebius, Augustine, and others do expound it; as did also the devil in his
combat with Christ; and then, it is not to purpose: for though it be granted,
which your Schools dispute, that Christ incarnate had his Angell-keeper, a
thing absurd, injurious, idle, if not impious, yet it goes no farther but to
one particular, and him only, as Head of the Church; and will confine this
Keeperage to the Church. Or it may be understood more enlargedly, of all those
that it belongs unto; that is, Those that dwell under the shadow of the most
High, that have made the Lord their refuge, even the most High God their
habitation; that is, of them in the Church, at least, if not only of The
righteous in the Church: as, after Ignatius, the major part of Authors have
expounded it. Take it how you will, this way or that, it proves not, that
Every one, in general terms, has his Angell-keeper: but the Protestants
Tenent, Some have, only, and no more.

Saint Cyril of Alexandria is not ad oppositum: he This very passage Saint
Cyril of Alexandria, Lib. 4. con. Julian. applies to our Angel-keeper.
does apply it to our Angell-keeper. And let him in good time, a Gods name so
apply it. I know no reasonable man but will embrace his application, and be
glad to be assured of such a Guardian. But that Our Angel, Sir Gagger, in your
language, unto whom, I pray, is it applied? To John a- N^ke and John a- Style
with you. To every man in your Ashdod language, Antichrist and All, you cannot
avoid it: for Antichrist with you, is a singular man: therefore, if Every man
have his Angell-keeper, Antichrist, a man, must have his; avoid this if you
can. Now see if S. Cyril applies this very passage as you would have him.

See then how handsomely your Texts and Proposition hang together. That is
conceived in these general terms, Every man has his Angell-keeper, in
opinion of your Masters (for I think you cannot tell what they teach, nor your
self what to hold), the explication is for singuligenerum, Every man living
upon Earth. The proofs out of Scripture are restrained, and speak only for
some men, a Peculiar People; the Righteous only, the sons of God, at least,
that live within the pale of the Church, and have interest in the Covenant of
Grace. Therefore, though They had their Angels Guardians, yet it follows not,
All and Every one has so.

Go and see, good Reader, those places, more; not Proofs for Every man's
Angell-keeper, but as plain See more, Acts 12. 14. 1. Cor. 11. 10.
Evidences of this fellows witless allegations. For first, those Angels
mentioned, 1. Cor. 11. 10. may, for ought he knows out of the Text, be other
Angels extraordinarily sent. It is not said, They were His or Theirs, but
indeterminately, The Angels. Therefore ought a woman to have power upon her
head, because of the Angels. Secondly, They may be Angels of the Church in
general, and not peculiarly of that man or this. Thirdly, Whosoever, or
whose-soeuer those Angels were, we find them not in the Wilderness, among the
Tents of Cedar, or at Babylon; but in Sion, in the Church, the Chapel, in the
Chancell; not only spiritually, in the Church of the Redeemed, but materially,
in the place of Divine Service, upon an Holiday; In locosancto, action sacra.
So that these are no Rangers amongst the beasts of the Forest: they have their
several walks in the Church-pale.

That Angel, Acts 12. 14. is One, a special one, an Angell-keeper indeed,
Leiger with Saint Peter in his life; but yet such an Angel, as for whom Every
man is never theneere. He enlarges not the Guardianship unto All, but
confineth it unto Some; A man in the Church, a member of the Church. Nay, say
you, The Church in him, provided for him, built upon him, committed to him.
Saint Peter's Angel, that great Apostle, of him speaks Rhode, it is his Angel.

Thus we have seen all we are likely to see. The poor man can afford us no
Fathers here; his reading, it seems, would not reach unto that, and his good
Masters were not at hand to help him. I could furnish him, if he would thank
me, to better purpose, then his Scriptures have: but want, I suppose, he will
rather, then be beholding to a Protestant. To conclude, we will not deny him,
that Every man has his Angell-keeper; but within the Church at least, not
rambling abroad. Are they not all of them ministering spirits, sent forth to
minister? To whom? where? Not to every man under heaven, but with restriction,
Who shall be heirs of salvation; In offensive sort against their foes; in
defensive manner for their good. Thus the Scriptures speak, and no otherwise:
thus the Fathers taught, and no otherwise. Not Every man, but Every Christian
man, at his Birth, or at his Baptism, has his Guardian Angel deputed to him.

XXIIII.
That the holy Angels pray not for us.

WIth Ly and all, Sir Gagger. Not pray for us? Now, I pray you, who says so?
No man will say or think so, that believes in his Creed, The communion of
Saints, and can tell what connection of the two parts of the Church of the
Redeemed there is, the one militant here in Earth; the other Regnant and
Triumphant in Heaven. Now a principal part of that Communion and Society which
they have with us, is, to recommend our state and necessities unto God our
Father. To which end God Almighty has, as we profess in our Collect upon
Michaelmas Day, appointed the Service of men and Angels in a wonderful sort.

But somewhat there was, or the man mistook. Their Praying for us may be
considered two ways; either in General, or in Particular. For the peace of
Sion: the prosperity of Jerusalem: the state and condition of the Church
militant in earth; thus in general. For Manasses in Captivity, Hezechiah
beleaguered by Senacherib. For this man or that man in particular, upon
special motives and occasions: and that likewise two ways; either ordinarily,
and of common course; or specially, by Delegation in extraordinary service.

Now this Proposition, Holy Angels pray for us, does not limit nor explain the
terms, but is ambiguous; as this peddler most an end frames all in his Pack,
to calumniate, and to deceive. Whether All Angels pray for All men; or All for
some men; or some for all; or some for some; who can tell, that was not of
counsel to his pen and purpose? As it lies lurking in fraudulent terms, I
can answer both ways, and contradictory ways. First, Holy Angels pray not
for us; and truly too. Nor shall this Goose hiscere against my answer, viz.
Not every holy Angel in special, for every man in particular; Not at all
times, upon any or all occasions. I can also answer, and truly too; Holy Angels
pray for us. And so this Gagger may go shoo the Goose. That is, It is a
principal part of their performance in Heaven, as they magnify their Maker
eternally, so to recommend unto Him, incessantly, the Estate and good being of
the Church of the Redeemed, as yet in great Tribulations. I add yet further,
At all times, some of them pray for the particular estate of some private Men,
Cities, States, Societies or Countries: And the Holy Angell-keepers, for their
special charges commended unto their trust by God, at sometime, some of them
for all, for some, upon special occasion, employment, or designation, as
extraordinarily they may and do undertake.

Now to come home to your loose and laxe affirmation: Contrary to express
words in your own Bibles, Zach. 1. 9, 10, 11.
Your express words in our Bible are not so express, as to speak to your
purpose: that of Zachar. 1. 9. 10. runs thus: O Lord of hosts, how long will thou net have mercy upon Jerusalem, and on the Cities of Judah, against which
thou have had indignation these 70 years? For, it follows not, because this
one Angel prayed for Jerusalem in Captivity, any Angel does pray for any or
every man. This was extraordinary: your supposall must be ordinary. This was
occasional, for his employment: your Angels must not be so allotted. Happily
this was their Angell-Guardian; Michael, Prince of the Synagogue. Plead thus
for Angell-keepers, none will gayn-say you. They pray for us, no question at
all. This was in a peculiar case, for restoring Jerusalem and Judah, according
to promise, in appointed time, 70 years designed by the Prophets. So the
question was idle like your self, Whether Now what, I pray you, is a prayer,
if this be not?
this were not a Prayer? The question well ordered, should have been, Whether
All Angels, at all times, do not in particular pray for every particular man,
as this Angel here did for Sion? To the former we answer positiuely, Yea;
to the second, negatiuely, No. Nor can this instance euict that.

Tobie 12. 12. Raphael tells Tobias thus: When thou did pray, and Sara thy
daughter-in-law, I did bring the remembrance of your prayers before the Holy
One. First, what an Addle-head are you, that trump in the Protestants way with
this Testimony, which your Masters can tell you (for, happily your ignorance
knows not so much) they esteem of no otherwise than a Talmudicall Tale?
Secondly, how can you accord this Tale with your own Tenants? Raphael both
speaks here as their Angell-keeper, and carries himself so in that whole
negotiation. Raphael was of the highest Hierarchy; next to Michael and Gabriel,
in your account. Your selves teach, that Angels of that Hierarchy are not
Custodes, nor employed unto men: but all employed ordinarily, are of the
inferior and lowest rank. Riddle me, riddle me: what is this? You told us of
one that could untie knots: let him untie this, or cut it in pieces; for, it
troubles us not a little.

That Angel, Revel. 8. 4. from whose hands the smoke of incense ascended,
which is expressed to have been the prayers of Saints, who was he? can you tell
me? whether the Angel of the Covenant, Christ Jesus himself; or Michael, the
Protector of the Church, do you know? or some other Angel, are you assured?
Was his employment ordinary or extraordinary, can any tell? Mystical, you may
be sure, this Passage is: and can you draw Arguments from such Testimonies?
Your great understanding does happily think, Yea: the common resolution is for,
Nay. But howsoever the prayers of all Saints, that is, of the Church, were
offered to God in the hands of an Angel, their Mediator, therefore All Angels
pray for all men; or some Angels for some men ordinarily? I deny the necessity
of this doctrine. When you say more, you shall hear further; but much more, I
believe, you cannot: for, you fail of your wonted Cue, See more, and See
Fathers that affirm it: neither Scripture nor Fathers here.

In Conclusion, from whence drew you forth this imputation, that The holy
Angels pray not for us? For, Bellarmine, your Polstar and Cynosura in point of
Controversy, does confess, It is not denied, that Sancti, and so Angel orant
pro nobis, saltem in genere secundum Scriptur as. And those that assent, as
most do, a^ the Church of England does, unto Angell-keepers, will not stand
with you for it, that orant pro nobis, not only in genere, but in particulari.
Your desire is only for private advantage, to keep a Faction on foot: and
therefore you flutter in dubious terms; Holy Angels pray not for us: which is,
or true, or false, as it may be taken.

XXV.
That we may not pray unto them.

PRay to them, if you like it; or to Saint Loiola, if you please: we cannot
hinder you from playing the fools, and exposing your selves to be laughed-at
for your labors. I say, as Joshua sometime said, in a case not very much
unlike, Call upon what Saints or Angels you will: go serve Baal or Astaroth, if
you fancy it. We in the Church of England will call unto the Lord of Heaven
and Earth, by immediate address, without intercession of Mediators; having
warrant most sufficient, by direction and inuitation, Psalm 50. 15. Call upon
me in the time of trouble; so I will bear thee, and deliver thee. Do you
know any man so unadvised, that will go about, when he may well go straight?
or will sue for assistance, and that also uncertain, when he needs none?
Perhaps there is no such great impiety in saying, Sancte Laurenti, ora pro me:
but in my opinion, till I am better informed, it is grand foolery, to say,
Sancta Catharina, ora pro me; where I may say, cum effectu, unto God himself,
Miserere mei, Deus: Lord, have mercy upon me. If you might have access unto
his Holiness at pleasure, would you use the mediation of Cardinal Barberino,
if there be any such, though the Pope's Nephew? I suppose not: if you did, I
say no more, but The Vicar of Saint Fools be your ghostly father.

But our Bible is against our Doctrine. In good Contrary to their own Bible.
time: how so? For, Jacob says, Genesis 48. 16. The Angel which redeemed me
(you read, delivers me) from all evil, bless these Lads: where, first, you
belly your own reading. You read, Angelus qui er uit me. Is that delivers, in
the present Tense, in your Grammar? It is to all, but you, in the Time past,
that has delivered. Now, what such difference, that it should be noted,
betwixt delivered and redeemed? indeed, that has taken me out. Secondly, read
it how you will, it is not to purpose. You propose it thus; That we may not:
you prove the lawfulnes, quia factum: so you may prove theft, murder, and what
not? It is a private fact of Jacob, there related by Moses: and the Acts, no
not of the best men, are no rules of actions unto others. We should live by
Precept, not by Practice. Our Savior said not, What see thou? but, What
read thou? But thirdly, I will take no such exception: I admit it ruleable
every way. Jacob did well: we may do so as Jacob did, and yet not pray to
Angels.

Therefore, fourthly, I answer contradictorily to That this was spoken to a
true Angel, and not to Christ.
your inference. This is not spoken to, but of an Angel; secondly, not of a
created Angel, but of Christ. Thirdly, Christ is a true Angel. This Fellow
must go learn to speak, before he write; what to put in Print, before he
publish it; to understand Divinity, before he babble in it. Is Christ an
Angel, and not a true one? Is he a false or a counterfeit Angel? in
appearance, in collusion, not in substance? Who ever heard such Stuff from a
Priest's lips? Christ is an Angel, not created, a true Angel, of an higher
alloy, Prince of Angels, as of men; a mighty Angel, The Angel of the Covenant.

And this was spoken of him by the Patriarch Jacob: The God of Bethel, as he
is called, that spoke with Jacob in Bethel, and met him there, who wrastled
with him, who blessed him, who told not his name, being secret; spoken of him,
by commemoration; not unto him, by invocation: That Angel which delivered me,
bless these.

The man had, I know not how, some intimation from some other, that we would
reply, that this Angel Basil. l. 3. c. Eunomium. and S. Chrysostom. ho. 7. in laud.
S. Pauli, and upon 1. of Col. and S. Hier. upon 66 of Esaias.
here specified, as indeed we believe it, was Christ himself, and no created
Angel: and therefore, to gag our mouths, he preuents our answer; that in the
opinion of Saint Basil, Chrysostom, and Hierome, it was not Christ, but a
created Angel: and therefore who for shame can say he prayed not to him?

Wisely, I warrant you; as if it could not be avoided, but he was then prayed
unto, because in the opinion of these men, he was a created Angel: which is
no consequence, except it were granted, that none but created Angels were to
be prayed unto, on any hand, at any time, upon any occasion. Now, who for
shame will thus reason, to shame himself, but he, that either is past shame,
or through ignorance not capable of it? It is good to uncase such a
Mountebanke, that he may be known what he is. But I go from him, to this, the
point in question.

These Fathers opined, That Angel was not Christ, but a created Angel: and what
then? As if as many were not of a contrary opinion. But were it not so, no more
can be collected then this, that in some men's opinion Jacob spoke of a created
angel; and thence, in some men's opinion, not by any express words of our
Bibles, which we were promised to have, this was not Christ. Which if it were
so, as this Gagger can never prove it so, I will undertake against him if he
dare: yet we answer first, Then it was Jacobs Guardian at least, as Tostatus,
and Jesuits that I have seen, imagine. Now the case of Angels-keepers, in
point of Aduocation and Invocation, is much different from other Angels not
Guardians; as being continually attendant, always at hand, though inuisibly: and
therefore though we might say, Sancte Angele Custos, ora pro me; it follows
not, we may say, Sancte Gabriel, ora pro me.

But lastly, here is no Invocation nor Intercession, nor praying unto any
Angel Custos or not Custos, ordinary or extraordinarily attendant. It is a
desire directed by Jacob unto God, to send his Angel for that service and
employment, to bless and keep those Lads. It is no address unto that Holy
Angel, whosoever he was. Which being so, and so far from express words
pretended, were not this fellow past all shame, he Which being so, who for
shame can say, He prayed not unto him?
would shame to say, Jacob prayed unto an Angel. But of this, and this Question
elsewhere more at large. Thither gang this Gaggler, and I shall gag him, I am
sure, in this point of praying unto Angels and Saints.

XXVI.
That the Angels cannot help us.

Seal up thy Lips for ever, thou lying tongue. Said ever any Protestant,
Angels cannot help us? Name me the man that may thus be blotted, or hot
burning coals be thy portion, thou Liar, and misborne El^e of the Father of
lies. It is contrary indeed to express words of our own Bibles, not alone in
the places rightly produced, but many more; and more to purpose then some of
these are; contrary to sense, reason, belief, and experience; contrary to our
teaching, our meaning our dreaming. We believe and confess of Holy Angels,
They can, will, have, do help us, ordinarily, extraordinarily: toties quoties,
they are employed, as the mighty Executioners of the Almighties will, for his
servants, against his foes.

And yet see the poverty of this fellows undertakings! He is to prove, that
Angels can help us. His first proof is, Daniel 10. 13. Michael, one of the
chief Princes, came to help me. I question not the meaning of that Text. I
yield it. But I marvel, this fellow can set it down, Angels help us; and
come in with this proof, which should be express; and therefore name Angels;
where Princes, not Angels are remembered; and so remembered, as sensu primo, they
may be taken for some temporal Potentate, some of the Satrapaes of the King
of Persia. But the Prince of the Kingdom of Persia withstood me twenty days:
but lo, Michael, one of the chief Princes, came to help me: and I remained
there by the Kings of Persia: are these words express, for Angels helping?
They are, I grant, for their help; but far from express, which are so
mystical.

That of Acts 12. in Saint Peter's case, is indeed express: and nothing can be
more plain, for proof, then that place, which represents a performance of
that delegation, He has given his Angels charge concerning thee: a thing
never questioned, denied, doubted, dreamed of by any Protestant, that I know.
To prove himself an honest man, it were good this accuser would name the man.
But somewhat there is in it, though he cannot tell what. We deny to address
our selves in time of need, unto Angels for mediation, or intercession; and we
do deny it, because we hold it needless, unnecessary, as no part of our duty,
as vnbehoouefull, and to no purpose; because we are persuaded, that ordinarily,
in every exigent, at all times, no Angel, not attendant without remove, can
take notice of us, understand our state instantly, pity us in misery, and so
relieve us. This is not for any inualidity of power, nor for auersnes of will.
If they know it, they are willing; if willing, they are sufficient. The want
proceeds not from them: it is from disability in ourselves, to acquaint them
ordinarily with our states: which needs we must do, if we will look that
they should help us. This is that which this fellow should pitch upon; but then
he were gone, and not able to say bough to a Goose: now he has somewhat to say
at least, and make a show amongst the Gaggle, though it be with a loud lie,
that They cannot help us, as we say.

And yet we have a show of Fathers, and are sent to see, first, Justin Martyr,
Apol. 2. and no more, C. W. See Fathers that affirm what has been said
touching Angels.
B. This man's founder has these words, The host of the good Angels we worship
and adore. Which if it were so, is not concerning any thing that has been
said touching Angels, by this Gaggler hitherto. But C. W. B. had it from
Bellarmine: and he followed, I know not what translation. The Text of Justin
Martyr, page 137 of Robert Steuens edit. in Greek is this: (...). We confess,
says that Father, that we are Atheists in regard of any worship that we give
unto those esteemed Gods; but not so in respect of the true God: him, and his
Son that came from him, and has taught both us these things, and also the
Host of good Angels, that are different from the other bad that followed him,
and were likened unto him, as also the Spirit of prophetical predictions, we
worship and adore, honoring them in verity and in truth. This is the Text of
Justin, meant by this man, word for word related in his own language, as he
did write, and expressed thereout punctually. And now Sir, what advantage from
Justin Martyr? What have your Proselytes seen in him? Your Translator,
Perionius, mistook his Author, and Bellarmine was glad to make advantage of it:
and your Instructor took it as he found it. As for your self, I think you are
innocent of all. Otherwise then so, it cannot be taken. For, though we should
yield it, Angels are to be worshipped; yet not with divine worship your selves
confess; with such as is due unto God alone. But if any worship be given them
here, it is, point par point, that which is due to God. See what it is to
blunder so.

This was for worshipping of Angels. S. Ambrose succedeth in his Book, de
Viduis, for praying unto Angels. So the man flits to and fro: Angels are to be
beseeched, who are deputed our Guardians; therefore not all Angels, but only
Guardians. And is this to purpose; Angels pray for us; or We may pray to them
indefinitely? But I let the rest alone. I have answered elsewhere these and
other places, and whatsoever other, beside these, have hitherto come to my
knowledge from our opposites in the point of invocation.

XXVII.
That no Saint, deceased, has afterward appeared to any upon earth.

I Do not believe you, that you can name For, some such my self have met with.
any Protestant that will defend this, That no Saint, deceased, has appeared
after death. Your word is no Gospel. It is a Catholic Trick now-a-daies, to
cog and lie, to cast any aspersion upon Protestants. If you have met with some
such, it had been well you had named us the men. Your luck and experience has
been better than mine: I never yet met with any such Deniers. Perhaps, in your
ranging up and down, you have met with some ignorant and simple people, that,
hearing your talk of Apparitions, thought you coniured; and, not knowing the
meaning of the word, would not believe you upon any hand: and, as your custom
is, you publish it for the doctrine of the Protestants, that No man ever
appeared, no not extraordinarily, after death.

But to purpose. We may conceive your meaning two ways; either as in common
course of kind, or else upon extraordinary course. Apparitions have been, and
may be; but, as works of wonder, dispensations of the right hand of the most
High. Apparitions are not ordinary, nor of common dispensation. And infinite
impostures, iuggling tricks, and collusions, have been obtruded at all times
upon the world, especially within the last 500 years, by coozening and
cheating knaves, under veil and covert of Apparitions; principally, to delude
poor superstitious people, with that opinion of Purgatory, to make merchandise
of the pardons. But why not as probable, that some Saints have appeared from
Heaven, as some Popes have come from Hell? Both at Gods good pleasure
extraordinarily, who does all things as he will in Heaven and Earth. What, if
The souls of the Righteous be in the hands of God; are his hands so shortened,
that no where but in Heaven they can be in his hands? God may send them, no
doubt, extraordinarily. No cessation of pain is to the one; no impairing of
happiness, unto the other: they carry their heaven and hell about with them
wheresoever they be. So that, in no diversity of opinion, we might well
passe-by your Texts to no purpose.

And indeed to no purpose: for, Mat. 17. 3. we read, There appeared unto them,
Moses and Elias talking with them: which apply to your Thesis, No Saint,
deceased, has appeared unto any; and advise how handsomely it agrees thereto.
For, do you not know, or have you heard of it, that Moses by some Authors is
reputed not dead? as by Hillary, Can. 20. upon Matthew; by Saint Ambrose, in his
second Book of Cain and Abel; but translated by God into Paradise, as Helias
was afterward: asserted of late by no Babies of your own; Ioh. Arboreus, lib.
11. Theosophias, and Ambrose Catharine upon Genesis 3? If that be so, you may go
seek a new Text, to prove apparitions of dead men by. It will be answered,
These were not dead. For, if Moses be living, Elias is sure: you hold him yet
alive; and why not both alive, seeing both must come, and oppose against
Antichrist, and be slain by him before Doomsday? Mend your conclusion, and
make it thus: Therefore Saints have appeared to some on earth; and Therefore
Saints deceased have appearea to some on earth
I will warrant, no man will quarrel your assertion.

But your second Text of Mat. 27. 52. comes home to your mind. They were
Saints indeed, deceased, but restored to life; and peradventure unto eternal
life, in bodies as well as souls. They appeared unto many; the Text is plain:
and I believe, you never met with any such, that, when you showed this Text,
would deny their appearing; which is express. And yet it is not well applied
by you: for, your apparitions, as I conceive it (inform me, if I do mis-take
you), are not in bodies restored to life, or raised up out of the dust, but in
bodies assumed, or some other way. These men appeared in their own bodies,
which were laid into, and rose up out of the graves; and so, not very fitting
your purpose.

As for Onias the high Priest, who being dead, appeared unto Judas Macchabeus,
let him justify it that has written it. If he report the story as it was;
very good; it may be done. I see nothing to the contrary; if not true, no great
hurt at all: your puling-whining souls in Purgatory, get nothing by the
bargain, That some Saints deceased, have appeared. For these were in Heaven,
of which there is constat for their appearing: at least prove you they were in
Purgatory, to which your apparitions tend. But the truth is, there are many
Schoens and Parasangs betwixt those wo^drous works of God, and those iuggling
tricks in the Roman Church; devised only to make the Priests pot to seethe,
and fill the Popes purse by collusion.

XXVIII.
That the Saints deceased know not what passes in the Earth.

Speak out, and speak plain. What mean you by what passes? All things that
are done on earth? in all places? at al times? by all persons? ordinarily? of
themselves? or some saints? some things in some places, at some times? by some
persons? extraordinarily? by revelation, or some such like means? No
Protestant will deny the one: no Papist has hitherto dared affirm the other.
Dare you abide by it? if you do, take up the bucklers, and see what will
follow. Your general position will bear either interpretation. We affirm,
that all Saints departed know something on Earth; as namely, The being of a
Church: That some Saints departed know something here done extraordinarily,
by revelation, intimation or otherwise.

As your position is captiously put down: so is your first proof from the
Text of Luke 16. 29. Sophistically affixed. There Abraham knew, that there were
Moses and the Prophets books in earth, which he himself had never seen.
Indeed Abraham was dead long before Moses wrote. And after Moses wrote, till
the time that Abraham answered thus (if it were an History, and not a Parable),
were many mo hundred years. In all which time, no Protestant will deny, but
Abraham might know when he was in Paradise, that God had left such books unto
Israel. Now this is not ad idem, nor proves the question: For, your position
is, what passes, not what has passed: your proof is for, what has passed;
and not, for what passes. A maine difference betwixt these two. I cannot tell
what you intend to write next: but I can tell, you have played the Goose in your
Gag: and hereafter when your worthy work puts forth head to view, I shall
be able to say what Animal it is. Abraham knew some 2000 years after his death.
Put the case so, that Moses and the Prophets were in the hands of the Jews,
and directors of them in their course unto God: therefore Abraham knew what
Rabbi Gamaliel taught Saint Paul such a day, in his Auditory. Is this a good
consequence now in your Logic? A coozener, a cobbler might reason so. Yet this
is your reason, cap, apee. I answer directly: First, Abraham's case is not
every man's. Secondly, Abraham's knowledge might be extraordinary: our Quaere
is of ordinary knowledge. Thirdly, Abraham might know in long tract of time,
which he could not so at an instant; and we make question of present
knowledge: for, that is required unto your purpose only. That which S.
Augustine witnesses, we deny not: that which we deny, he witnesses not. He
witnesses there, that Abraham At Saint August. witnesses, Lib. de cura
mortis. cap. 14.
knew of Moses. He tells not how he came to know of Moses; nor what Abraham
or Moses can know touching us.

In the next, as much ridiculous. John 5. 45, our Savior there tells the
Jews thus: Do not think, that I will accuse you to my Father. There is one
that accuses you, even Moses, in whom you trust. Upon citing this Text, it may
seem, the man was some what conscious, that it was not (...), as it should be,
express; that the Thesis was, of knowing what is done upon earth; the proof,
of accusing unto God in heaven. Therefore, to help it, we have an argument, a
consequence inferred upon that Antecedent thus: How could Moses, dead 2000
years before, accuse those that were living, if the Saints deceased, know not
what passes in the earth? If so; then take heed that Moses accuse not you for
a fool, as very an one, as ever went without the privilege of a babble; who so
childishly imagine, that God set in judgment, the Jews were arraigned, every
mothers son. And Moses did, as the devil with Job, came and accused them,
every one in particular, of every crime committed: for so it must be.
Doubtless Moses had work enough to do; especially in those last, worst,
tumultuous times. You should have let us known, who was of their Council, who
their Advocate against Moses; and whether it came to a demurrer or not.

But good man Wiseacres, learn of your Masters, to take things aright. By
Moses, is not understood his person, then in Paradise, dead or alive; but Moses
writings, the Law of Moses, that in which the Jews did so much trust. So it is
not personal: it is isntrumental: his writings accuse you, and will condemn
you. So Caietan, Maldonate, and who not? or if personal, Moses himself, why
then thus they take it: It is his office, it will be performed by him at the
Resurrection, and day of Doom: Moses then will stand up and accuse you. Any
way take it, it cannot conclude, that Saints in Heaven do know, by any
ordinary course, what passes continually upon earth. What Saints are said to
know, and what not; how many ways, to what purposes and ends, I could let the
Reader see, and gagge up this gabbler for ever: but I have don it already
elsewhere, in that point to which this tends of Invocation: of which
notwithstanding I must say some what here: for it follows next in order.

XXIX.
That they pray not for us.

WE say not so. You either mistake us, or belly us. The Saints pray for us all
in general; all Saints for us; or every Saint for us: that is, for the Church
militant on earth. You shall find, if you enquire, that the Caluinists
themselves, as you call them, or Puritans, hold this.

I add, The Saints pray for us in particular; some particular Saint, for some
particular man, in some special cause, some time. And to come more
particularly to it: The Question is not, whether Saints departed do pray unto
God: that is confessed on both sides; all Saints do, by prayer, intercession,
supplication, as well as thanksgiving. It is confessed they pray for others,
and for themselves Nor can any be so senseless as to say they pray for them
selves.
too, by all but this addle-pate, who prates he knows not what, and measures
other men's senses by his own senslesnesse. It is evident they do, Apocal. 6.
10. How long O Lord holy and true! do thou not judge and avenge our blood on
them that dwell upon the earth? The fellow never heard, that the souls of the
Righteous pray for their consummation in glory: such an infant is he in these
speculations which are so common.

Again, it is not denied they pray for us, in regard of that Communion of
Saints, whereof this holy performance is a principal and main part; for us in
general, out of fellow-feeling and commiseration of our miseries which
themselves have tasted in this valley of tears; for their friends in
particular, whom they remember, whose state they recommend unto God in prayer;
they having lost no endowment in their Soul in Glory, which did accrue unto
them upon Earth. And as for Love and Charity unto their brethren, which makes
them so forward to do them good, that is exceedingly enlarged there. Monica,
Saint Augustine's Mother, for instance, departing this life before her Son, I
make no doubt, being seate^ in those Heavenly Palaces, might and did remember
her son on earth, recommend his estate unto our blessed Savior, pray for him
in general; his good Constancy, Perseverance, and Confirmation in the course
of his Christian Profession and Priestly Function; and not only so, but might
remember him in some particular occasions, occurrences and actions, with which
in her lifetime she was acquainted. And yet Saint Augustine had nor could have
any warran^ at all to pray unto her for her remembrance of him, or assistance
in things that fell out afterward, after her death; because there was not, nor
yet could be, any ordinary course certain, whereby he might acquaint her with
his particulars after her death: which is all in all for invocation.

To come home to the point. It should not be put, as here it is, that they pray
for us: for, without question, they do; and it is confessed by all
Protestants, that they do pray for us in general, all, without limitation; in
particular, in some cases. But it should have been specified, when, for what,
by what means, and how, they do, and do not, pray for us: but of these, and
such like necessary Inferences as these, this Dreamer thought not, or else
would take no notice. So hard a thing is it, to know or set down the state of
a Controversy right: so unwilling, at least, men are to come to terms of
commerce, and some agreement, who mind nothing but faction and disturbance.

This being premised, we proceed to see how contrary the Doctrine of the
Protestants is unto their Contrary to their own Bible.
own Bible. Apoc. 5. 8. our Bibles read thus: The 24 Elders fell down before
the Lamb, having every one of them Harps, and golden Vials full of Odors, which
are the Prayers of Saints. Here 24 Elders are represented; but, in a vision.
Then who told this Smatterer in divinity, who they were? It is expressed, that
these Odors were the Prayers of Saints: but is it expressed, who they were that
presented them? or what Prayers? or what Saints? The Prayers of Saints on
Earth. But then, except a man be a Saint on Earth, Intercession unto, Mediation
of Saints in Heaven will do him no good at all. Presented by Saints in Heaven:
but, Quo warranto? For, not because this vision was in Heaven represented,
therefore the Action and Actors intended, were also heavenly; and the thing
represented, no where done but there. Such obscure Prophesies, not yet
understood, that you can say, by any, are never assumed for Proofs in point of
Controversy, but of men that uphold a desperate forlorn cause, for want of
cleerer Proofs.

For the Text, Irenaeus inclines to take it of those Prayers which the Church
of GOD offreth upon Earth, lib. 4. cap. 33: Quoniam ergo Nomen Filij proprium
Patris est, and in Deo omnipotenti, per Iesum Christum offert Ecclesia, been
ait secundum vtraque: in omni loco incensum offertur Nomini meo, and
sacrificium purum. Incensa autem Johannes in Apocalypsi, Orationes ait esse
Sanctorum: which is again repeated by that mvsticall Divine, Apocal. 8. And the
smoke of the incense, which are the Prayers of Saints, went up from the hand of
the Angel before God. No more is collected, or can be, from these Texts, but
this, that Prayer is compared to Incense; according unto that in the Psalm, Let
their Prayer be set forth in thy sight like incense; and let the lifting-vp of
their hands be as the evening sacrifice. But, concluded it cannot be from
these mystical Visions, that these Saints prayed unto that Angel; that the 24
Elders represented the Angels; that those Prayers were addressed from men upon
Earth; that the Vision expressed a thing ordinary, and done; that any man of
discretion or understanding in Divinity or common reason, would have gone in
hand to have proved a thing controuerted and obscure, by that which is much
more obscure, as this Fellow does.

In Macchab. 2. 15. 14. thus we read: This is a lover of the Brethren, who
prays much for the people, and for the holy City; to wit, Ieremias the
Prophet: and from thence the conclusion is, Therefore they pray for us. To
weet, you should have added, the Prophets or the Jews. Indeed in a Dream,
worthy (no doubt) to be believed, verse 11. For, so Judas dreamed, and you
believe it; and draw us a Conclusion from your Dream thus: Therefore they,
Jeremy and Onias, if you will, pray for us: In a Dream too. So the Doctrine is
a Dream; the proof, a Dream: a Dreamer related it: a Dreamer recorded it; and a
Dreamer does tell and believe it. So, Qui amant, ipsi sibi somnia fingunt: men
are apt to believe Dreams, when the Dream is for their purpose. Admit it no
Dream: let it be a story, and res gesta. Jeremy might well pray for them in
general, as having not forgot them in Heaven, whom he did know upon earth. In
some particular he might, either by extraordinary relation, or Divine
Revelation, or howsoever; and yet you be far enough from building your
imagined device from thence; that therefore we may pray unto them: if yet you
were able to make it good, how Jeremy then in Limbo (for this was before Christ
harrowed hell, and therefore far enough from God), could pray for the Jews,
as he is said, who might as soon and as well pray for themselves, as he might,
and were in possibility to be heard as soon as he.

For the Text of Ier. 15. 1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before me, yet my
mind could not be toward this people, I have acquainted you with what I
think thereof elsewhere. You add out of Bellarmine, touching Hierom in his
Comment. upon that place: and Saint Gregory 9. of his Morals, 12. that they
gather, how Moses and Samuel, after their death, both could and did sometimes
pray for the same people. Bellarmine adds Chrysostom. How is he omitted?
Did you forget him? for you looked upon all alike, secure what any of them, or
all of them said, more then was tendered to your hands.

First, Hierome in his Comment. says thus, nor more, nor less: Hos enim
legimus, irae Domini pro populo restitisse, et iam impendeniem auertisse
sententiam. Etsi, inquit, illi steterint, vel in conspectu meo, vel contra me,
quorum vni dixit Deus, Dimitte me, et percutiam populum istum: tamen non
exaudiam, quoniam consummata sunt scelera populi delinquentis: For we read,
that these men, in the peoples case, and their defense, opposed against the
wrath of God, and put by the sentence ready to be put into execution.
Although, says he, that these men shall stand, either in my presence, or
against me, unto one of which God sometime said, Let me alone, and I will smite
this people: yet I will not hear, because the sins of this wicked people are
consummate. Now, from which of these words does your wisdom collect, that
Hierome made his conclusion, that Moses and Samuel, being both dead, could
yet, and also did, pray for that people? It is to be gathered, they did it
sometime. Sometime in their life they did it, it may be gathered, because it
is clear. But this, being dead, is a gloss of your own, an addition to
Hierom, that corrupts Hierome: It dropped from your pen: he has it not. That
which is to be collected from thence, is; If Moses and Samuel, who living,
appeased Gods wrath to the people, were now again alive, and should pray for
this people, as sometime they did, yet I would not be entreated now of them,
as I was then; nor give way to their petitions, as then I did: because now, The
iniquity of the Ammonite is fully ripe: the If an Horse or an Ass should pray,
etc.
sins of this people are now consummate, which then were but growing in the
blade. Your Horse or your Ass, though like your self in understanding, would
not so conclude, if, as Balaam's Ass once did, the poor beast could speak:
as worthily you do, and like your self. If an Horse or an Ass should pray,
etc. You would have said, bray: that is fitter for such an Animal as you.

Saint Gregory says less, Moral. 9. 12. For, he but only repeateth the Text
of Jeremy, and enquireth why the Prophet did rather insist upon Moses and
Samuel, then any other? And his answer thereto is, Because they especially
prayed for their persecutors. This is all that I can find (no prouender for
your Ass or Ox): if you can meet with any more, let me know it, and you
shall understand my mind thereof; only this (almost forgotten in him, though
I put it home to you before), not much to your purpose, no^ thank-worthy; that
Saint Gregory did not dream, as Judas Macchabeus did, of any Intercession by
dead men, but conc^iued it thus, that if they were then living, they should not
prevail with God, as they had done sometimes. Quid est ergo in difficultate
deprecandi, Mosen et Samuel deducere, nisi apertius indicare, quia eius ira
neque illi obsisterent, si astarent? What means the Prophet to mention such
difficulty, in obtaining for Moses and Samuel; but only this, to make is
clear, that even they should not abide or resist his wrath, if they then stood
before him, as once they did?

Thirdly, Chrysostom yet strikes it further dead against you: which makes me
imagine some more advised, who had peradventure looked on the place, left out
this testimony, though Bellarmine had appealed to him. For he comes home
against you indeed, To. 4. pa. 165. of our E^on Edition, (...). Short, but
sweet, and to purpose. Therefore if this man were now alive, and should speak
thus, he should not for all that prevail. Do you mark? you have wished us to
note, more then once. Were he now living; Nothing to purpose, of hearing in
Heaven, or understanding so wheresoever he were. This Text is for living, not
dead men; for their Prayers, not Intercession of these, in opinion of
Chrysostom.

Baruch 3. 4. thus we read: O Lord Almighty, thou God of Israel, hear now
the Prayers of the dead Israelites (we read, say you, of the dead of Israel):
Therefore the dead Israelities prayed for the living; that you, had you been
efemore Jacob, might not absolutely turn fool. These dead Israelites must
needs then be in Limbo, when they prayed for their brethren. Some information
there they must needs then have had, by some Currire: but who was He, Qui fas
per limen vtrumque solus habet, that was so employed unto Limbus Patrum. For,
the resolution of your Schools is, if Bellarmine do not mis-informe us, That
because the Saints and holy men, who died before Christ came in the flesh, did
not enter into Heaven, did not see God, nor could by any ordinary means
understand the prayers of such as sued unto them; therefore it was not used in
the old Testament to say, Holy Abraham, pray for us: but men prayed themselves
by themselves unto God, and alleged the merits of Saints that were already
dead, that by their merits, their prayers might find access. Thus that great
Undertaker of all Protestant Adversaries, thereby cutting the throat of
Invocation, Aduocation and Intercession in the old Testament; putting you off
from all your recited Texts at once, of Baruch, Jeremy, Judas Dream and all.
And what are you Pumillo, to that great man-at-Armes? What is your word, that
we should believe you, The dead Israelites prayed for the living? You told us
of Harps but even now, out of Apoc. 5. 8. You and your Masters agree as well as
Harp and Harrow, and no better, Your self are fitter for an Harrow, than a
Harp, Asinus ad lyram, in these controuerted points of piety.

But touching your dead Israelites, Sir of little wit, and less understanding,
they were not dead, though peradventure sleeping. They slept not then in the
dust of the earth, being gathered unto their Fathers; but dead, because like
unto the Dead; out of mind, cast off, cast out, of no reputation; in the
opinion of the world, dead. Ver. 10. 11. in the same chapt. Men waxen old in a
strange Country, accounted with them that go down into the pit, as the Prophet
expounds his own meaning. These were not Ezechias, Josias, David, Esaias, or
the rest; but Ezechiel, Baruch, Daniel, Sidrach, his companions then alive.
These dead were living, and in case to pray, and did pray for themselves, their
wives and children, their Countrymen at Babylon in captivity.

We imagine so: and Baruch himself bids us think so. Yet note what
Theodoret says to the contrary. Where note, that Theodoret, paraphrasing upon
Baruch, interprets this very place as Catholics do.
And so we will: for, it is worth the noting, if he knew Baruch's mind better
than himself. Note it we will, and subscribe it too, if Theodoret interpret
this place as you do: for, as for Catholics, I have not enquired how they
interpret it; I need not, it is so palpable. I verily suppose, you have pigges
in your belly, and cry, We Catholics (when it is but a Cacolick, and a poor
one, God knows, your silly self) interpret the place so. But have you looked
upon Theodoret? Are you certain, he interprets it so? I cannot find it, to
note it in him. This is all that I can note, in no very great Paraphrase
neither; Verba clare ostendunt immortalitatem onima: and to this, Protestants
firmly and constantly assent, as well as any Papists or Popes either: for, some
of them have scarce assented thereto; though not for this Proof of Theodoret:
which how clare it shows that, I see not.

Theodoret could not hence note unto us the immortality of the soul, otherwise
than because the dead do live: which to admit, yet is it far enough from the
exposition of Catholics, that imagine, Invocation may be inferred hence.
For, dead men may pray, and yet not for others. It is an idle exception; If for
themselves, their glory should not be complete. For, does this Ignaro imagine,
their glory is yet complete? no augmentation to accrue unto it, at least
accidental, at the Resurrection? If he know not this, the Catholic Cause
was very far forlorn, when such Smatterers set pen to paper to propugn it.
Secondly, there are causes, more than one, of such prayer. They may well pray
for others, and yet not be prayed unto themselves, in regard of general union
and knowledge particularly, and remembrance, extraordinary knowledge and
information. So this Andabatarian Catholic fights with his own Now, is the
Sun more clear, than that Saints pray for us?
shadow. We deny it not in these terms, The Saints departed do pray for us.
The Sun is not so clear, as there is no clear understanding in him.

XXX.
That we may not pray unto them.

WHatsouer they do for us, we do not much for them: for we say, we may not
pray unto them; contrary to our own Bibles. Believe it who list. Pray to them,
if you will: we and our people will pray unto the Lord, who is ready, willing,
able to hear us every way, without such Advocates or Mediators. And where are
our Bibles so contrary to us? Nay, understand you the resolutions of your own
men? Sancti non sunt inuocandi, Saints are not to be prayed unto, is a
Proposition of Father Roberts: I grant with limitation, thus; Not as Authors of
divine blessings or goodness. But, what a Buzzard are you in the mean time, that
leave such an advantage to your Adversary? For, against this loose Proposition
of yours, Saints are to be prayed unto, without his restraint, these
Scriptures are plain, Psalm 83. God gives grace and glory. Psalm 120. I lift
up my eyes unto the hills, from whence comes my help: my help comes only
from the Lord that has made heaven and earth. And that, James 1. Every good
gift, and every perfect giving, is from above, descending down from the Father
of lights; and such like, that send us only and directly to God, in the
opinion and upon the allegation of Bellarmine.

You cannot answer these Texts of your Bible, contrary to your Tenet, as you
set it down. We can answer whatsoever you bring against; as, Luke 16. 24.
Father Abraham, have mercy on me. Here is one Saint prayed unto. First, by
whom? By Dives, a firebrand in hell. So the Damned are directers of your
doctrine; no doubt good doctrine, so well grounded. Secondly, this was no prayer
unto Abraham, if Bellarmine have taught us aright: for, the Saints of the old
Testament, says he, being then in Limbo, were not prayed unto, as not seeing
God: but Abraham was a Saint of the old Testament, not of the new. Thirdly, it
is a Parable; and so, not concluding farther than the scope and end: which is
not this. Fourthly, Abraham is supposed, at least here, to have bin within
hearing. Bring the Virgin Mary within my kenning, I will say unto her, Sancta
Maria, or a pro me. Next, Send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger
in water, and cool my tongue. Here, say you, or else you err, is another Saint
prayed unto. No such matter, Sir Gagger: gape wider, and stare the Text in the
face: you shall see at last, if you have not lost your wits and eyes and all,
that, if any be prayed unto, it is not another, but the same Saint Abraham, to
send Lazarus. Dives says not, Saint Lazarus, come; but, Father Abraham, send.
When you call to your Bottle-ale-Hostesse, to send her Maid for something you
want, the Maid must so take it; you withal entreat her to go. Sure, your wits
are drowned in Bottle-ale, or mured in a Bakers Basket. That of Job 5. 1. for
so it is, Job 1. 5. (...)
does not answer our expectation, nor your undertaking. You vaunted to confound
us by our own Bibles: and you are fain to go to your Bibles. In our Bibles we
read, Call now, if there be any that will answer thee: and to which of the
Saints will thou turn? In your Bibles it is, And turn to some of the Saints.
Your fleeing from ours unto your own, argues, that in your opinion there is
difference betwixt the interpretations; and so there is: for, by our
interpretation you are gone. Eliphas tells Job, It is in vain to go unto any
of the Saints: for, there is in them no help at all; an Interrogation, being
equivalent to a Negation. Is there any can do this? in effect, There is none
that can do it. So that you discredit your own cause, that are fain to be
recreant in your undertaking, and flee off from our Bibles unto your own Bible.

Thither I need not follow you: but I will. So little are you to be feared at
your own weapons, even upon your most advantage. Let it be, Turn unto some of
the Saints; yet have you no more but opinion: and the opinion you most follow
of new birth, hatched first by Aquinas, as may be collected. For, as for Saint
Augustines expounding it as Catholics do, I will let the S. August. himself
expounds this very place as Catholics do, in his Annot. upon Job. If it had
not been the common custom in the time of Job, to invoke the Saints
deceased, it had bin friu^lous for Eliphas to have asked Job, to which of the
Saints he would t(...)?
Reader see, and then judge. One of your own says, Pineda on the place, Some
take it spoken ironically: and so it is for your purpose; is it not? By which
is meant nothing less. Alij serio: others take it spoken in good earnest; but
not therefore as aduising Invocation. Call, says Caietan, unto some of the
dead: let him be a man that has lived most unblameably: put him to defend thy
cause. Assuredly, not any will make answer, because they are not; their souls
having di^d together with the bodies. Cardinal Caietan, Luther's great
Antagonist, was so far from imagining any custom of Invocation in the time
of Job, which Bellarmine likewise denies, that he supposes Eliphas to have
been an Atheist, and to deny the souls immortality: and what be comes of
your custom of Invocation, in his opinion, in the time of Job? Eugubinus, by
Saints, understands holy men alive; and by Call, not Invocation, but
Allocution or naming of them. And with him accord Philippus Presbyter and
Polychronius, as it may be collected by your own Pineda. Others, by Saints,
mean holy Angels; but present, employed, to be spoken to: as apparitions were
then frequent among those holy men; either Leiger, or extraordinarily employed
Angels. Lyra runs another course; not to the Persons, but Precedents of Saints.
Reuolue the remembrance of Ages past, as if Eliphas has said so: and go
consider the lives and actions of holy men: thou shall find them discussed
exceedingly all; but not impatient in affliction, any of them.

In such diversity of opinions, and greater than this, to conclude for
Invocation assertiuely, none can, none will, but men like your self, qui^us
anima prosale. S. Thomas alone must ouersway all, because, as Pineda
confesses, he was the first that applied it to Invocation. Tandem sapienter D.
Thomas sententiam hanc ad inuocationem pertinere voluit: After all other
Expositors, says Pineda, he would have it belong to invocation of Saints.
Therefore put up your Pipes for Saint Augustine, singing that Catholic Song.
S. Augustine's words are these: Indignatio, qua quisque angitur, tanquam inique
sibi aliquid acciderit, dum non cogitat vsque adeo se immundum esse coram D^^,
vt innocanti Angeli non respondeant, aut se demonstrare dignati sint: qui enim
hoc (...) cogi^at, stultus est, and ira irrationabili interimitur. Aut idcirco
Angelos non audire, non videre potest stultus, quia ir a interemptus, and a
zelo occisus. Indignation, says he, expounding the second verse, which vexes
a man as if he were hardly dealt withal, whilst he does not remember, that in
Gods fight he is so unclean, that the Angels vouchsafe not to appear unto him,
or give him any answer when he calls for them. He that thinks not so, is a
fool, and killed of wrath. Or thus: A fool cannot hear or see the Angels,
because anger and wrath have even slain him.

Thus Saint Augustine, in those Annotations, brings a double exposition of
those words: in both (according to the Septuagints reading, whom he
follows), by Saints, he understands not men departed, and with God, as the
Catholics, since Thomas, do interpret it; but Angels of Paradise. Secondly,
he is not for calling upon them (for, how could he, if he held Bellarmine's
Rule, for Sancte Abraham?), but unto them. How? As familiarly conuersing with
them in those days; as often appearing and talking with them (his very words)
either Guardians or otherwise. Let it be so now; Saint Peter, Saint Paul
appear, converse with, demonstrate themselves to us: for my part, I will speak
to them, to remember my necessities or cause to God; as I would to your self,
or any other Christian, for your Prayers, or the Churches. Thus what get you by
Saint Augustine, or your own Bible?

I list see no more: I have seen enough already: the Sea more.
utmost, I am sure, that you can say, and what I have seen, I have satisfied
already, both in Scriptures and Fathers, elsewhere. These very places you have
named, and many others, I will not, as you use is, actum agere: only this, for
your better direction or information in this point of Iouocation, or rather
Intercession through Allocution, we do not, we dare not pray to Saints, that is
speak to them, or entreat them to pray for us; not for unlawfulness of the act
so much, as for unaptness of the Agent: for, we are not persuaded, nor can it be
proved unto us by any Romish Catholic living, that the Saints departed, and
now with God, do or can ordinarily, by any power or ability in themselves,
hear, see, know, take notice of the wants, state, cases, or prayers of men on
earth, to be mindful of them unto God in heaven. Nor can it be proved, that
otherwise God does ordinarily reueal unto them by any means those former
specified, that so they may take notice of them. This must be proved, or it is
in vain to pray to them; unless a man will hazard his state and all, upon
uncertainties. It suffices not, that they know some things, at some times, in
some places, of some men extraordinarily; for, so we are uncertain, what
Saints know what, how much, when, by what means; and so may well be blamed of
folly for going about, when we may go direct; unto them, when we may go to
God. Save all other labor in this point, prove but only this, Their
knowledge of any thing ordinarily; I promise you straight, I will say, Holy
Saint Mary, pray for me: till then you must pardon us Protestants, for not
playing the fools with you.

XXXI.
That the bones or Relics of Saints are not to be kept. No virtue proceeds
from them, after they be dead.

YOu may keep, if you will, and lock up, if you please, in your Cabinet, or
Calket, or where you will, Saint Campions thumb, Saint Garnets straw, Saint
Loiolaes hair; which cured, if I remember, Michael Vasques, of I know not
what: or that goodly Relic, which at Denham once, in Sir George Peckhams
house, courst the devil up and down from Anne Smiths foot, over all her body,
the Priest following Him with his hand, up and down, wheresoever the Spirit
went. And further, take Saint Lipsius old breeches to shrine them in, and the
virtue that did or might drop from them: our Lady of Sichem will perhaps lend
them to so holy and devout a purpose: I know no Protestant will steal them
from you. But ad Textum, as Marcellinus uses to say; your Texts of Scripture I
mean.

As all the rest, so this also is contrary to express Contrary to express
words of their own Bibles.
words of our own Bibles. This say I? but what? Why, two things are proved,
or should be: First, that Relics may be kept; Secondly, that virtue
proceeds from them. Both these must be expressly proved, or the man says
nothing, and may hold his peace and pen both.

In the second of Kings, or the fourth, it skilleth In second of Kings, but is
the 4 by the account of Catholics, 13. 21.
not; for, our Bibles also intimate as much, 13. 21. it is written, that the
bo^es of Eliseus being touched by one that was dead, they did revive him. Thus
we grant it is written, and we believe it: what then? Why This could not be,
had not some virtue proceeded from them. Good: and what of that? Therefore we
that hold, No virtue proceeds from them after they be dead, are contraried by
our own Bibles. If we did hold so: but we hold not so. Indeed we hold, and
assuredly believe, that Saint Campions thumb, Saint Garnets straw, Saint
Stories halter, never did, nor shall ever raise up any dead man. We deny not,
Eliseus bones, or Saint Peter's shadow, or Saint Paul's napkins, did work
wonders. Sir Addle-head, or idle p^te, touching virtue from dead men, thus we
hold: this is our opinion:

Virtue has often proceeded from the bodies, bones, garments, relics of many
holy men and blessed Saints, dead and alive; not ordinarily, or of and from
them naturally; but extraordinarily, by dispensation, as works of wonder
wrought by God. But these are not ever to be had, or seen. Such works are of
voluntary dispensation; and therefore not (...), or (...), for all, from all,
at all times. The red sea was divided for Israel to pass. Jordan was driven
back more then twice, by Joshua, Elias, Eliseus: are you so wise to imagine, so
ridiculous to proclaim, that all Seas and Rivers may so be served. Go try the
Thames at Trigge Stairs, or Broken Wharfe, that the world may take notice of
you for a Frantic or an Impostor: or the Jews send and hire you to divide
Euphrates, at their return shortly unto the holy Land: For by your reason, or
else you ramble wide, the water should give you way. For, mark: Eliseus bones
did once raise a dead man to life; therefore they had virtue issuing from them,
and residing in them: therefore all Saints bones or relics have virtue that
proceeds from them perpetually, naturally, when they be dead: and you, if
you have none, may easily borrow such Relics at the Brokers, to serve a turn
for the Catholic Cause. This is your Logic, if you remember what you have
learned: Any particular may infer a General. Once it was done, it may be
ever; at one time, therefore always. Eliseus bones revived a dead man:
therefore all Saints bones and Relics can do that or the like.

Acts 15. 14, 15. And believers were the more added unto the Lord; multitudes
both of men and women: insomuch, that they brought forth the sick into the
streets, and laid them on beds and couches, that at least, the shadow of
Peter passing by, might ouer-shadow some of them. This is not, Acts 15 but Acts
5. But that may be the Printers fault, not yours. Secondly, here is no
express mention of virtue proceeding; but of shadow ouer-spreading. But you
answer; In our Bibles, it follows, And they all might be delivered from
their infirmities. But what is that to purpose? We are to be tried by our
Bibles, at your own choice; not by yours: therefore you fail in your
undertaking. And as for our Bibles, they have not that clause indeed; no more
have the Editions of Catholics, nor the Copies used by Robert Steven. The old
Translator, I doubt not, found it in his Copy, and did express it: so would
we have done, had we found it in ours: for we left it not ou^, nor do you
say so, of set purpose. But fourthly, let it be added; for we grant it true:
it is not ad idem: for you propound it of the Dead, and prove it of the
Living. Saint Peter was then alive: betwixt Living and Dead, there is a maine
difference: the one may do what the other cannot, in my learning.

Lastly, admit Saint Peter then dead, because his shadow was no substance:
virtue is immanent, and emanant; and both, two ways considered. Naturally and
ordinary: or by dispensation and extraordinary. It was no natural quality in
his shadow: and as for endowments of dispensation, they are particular, and
restrained; now in being, anon, not. From no Saint departed or alive, from no
shadow or substance, does any such virtue issue naturally? From many alive and
dead, great virtue has extraordinarily at times, upon occasions, for special
ends, by dispensation. And what then? Therefore your Relics can do the like?
If this be the consequence, I deny it. Else, because the Apostles could speak
with tongues, our Priests and Jesuits can do the same. Do it, and I yield.
But experience proves true, you cannot now say, Arise and walk.

What you cannot do for Saint Peter's shadow, Saint Augustine shall help at a
dead Lift to bring the Text home. Ser. 39. de Sanctis, he says, If the shadow
of his body could help, how much more the fulness of his power? I will not
quarrel the Authority, nor the Author, though I may: how the allegation should
serve for relics, I cannot see; except the Fulness of power be his Relic,
opposed to the shadow of his Body: and that indeed is made a Relic of Saint
Peter; and it is the best that ever he left, worth all his other Relics
whatsoever; and therefore deserves to be kept charily in the Popes Wardrobe.
But that is a Relic of another kind: we speak of no such Relics now.

Relic or not: what express mention? None, nor regarded. For the man has
recourse unto consequence, in stead of express mention, and supposes thus:
Saint Augustine supposes two things: The one, that the shadow of his body,
being here on Earth, did both help and heal infirmities: which Protestants
Bible leaves out. And so did Saint Augustines Bible, without doubt. For he
supposes it, you say: which he needed not have done, had he found it
express. For supposition is not (...), where words are plain: and no marvel
if Saint Augustines Bible did so: for the Originalls did and do so; old and
new, Papists Bibles as well as Protestants: neither is it found in the Syriack
Edition, nor regarded by your own learned Commentors; only cast in by such
quarrelers, as if the Protestants had depraved the Text sacrilegiously.

The other thing supposed by Saint Augustine, is, That being in Heaven, he
can still help us by his Power. And what Power? how help us? Saint Augustine
does not; and you, I think, cannot resolve us. Whatsoever it be, what
reference to Relics? Not here mentioned, not to be inferred: or say how. The
Relic your men dream of here, is plenitudo virtutis, and gratiae permanent
is: which they were wont to presume to be that Omnipotency of his Sea. Were you
well served, you should be turned into the Inquisition, for abating or
trans-planting such his Power, and depriving his Supremacy of such a testimony
in S. Augustine, of your own. And do you mark it, that I say, your own: for,
this Saint Augustine is none of mine. It is ser. 29. in which this passage is;
not 39, as you mis-report it: which is a Counterfeit under S. Austen's name, as
the Louanists, and other your own men, observe.

There is a Commemoration of Saint Peter' s chain: you keep an Holi-day in
memory thereof, Augusti 1: and yet Saint Peter' s Chain (as Baronius observes)
was not found until Saint Augustine was dead. Had the man been as he would
seem, Saint Augustine, yet might he have been deceived in his collection, as
well as in somewhat else noted by Lorinus, that hither tends. For, de
Catechis. rudib. 23. he delivers, that The shadow of Saint Peter, passing
along in the streets, restored a dead man to life. Do you find this written in
your Bibles? I suppose not. S. Augustine did (without doubt) in his: or how is
it, that he says it? Therefore the Papists Bible has left something out,
as well as the Protestants. Look unto it, and answer it as you can.

Acts 19. 11, 12. And God wrought special miracles by the hands of Paul: so
that from his body were brought unto the sick, handkerchiefs, and aprons; and
the diseases departed from them, and the evil spirits went out of them.
Therefore what? Virtue proceeded from Saint Paul when he was dead? I deny that:
for, Saint Paul was then alive, and aliues like. Therefore this is for the
living, not the dead. And yet take me not so, that I deny the thing. Virtue
may proceed from the true Saints of God, dead and alive. I deny your proof, and
wonder at your wit, that can go ab equis ad asin^s so easily, as if both were
fit Inmates for such an Animal as your self; Ass, Horse, and you, for such
prouender.

S. Chrysostom might very well infer, upon the passages of Saint Peter and
Saint Paul, that Christ, S. Chrysostom. To. 5. cont. Gentil. quod Christus sit
Deus, in an whole Book, proves heerby, and by the like virtue of other Saints,
that Christ their Lord and Master, is God: whose servants napkins and shadows
could do such wonders.
their Lord and Master, was truly God: whose servants, in his Name, and by his
Power, nay, their shadows and napkins, did such wonders: for, Could any man do
so, except God were with him? But, all this wind shakes no corn. First, this
virtue was not inherent; only incident. Secondly, it was miraculous; so,
peculiar. Thirdly, it was Then: those Times are done; those napkins gone into
Materia prima. Show such napkins or shadows, and we yield. For, no man
doubts what has been done, or may be done: we go no further than to what is.

See more, you so direct us: and we had need, or else we shall see your proofs
by halues: for, hitherto we have only heard of virtue proceeding from the
Dead; nothing touching keeping of Bones and Relics. Now have at them, or else
never; and indeed never: for, Exodus 13. 19. Ioseph's bones were carried by
Moses out of Egypt. What then? Therefore bones of holy men may, by warrant of
that, be dug up, shrined, and preserved. Happily they may in some cases, but
not therefore: for, this was a singular Fact; which are no precedents for
general rules. One Swallow makes not Summer; nor one Woodcock, Winter, but
among Birds of that Bill and Feather. Secondly, as it was singular in Fact; so,
special in Reason. There was a Tie upon Israel, to do that which they did.
Joseph, dying, had bound them with an oath to do so. Had our Lady so bound you
for her smock or her milk, you were excused. Thirdly, they carried them thence,
not to keep them, which is your Tenet; much less to shrine them or adore them,
which is your practice; but to bury them in the Land of Canaan: which they did,
Ios. 24. 32. Do you in like sort, and we applaud you with your Relics.

So we see in this first place no more than we looked for; nothing to purpose:
nor in the second, 2. Reg. 4. 8. Eliseus takes up Elias cloak that fell from
him; and, wrapping it together, smote the waters of Iordane; which parted
asunder. A Text seeming to say somewhat: for, Elias cloak is Relictum, a
Relic to Eliseus; and he took it. But this is verse 14. not 8. but not yet a
Relick for our purpose. For, what he did with it, is not remembered: it is like
enough, Eliseus wore it out. We read not what he did with it; whether he laid
it up, and left it to posterity to be adored: unless you can prove this, you
say nothing; otherwise, in your sense it is no Relic. For, keeping and
adoring is all in all for them.

But let it be kept. Eliseus did no more than I* or any Protestant else, should
have done. For, you mistake us. The Relics of Saints are not (...) with us:
we dishonor not their garments, much less their bodies, having been the
Temples of the holy Ghost; being again to be raised from the dust, and be
made like Christ's glorious body. By and in them, at sundry times, God has
miraculously magnified himself in his Power; as, when the body of Babylas made
the Oracle mute, in despite of Julian that Renegado: Then especially, when
there was great cause; when Paganism, Persecution, Opposition swayed, for the
manifestation of that Truth, which in them and by them had been propagated.
Show any such Relic, and see what we say unto it. It is natural for any man
to affect the remembrance or memorials of a friend; to admire and make much of
rare things, not every day seen. Bring me then a piece of the Cross of our
Savior, one of the Nails, or some such memorial of his Passion: show me
Moses R^d, Saint Peter's Sword, I will prize them above all the Jewels I can
have. Will this content you? I know no Protestant will do less then so.

Worship them I dare not. Show them as you do, I would not: as men do monsters
in Fleet Street or Sturbridge Fair: in this you abuse them too profanely,
making merchandise of the Word of God. In that you profane them to Idolatry,
misleading the People to adore them. This did not Antiquity, nor do we. In
the Primitive Church, Memoriae Martyrum were in great esteem; The place where
they suffered, or else where they were buried: Here commonly their
Church-meetings were for divine Service; for receiving the Sacraments, with
commemoration of their Passion; and a collation to follow their noble Acts:
which was seconded with this opinion, that those blessed Souls themselves, by
special grace and dispensation of God, took notice of that general Act of the
whole Church, and accompanied their devotions, with their own best assistance
unto the Majesty of Heaven. But times are changed, men's manners altered: Those
Saints, Relics, Memories, and Oratories of the true Saints of God, gone, no
where to be found; coozening, colluding, fraud, impiety, come in place. The
miracles, memories, relics of Saints in your Roman Church, are all of them
known to be iuggling tricks of deceiving knaves: and if Saint Martin were
alive again, he might find out only one man's Relics, but many thousands
to be the bones of theirs that died at the gallows for their sins; nor of
Martyrs, that shed their blood for Jesus. Talk not then of Relics, and
keeping of them: but show us the Relics, true ones indeed, and then blame us,
if we respect them not, as Augustine, or Ambrose, or any ancient Fathers did.

See your Fathers I need not. I have seen them often, before ever I saw C. W.
B. your good Benefactor, whose scroles you have filched every where: yet lest
it be thought, there is some stuff to be seen which we dare not set out to
view, the Reader shall see them, if he will be so idle, and have so much
leisure. Eusebius in the seventh book, and fifteenth Chapter relates, that
the chair of Saint James, brother to our Lord, and first Bishop of Jerusalem,
was kept and preserved by his successors. And what if Eusebius write thus? it
is no such great wonder for a chair to last 300 years; in keeping of it, I
know no hurt, or impiety, as I do in your Lipsanolatria. For Eusebius does not
say, that they worshipped it, or that any virtue went out of it. Though, if you
have read the place, as I think you never did, you may remember, that Eusebius
there says, It was a custom taken up from the Pagans, as it was indeed; and
can demonstrate, if need be. But I take no exception at that original, as you
would do with us for much less advantage. Only this I add: It was no bone
or Relic of Saint, nor had any virtue issuing from it; and therefore not to
be remembered here.

Athanasius, in the life of Saint Antony, has many passages; the work is of
some reasonable length. Now what shall we see therein? or whereabout? you know
not: for C. W. B. did not inform you: and you, poor man, are not so well
provided at home. But well fare Bellarmine, who would have told you, had you
consulted him. He does inform us: who otherwise might have sought a needle
in a bottle of hay, and have given the hay to this beast for prouender. Saint
Antony dying, bequeathed his cloak unto a friend: the Legate accepts it very
kindly: an example of kindness given and taken; no more. If Saint Antony could
have given more, he would have done it: had he given less, the Party would
have taken it. It is not said, He received it so, as he laid it up, kept it
amongst his Jewels, and plate. Which if he did, what is that to Protestants not
adoring relics? did the man make an Idol of his cloak? did there any virtue
come from that cloak? If I knew you, were acquainted with you, I would bequeath
a Cockscombe to you, and you would lay it up happly for a Relic for such
fools to adore.

Saint Basil in Psalm. 115. what does he say? You know not: for you were not
told. Let me help you. Upon those words, Right dear in the sight of the Lord,
is the death of his Saints, he dilateth touching the Persons and Passions of
blessed Martyrs; prefers them before Garlands, Jewels, and precious stones;
opposes the state of the time of Grace, unto that of the Law. Then it was not
lawful to touch a dead body; but he that touched it, was unclean. But now,
says he, He that touches the bones of a Martyr, somewhat partaketh of
sanctifying power, by that Grace which assisteth the body. This was true in
those times: but those Martyrs are not: those bodies are gone: that grace is
neither diffused nor effused at this day. It was of that grace which then
wrought wonders; now, no where to be found: your pretended Martyrs are scarce
Christians some; few good Christians; your relics, impostures; your miracles,
iuggling tricks, lewd lies, and forgeries, Prove them otherwise; we will do
as they did, and give them the respect Saint Basil did.

So we answer you for Chrysostom and for Ambrose: let the case be the same
which then it was, our affections every way shall be the same with theirs. But
those days are done; those Worthies gone: impostors are every where, in every
corner. In regard of these Iugglers, and not with reference to the Heroic
times, I say with Tatian, If God had made them (he speaks of charms and
amulets) to the purpose that men employ them, he should have been the Author
of some evil. But all things that God made, were very good: the devil, in his
insolency rioting upon them, has converted them unto all purposes. From him
came first this evil custom (with you, in adoring you cannot tell what): it
never was the work of the Perfect God. For how is it, or can it be, that
while I live, I do no hurt; but being dead, some piece, some relic of my
self, without sense or feeling, which can do nothing, which serves not at
all, no more then I do, should operate, or effect any thing? How can he that
has been hanged himself, possibly save another from the gallows? or how can
a bone of him that died of a fearful disease, deliver another from the same?
Sir, I believe, Tatianus did prophecy so long ago, so graphicially does he
describe the impostures of your Romish Mountebanks, in applying the Relics
and ^owzie fragments of Knaves, Rake-hels, and Traitors, unto, I know not what,
wonder-working tricks of Leiger-de-maine.

XXXII.
That the Creatures cannot be sanctified, or made more holy then they are
already by their own nature.

Until I had read over the whole passage, and came at last to holy bread, holy
water, holy ashes, and the like, trash and Mountebank wares, I marueiled, I
confess, what this man meant by his position, The Creature cannot be
sanctified, etc. For, I know no Protestant, but willingly acknowledges the
Separation and Sanctification of the creature unto divine, religious and holy
uses. I was sure, our Church maintained, and many ways practiced the contrary:
there I Are they not therefore fools and blind, that keep such a ^ooting at
Holy-bread?
found my error, and so perceived what the fool meant; and whither the blind
Buzzard did direct his groping, that made boys to laugh and hoo^ at him.

That the Creatures of God are good, we believe: as proceeding from a total
cause, absolutely good: that nothing ought to be refused, as 1. Tim. 4. 4. if
it be received with Thanksgiving, you rather deny then we. That the Word of
God and Prayer does sanctify the creature to the several uses, we profess
willingly, and practice it accordingly in all our courses, Mat. 23. 17. we read
and subscribe, that the Temple, the seat of Gods Presence, the House for his
Service, sanctified the gold employed in the Temple, as being put unto a
religious use; That the Altar did sanctify the Sacrifices offered upon the
Altar. But if the Calves of Bethel had been placed in the Temple, had they been
sanctified unto God by being in the Temple? The Altar does sanctify the gift,
but so, that it be a gift for the Altar. If a Dog or a Cat were offered
there, it would be no more holy or sanctified, then the abomination was of
desolation, which was set up in the Holy Place. It is not the place that
sanctifies, but the true employment of the thing. We never read it warranted,
that creatures may be abused, or ms-imployed. Are they not therefore fools,
to return your own words upon your self, that produce these passages, for
such stuff as holy bread, etc? which as they are used in your Antiques, may
with reason be hooted at by Boys.

Holy bread with you, is an apish Imitation of that ancient practice in the
Primitive Church, whereby a part of the consecrated Host, in and for the
Sacrament called Eulogia, was sent unto the adjoining parishes, or diocesses,
and imparted unto strangers that came unto them, as a sign, pledge, and
assurance of mutual love and confederation in the same faith; a thing
prohibited afterward in the council of Laodicea, but reassumed, and long time
frequented in the Church: which growing at last into disuse, in the Latin
Church especially, Bread began to be blessed indeed, but not consecrated, for
or in the Communion: which in Paulinus, Augustine, and others, is named
Eulogia, or Panis Catechumenorum. The Catecumeni being not baptized, could not
be imparted with the body of Christ, but received Bread blessed by the Priest,
for their use and eating, as an assurance of that Communion, whereof in due
time they were to be made partakers.

The later Church abused this practice of the Ancients, employing it as spells
or amulets to cast out diuils, to heal diseases, to keep men from danger;
whereto nor God nor man had designed it anciently. The form of consecrating it
is this, in Burchard. Cap. 28. Lord God Almighty, vouchsafe to bless this
Bread with thy holy and spiritual benediction, that it may become health of
soul and body unto all, a defense and safeguard against all diseases, and all
the assaults and deceits of the enemy, through our Lord Jesus Christ, thy
Son, the Bread of Life, who came down from Heaven, brought life and
salvation into the world: who lives and reigns with thee for ever. Was any
thing thus consecrated, 1. Tim. 4. 4. Mat. 23. 17. 19? Or any water any where
to the like purpose, to be sprinkled in houses, to drive away Fayries and
Hobgoblins? to remove the lets and impediments which might hinder the receiving
of the Blessed Sacrament of the Altar? to put out the guilt and tainture of
original sin? I find no such thing in Scripture or the Primitive times. I
do in the Rituals and Pontificals of the Pagans. Nam et sacris
quibusdaminitiantur Isidis alicuius aut Mithrae. Ipsos etiam Deos suos
lauationibus efferunt: villas, domos, templa, totasque vrbes aspergin^
circumlatae aquae expiant passim. Tertullian speaks of Pagan superstitions,
and it agrees unto your fopperies, point by point. Such hallowing and sacring
of the Creature, as of ashes, bells, and other bables, are far enough
removed from that sanctification of the Creature in Saint Paul, unto holy and
religious, or common uses. Saint Paul never baptized or blessed a bell, to
clear the air, assuage storms and tempests, help against lightning and
thunder, drive away devils, and wicked spirits, that would hinder good
Christians from going to Church, or righteous souls from passing through the
air into Heaven. Such old wives tales I find not in Saint Paul, nor in Saint
Basil, whom we are directed to see, Lib. 2. de baptismo: but for what, or
where-about, I profess my ignorance, I cannot tell, and yet I have Basil, and
have read him. Transeat therefore: till I know what, and where I should see
Basil, I must suspend my answer unto his authority.

XXXIII.
That children may be saved by their parents faith without Baptism.

THe man, when he undertook this gagging task, opposed himself intentionally
against our Church: in which regard, with what face, with what forehead, can he
thus impudently belly us, knowing in his conscience, our Doctrine, our practice
to the contrary; and that we have been put to maintain and justify it
against schismatic humors, not Papists but Puritans at home? In the very
first Instep to the form of Administration of Baptism, we profess, All men
be conceived and borne in sin: we add, alleging our Saviors words, None
can enter into the Kingdom of God, except he be regenerate and borne anew of
water and the holy Ghost; Being assured, that as Truth has spoken it, so it
is impossible, ordinarily, for a man to be saved, that is not baptized. Upon
which persuasion of that necessity of water and the holy Ghost, we, following
the use and warrant of Antiquity, have tolerated, practiced, and defended
private Baptism at home, by Laypeople: and yet this shameless Detractor
charge us to hold, That children may be saved by the Parents faith, without
Baptism, as if it were unnecessary. One man peradventure thought so, that the
children of the Faithful that were in Christ, might ordinarily be saved
without Baptism. I say peradventure: for, it appears not, that he held it of
ordinary course, nor referred it to the Parents faith, but unto that Covenant
of grace, I will be thy God, and the God of thy Seed; as even Bellarmine his
Adversary confesses touching him; who yet is nothing unto us.

Touching the necessity of Baptism, there has bin variation ever in the
Church; and yet ever a necessity held upon all hands, more or less. For,
Antiquity supplied the want of water, by blood. Martyrs, not baptized, went to
heaven. The inevitable want of water, by the Spirit; in desire and assured
faith, if it might be had, in Christ the Author and End of it. For, as in
little Infants, the faith of the Church, and those that present them to be
baptized, is by God reputed their own: so the willingness and desire of the
same Church, of their Godfathers and Parents, is reputed theirs. So that no
absolute necessity in opinion of Antiquity, and indispensable, was held of our
Saviors Asseueration, Except a man be born anew of water and the holy Ghost,
he cannot enter into the Kingdom of heaven. Which necessity, thus qualified by
Antiquity, some late Writers have qualified further upon other grounds; as
namely, that supposed Decree of God, touching absolute necessity of salvation:
which admitted, yet includes a subordination of means. As Paul and his
company were determinately saved from perishing by sea; yet he told them, it
could not be, except the Sailers stayed: so nor Gods Decree be accomplished
without means, which is water and the holy Ghost ordinarily.

Others, it may be, have qualified it from the state, faith, and interest of
their parents: which, if it be so, is but a private opinion of some men; not
the doctrine of this, or any Protestant Church that I know. You would be loath
to maintain all private opinions in the Church of Rome. The most that we have
said thereof, is, Of the will of God to impart his grace unto Hooker.
infants without Baptism: in that case, the very circumstance of their natural
birth may serve as a just argument. Whereupon, it is not to be mis-liked, that
men, in charitable presumption, do gather a great likelihood of their
salvation: to whom the benefit of Christian parentage being given, the rest
that should follow, is prevented by some such casualty as man has no power
himself to avoid. So that the most this Fellow can impute unto us, is, that In
some case of inevitable and inunicable necessity, little infants may be
charitably supposed saved by their parents faith. And so that of John 3. 5. for
necessity of water, will iustifiably be answered, If it be possible to
attain it. That of Tit. 3. 5. urges no more, but that the washing of
Regeneration is the ordinary entrance into life.

As for Genesis 17. 14. (to admit all paralleld in Circumcision and Baptism) all
were not damned that died uncircumcised; nor all cast away, that die
unbaptized, as this Fellow himself will or must grant; but those that neglect,
contemn, or omit the means which may be had. As for Mark 16. 16. the very
words do support this mitigation: for, though Christ says, He that
believes, and is baptized, shall be saved; yet he does not say, He that is
not baptized, shall be damned: but, He that believes not, shall be damned;
that being every way of indispensable necessity; this sometime tolerable, the
rather, because we are plainly taught of God, that The seed of faithful
parentage is holy from the birth; which the children of Pagans are not: these
having an habitual interest and consecration to God in their parents, which
the other want. But whatsoever, in charitable constructions, may be thought of
extraordinary courses, they are not for us: we must leave them to God; in whose
most rigorous courses of constitutions, and most sharp denunciations, deep
mercies are ever hidden: who though he be the God of justice, yet is he the
Father of mercies. And yet ordinary ways are for us and our children. Ordinary
way unto life eternal there is none, but by Baptism of water, and the holy
Ghost. Gag them, Sir Goose, that teach otherwise. The Church of England is not
guilty thereof.

XXXIIII.
That imposition of hands upon the people (called by Catholics, Confirmation)
is not necessary, nor to be used.

NOT by Papists alone, but by Protestants also, is it called Bishopping or
Confirmation; not used only by them, but by Protestants likewise, commended,
commanded to be used. Look in the Communion-book, good Reader, and wonder at
the impudent face of this lewd Impostor, that dares give the Lie unto public
Records, that dares tell the world, It is midnight at midday: for, if there be
then any Sun in heaven, this imposition of hands by the Bishop alone, called
Confirmation, is both maintained as necessary; used and commanded, as every man
knows, in the Church of England. Would any man but he, or some of his
Camerades, take up the private fancy of every Peddler, and expose it to view
for Protestants doctrine, contrary to knowledge, to conscience? But so it is.
If it were not for such courses, the poor needy Fellow would have nothing to
prate on unto his Proselyte-gossips in Partridge-Alley. The Lie is so loud, the
case so apparent for Bishopping or Confirmation, I shall not need to say any
thing, but, Blush for shame.

XXXV.
That the Bread of the Supper is but a figure of the body of Christ.

IS but a sign or figure, and no more? Strange: and yet our formal words are,
This is my body: this is my blood. This is, is more than this figureth or
designeth. A bare figure is but a phantasme. He gave substance, and really
subsisting essence, who said, This is my body: this is my blood. And yet our
Catechism in the Communion-book, authorized, says expressly, The body and
blood of Christ taken and eaten in the Lords Supper; not the figure or sign of
his body and blood, which can neither be taken, nor yet eaten. Poor Poor
Protestant, whither now is thy figure fled?
Woodcock or Catholic Cockscomb, that sendest a Protestant to seek a figure,
who is as real and substantial as any Papist.

Were the peace of the Church, and unity of faith (which is more mystically
insinuated in this Sacrament, than elsewhere; in the Materials thereof, both
Bread and Wine) so dear and precious as it ought to be, unto such common
Barretters of Christendom, as Priests and Jesuits are for private ends; this,
and many other Controversies on foot, might cease. For, it is confessed on
either side, that Sacraments, which have their Being from institution, are
signs of Gods love and promise, seals of his covenant and grace, and
instruments and conueiances of his mercy. What they intimate, signify, and
represent, they conueigh unto the soul. In the ordinary Catechism alone
allowed (and I would, no other were tolerated) the question being asked, What
meanest thou by this word Sacrament? the answer is, I mean an outward and
visible sign of an inward and spiritual grace, given unto us, ordained by
Christ himself, as a means whereby we receive the same, and a pledge to
assure us thereof. This is more, even in your little understanding, than a bare
figure; a means and a pledge whereby etc.

Sir, we acknowledge right willingly, and profess, that in the blessed
Sacrament (as you call it, of the Altar) the Body and Blood of our Savior
Christ is really participated and communicated; and by means of that real
participation, life from him and in him conveyed into our souls. This we
believe and profess;

knowing, that he is able to effect it, who has spoken it, by that mighty
working, whereby he is able to do whatsoever he has said. We are not
sollicitous for the manner how he works it; not daring to pry into the secret
Counsels of the most High. We have learned, that Revealed things are for us;
secret things are for God. Therefore we wonder, why the world should be so much
ammused at, and distracted with, those inexplicable Labyrinths of
Con-substantiation and Trans-substantiation, which only serve to set the world
in division; nothing to piety, nor yet information. As we therefore condemn
that presumptuous definition of Trans-substantiation, in the Laterane Council:
so we do not like nor yield assent unto that jejune and macilent conceit of
Zwinglius and Oecolampadius: whereby men account of this Sacrament, but only
as of a bare shadow, empty and void, and destitute of Christ; but ingenuously
profess, that by this Sacrament Christ gives us his very body and blood, and
really and truly performs in us his promise, in feeding our souls unto
eternal life. As for the manner how, (...): This inexplicable, that
unutterable: it is faith only that can give the resolution. Trans or con, we
skill not of.

John 6. 51. The bread that I will give is my flesh; which I will give for the
life of the world. Therefore his flesh is bread, the Bread of life. Most true;
but not therefore his flesh by Trans-substantiation. You find not that in the
Gospel, or any where else. Life, begun in Baptism by the Lauer of
Regeneration, is confirmed and sustained in the holy supper by his body and
blood. How? I cannot explicate. How should I, that cannot tell how (who can do
it?) my body is nourished by the ordinary meat and drink I take? yet is that
familiar, and in use every day. When Christ gave it, he said, This is my body.
Saint Paul, repeating the Institution, says, This is my body. It was never
denied to be his body: it is affitmed still, to be his body. Mad Papist, that
imputest to poor Protestants, an Idol, a Chimaera of thy own brain; that The
bread is but a figure, and no more, of Christ's body. Protestants say it not:
they never said it. As commonly it happens, that all Reformations or
Innouations are upon and into extremes: so some happily have, that departed
long since from the Church of Rome. But what is that to our Church, that
publicly, privately, all and some, directly maintains the clean contrary? Your
great Aduiser, C. W. B. has said enough, could he see what himself has said,
or you understand what he alleges, to stop the mouth of such Gabblers as you
and he for ever, in the contrary assertions of the Protestants. But, the devil
bred you in a Faction, and brought you up in a Faction, and sent you abroad to
do him service in maintaining a Faction: otherwise acknowledge, there is, there
need be, no difference in the point of real presence.

See your Fathers if I do, I shall do more than See Fathers that affirm the
same. S. Ignat. in his Epist. ad Smyr.
you have done: for, I auow it, you never read Ignatius for this. Read that
Epistle over, unto the Smyrneans, and see if you find any such thing there: if
you do, then trust not me again: if you do not, what descrueth that impudent
imposture, S. Ignat. in his Epist. ad Smyr. But I can show you better evidence
for Bread and Wine out of Ignatius, page 125. edit. Paus. Maestrei. The flesh
of our Lord Jesus Christ is one: His Blood, one, which was shed for us: also
one Bread was broken for all: one Cup distributed unto all, Bread and Wine
after consecration: Both distributed to all, against your half Communion. And
again, page 261. (...); Breaking one Bread, which is the medicine procuring
Immortality. Thus I find nothing in Ignatius for you: this I have, and happly
more could against you, were I desirous with you to maintain a faction.

Justin Martyrs testimony I acknowledge in the end Justin Mar. Apol. 2. ad
Antoninum.
of his Apology, and willingly make his words our own: For we do not
receive these things as common Bread, or common Drink: but, even as our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, by the Word of God becoming flesh, had flesh and
blood for our sakes; so are we taught, that the food which was blessed by him,
in the Word and Prayer, through which food, being altered and changed, our
flesh and blood is sustained becomes the flesh and blood of him, that Jesus,
who took our flesh in his Incarnation. Thus that ancient Father, not fully
represented by your director: who says not any thing that Protestants deny:
For they confess, They eat the flesh of the Son of God and drink his blood:
they are one with him, and he with them; but comes not home to the Papists
Resolution, that we eat it and drink it by Transubstantiation; but the
contrary: for, but four lines before, he calls it Bread and Wine after
Consecration. Those, says he, whom we call Deacons, do give to every one
that is there present, part of the Bread, Wine and Water consecrated.

Saint Cyprian, Sermon. 5. de lapsis. Now good Sir Gagger, can you tell how many
Sermons de lapsis Saint Cyprian wrote? ignorant Ass, and yet bold Bayard!
Saint Cyprian wrote no Sermons de lapsis: he wrote a book de lapsis, divided
into sections by some or other. But Reader, see the audacious Dunsery of this
Ignaro. C. W. B. had, in his Catalogue of the Fathers of the third Age, for
transubstantiation, cited Cyprian thus; Ser. 5 de lapsis, for Sect. 5. de
lapsis (unless he also took his Authors by tale upon trust) and Ser. de coena
Domini. This blunderer stumbled upon the first, false or true; to purpose or
not, all was one to him; and set it down: the second quotation he left out:
yet that is it which he should have taken: for in the first, Sect. 5. de
lapsis, there is nothing; in the second, Ser. decoena Domini, as he will have
it, though it be no Sermon, Sect. 6. there is, thus: The Bread which our Lord
reached unto his Disciples, being changed, not in appearance, but in Nature,
by the omnipotency of the Word, is made flesh. Saint Cyprian said as much as
this once or twice before. No man denies a change, an alteration, a
transmutation, a transelementation, as they speak: no man otherwise believes,
but that the natural condition of the Bread consecrated, is otherwise then it
was; being disposed and used to that holy use, of imparting Christ unto the
Communicants. Stay here: be contented with That it is, and do not seek nor
define How it is so: and we shall not contest or contend with you. Hoc
Sacramentum aliquando corpus suum, aliquando carnem and sanguinem, aliquando
panem Christus appellat, portionem vitae aeternae, cuius, secundum haec
visibi^ia, corporali communicauit Nature. Panis iste communis in carnem et
sanguinem mutatus, procurat vitam et incrementum corporibus: ideoque ex
consueto rerum effectu, fidei nostrae adiuta infirmitas, sensibili argumento
edocta est, visibilibus sacramentis inesse vitae aeternae effectum, et non tam
corporali, quam spirituali transitione Christo nos vniri. Thus the same Saint
Cyprian: so we: we confess it: we believe it: we cannot comprehend it.

Saint Ambrose says no more then we will subscribe, Lib. 4. de sacramentis.
Before consecration it was Bread; common, ordinary, mere Bread: but after
consecration, it becomes the flesh of Christ, because then the Sacrament is
consummate. But does Saint Ambrose tell you how it is so made? That I find
not, that I expect, that I must find, or I find nothing to your purpose.

One Father yet you add. Saint Remigius says, but you cannot tell where: your
Director told you, it was in his comments upon the 10. Chap. 1. ad Corinth. The
flesh which the Word of God took in the Virgins womb, and the Bread
consecrated in the Church, are the same body. And yet, being consecrated, he
calls it Bread. How can your Saint Remigius make that good? He should have
said, for doubtless he meant so, The Bread which was being consecrated in
the Church, is transubstantiated into that flesh which the Word of God took in
the Virgins womb, and become the same body. This Remigius says not; a great
sign he meant not. And indeed he did not mean it: he goes no further then
Reality: he determines not modum praesentiae at all. And yet this Remigius is
not, peradventure, the man you would have him; namely, Saint Remigius,
Archbishop of Rhemes, who converted King Clouis of France to the Christian
Faith, who lived within 500 years after Christ, though he died about 544. This
man wrote nothing, that I can hear of, either in Sidonius, who lived at that
time, or Hinckmarus, or Flodoard, or Sixtus Senensis, or Bellarmine, or
Chesneu, or any other. He that wrote the notes upon Saint Paul's Epistles,
taught indeed at Rhemes, as appears by Flodoard (and thence grew the error, I
suppose, of those who took him for Saint Remigius Bishop of Rhemes): but he is
called Remigius Antisiadorensis, because he was borne at Auxerre. Of him we
read in Sixtus Senensis, that he wrote on Saint Paul's Epistles. He is of a
much later date; living under Charles the bald, about 880. Howsoever, we are
not touched by him, or any of the rest: for we neither believe, nor say, that
the Bread of the Supper is but a bare figure of the body of Christ, not his
Body: we profess, we receive the Lords Body, and drink his blood, in
commemoration of his Death and Passion, as he has appointed. If you say
otherwise, we have done with you.

XXXVI.
That we ought to receive in both kinds; and that one alone suffices not.

WE ought so indeed: nor is it sufficient to administer the Communion, as the
Romanists now do, under one kind. This is the authorized and received, and
justifiable Doctrine, and Orthodox practice of the Church of England. Artic.
30. thus we read: The Cup of the Lord is not to be denied unto the
Lay People. For, both the parts of the Lords Sacrament, by Christ's ordinance
and commandment, ought to be ministered to all Christian men alike. And in the
Communion book it is expressly said, That the chief minister, if there be more
present, as it often happens, in Colleges especially and Cathedral Churches,
shall receive it first himself, and then deliver it to other Ministers, and so
to the People in both kinds. This is our practice and our profession: for
which I join issue with all Papists living; that it is the prime, original
institution of our Savior; which gives Birth and Being to a Sacrament; that
it is Sacrilege to alter it therefrom; that it never was otherwise used in the
Church of God, for above 1000 years after Christ. Let all the Papists living
prove the contrary, and I will subscribe to all Popery. As for this poor
fellow, he can say no more then he finds ready to hand, or is put into his
mouth: his Camerades were conscious to themselves of nouelty and innovation:
for in a point so notorious, so scandalous, of such consequence, we are not
sent, as accustomed, to see any Fathers.

It is manifest, says Cessander, a man professing himself a Roman
Catholic, though of wonderful modesty, moderation, and learning, that in
administration of the sacred Sacrament of the Eucharist, the Universal Church
of Christ until this day, and the Western or Roman Church, for more then
1000 years after Christ, especially in their solemn and ordinary dispensation
of this Sacrament, did exhibit and give unto all faithful Christians, not one
only, but both the kinds of Bread and Wine: as is most clear and evident out
of innumerable testimonies of the old Writers, both Greek and Latin; which I
can make good, and of some will give a taste.

Ignatius in his Epistle to the Philadelphians. (...): One Bread is broken unto
all; and one Wine given to the whole multitude. This man was Saint John's
Disciple. Martialis, as you say, one of the 70 Disciples: Epist. 1. Sect. 3.
Nunc autem multo magis sacerdotes Dei honoratis, qui vitam vobis tribuunt in
calice et viuo pane: and he speaks, you see, to the people. Dionysius
Areopag. S. Paul's Disciple, page 157. (...), etc. for having discovered the
covered and undivided bread, and divided it into many parts, and distributed to
all, the Unity of the Cup, he consummateth in those Symbols and signs, the
Unity of the Church: and so in many other places. S. Clement, Saint Peter's
Disciple and Successor, in his Mass having set down the order and form of
consecration, comes to participation thus: Let the Deacon give the cup; and
when all have received, men and women, let the Deacons carry the remainder into
the Reuestry. So Saint Mark in his Liturgy, another Disciple of Saint Peter.
So Saint Peter himself in his Liturgy, or Mass as you call it. So the rest.

Justin Martyr, in the end of his Apology, describing the service of those
ancient Christians, says, (...): They whom we call Deacons, give to every one
present, part of the consecrated Bread and Wine. Irenaeus in lib. 4. cap. 33.
proves the Resurrection, because we participate of the body and blood of
Christ. And lib. 5. cap. 11. speaking of a Christian man, he says, that de
calice, qui sanguis eius est, nutritur; and de pane, qui est corpus eius,
augetur. That railing Feuardentius, in his Notes upon Irenaeus, was not able to
produce one Testimony for half Communions, though he vaunt, it was a practice
in the Apostles time. Tertul. in de Resurrect. speaking of all Christians in
general; Caro corpore and sanguine Christi vescitur, vt and anima saginetur.
And because these Patrons of a desperate cause, contrary to all art and reason,
conclude negatiuely, The cup was not communicated, because the bread is alone
sometime remembered; we may infer alike, The bread was not given, but the cup,
because Tertul. in depudicitia, remembers only the cup thus: Aqua and aliis
initians, cui ille si forte patrocinabitur pastor, quem in calice depingis,
prostitutorem and ipsum, Christiani Sacramenti, mento et ebrietatis idolu^, and
moechiae asylum post calicem subsecuturae, de quo nihil libentius bibas, quam
ouem poenitentiae secundae. The man was then, I yield, a Montanist: but that
hinders not his credit from relation of truth and universal practice on foot,
though he oppugn it.

Clemens. Alexandrinus, Stro. 1. p^. 117. (...): For which cause, some men,
when as they distribute the holy Eucharist, as the custom is, permit every man
of the common people to take a portion. And what he means by Eucharist,
himself explaineth, 2. Paedag. 2. cap. (...), etc. The mixture of both in one,
that is, of Wine and the Word, is that which we call the Eucharist: whereof
the Faithful when they participate, are sanctified in soul and body both.
Dionysius, Bishop of Alexandria, in Eusebius. Hist. lib. 7. cap. 8, writing unto
Xystus Bishop of Rome, relates of an ancient Christian, no Priest, but a
Layman, that upon occasion supposed he had not been well baptized. Of him he
writes there, that long before, and often, he had been partaker of the body
and blood of Christ; not of his body alone, but of his blood also, in express
words.

Saint Cyprian, in more places than one, Epist. 63. Tamen quoniam quidam vel
ignoranter vel simpliciter, in Calice Dominico sanctificando, and plebi
ministrando, non hoc faciunt quod secus Christus, etc. The Cup of the Lord
communicated to the Laity. And again: Quomodo possumus propter Christum
sanguinem fundere, qui sanguinem Christi erubescimus bibere? By which reason of
Saint Cyprian, no Roman Lay-Catholique can shead his blood for Christ, that
never drank the blood of Christ. Which argument he uses in another place,
Epist. 54. Sect. 2. With what ground can we teach or exhort them to shead their
own bloudin confessing the Name of Christ, if, putting them forth upon that
service, we deny them the blood of Christ? or how can we dispose and fit
them to drink the cup of Martyrdom, unless we first admit them to their
right of communication, in drinking the Lords cup in the Church? Let our good
Catholics answer this, who so punctually, forsooth, and precisely follow the
steps of Antiquity without any swaruing. These are all within 300 years after
Christ, and all express for the Cup.

Athanasius, in his second Apology, being accused for breaking a Chalice,
writes thus: What manner of cup? or when? or where was it broken? In every
house, in every shop, there are many pots: any which if a man break, he
commits not sacrilege. But if any man willingly break the sacred chalice,
he commits sacrilege: but that chalice is no where but where there is a
lawful Bishop. This is the use destined to that chalice; none other: wherein
you, according to institution, do drink unto and before the Laity. This was the
custom in Athanasius time; this, in all the Fathers times, as I could deduct
almost out of every one. This is every where the custom in all the world unto
this day, but in the Roman exorbitant Church, as Cassander says; and was not
quite abolished in that Church, till about 1300 years after Christ; and by
much art, colluding, and fine forgery, was retained from being cast out of that
Church, in the late Conuenticle of Trent, only kept-in for a faction, but
mightily opposed by learned, honest and conscionable Catholics.

For why: who can alter Christ's Institution? who dare change that which he
has ordained? Sacrificium verum and plenum tune offert in Ecclesia Deo Patri,
si sic incipiat offerre, secundum quod ipsum Christum videat obtulisse, says
Saint Cyprian. But says he again, and we know it is true, Constat Dominum
obtulisse calicem in commemorationem Passionis. Et quia Passionis eius
mentionem in sacrificijs omnibus facim^^, nihil aliud quam quod ille fecit,
facere debemus. Why? Because otherwise we offer not the Sacrifice as we
should. Nec sacrificium Dominicum legitima sanctificatione celebramus, nisi
oblatio et sacrificium nostrum responderit Passioni: and that cannot be without
pouring out of wine, that represents the sheading of his blood. But your
Church has altered it; presumptuously done. Who gave your Church such
authority? Hear Saint Cyprian again. Quare si solus Christus audiendus est,
non debemus attendere quid alius ante nos faciendum putauerit, sed quid qui
ante omnes est Christus prior fecerit. Neque enim hominis consuetudinem sequi
oportet, sed Dei veritatem. Nam si Jesus Christus, Dominus and Deus noster,
ipse est summus Sacerdos Dei Patris, and sacrificium Patri seipsum primus
obtulit, and hoc fieri in sui commemorationem praecepit: vtique ille sacerdos
vice Christi vere fungitur, qui id quod Christus fecit, imitatur: and
sacrificium verum ac plenum tunc offert in Ecclesia Deo Patri, si sic incipiat
offerre, secundum quod ipsum Christum videat obtulisse. You do not this:
therefore, in Saint Cyprian's judgment, your sacrifice is neither full nor
true. Much more in that Epistle, Saint Cyprian has, and also elsewhere, unto
the purpose.

But you have Scriptures for the nonce; expressly in our Bibles, contrary to
that we teach and practice; to justify what you practice and teach touching
this sacrilege and perfidiousnesse in altering Christ's institution. Marvel
you should have Scripture against Scripture, Christ's institution being so
direct, for Drink you all. Produce your Scriptures, Ioh. 6. 51. If any man eat
of this Bread, he shall live for ever. And the Bread which I will give, is my
flesh. Here is eating of Bread; and that same Bread, Christ's flesh: but here
is no such matter, as we ought to receive Bread only; or, that Bread alone
suffices. Yes: for, Lo everlasting life attributed by our Lord himself, to
eating only under one kind. I grant: for do they in your country use to eat
under two kinds? Is Wine eaten with spoones there? I have heard of
communicating and receiving under one kind; but never till now, heard talk of
eating under one kind. Go learn to speak, and then write. In the Interim I
take your meaning. Christ, that mentions only eating, does not exclude
drinking; does not say nor mean, eating only suffices. Bread is not
exclusive here, no more then where our Savior went to eat Bread with a
Pharise: at which time, in your Learning and Logic, he did not drink all
dinnertime, or supper-time, because he went only to eat Bread. But Sir, your
wisdom must know, that he which eats Bread, according to the Scripture
phrase, drinks also; Bread importing necessaries for man's life: and to eat
Bread, is both to eat and drink; as to eat his Body, is as well to drink his
blood. So anon the same Evangelist: Unless you eat the flesh of the Son of
man, and drink his blood, you shall not have life in you. Lo here everlasting
life, not had without drinking. Look you to this, if you look to have
everlasting life.

John 4. 14. Christ promises Water to drink; of which water whosoever tastes,
shall thirst no more: therefore, say you, He promised no Wine: therefore, say
I, By your reason he gave not Bread. Therefore, if needs you will have one
kind, and no more, have it in Wine, not Bread. Again, he tells his
Disciples elsewhere, that he would drink no more of the fruit of the vine,
until he drink it new in the Kingdom of God: he makes no mention of any
Bread. Therefore in Heaven, belike, Wine is drink, and only Wine drunk: but
they eat no Bread there. And yet we read of Angels food: which I can tell you,
who take it literally. I might say, our Savior speaks here of Bread, and
not of Wine, in regard of that foregoing occasion, which was the first motive
unto this his Discourse, namely, his miraculous feeding 5000 men with five
loaves: so that he kept him to the Subject and occasion. But this wise man's
observation is clean cashierd by our Saviors Epexegesis afterward, ver. 53,
54. he plainly and expressly makes it plain, that he meant not to exclude
blood, speaking of flesh; nor shut out Wine, where he mentioned Bread.
Everlasting life, to return your own words upon your self, is attributed by
our Lord, not to eating only under one, but both kinds; Except you eat the
flesh of the Son of man, and drink his blood, you have no life in you. Lo,
without drinking, no life everlasting: then, poor deceived Papists, what will
become of you? you shall perish in your sins, though your blood shall be
required at the hands of your ignorant or rather deceitufll guides, that thus
mis-leade you from Christ's Institution.

Luke 24. 30, 35. Christ at Emmaus communicated his disciples under one kind.
Two things are insisted on out of these words, as it appears by the laying
down. First, that this was actio sacra, a Communion of the Body of our
Savior; then that it was done under one kind: this is taken as granted,
because there is no mention of drinking of Wine, there is made mention of
breaking the Bread. Ignorants and wilful take things amiss: an ordinary
Hebrew phrase it is in the Scriptures, to eat bread, to break bread, for to eat
and drink, to take a refection, or repast. This man imagines, that all their
meals were sicca conuiuia; altogether without any liquor, nor Wine nor Water
used, though in hot countries. Such a fool would have no other answer made
unto him, but as Arisotle would have made to him that should deny motion; or
that he should never drink at his meals: the best answer could possibly be
made unto him.

That it was actio sacra and not communis, our Savior did celebrate the
Communion of his Body and Blood: though I know it is controuerted, for my part
I will not contend at present. I know it is held so by Augustine, Theophylact,
and I add too Beda, and Hierome with others: but take heed of the Precedent:
for if he communicated only Bread, then I know not what use of Wine at all
there will be in the blessed Sacrament. For these were, peradventure, of his
Apostles; but without all question, of his Disciples, and so had interest in
the Cup, if any had at all.

See more we cannot, Acts 2. 42. then we have seen already; mention made of
breaking of Bread, which is not exclusive from drinking of Wine: no more then,
1. Cor. 11. 13. drinking does exclude eating at all. Poor shifts for
Sacrilege and impiety, of late made an Article of faith in the Church of Rome.
He that instituted the one, ordained the other, jointly both, and at the same
time, with all circumstances alike: if any advantage is, it is for Drink not
for Eat. For, Drink you all of this, says the Author of the Sacrament: he
says not expressly, Eat you all of this; as foreseeing that impiety, which in
time, humane presumption should bring-in upon and against his own institution,
fulfilled in the Church of Rome at this day.

XXXVII.
That Sacramental unction is not to be used to the sick.

Use it, if you will: we hinder you not, nor much care or enquire what effects
ensue upon it: but obtrude it not on us, or unto the Church, as in Censu of the
Sacraments of the time of Grace, as Baptism is held, and the Lords Supper,
Visible signs of invisible Grace; Powerful instruments ordained by God, to
work in our Souls eternal Life, by conueighing the means thereof unto them.

Sacramental unction call it, if you please, so far as in the writings of the
ancient Fathers, all Articles peculiar unto our Christian faith, and belief,
are sometime called Sacraments: all duties of religious piety unto God; all
divine and Ecclesiastical ceremonies, are named Sacraments: in which sense you
might reckon not seven, but seuenscore, if you were disposed to make a search
for Sacraments.

In the Apostolical and Primitive Church, it was a custom to anoint the sick
with oil, to pray over them, and so commit them unto God. This Saint James
remembers, 5. 4. Is any sick among you? Let him call for the Elders of the
Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil, in the name of the
Lord. The Apostle does not call it a Sacrament; Sacramental unction, as the
Thesis proposes, and which is that should be expressly proved. Our Bibles
say, the sick were anointed: but not our Bibles nor theirs do say, that this
anointing was a Sacrament. And Fathers we are not sent to see, that prove it:
so the place is not to purpose, as it is proposed.

Mar. 6. 13. is a Text defacto. They anointed with oil many that were sick,
and healed them: but de iure there is not a word in that Text, whether yea or
no this Anointing should be a Sacrament. The Master of controversies
confesses himself, that it is not accorded whether in this Text or not,
Sacramental unction was instituted: and himself is of opinion, that it is
not; grounding on the resolution of the Council of Trent: to which, all
Papists are tied to subscribe and yield; and how dare you bring this as a
proof?

Now, say the truth, Sir Goose, and shame the devil. Now, say the truth, and
shame the Devil: are not they sick in their wits, which will oppose such
plain Scriptures?
How plain are these Texts, that set your great Directors together by the ears!
Where were your sick wits, that did not advise you? Take heed of falling foul
with the Council of Trent, the cynosura of your faith. Sure, they were made of
the pappe of an apple; so easily they squeeze themselves out to nothing* your
great Dictators have found hitherto but one direct Text, James 5. 4. can we
think your sharp sight should spy out three more? a Fox or a Fearne-bush:
somewhat or nothing? for, Mat. 16. 18. Acts 28. 8. nor oil, nor unction is
remembered; bare imposition of hands upon the sick, and diseased: so that we
stand in some possibility hereafter, to have added an eightth Sacrament to the
former seven.

XXXVIII.
That no interior grace is given by the imposition of hands in the Sacrament of
holy orders.

THis indeed is contrary unto the express words of our Bible; and therefore
directly contrary to our Opinion, Doctrine, and Practice. Can this fellow be
so ignorant, as not to know; or rather so impudent, as to deny, that in giving
of holy orders, we use those memorable, formal words of our Savior, Receive
the holy Ghost? Was ever man made Minister in the Church of England, but in
that sort, with that form? Can he deny, that we not only practice it, but
propugne it, command it to bevsed, enquire of, and punish the neglect,
opposition and contempt thereof? What shall we say to such a base detracting
Varlet, as shameth not, in view of heaven and earth, to deny the Sun shines at
noonday? Roman Catholics, I admire your patience, that suffer such
Hog-rubbers to lead you by the nose, and make you believe the snow is black.
Poor deceived Souls, trust no such Merchants, that would sell you to the
devil for a morsel of bread, and make you stand out upon terms of
Separation, for their own advantages, against the Church, as Schismatics, in
which you live and have been baptized.

XXXIX.
That Priests and other religious Persons, or any others who have vowed their
chastity unto God, may freely marry notwithstanding their vows.

TOuching marriage of Ministers, this is our Doctrine, resolved, maintained,
and justifiable, Article 32. Bishops, Priests, and Deacons, are not commanded
by Gods Law, either to vow the estate of single life, or to abstain from
marriage. Therefore it is lawful also for them, as for all other Christian
men, to marry at their own discretion, as they shall judge the same to serve
better unto godliness. I find no vow mentioned in this Article, nor leave
given to marry, notwithstanding vow: it is your addition, to scandalize the
Doctrine which otherwise you durst not touch.

Marriage is honorable amongst all men. This you do not deny: that single
life is essential unto the Clergy, and indispensable, none of your side
affirms, that I know, but nonus Dogmatistes in Italia, as Cassander calls
him, Francisco Tunia^ the Jesuit. It is but an Ecclesiastical sanction, this
both you and we set down. It is not deined, but notwithstanding that general
license to all, the Church may restrain marriage unto some, at some time, upon
some occasions, as we use in our Colleges at this day: which is no restraint,
but a condition tendered; Leave your fellowship if you marry.

The Primitive Church used, I deny not, this conditional restraint in some
cases, to some men, upon some occasion: they might so do, without tax or
blame: and so may you or we, for ought I know, with moderation or discretion.
So the question is not, Whether Priests may marry? but, Whether it be
convenient for them so to do? You say no, never, at no time. We deny this
rigor, and leave it indifferent to their own discretion; resolving, that at
some time, for some causes, it is convenient, and to be permitted: to some
men, at some time, for some considerations, it may be denied to marry.

Your Church, for reasons best known to her self, though apparent enough to
all, has a long time doated upon single life of Priests, for I cannot say
chaste; and the better to secure her self of that state, has laid a tie of
conscience, a band by oath upon them; admitting none to holy orders, but such
as first solemnly take that vow: which has many times and often filled your
Churches with knaves and dunses abundantly; honester men, and discreet
Scholars, refusing such a tie.

We advise you not to break your vow, persuade not your selves so: we counsel
and advise you by all means to keep it, and live honest: marry freely, if you
be free; if not, we say not to you, Do as Alexander did with Gordius knot; Cut
it in pieces, when you cannot undo it. It was ill to vow so unadvisedly; worse,
to force you to it on no necessity, yet worse to break it securely with
presu^ptio^: butworst of all, adhinnire after fresh maidenheads, or neighbors
beds continually.

We say, you did ill to vow absolutely, that which was not in your power to
perform: a mischief past, that cannot be remedied, must be relieved what it
may. If you have vowed, keep it on Gods name: it is sin to break it, I make
no question of it, which was deliberately, discreetly, possibly promised, in
things not against nature, common right or reason; for even in a bond, a
condition evil, impious, or impossible, is void and binds not, they say.

I deny not vows in the new Testament, they may be means unto, and parts of
Gods worship, as well in the new Testament as the old. So Gregory Nazianzen
imposed a vow upon himself, not to take the name of God in vain, and kept it:
So have many other lawfully and profitably done: do you so, and we commend you
for it.

The Texts you produce, do not one of them Deuter. 23. 22. Psalm. 66. 13. Psalm.
19. 11. 1. Tim. Math. 5. 12.
speak of the marriage of Priests or religious persons, or any other that vowed
chastity unto God: of vows they speak, and of vows to be kept: but Quid haec
ad Bacchum? Your promise was, your undertaking is, to prove by express words
of our own Bibles, that the vows of Priests and religious persons touching
single life, should be kept: and yet neither do we deny the one; nor you
prove the other. See your honesty in this also, and insufficiency to perform.

XL.
That fasting, and abstinence from meats, is not grounded upon holy Scripture,
nor causes any spiritual good.

FAsting, is abstaining from all meats; or from some certain meats: the first
istruly Fasting, which must be limited and confined to a time, for so totally
to fast is impossible. The second is dieting rather then fasting; and yet is
that which this man principally means by Fasting, as speaking according to
the tongue of Ashdod, in the Church of Rome, that is more for appearances then
true substances.

Fasting is manifold obiectiuely, as it has been practiced by Jews, by
Pagans, by Christians. This man should speak of the Christian Fast only; but
huddleth all altogether, without distinction. Fasting is distinct,
subiectiuely. Among Christians there is or may be understood a natural, a
moral, an ecclesiastical Fast; for necessity, for remedy, conueniencie,
policy, piety. This addle-headed Fellow cares not to put a difference between
the kinds, nor to add quantity to his position, that men might know where to
have him, and find what he should say.

He cannot be ignorant, that we commend Fasting, as a profitable help unto
devotion and piety. He cannot choose but know, that we command it, not only
for civil, but religious ends, and use it in times of special note, for
fitting dispatches of principal alloy; In our Ember-weeks, for giving of
Orders; in our Lent, to humble our selves against Easter; upon the Vigils of
Saints, and other set days: which we ground upon Scripture, and use to this
purpose, To cause spiritual good.

So Scriptures and Fathers serve to no purpose, being brought to prove that
which is not denied. We ground it on Scripture, but not that alleged of the
Rechabites. We have warrant sufficient from Christian Ier. 35. 5. Therefore it
is grounded, etc.
practice and direction. We need no address to Jewish, either Nazarits or else
Rechabites, for example: and if we should, yet what have we to do with this
pretended? They drank no wine at all; none of them for ever: as the Icthyophagi
of Aethiopia eat no flesh; a general custom, no Fast. They did it out of a
politic respect, because they were strangers in the Land. We must have a
religious example to serve our turn. And lastly, they were yet under the Law:
the Vow of the Nazarite might as well be pleaded; and all Jewish Ceremonies,
for observation unto Christians. So ignorant is this Idle-pate.

Otherwise we ground Fasting upon holy Scripture, and could add many more
places of Fathers to be seen: the true end and intent whereof is double; (...),
to be anointed with the holy Ghost, and (...), to be washed and rinsed from
our sins: but it needs not. It suffices only, we confess most willingly
the ground of Fasting to be divine, the use of Fasting to be singular. So these
goodly proofs touch not us at all. Use them against those that use not Fasts:
for, lastly, it is our practice.

XLI.
That Jesus Christ descended not into hell, nor delivered thence the souls of
the Fathers.

AProposition of two feet, neither relying upon either: The souls of the
Fathers might not be thence delivered, though Christ descended into hell; and
Christ might very well go down into hell, and yet not deliver any Fathers
thence; as finding some other work there to do; and, having other causes of
his descent, finding no Fathers to deliver.

For the former part of this Position, that He went not into hell; with what
face, what forehead, can this Fellow show we teach it, when in our Creed we
profess, that He went down into hell, and have publicly defended it against
opposition! Nay, we more believe it, than the Church of Rome does; and are
more punctual in it, than are they.

They quarter out hell into four Regions; Hell of the Damned, Purgatory,
Limbus Infantium, and Limbus Patrum. This division, without warrant of holy
Writ, be it granted them; into which of these Quarters, into all, or into some,
did the soul of our Savior, separate from his body, descend? Say they, Into
the hell of the Fathers only, really; into the other parts, virtually, or by
effects. Thus Thomas: and who dare deny him? Thus the Current of their Schools.
This is their Tenent, and no otherwise.

We profess and believe, that Christ went into hell, that is, that the humane
soul of our Savior, in the Interim of separation from the body, did
essentially and really go down into hell, the place of the Damned, and of the
Devils; not alone into Limbus of the Fathers, which was not there; not to
suffer any thing there at all: for, all sufferings ended upon the Cross. In the
Land of darkness, and shadow of death, began the first step of his exaltation;
that, free among the Dead, he walked where he would, not being consined to any
place; that he took real possession of a part of his Kingdom, and presented
his person unto those his vassals; having beaten his enemy in his chiefest
hold, chased him out of the castle of his strength, triumphed over him in
himself, and preached confusion unto his foes, that would not entertain his
mercy in time of life, nor partake of grace offered them unto repentance. This
is our belief concerning his descent into hell; if not orthodox, ancient, and
received, let this wrangler show where, how, and we will yield unto better
discretion from Antiquity.

It is idly supposed, that, the descent granted, we must needs infer
withal a Limbus Patrum, or deliverance of the Fathers out of hell; there being
alleged (not contrary to Scriptures, nor Analogy of faith; not inferring
impiety, impossibility, improbability, absurdity, or contradiction) so many
true, good, and catholic reasons of our Saviors descent thither, beside this.

The Fathers he means, are the Patriarchs and Prophets, and righteous men,
that lived and died before Christ came in the flesh; that expected the
Promises, and believed in hope, but enjoyed not the fullness which we do
since. Being dead, they are considered two ways; in regard of state, in
respect of place. For place, the Scripture runs in general terms: In the
hands of God; In Abraham's Bosom; With their people; and such like; thus
affirmatively determining no certain place: negatiuely resolving, they were
not there whereas now they are, in the highest heavens, and glorious, where the
Body of Christ resideth, exalted above all Powers and Principalities.

For, He first entered into the most holy place by his own blood. They without
us were not to be perfect; standing the first Tabernacle, the holiest of all
was not yet opened. The way was new, which he prepared for us. The gates to be
opened were eternal gates, never opened since they were gates; but gates, and
eternal shut gates together. Therefore we profess with holy Saint Ambrose,
every day in our Liturgy, When thou had overcome the sharpnes of death, thou
did open the Kingdom of Heaven to all Believers. This, we acknowledge, is
the received opinion of the fathers, and (for ought I know) of Protestant
Divines not a few.

Though they were not in heaven, in regard of place; yet were they in
happiness, in respect of state. The souls of the Righteous, said he, before
Christ came, are in the hands of God: and no kind of torments shall once touch
them. This is also the consented doctrine of Antiquity. If no kind of torment,
then not loss, nor pain; then not in hell: for, I never heard of hell without
all manner pain. So it follows not, in opinion of the Ancients, the souls of
the Faithful were not in heaven above properly; therefore they were in hell
properly. Gods hands, in which they were, are not so shortened; his Kingdom is
not so narrowed, but that he might well have more places than one; Receptacles,
Repositories, Resting-places, for the righteous, where he would dispose them,
enough, could we be content.

Curiosity will not stay here, but proceed to enquire, Where were they then? In
what place of the world was their abiding? I answer, I cannot resolve that:
for, the Scripture has not determined it. Nescire velle, quae Magister maximus
docere non vult, erudita est inscitia: It is learned nescience, Not to know
what our grand instructor will not teach. It is enough to know, they are in
better case now, than they were then. With Christ they entered into his Rest.
Ever they were in the hands of God, though not ever in like distance or
proportion with God. So what need we wrangle about the place, if the matter be
agreed touching state? See how contrary to our own Bibles.

Ephesians. 4. 8. out of Psalm. 68. 18. When he ascended up Contrary to their own
Bibles.
on high, he led Captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men. Christ, in his
Ascent, led Captives along. The Question is, Who these Captines were? No, Sir:
the question should first of all be, What this Ascent was? You take it of his
Resurrection. It plainly is referred unto his Triumph into the heavens, in his
Ascension, both in the Prophet, and Apostle, and by all Interpreters, but your
self.

But to follow you in your follies; Be it as you These freed Captives cannot
be the souls of the Saved, which no man in his right wits, can call Captives:
nor of the damned; for, so the devils should be brought again into heaven.
Therefore they were the souls of the Fathers which Christ delivered out of
hell.
would have it, of his Resurrection: must these freed Captives needs be the
souls of the Fathers which Christ delivered out of hell? Yes, no nay; no other
possibility. For, they were not the souls of the Saved, nor the Devils;
therefore the souls of the Fathers. Sir, can you find no mo but these, Devils
or Saved? Justin Martyr could: and he is ancient, page 57. edit. Rob. Steph.
with him in his opinion: and I think he was in his right wits. We are those
Captives, that since the Ascension of our Savior, by the preaching of the
Gospel of peace, are captiued unto truth, being freed and delivered from
error. Irenaeus, in his wits too, I suppose, goes not far from this meaning:
for, having remembered the Text whcih he refers to the Passion, he infers
thus; Dominus per passionem mortem destruxit, and soluit errorem,
corruptionemque exterminauit, and ignorantiam destruxit. Tertullian was also in
his right ^its; who, in 5. against Marcion, writes thus: Ascendit in
sublimitatem, id est Coelum. Captiuam duxit captiuitatem, id est, mortem, vel
humanam seruitutem.

See then Fathers expounding it of nor Devils, nor Saved: and yet this
confident Ignorant, that scarce ever read Father, it is probable (but, who so
bold as blind Bayard?) pronounces, that These freed Captives here, could be
no other than the souls of the Fathers whom Christ delivered forth of hell,
because they were nor Devils nor Saved, in his opinion.

They were not Devils; very magisterially spoken, and pro Imperio; because this
learned Theologue says, They were not. Athanasius says, It was the Devil
that he captiued; (...), having made captive the Tyrant of captivity, To. 1. de
salutari aduentu Jesus Christi: and yet Athanasius never feared to be challenged
for bringing back the Devils into heaven; unto whom God Almighty had sworn in
his wrath, They should never more return into his Rest. Might he not lead them
along the air, and shut them our, cast them off at heauen-gates? Captivity is
actiuely or passiuely taken; Those that held in captivity, or such as were
held. Christ led them both, death and damnation; the Devil, the grave, the
Chief and Principal in the dwellings of Ham, the Commanders of the Prince of
darkness: of whom he made a show openly, and triumphed over them in his flesh.
They might be the Righteous, the Saved, though you deny it, that were formerly
in captivity unto their enemies, and now freed and delivered to serve Christ
Jesus; which the Fathers call, if you ever read it, a better captivity: whether
you hold them in their right wits, or no, I know not. I am sure, your wits
and wisdom are far asunder, though no great substance in either.

Very far; or could it have dropped from your pen, They cannot be the
souls of the Saved; and yet, Therefore they were the souls of the Fathers
whom Christ deliuerd out of hell? who peradventure were not saved, but cast
into another hell, being taken thence. Go learn to speak and write, Sir giddy
Goose-gagger, and then undertake to stop the Protestants mouths. You must not
look to prate and talk idly to them, as you do to your Proselytes, poor
fools, that are hood-winked willingly by each Buzzard, to blind obedience.
You may let these freed Captives be these or those, delivered, saved, so or so:
you cannot infer, they were delivered by Christ, therefore they were freed
out of hell. Let them not have been in heaven before our Savior: I deny it
necessary, they were therefore in hell. Hell is one thing, says Tertull. lib.
4. against Marcion, Abraham' s bosom is another thing. For, Abraham says, A
great depth is betwixt these two Regions; which permits not any to pass to
and fro. Neither could the rich man have lift up his eyes, but to places above
him, and far above him, by reason of that infinite distance betwixt that
height and that depth. That Region, then, I call Abraham' s bosom, which,
though it be not heaven, is yet higher than hell.

Thus he, upon warrant of our Saviors words, who places Abraham far above
that place of torment; and so the one no part of the other. And so likewise
resolves that profound Divine, Saint Augustine, in his 99, the memorable
Epistle to Euodius, instantly rehearsed by the Discourser: Non vtique sinus
ille Abrahae, id est, secretae cuiusdam quietis habitatio, aliqua pars
inferorum esse credenda est: Then, without doubt, the Bosom of Abraham, which
is an habitation of secret rest, cannot be thought to have been any part of
hell. You dare oppose Saint Augustine: dare you not?

It is true which that illuminate Doctor auerreth in the same Epistle: None but
an Infidel, will deny Christ's Acts 2. 27. Which very words Saint August.
applies to the paint of Purgatory, and adds, Who but an Infidel will deny
Christ to have descended into hell? Ep. 99. ad Euodium.
descent into hell; and as true, that none but an Ass or an Idiot will say,
that therefore necessarily he went thither to fetch up the fathers that were
there in hell. Saint Augustine denies them to have been there: it is plain, and
not denied by your Masters. Indeed it is answered, that Saint Augustine did not
know what the besome of Abraham was; but that he applies that Text, Acts 2.
27. to the pains of Purgatory, is but a conjecture at the best. S. Augustine
says, that Christ delivered some from the pains of hell; and interprets
himself, not to mean That of those holy souls that were in the Bosom of
Abraham; nor of the souls of the Damned that were in hell torments, out of
which is no redemption. Heerupon you think wisely, he must needs mean the pains
of Purgatory, and no other. It is the doctrine of your own Schools, that such
as were raised at any time from death to life, were not certainly doomed, nor
confined into their stations: but, in regard GOD foresaw they should live
again, extraordinarily he suspended their determination, this way or that way
irreuocably. Why might not Saint Augustine mean some such thing? Without doubt
he did not mean it of Purgatory. For, Saint Thomas, 3. p. q. 52. ar. 8.
resolves, that the souls of Purgatory were not freed nor delivered by Christ's
descent thither; his merit extending unto eternal deliverance, and unto no
partial or temporal freedom. But, somewhat you would say, though poor man
you be to seek, in the manifold labyrinths of Purgatory, Limbus, and Hell: out
of which, wiser than you cannot wind.

The word Hell is ambiguous in the Writings of the Fathers. Sometime it is put
for the state and condition; sometime, for the place and receptacle of souls;
and that in a different manner, in opposition to a twofold heaven. For, earth
is respectively called Superi, and the state of men living, by the selfsame
name: and so in opposition, any Dead are Inferi; and their place and
receptacle, Infernus. Secondly, Superi is the highest heaven: and they that do
live there, are so styled. In opposition heerto, the name of Inferi has a two
fold interpretation. First, for a place or state contrary to the state and
place of the highest heaven: this is hell properly, or of the Damned. Secondly,
for a state or place negatiuely opposed, and not contrary to heaven: and so
every place and state which is not that highest in the highest heaven, is
called Inferi; and may so be, as Pamelius has observed upon Tertullian, lest
you take it for a Protestant device.

This Fellow perchance knew not this before: and therefore wheresoever the
Fathers speak of Christ's descent into hell, and carrying thence the Fathers
into the highest heavens, he faineth Limbo unto himself, even as the Bell
tinketh whatsoever the fool thinks; when the Fathers meant nothing less
then so, but alteration of state, and place. See then as many places as the
book will hold. They may prove the descent of Christ into hell; which, as an
Article of our Creed, we willingly embrace. The descent to Popish Limbus they
do not prove: the which no Father ever dreamed of, in that sort as our
Masters tender it unto us to be believed at this day.

XLII.
That there is no Purgatory fire, or other prison wherein sins may be
satisfied for after this life.

NOt resolved of by Antiquity, out of Scripture; nor determined by Scripture,
old or new, as certain, and necessarily to be believed. You say, Yes:
therefore we contrary the express words of our own Bibles.

1. Cor. 3. 13. The fire shall try every man's work of what sort it is. Is this
so express in your opinion, Sir Gagger? It seems not; for neither have we
your Therefore, etc. for the conclusion, nor your ordinary express words; but
barely thus: Contrary to their own Bible. Your conscience checked you: or did
Bellarmine stumble you? or what is the cause you faint in your Evidence?
Bellarmine confesses, it is one of the hardest places in Scripture. And such
are not express Directors, or Concluders; therefore no good proofs in points
of faith, without evident conspiring of some more perspicuous place. For,
points of faith must have manifest assurance: to prove obscurity, by more
obscurity, your Logic can tell you, if you have not forgot it, is a fault. We
doubt, and make a question unto you of Purgatory. Your Evidence for it, is from
that of which we more doubt, at leastwise as much as we do of Purgatory.

For, beside the confession of the Master of controversies, and the diverse
senses, and expositions by him confessed and produced, the latest, I think, I
am sure one of the learned of your own expositors, Estius, both confesses
as much, and resolves against your intent for Purgatory out of this place. The
Fire, says he, which the Apostle in this discourse has named three several
distinct times, is variously expounded by diverse men. Augustine and Gregory
understand it of the afflictions of this life: as in the 65. Psalm. We have
passed through fire and water. Others take it for Hell fire. Some, for
Purgatory. Some, for the fire of Conflagration, which shall either proceed or
accompany Christ the Judge at the day of Doom. Others imagine a threefold fire
answerable unto fire thrice named by the Apostle. The first, that fire of
Conflagration. The second, the fire of Gods severe Judgment. The third, of
Purgatory: an absurd interpretation, says your own Estius: the fire is the
same in all places, says he. That fire is either that of Conflagration, or
Gods severe Judgment, or both, according to the opinion of Cai^tan (no
Protestant), in his own opinion, rather that of Conflagration, which shall set
the world on fire at the last, which has a threefold effect upon three
different sorts of men: for probation upon the thoroughly clean: for Purgation
upon the yet defiled: for revenge upon the cast-awayes and ungodly. For which
exposition, he cites Basil in three several places; Hilary in second Canon
upon Matthew, Ambrose, Lactantius, Eucherius and others: but in no case your
Purgatory fire, because Purgatory receives men after Judgment particular, and
is utterly amolished before the general Judgment finished. Secondly, because
Purgatory tries no man's work, but punishes the evil works of such as shall
be saved. If such men, your own, be not resolved for it, nay, resolved
against it, would you have us instantly profess a Purgatory, because you say
Saint Paul meant so, and cannot prove it?

Prove it you can, out of Saint Ambrose, Ser. 20. in Psalm. 118. and Bellarm.
says, that Idem habet, on the place Saint Ambrose, Ser. 20 in Psalm. 118. Saint
Hierome upon 4 of Amos. Saint August. upon the 37 Psalm. Saint Gregory lib. 4.
Dial. explicate this very place of Purgatory.
of S. Paul, in his Commentaries: and Estius, Ser. 3. upon the same 118. Psalm.
Which testimony he alleges, for, against the Conceit of Purgatory extracted
hence: so that, if these testimonies are all one, Ignis Conflagrationis is
intended, at the end of the world to begin; not the fire of Purgatory, which
is to be consummated at the worlds end. Post consummationem saeculi, are Saint
Ambrose words, missis Angelis qui segregent bonos et malos, hoc futurum est
Baptisma; quando per caminum ignis Iniquitas exuretur: vt in regno Dei fulgeant
iusti sicut Sol, in regno Patris sui; et si aliquis vt Petrus sit, vt Johannes,
baptizatur hoc igni. This is a purging fire as well as a proouing and consuming
fire, as your Estius has well observed. In which sense Saint Ambrose speaks,
vt per ignem purgatus fiat saluus. So you belly Saint Ambrose, for explicating
this very place of Purgatory in your sense.

Secondly, you prove it out of Hierome, upon the fourth of Amos, 11. You were
as a firebrand plucked forth of the burning: where what Hierome has for
Purgatory, I would willingly understand of your Gaggership; for I profess my
disability to conceive. Hierome compares that place of the Prophet, with the
other of Saint Paul; and only compares it, no more: Hierome does not
determine Fire in either place, to be your Purgatory fire: all that can be
collected is, That by fire, Saint Hierome meant, the severe Justice of God. Cum
subuer si fuerint ob similitudinem criminum Sodomae et Gomorrhae, pessimaque in
ijs aedificia diuinus ignis exusserit, ipsi liberentur, quasi torris raptus de
incendio. Et quomodo Lot, Sodoma pereunte, seruatus est, amittens substantiam,
et partem corporis sui, quam intelligimus vxorem: sic omnes isti Sodomorum
diuitias amittentes, euadunt nudi, iuxta illud quod in Apostolo legimus, Si
cuius opus arserit, etc. Si ergo saluatur per ignem, quasitorris de incendio
rapitur. If there be no fire but that in Purgatory, I confess, this fire must
be that of Purgatory: but if there be many fires beside this of your
Imagination, it is rather any fire then that of Purgatory. For I never yet
heard, that an Heretic dying an Heretic, may have his Heresy purged in
Purgatory; and so leaving that there, as a snake her slough, himself may stie
up to Heaven: but without all controversy, out of that fire in Saint Hierome,
Heretics be saved into Heaven. Postquam in eo opera arserint, in antiquum
restituatur locum. See the place, Reader, and tell me thy opinion of this
Gagger.

Saint Augustine cannot possibly understand this place of your fire of
Purgatory, except he will and do contradict him: For by your own
confessions, Saint Augustine conceived it of the Tribulations of this life;
therefore not of Purgatory after this life. The words you mean in Saint
Augustine upon 37. Psalm. are, It is said, He shall be saved, yet as it were
by fire. And because it is said, He shall be saved, therefore that fire is
not regarded. No marvel: and yet that fire is more insufferable then any
torment which a man can possibly undergo in this life. Here (no doubt) the
game is up for Saint Augustine. Fire after this life, and yet not eternal:
therefore of Purgatory, no question. Yes, Sir, a question. Indeed no question
what Saint Augustine meant. For first, he calls it plainly Emendatorium
ignem, fire that corrects men, and makes them better. Purgatory is not so:
it is penal only. There is no merit in Purgatory: souls cannot sin nor
deserve there, in the resolution of your own men. Secondly, the fire which
Saint Augustine means, does then, in his opinion, perform that office, when
the sheep are separated from the goats; that is, when your Purgatory, in your
own opinions, is no more for ever. Thus the ordinary Gloss understood Saint
Augustine. We read, says the Gloss, of two fires that shall come. The one
eternal, which eternally shall torment the reprobate: This fire is to ensue
the Judgment. The other fire shall go before, which shall burn up the
surface of this world, and shall amend them that have builded wood, hay, and
stubble. But such as have builded gold and silver, end precious stones, shall be
secure and safe from either fire. And in like sort does Salmeron conceive of
Saint Augustine: and Augustine could not mean your Purgatory in Saint Paul.
For such as build gold, etc. come not within your Verge at all; but into Saint
Paul's Fires, as says Saint Augustine, comes both one and other: Ignis de
quo locutus est eo loco Apostolus Paulus, (...) debet intelligi, vt ambo per
cum transeant: id est, et qui aedificat supra hoc fundamentum aurum, etc. et
qui aedificat lignum, etc.

Lastly, Saint Gregory does explicate this very place of Purgatory, Dial. 4.
and to help you out, for you could not tell, Cap. 39. sed tamen are his words,
de quibusdam leuibus culpis esse ante iudicium, purgatorius ignis credendus
est. And to this sense he says, that Text of the Apostle may be applied. But,
Sir Gagger, this Gregory, the Author of the Dialogues, is no authentical
writer with me. I do not hold him for the man whose name he bears. But at
this time I will not question him for your sake, though I owe you little. He
tells us of a purging fire. Good: but every purging fire, is not that you
dream of, which has made the Popes Kitchen smoke so much heretofore. Saint
Augustine acknowledges another: so do many of your own men. And this of Saint
Gregory is no other then that of Fire, which goes before the Judge: Ante
iudicium, says your Author: which we deny not, and helps you nothing. Saint
Augustine led Saint Gregory the way: Videtur euidentius apparere, says he, in
illo iudicio, quasdam quorundam purgatorias poenas futuras. No such matter then
in their opinion, for the present. Many trying Fires there may be: there are
both literal and metaphorical, which will claim interest in Saint Paul's
meaning, 1. Cor. 3. 13. before your Purgatory can find admittance there.

Toby 4. 17. Power out thy bread upon the burial of the just: that is, Offer
for those which are in Purgatory; no doubt: For Saint Chrysostom, Hom. 32. in
Math. understands this very place of Purgatory. Understands? And what of
that? Understanding will not serve our turn: we must have express words in
our own Bibles for it: else, Olle, quid ad te? Purgatory and Burial are all
one with you: or Purgatory will not appear hence. As for your warrant from
Saint Chrysostom, you belly Saint Chrysostom, and your Author both. I say it,
because the man you would remember, is not Saint Chrysostom: but the Author of
the Imperfect work upon Saint Matthew: who indeed was wont to go under Saint
Chrysostomes name, but is acknowledged by every Smatterer amongst you, not to
be Saint Chrysostom. Did you not know this? I pity then your case, which
has such poor companions for Patrons. Did you know it? the more to blame
you, that would not distinguish him from Saint Chrysostom: who in his 32.
Homil. has not any thing looking that way. You might have been challenged for
forgery every way, had I not found you out; as you may for folly or ignorance,
or dissolute security, being found out.

But neither does your Saint Chrysostom that is the Author specified, so
understand or talk of the place of Toby. For, Homil. 26. not 32. upon 41.
verse of the tenth of Mat. having expounded these words of Toby not ill,
tells us a tale out of Clemens, concerning Saint Peter, and this Doctrine
delivered by him out of Tradition. Sed audi mysterium, etc. But hear a secret,
and mystical meaning, given by Saint Peter, remembered by Clemens. If any
believer shall do a good work, it is profitable unto him in this world, by
delivering him from evil, and also in the world to come, to attain the
Kingdom of heaven; rather there in that world, than in this. But if an
unbeliever do a good work, it will profit him here, by delivering him from
evil, and God will return unto him good for his work: But in that world to
come, his work will profit him nothing. For neither is he ranked, for that his
work, with other believers, and that deservedly, because he did that good,
out of natural good motions, and not for Gods sake. Wherefore he receives
his reward, both in and for the body, not in or for his soul. Also if a
Christian shall give unto no Christian, he shall therefore receive no great
reward, because he gave it not unto a Christian, nor as unto a Christian; Toby
saying, Pour out thy wine upon the sepulchers of the just, and give nothing
unto the sinner. Whosoever gives a little to an vnbelieuer, has his reward: but
he that gives any thing to a believer, has a double reward: first, in as much
as he is Gods Creature; secondly, because he is just before God. But
whosoever gives unto an unbeliever, has only a single reward; in as much as
the unbeliever is Gods Creature, though in will opposite unto God. If a
Christian do receive no Christian, but an Infidel in the name of a Christian,
have his reward notwithstanding appointed for him he shall; because, as much
as lies in him, he receives indeed no Christian, but as a Christian. It was
necessary I should, as I have done, set down the whole place at large, both
that the Pamphleter may direct me to that passage, or those words; in which,
or by which, Saint Chrysostom understands this place of Purgatory: which I
profess, such is my dullness, I cannot see nor imagine: As also that I might
deal uprightly in the cause, and sincerely with him that deals honestly in
nothing; and lastly, that the Reader may pick out, if he can, where or how he
may ground Purgatory; or if he cannot, may see and know, and take notice of a
forlorn cause, so vpholden by false shows and collusion. Find Purgatory fire,
or not fire; prison, or not prison; state, or not state of the deceased in
expiatory torments or pains here, and I will instantly profess and believe
Purgatory without more adoo.

1. Cor. 15. 29. Else what shall they do, which are baptized for the Dead?
Upon this Text the Gaggers Gloss is, An evident place concerning the succor
which the souls departed receive by the assistance of the Church. To admit it
evident, and concerning succor which souls departed receive, and that by the
assistance of the Church; yet first, I say, you go from your word: no such
contrariety here, as you pretend. Secondly, you are a poor Ignaro, that think
souls must needs be in Purgatory, that receive assistance from the Church. It
may be, your poor understanding will wonder at it: but know, Sir, I can admit
Prayer for the Dead, and deny your Purgatory. I can give you reasons to pray
for the Dead, and yet keep far enough from your Purgatory. But for that some
other time. At present I answer, You are a silly man, that call this an evident
place; one of the hardest in all Scripture. Quid sit baptizari pro mortuis,
obscurum est, and ab Authoribus vary exponitur, say your own men; which is
true: For till this day, it is not agreed what is the meaning: no man can say,
This is the sense; and yet our Blunderer says, It is evident.

Do you know, that some take pro mortuis, for the Dead, that is, for sins,
because men die through sins; and the works of sin are called Dead works? And
so men are baptized to be delivered from sin. These men dreamt not of
Purgatory. That others use pro mortuis, that is, do represent the Dead,
because we die to sin in Baptism, and are buried unto corruption? And not
much differing hence, that others take it, Into the death of Christ? which of
these thought upon Purgatory? Again, some take Baptism for affliction: men
afflicted unto death, what shall they do, if the dead rise not again? Some
refer it unto a Jewish custom; by which, if a man had died polluted, another
was cleansed and washed for him; that so being dead, he might get advantage by
it. This Jewish Fable may happily look upon your Purgatory: and much good may
it do you. Yet farther, Chrysostom relates upon this place, that when any of
the Catechized among the Marcionite Heretics died, a living body was laid
under the Beer; and the question proposed unto the Party, If he would be
baptized? for you know, the Catechumeni were (...), unbaptized. The Party
answered for the dead man, Yes, I will: and so was he baptized for him. And
thus they expounded Saint Paul's meaning. Tertullian, by dead, understands
the body of man. If there be no Resurrection, to what end is the body baptized?
Epiphanius lastly, and most men, commonly take it for the baptizing of the
Clinici, as they called them. Men in those times usually deferred Baptism
until their death, and in extremis would be baptized. So to be baptized for
the Dead, is to be baptized, when men are ready to die: which they not do, but
upon hope of the Resurrection. In such variety, and greater than so; yet says
this fellow, An evident place. To come home to the assertion, It is plain and
evident, the Apostle speaks not of any succor that souls departed received
from the Suffrages of the Church (which were it granted, no necessity of
Purgatory would ensue), but of comfort that men received from that main point
of our most holy faith, the Resurrection of the Dead; the main Subject of that
Chapter, as every child with us can tell.

See more: for we have seen but little hitherto, 2. Tim. 1. 18. where That
day is transmued into Purgatory. For Saint Paul's words are, The Lord grant unto
him, that he may find mercy with the Lord at that day, that is, may be
delivered out of Purgatory at the day of Judgment. So wheresoever God shows
mercy, there is Purgatory; or, All that find mercy at the day of Judgment,
come out of Purgatory. Unless this be his meaning, let him tell me what he
would have with Saint Paul here. If this be his meaning, I wish him well: for
sure, he is in no right wits; because so, no man living can escape Purgatory
by this inference. For no man but finds mercy with God before that time, and
then. No man but needs Gods mercy then, (...); In that fearful and terrible
day, when we stand in need of great mercy indeed, says Chrysostom. who never
dreamt of any Purgatory; nor would have sent Onesiphorus thither, had he
fancied any such thing: for even according to your own Doctrine, his good
deeds had not only abundantly merited for himself, sufficiently satisfied
for his Peccadilloes: but his Indurances, over and above, laid somewhat unto
the Church-treasure. And what has Purgatory to do with such a man?

Esaias 4. 4. the Prophet speaks of the Spirit of burning, and of Purging,
thus: When the Lord shall wash the filthiness of the daughter of Sion, and purge
the blood of Jerusalem out of the midst thereof by the Spirit of judgment, and
by the Spirit of burning: then, without all doubt, Purgatory burns apace; the
rather because Saint Augustine expounds it of Purgatory, Lib. 20. de Ciuit.
Dei, Cap. 25, says Bellar. You left us to seek. Cap. 21, say others, so your
selves are to seek, I mean, for any such thing in Saint Augustine. For he is
belied in both places: which touch not upon Purgatory at all, but manifestly
design the last Judgment. In the 21. he professes himself, that his discourse
was wholly thereof, a primo Saluatoris aduentu, vsque ad vltimu^ Iudiciu^, de
quo nunc agimus. And more evidently, Cap. 25. Videtur euidentius apparere in
illo Iudicio quodam quorunda^ futuras Poenas purgatorias. Purgatory pains are
by S. Augustine put off and adiourned unto the last Judgment; then to begin
when yours end: and this but in opinion, not resolution. Now Sir, what
advantage have you by Saint Augustine, who speaks opiningly of Purgatory, but
excludes your Purgatory.

And to as much purpose is Saint Basil, expounding the place of Esaias, 9. 18. of
Purgatory, you say. The text is, For wickedness burns as a fire, it deuoureth
the briers and thorns, and will kindle in the thick places of the Forest, and
they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke. Basil in his exposition
names purging fire. I grant it: but this purging fire is in life, not after
death: in this world, not in the world to come: and God himself is this
purging fire; who abolisheth and consumes iniquity by Repentance, being
detected by confession, as any man may see, that will but look upon the place;
and the same Father upon the 10. of Esaias, more plainly explicateth his own
meaning: Pandit hic naturam ignis, quia lustratiuus est et purgatorius.
Sanctificabit enim ipsum quasi in igne ardenti. Quomodo autem sanctificat
ignis? Quia comesturus est syluam tanquam foenu^. Sane ex quo Deus noster ignis
consumens est, consumet sylua^ et vitia, quae a sylua^, sieve materia promanant
animae quae non degit in spiritu sed in carne. Strange conceits; that if any
Father name purging fire, he must needs be a favorer of Popish Purgatory.

Your second of Macchab. 12. 44, 45. you may make your friends with: your
Catholic Readers may pass it for current: but your protestant adversaries
admit it not. And if they did, you gained nothing thereby: I told you before,
that Praying for the dead does not infer Purgatory. There are other causes
for that practice, beside the opinion of Purgatory: And were there none, this
text does infer but a mere opinion, no decision or point of faith. Believe
Purgatory, if you will: for my part I hinder you not, so you leave it to me to
believe it, or not, and not force me to consent against my knowledge and
resolution. But lastly, I answer, The author of that story did intend no more,
but to set out Judas unto us as a Pharise, not a Sadduce: he thought of the
Resurrection, which the Pharisees believed; but was denied by the Sadduces: for
these factions were then on foot: and Hyrcanus, in whose time the book was
written, was a Sadduce, denied the Resurrection: which his Uncle Judas did not:
so much this writer would infinuate, and so tax the impiety of his own times.
For good Sir, how could Judas dream of any Purgatory ex animi tui sente^tia,
when as all the fathers and godly that died before Christ, went into Limbus
Patru^? But were their testimo^y evident, as it is not, yet the book was never
used for dogmaticall co^clusio^s of faith, farther the^ co^firmd by the Canon.

Math. 5. 25. 27. no, it is 26. which you would have: He shall not come out
thence, until he have paid the utmost farthing. Therefore at last he shall,
payment being made; but not out of hell, therefore out of Purgatory, Nay, as
much and as soon out of hell, as out of Purgatory. This place will as soon
conclude, the Devils and Damned shall be saved, as any delivered out Purgatory.
Our Savior means, That he shall never come out, because he never can pay the
uttermost farthing. He speaks of a Reprobate and castaway for ever: Such
have nothing to do in Purgatory. For All in Purgatory are at length saved, by
your own Rules. This is no Protestant fiction: your own Maldonate put it into
my mouth. Quod autem dicit, nos inde non exituros donec vitimum quadrantemper
soluamus, non significat exituros postea, vt ait Augustinus, and you with him,
sed nunquam exituros: Quia qui in Inferno sunt, cum semper debitas poenas
soluunt, quia pro quolibet mortali peccato, infinitas poenas debent, nunquam
persoluunt. Until then is never: as where the Evangelist says, He knew her
not, until she brought forth her first Son: that is, He never knew her:
although Maldonate there mistook Saint Augustine, unless his words were
mistaken by the Printer, and transposed. What you mean by John 22. I can not
tell: when I know, I shall tell what to say.

To conclude: there is not any Resolution public or private for Purgatory for
600. years, in the Church; where it is, your selves are not resolved; what it
is, you cannot tell, whether fire or none; and if fire, whether corporal or
not; nor can you resolve how it tormenteth souls. You can not tell, who are
executioners of Gods wrath there; who and what manner men are sent thither; how
long they are to continue there. Dominicus a Soto played the fool in broaching
such a dangerous conceit as this, No soul abides there above ten years.
There being such uncertainty on all hands in every point, what Reason have you
to tender it as de fide, and propose it, as an Article of my Creed? Believe it
if you will: I must see better evidence, before I believe it.

XLIII.
That it is not lawful to make or to have Images.

THose that held it so unlawful, mean, It is not lawful for men, of
themselves, out of their own voluntary motion to make them: they never
intended, that God could not dispense with his own mandate, or a man might not
make them at his command. That Text, Exodus 25. 18. therefore does not contrary
the opinion of those such Proposers: for God there commands it to be done,
by special warrant, and in a retired and reserved place. So, this place,
though express, is not to purpose. Nor that of 1. Kings 6. 35. which was done
by warrant of the former direction, and according to pattern in that
direction. Solomon did, as Moses was commanded, make Cherubins in the Holiest
Place.

But the truth is, this Andabatarian Fencer fights with his own shadow. No
Protestant ever said, that it was unlawful to make or to have Images. No
Protestant but has, or has had in his house, closet, study or the like,
Pictures and Images, many or few. That which Protestants mislike and condemn
in Papists, is not the having, but adoring and worshipping of Images; the
giving them honor due unto God; as the ignorant do, that go to it bluntly
and downright: the giving them the honor due unto the Prototype, as the
learned amongst them persuade unto: as much honor to a wooden Crucifix, as to
Christ Jesus himself in Heaven, at the right hand of his Father: this they
mislike. Heb. 9. 1. 5. Lo, Saint Paul calls the pictures of the Cherubins
which Solomon made, an Ordinance of divine Service, which Protestants call the
making of Idols: who now shall we believe, whether S. Paul, or a Protestant?
When painting and grauing of (...)tures is so far from being Idolatry, that
it is proved to be a Science divinely infused by God himself.


This is no divine ordinance, but a prohibition to do it: a curse upon the
maker and adorer of it. S. Paul called, Heb. 9. 5, 1. amongst other things in
the first Tabernacle, those Cherubins we spoke of but now, divine Ordinances,
and so do we. It is an impudent slander, that Protestants call those
Cherubins, Idols: those Images which the Protestants call Idols, are Images
made, abused to adoration in the Church of Rome. Does he that calls the
Image of our Lady of Lauretto, an Idol, call the Picture of Baronius, or
Bellarmine, Idols? then he that calls Will Summer a fool, calls A. Pe.
the Priest (what he is I know not) a fool too, because he has the figure of a
man as Will Summer had, though he be indeed as very a Look-like-agoose as he
was, peradventure.

See more, you say, 1. Kings 7. 36, 42, 44. Numb. 21. 8, etc. and do so,
Reader, and thou shall see so many testimonies of Malice, of Ignorance, of
Collusion. Never man thought, much less ever said, that painting and caruing
of Pictures was Idolatry: but lawful trades, excellent skill, sciences, not
infused, but given by God to the use of man, the glory of Gods name, the
commendation of the parties therewithal endowed. Images have three uses
assigned by your Schools. Stay there, go no further, and we charge you not
with Idolatry. Institutionem rudium: Commonefactionem historiae: et
Excitationem deuotionis, you and we also give unto them.

See Fathers that affirm the same. What do they affirm? This man cannot
tell, for he knows not what, nor where they affirm. He sends us to
Tertullian in his second book de Pudicitia. The poor Ignorant that talks
thus of Fathers, knows not that there is but one book of Tertullian of that
argument and title: and lo, he sends us to see the second book. It is well he
told us not in what Chap. we might find it. Such Roters as these, are the men
that talk of Fathers amongst their Gossips, and Proselytes; and yet are so
stupid, as not to know what works a common Father has written. Besides, had
Tertul. wrote such a second book, or said any such matter in that second book,
a Protestant of but mean reading, could tell him, Tertullian wrote that book,
being lapsed into Montanisme; and so of no authority in the Church for
resolution, though for relation. But the truth is, the man did but use
Tertullian's name for a cipher, to fill up a number, and make a fair dumb show
of a Shepherd with a sheep on his shoulders, on a Chalice, which is the
picture he looked at in Tertul.

But I can send him to Tertullian, to learn how like a Woodcock he remembered
those Texts of Scripture, for the Cherubins. Sic et Cherubin et Seraphin, aurea
in arce, figuratum exemplum, certe simplex ornamentum accommodata suggestut,
long diuersos habendo causas, ab Idololatriae condition, ob quam similitudo
prohibetur, non videntur similitudinum prohibitarum Legi refragari: non in eo
similitudinis statu deprehensa, ob quem similitudo prohibetur, Lib 2. con. Mar.
22. This comes home to the reason why God ordained them, and answers your
Cavil to the full. As for your Images, take his description in the like, de
Praescript. cap XII. Igitur si statuas et imagines frigidas mortuorum suorum
simillimas non adoramus, quas milui, et mures, et aran^ae intelligunt, nonne
laudem magis quam poenam merebatur repudium agniti erroris? He thought not
then very honorably of Imagines, whom we are bidden go see, for I know not
what, engrauing on the Chalices.

For Gregory Nazianzen: I did much marvel what it was we might see in him,
concerning Images, who writes only a deprecatory Epistle in behalf of the
Inhabitants of Diocaesarea, unto Olympius the Emperors Lieutenant. For I could
find nothing tending unto Images, but only this, (...): It is not much if the
Statuae be demolished and cast down, though it be indeed a pity to have such
a thing done. And what is here to be seen any way to purpose? This man, I
believe, had read, or rather heard of Billius note upon the place, this, Hic
obserua Gregorij quoque tempore, aedes sacras statuis and imaginibus ornatas
fuisse; and having heard of it, made much ado about it: whereas Nazianzen does
not so much as mention Churches, nor Chapels: the statues he speaks of,
were public Ornaments of the City: and as for worshipping of them, it came
not within the compass of his thoughts. Billius meant well to the Catholic
cause; and out of his affection, set down that which he would have had
Nazianzen speak, but not what he did say: for Nazianzen not so much as
squinteth that way. More may any man marvel at his trifling with Saint Basil,
on Barlaam the Martyr: What shall I call thee, O valiant Soldier of Christ
Jesus? Shall I call thee a Statue or Image of brass? why, it is not so solid
or substantial as thou art, for Fire does melt it: but fire could not cause
thee pluck forth thy hand. This is not that passage peradventure intended, but
that which insueth, Exurgite nunc athleticorum gestorum pictores, mutilam ducis
imaginem, vestro illustrate artificio, et obscurius a me depictum, coronatum
athletam, vestrae industriae coloribus conspicuum reddite; not with a pencill
(conceive not Basil to have been a Painter) but with a pen. So that Homers
describing Achilles, Ulysses, in this man's construction, is painting in a table
with colors and portraiture to the life. None but a Statue would thus
discourse, or one more senseless than a block.

What Basil and Nazianzen could not do, Augustine shall supply; who
witnesses, that in his time Christ was to be seen painted in many places,
betwixt Saint Peter and Saint Paul. So is he in many Churches with us, betwixt
the blessed Virgin and Saint John Evangelist. So was the holy Virgin by Saint
Luke, you say. So let them be every where, if you please. Not the making of
Images is misliked: not the having of Images is condemned; but the profaning
of them to unlawful uses, in worshipping and adoring them.

XLIIII.
That no man has at any time seen God; and that therefore his picture or Image
cannot be made.

IGnorant Blunderer, whither will thou? Sure, the man is not well in his wits,
that challenges the Protestant upon these terms, No man at any time has
seen God. Is it not plain, express Scripture, that, Ioh. 1. 18. No man has
seen God at any time? Exo. 33. 20. Thou can not see my face. For there shall
no man see me, and live. No man has, no man can in this life: no nor in that
which is to come. So Saint Paul, 1. Tim. 6. 16. Whom never man saw, nor yet can
see. The reason is rendered by a Pagan, (...): Mortal men have mortal eyes,
and God inhabits Immortality: and yet this Gagger thinks to gag the Spirit of
truth, by opposing Texts of Scripture to the contrary; that a man may see God.

Genesis 3. 8. Where God appeared unto Adam, walking in the Garden of Paradise, in
a corporal form. Accursed Glosser, to corrupt the Text! There we read: They
heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the Garden in the cool of the day.
So, Hearing and Seeing is all one with this man, that has lost both Hearing
and Seeing, and understanding too. A voice, in his Philosophy, is a corporal
form: and so to hear one speak, is to see one go: and Moses said he knew not
what, Deuter. 4. 12. You heard the voice of words; but saw no similitude, save
a voice. A whip for a fool, rather than an answer to his folly.

Genesis 28. 12, 13. God appeared unto Jacob, standing above the Ladder, whereon
the Angels ascended and descended. In what shape did he appear? can you tell?
The Lord stood above it, so are the words, and spoke. He might there stand and
speak, as he did in Sinah; and yet, as says the Scripture, they see no shape.
So that yet we have nothing but belying of Scripture, and deprauing the Text,
to countenance Idolatry in consequence.

Exodus 33. 11. To Moses He spoke, face to face, as a man speaks unto his
friend. Your great Prophet S. Thomas shall stop your mouth, 1. 2. q. 98, ar. 3.
Secundum opinionem populi loquitur Scriptura: The Scripture speaks according
unto popular opinion; who thought, that Moses talked face unto face with God,
cum per subiectam creaturam, id est, per Angelum and Nubem, ei loqueretur and
appareret; where as indeed God appeared unto and talked with him by the means
of creatures, an Angel in a cloud: Or if not so, and this answer will not
serve, by face to face, the Scripture means a certain eminent and more
familiar kind of apparition, go answer Saint Thomas.

And your Masters can tell you, that whereas it is related in the old Testament
often, that God appeared unto men, the Doctors of the Church are not resolved,
whether God appeared at any time personally, or wholly by the Ministry of
Angels. Your men, the Jesuits, Victorellus, Vasquez, and the rest, nay, all
later Divines, says Vasquez, but Clictho^^us, affirm, that God never appeared
but by the Ministry of Angels. So that your express testimonies are in a wise
case; and your self an Ignorant or a Confident, that knew not this, or dare
oppose your Yea unto their Nay.

Therefore, Esaias 6. 1. he that sat upon the Throne, and he that, Dan. 7. 9. is
described, was not God, but some Angel; or if God, yet the second Person: the
Father never appearing unto any. Therefore, as Vasquez himself confesses, that
great Vpbearer of Roman Idolatry, Henricus quodlibeto 1. Abutensis in 4.
Deuter. Durand. in 3. d. 9. q. 2. ad 4. Martin Aiala de Tradit. 3. part. do
teach it as well as Calvin, that it is utterly unlawful to picture or
represent the Trinity, or God, otherwise than as in Christ he took our flesh,
and was found among us as a man. These were nor Heretics, nor Protestants,
that did teach so: and yet we see it ordinary amongst our good Catholics, to
represent the picture of the Trinity more ways than one, which never appeared
in humane shape, as yet to any. Impious Artificers, not only vain, that make
the most blessed and most glorious Trinity a certain Geryon; or, as Tertullian
phraseth it, Sororem vasculorum: (...): A thing not only contrary unto reason,
but to the despite and contumely of God: whose glory being such as cannot be
uttered, and shape such as cannot be expressed, is denominated from, and
represented in base and corruptible things, that have no permanency without
supply. So feelingly complained Iustine Martyr of your Camerades, the Idolaters
of those times. Such Images Hesselius a Papist, Professor at Louain, whereby God
the Father is represented in an humane shape, utterly himself disliketh, and
justifies his dislike out of the Fathers; that not only Protestants may be
the mislikers of such impiety, but Papists of better spirits, and more solid
learning.

XLV.
That it is not lawful to worship Images, nor to give any honor to any dead
or insensible thing.

TWo several questions, as often confusedly propounded in one Proposition,
which are of different natures, of unequal extents, of diverse and disparated
approbation. The latter, that It is not lawful to give any honor to any dead
or insensible thing, is a false imputation cast upon us, an horrible lie,
against common sense, refelled in the ordinary practice of Protestants; who
give honor and respect, though not adoration, to many dead and insensible
things, as this Fellow, living in a Protestant State, cannot choose but know,
unless with Bartimaeus ^ee were borne blind, and withal has continued deaf
from his mothers womb.

This he cannot prove by express words, that we deny, nor yet any consequence
thereupon. It is contrary, he tells us for fashion sake, unto the express
words of our own Bible. What is contrary? that It is not lawful to worship
images? or to give any honor to dead things? Two distinct Assertions, not of
necessary consequence or dependence; and so, not necessarily inferred, one upon
the other. Besides, where is that express place of our Bible, which is
contrary to that Assertion? This place was forgotten through Contrary to
express words of their own Bible: and he said, Draw not nigh hither, etc.
too much haste. I will supply the defect, and design the place which the man
intended when he over passed it.

Exodus 3. 5. Joshua 5. 15. Put off thy sho^es from thy feet: for, the place
whereon thou stand, is holy ground. This may prove, that at some time, by
special precept, upon some occasion, some insensible thing may be honored;
which no Protestant ever went about to deny: but the inference they do, and
most justly Lo how clear a place is produced here against Protestants: where an
insensible ^reature, without reason, was commanded by God himself to be honored
may, as having no reason of illation; Therefore an image, representing unto us
an holy thing, may be worshipped, say, and not honored: for, of honor we
contend not: our difference is about worship only.

But take it of honor, and see the handsome consequence. God said, Some ground
was holy: therefore all Images may be worshipped. What an Image of Rie-dough
is this Cods-head! To as good sense it might be spoken, Jerusalem was called
The holy City: therefore the Jews might worship Images: Or, The Temple was an
holy place: none but Israelites, and those also clean, might enter there: the
Priests and Levites did wash their feet, being to do service there: all common
people wiped off the dust from their feet, when they entered therein: therefore
Ahaz might erect his Altars there; Manasses profane it with Idolatry;
Antiochus set up the abomination of desolation there. Had not the Beast cause
to low thus; Lo how clear a place is here produced against the Protestants;
wherein an insensible creature, without reason, was commanded by God himself to
be honored: for, the refraining to tread upon it, was the doing of honor to
it? Therefore an Image, etc.

Of Honor be it, but not Worship. Honor and worship differ more than latria
and dulia do. Without sense. I grant, and life too. The earth has neither
life nor sense. The earth was made to tread upon. It was not great honor, To
inhibite this course of kind. Honor was done, not Worship; not to the place,
but to the Holy place. The place was holy, not in it self; not made so by man,
but from the personal presence of the most High. Make an Image so holy, and
then so honor it. This honor was not (you were asleep, man) in refraining to
tread upon the earth: for, where stood Moses and Joshua, when they talked with
God? in the air, or nowhere? or in the fifth imaginary body? But the honor
was, In refraining to tread on it with their shoes on: as when men come into
the Church, but uncover the head at their entrance into the Church.

And for the honor in kind or correspondency; what similitude betwixt that
and yours, to an Image? You fall down unto an Image, at least, before it. You
honor the Image with the same honor that the Representee is honored withal;
at least accidentally, in your relative worship. Did Moses or Iosuab so honor
the ground? Fell they down unto it? Put they their shoes off to it? for the
grounds sake, and not rather for the presence of God there; whom, without any
relative worship at all, they honored immediately in himself? Any thing, I
see, will serve a Priests turn. No matter what you prate, so that you prattle.
Happy men that have so pliant Proselytes, that so easily believe whatsoere is
told them, though it be a tale of a Tub.

There is a respect due to all the works of God; as good, as his, as arguing
the art and excellency of the Maker: so all of them are honorable in their
kinds. Do you therefore adore them? make them Images, as well you may, and
far rather than a carved piece of wood? by them give relative honor unto
God? This you cannot digest by any means: for, then your Idolomanie in Images,
with stocks and stones, were clean dashed. And yet, if dead and insensible
things be to be honored, you cannot avoid the sequel, do you what you can,
Live things may be much more honored.

Upon the same ground, we are sent to adore the footstool of his feet, Psalm.
99. 5. as common in your mouths for Adoration, as Ergo with boys in the
schools: as if an Image were Gods Footstool, and so must be worshipped. Indeed,
(...), an Image may be for him to trample and tread under foot; as he will
do, in just anger, the Image, and adorer of the Image, that gives his glory
to a stock, a stone. So we well may take you at advantage, if we will: but we
take you at best, as your self will. Footstool you expound in the literal
sense, to be the Ark of Gods Testament, as 1. Chron. 28. 2. not as Saint
Augustine; by Scripture too, for the Earth; or by anaiogic, Christ's body, after
Saint Ambrose, as I remember.

Be it the Arc: worship and adore it, if you can find it; worship any thing
like it, any Image for it, if you can bring so good warrant for your so doing,
your adoring thereof, as is this, Adore the footstool of his feet. Tu
Prophetam imitare, nee adores imagines, nisi tibi Deus iusserit. Do as the
Prophet wills; Adore no Images, unless God command. If God had commanded
Israel, notwithstanding that Precept of Eternal Morality, Thou shall not bow
down to them, nor worship them, to make Cherubins, and to adore them, Israel
might have done it; yet could not you have followed Isreal's example, without
sacrilege. For, peculiar privileges and dispensations take away no general
right, nor reuerse an eternal law. Adore you Images, and spare not, if you
show me such a Text, as, Adore the footstool of his feet, if it were an Image.

I add, If that footstool be the Arc; what is Mountain, ver. last? for as
ver. 5. we read, Adore we the footstool of his feet, so ver. 9. we also
read, Adore we his holy Mountain. What Images were in that holy Mountain,
can you tell, for which we are willed to adore it? Some there were, some there
must be, your reason is no reason else: thus, Now the principal reason why
the Arc was worshipped, was in regard of the Images that were upon it. So
that, no question, there were Images upon that holy Mountain, otherwise the
Prophet would not have sent us to adore it. We read, Adore his holy Mountain:
we do not read of Images upon it; therefore a Reason, no reason, much less
principal, is alleged, and fathered upon S. Jerome.

But indeed that is a reason, a principal one too: Now the principal reason
why the Arc was worshipped, was in regard of the Images that were upon it,
which as S. Ierom says, the jews did worship, in his Ep. ad Marcellan.
the same in both places: could you squint upon it. v. 5. For he is holy, verse
9. For the Lord our God is holy. Which reason held before in putting off Moses
shoes; The place is holy ground; Holiness of the Lord. The presence of God
communicated this Holiness unto that place. Adore his footstool, for he is
holy: Adore his Mountain, for he is holy: Toward the Mountain, where he
dwells: Before his Footstool, where he treads; or in his Arc, as in his
holy Mountain, as your own Bibles, if I mistake not, read the place. So take
it as you will, or as you can, out of Arc will proceed no Imageworship; nor
yet from upon the Arc, any Images.

The Jews did worship Images upon the Ark. That is no warrant for you to do
so; nor yet precedent to take it so. They worshipped Baalim, and the Hosts of
Heaven, Milcom and Moloch. Will you do the like? They burnt their children in
the valley of Hinnon. Would you be contented to be served so? I would I had the
power to dress you so, to make you low a little louder, out of that bull. Such a
wise collection as this, Because there were Images upon the Arc: and because
the Jews did worship those Images, therefore the Prophet took up that
admonition, Adore the footstool, etc.

You belly the Jews, they did not worship them. For they could not come to
worship them. The Arc was reuestried in the most holy place: No Israelite came
thither to adore it: only the High Priest had access thither: He only once,
but one day in the year, and but one time in that day. And for any thing I yet
know, Saint Hierom says it not: in his Epistle to Marcella do you mean, or
some other? S. Hierom wrote many Epistles unto Marcella: in which of them all
does Saint Hierom say so? Did you suppose that he wrote but one? It is more
then probable you thought so. Or if more then one, may we entreat you to tell
us in which of his Epistles he says so? But I may mistake, for I cannot tell
what to make of in his Epistle to Marcellan. When you speak more plain, I
shall be able to give you a fuller answer: till then, I proceed.

From Images, to, I cannot tell what to give unto it, but it is, the name of
Jesus, somewhat strangely carried unto Adoration, Philip. 2. 10. That at the
name of Jesus every knee should bow, of things in Heaven, things in Earth,
andof things under the earth. Upon which premises the conclusion is. Therefore
Images are to be worshipped. So the name of Jesus is become an Image; a
strange kind of Image to my understanding, that a man's name should be his
image. Imago is quasi Imitago, you say: which is not, says Sanders, with
Vasques approbation, any similitude whatsoever, but only that which is
expressed to represent the thing, as the Picture of a long-eared beast does an
Ass. Jesus printed, or painted on a wall, is no Image of our Savior: much
lessethe word pronounced, conueighed to the ear: which at least is, if not the
entire, yet principal meaning of S. Paul. Names are notes of things. But names
pronounced, are but transeunt: and names painted, no Image. Your
Bottle-ale-wife ca^^el you so much, that a Bottle, is not the Image of a
bottle; and your Baker, that his basket, no representation of himself.

But to point. Your undertaking is for express words in our Bibles. What
expresnes, in bowing the knee at the name unto an Image, made of what you will
have it? Beside, the name of Jesus is so far from being express to prove it,
that it is not resolved what is meant by the name of Jesus here.

By that name is meant the Glory and Power of Jesus (...), says Chrysostom:
because al things are subjected unto him; as, There is no other name given
under heaven, by which we may be saved; no Power, no means beside; or the name
of Jesus, is Jesus himself, that is, that at his name, in effect, unto him
every knee should bow, as He that calls upon the name of the Lord: that is,
he that calls upon the Lord shall besaued; but we grant the name of Jesus, to
be Jesus named; and when we hear that sweet name of our Savior named,
accordingly do, and are enjoined by Canon to do reverence with our body. Here
it does not ensue, we may worship Images: there is text for the one; none for
the other. Show it, that unto the Image os Jesus every knee should bow;
Difference in the one, from the other. Images are resemblances, which in use
and application, may in natural proportion have such a relation unto the
Prototype, that they supply the room thereof, insinuating the form and
fashion thereof; which the name thereof cannot do, insinuating only that
being thereof. So there is reason for the one, none for the other: less reason
of alleging this text of Saint Paul for ratification of Image Worship.

In the Brazen Serpent there is more resemblance. It may be a warrant for
making an Image, no warrant Number. 21. 8.
for worshipping an Image made, nor for making ordinarily: because that was
made by special direction to a special end, against a general practice upon
precept, Thou shall not make any graven Image. God may so dispense with his own
Law, where, when, in what sort, and to whom he will; but not we.

The first observation then, out of this Text against Hence are evidently
proved diverse things against Protestants, etc.
the Protestant, that God commanded the making of this Image, is idle: never
Protestant made question of it: nor of the second, that it was set up for a
sign: nor the third, that the lookers upon it should receive health: nor the
fourth, of exempting the practice commanded, from the breach of the first
Commandment. These they confess, they plead, and bid you show the like for
your Images, for making, erecting, beholding, reuerencing any Image of God, or
Saints in this sort, and they yield.

This Serpent was beheld, not adored by those that looked on it, though it had
a reference unto a great mystery, and was a Rememoratiue of salvation extended
by the Son of God. Unless it were adored, it is to no purpose alleged. For
making is one thing: this may be done. Adoring another thing: that is
unlawful. Therefore Saunders, and Catharine, and Saunders, and Bellarmine do
maintain, adoration was given unto it. Vasques denies it, and that justly:
for when they began to adore it, the good Ezechiah brake it in pieces. But yet
Vasques must yield it was adored, or else, that it is alleged to no purpose to
prove Adoration.

To conclude, no Text of Scripture does expressly say, nor by consequence
infer, that ever Images were worshipped with countenance or commendation of
God, or any holy man in Scripture. Saint Ambrose says no such thing as is
pretended, that Images lawfully may be worshipped. He says, Whosoever See
Fathers that affirm the same. Saint Ambrose, Ser. 1. in Psalm. 118.
crowns the Emperors Statue, crowns the Emperor, that is, honoreth him:
and whosoever dishonoreth the Emperors Statue, dishonoreth him. What then?
Whosoever dishonoreth Gods Image, dishonoreth him. I grant. And what of that?
Therefore, honor is to be given some Images. No man denies it. Therefore all
Images are to be worshipped. Away with that; no such consequence. Honor is one
thing, Dulia, if you will, Latria is another: worship, I am sure. First, What
is Gods Image? Then, How far Gods Image? Then, What honor is due unto Gods
Image? And lastly, Whether the honor given be not more, or other honor then is
due unto an Image?

Saint Augustine in his third book de Trinit (You might have added cap. 10. as
well as the book, out of Bellarmines) names the brazen Serpent expressly in the
rank of such things, as, tanquam religiosa honorem haberepossunt. And so do
we: and many things of that nature; as the Sacraments of the Church: of the
which very things he speaks: and it had been better he had said nothing of
them. For he demolisheth that Idol of Transubstantiation, in adding, Stuporem
tanquam mira habere non possunt. Which could not have passed from his pen, had
he believed Transubstantiation. This place of Saint Augustine is to no purpose:
for there is not a word of Images there.

Saint Gregory is of later date then Saint Augustine, and of less credit by
much in controuerted questions. Images in his time were much improoued: and yet
not unto Adoration. Honor, Reverence, and respect was given then, to be
books for the simple and ignorant people: to be remembrances of things by
representation. Hold you here, and we blame you not. As for Damascene, he was
a child, in respect of those Heroes of the Church; Postnatus, and a party in
that Image quarrel in the Eastern Church: exception against him may lie as
partial and interessed: and yet he says no more, (though what he says,
cannot be proved) then that the honoring of Images, was a Tradition
Apostolical. You or Damascene prove this, and I yield. I marvel none ever
said so before Damascene, who yet had good occasion to auow it, if it had been
so.

They had, you say, and did auow it: for Saint Basil against Julian, has the
same, that it was delivered from the Apostles. Some body told Pope Adrian so,
and he believed them: for, facile credimus quae fieri volumus. Adrian related
it in the second Synod of Nice: and you take it for Gospel. It Saint Basil
said it, I Will subscribe it: show it in Saint Basil, and no more ado. I
marvel, Saint Basil should every where forget this Tradition, remembering so
many as he does: especially in his book de spiritu sancto. Basil is not the
only man belyed in that ridiculous Synod: nor the only man forged in that
Epistle of Pope Adrian, whence the Rhemists, and Harding, and Bellarmine had
it, from whom you took, whatsoever you have, impudent Plagiary as you are!

Saint Chrysostom's Mass is not entirely his: many things have been added in
tract of time: no man will deny it, that knows any thing: this bowing to the
Image is one of those additions: and yet in some editions there is no mention
of any Image: if there be, it does not come home, to justify that in the
Church of Rome, whereby worship is given to stocks and stones, and such worship
as indeed is Gods peculiar.

Images and Idols may be two things: these profane and impious, never
tolerable: those not unlawful, and sometime profitable, especially
resemblances of Stories: Images were unlawful unto the Jews at all, the very
ordinary and civil use and making of them, except by special warrant, in some
place: as in the Temple, upon the Ark, which though perhaps not observed, yet
is true, and apparent to any man that advisedly shall read Philo and Josephus.
Unto Christians they are not unlawful, for civil uses: nor utterly in all
manner of religious employment. The pictures of Christ, the blessed Virgin, and
Saints may be made, had in houses, set up in Churches: the Protestants use
them: they despite them not. Respect and honor may be given unto them: the
Protestants do it: and use them for helps of piety, in rememoration, and more
effectual representing of the Prototype. But quatenus? In terms there is not
much difference: you say they must not have Latria: so we. You give them Dulia.
I quarrel not the term, though I could: there is a respect due unto, and
honor given relatiuely unto the picture, sign, resemblance, monument of great
men, friends, good men, Saints, Christ. If this you call Dulia, we give it too.
But whatsoever you say, howsoever you qualify the thing with gentle words, we
say, In your practice you far exceed, and give them that honor which is
Latria: a part of divine respect and worship. So not we. Let practice and
doctrine go together, we agree. So that the question is not, What may be
given them? but, What is given them? You must then change the state, and
prove, that what you do, is not any way, any jot or part of divine honor,
but merely civil respect, Dulia. This you cannot do, so long as your people
go to it with downright adoration, and your new Schools defend, that the same
respect is due unto the Representee, as must be given to the represented. So
that the Crucifix is to be reverenced with the self-same honor that Christ
Jesus is. A blasphemy not heard of, till Thomas Aquinas set it on foot. Clear
these enormities, and others like these, then come, and we may talk and soon
agree concerning honor and respect unto Relics or Images of Saints, or
Christ: till then, we cannot answer it unto our Maker, to give his honor unto
a Creature.

XLVI.
That blessing or signing upon the forehead, is not founded upon the Scripture.

BLessing or signing, what is that? Doubtless the man meant signing with the
Cross, upon the forehead: otherwise, the fellow is more then impudent, that
fathers this upon any Protestant, that blessing is not founded upon Scripture.
And yet this he would have his Proselytes believe: to this his two first Texts
are addressed, to prove that Protestants use no blessing at all, in any action
divine, moral, or civil.

For Mark. 10. 16. we read, He took them up in his arms, put his hands upon
them, and blessed them: without any signing in the forehead: therefore he
must needs mean this: That Protestants never bless any thing, or man
whomsoever: and yet they do their children every Morning and Evening; and yet
they do their meats every meal: yet in many other actions, nothing so
frequent as this. The like is that, Luke 24. 50. For there is no signing added
unto that blessing: only, Revel. 7. 3. there is mention of sealing, or
signing, take whether you will, in the fore head: and that happly was with the
sign of the Cross.

But Sir Maleuolo, know, we use Blessing as much as you; in as many lawful
things as you, and more piously than you. We use signing with the sign of the
Cross, both in the Forehead, and elsewhere: Witness that solemn form in our
Baptism: for which we are so quarrelled by our Factious. Caro signatur, vt
anima muniatur, says Tertullian: and so do we. They used it in Baptism, all
the world knows it. They signed their Foreheads, Cyprian, Epist. 56. and
many other places of his Works: upon their hands. (...). Their whole body and
bed, Tertul. 2. ad vxorem, 5. ad omnem motum and habitum, the same Tertul, de
corona milit. 3. Whereupon, the old Christians were named, Religiosi Crucis:
and yet they never adored the Cross. In the Greek Liturgy, the sign of the
Cross is frequent. The worship of the Cross is not found. Not any of the
Fathers auerre that: the use of the Sign they do all. And if you will thank
me, I will add as many more. Ignat. Epist. 5. pa. 48. Clement in constit.
VIII. XII. Martial in Epist. ad Burdigal. justin. Mart. pa. 285. and 58. and
92. Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 3. 47. and conclude with that of Athanasius:
(...): By the sign of the Cross of Christ, all Magic Spells are disappointed,
witchcraft and sorcery comes to nothing, all idols are abandoned and forsaken.
For the reverent use of signing with the sign of the Cross, I know no such
cause of distraction or dis-affection. Our Church allows it, uses it, and
commands it: and I could tell you some experimented effects of it.

XLVII.
That it is both superfluous and superstitious, to repeat one and the same
prayer sundry times.

A Strange imputation; so false and slanderous, as every child that can read,
knows it is a Lie: for, in our Liturgy and public Service, the Lords
Prayer is repeated many times. In our Letany, how many repetitions of the same
thing! insomuch as that we cannot escape reprehension for it. But this Fellow,
that set himself to quarrel, and whole opus is, to maintain a faction on foot,
raketh up the retrimenta of each private, singular, contentious spirit, and
tendreth them as public received doctrines of the Protestants; who hold it
neither superstitious, nor yet superfluous, to repeat one and the same Prayer
oftentimes: for, (...), good things may be remembered once and again: and if to
man decies repetita placebunt, some things cannot be repeated too often to
God. It cannot any way discontent God, who loves affection above all: and we
can have no surer sign of affection, than repetition; when a man desires to
dwell upon a thing, and not willingly to leave it, as Psalm. 18. 1.

But take we the Fellow according to his fancy: Where first, our Lord having
taught his own Disciples that excellent Prayer of all prayers, which he would
have them to offer to him, the Pater noster or our Lords Prayer; he
afterward, in many other places, wills them to pray always, as Luke 18. 1.
he was not well provided to prove a truth by Math. 7. 9. compared with Luke
18. 1. Luke 21. 36. There our Savior taught his Disciples a set form of Prayer,
as John Baptist had taught his. There he wills them to pray continually; to
pray, and cease not. This idle fellow inferrs heerupon, How is it possible to
persevere in so short a form of prayer, except we often repeat the same? I
grant, not possible to continue in praying that Prayer, without often
repetition. And who finds fault with repeating it often? Repeat it, on Gods
Name, again and again, so often as you have fingers and toes; but your
repetition will have no warrant here: for, Christ does not bid them, either
Luke 18. 1. or 21. 36. repeat the Lords Prayer often, pray that Prayer only,
and no other often. As the matter and occasions, so the form and manner, he
leaves to themselves; and nor there, nor elsewhere, ^ieth them to any. If he
did, how can the Catholics answer it to God, who have so many and diverse set
form of prayers, beside the Pater noster?

The Angels Trisagium is more to purpose; where The Angels in the Prophet Esaias,
Esaias 6. and the beasts in the Apoc. Apo. 4. which rest neither d^y nor night,
do thrice repeat, etc.
Holy is repeated thrice by them: and yet short ejaculatory Prayers do differ
from long-contriued Orisons, and are much fitter for repetition than these.
Tertullian says well: Dominus prospector humanarum necessitatum, seorsimpost
traditam orandi disciplinam, Petite, inquit, and accipietis, and sunt quae
petantur, pro circumsta^tia cuius (...) praemissa legitima et ordinaria
oratione quasi fundamento, accidentium ius est desideriorum, ius est
superstruendi extrinsecus petitiones. It was never heard of till now, that the
Lords Prayer should be the only Prayer a man ought to use upon occasion. It is
a contrary Extreme, It was not given to be used at all. The Angels in heaven,
the souls of the Righteous, Christ Jesus in the garden, the three children in
the fiery furnace, use repetitions of their prayers. A sanctis pete perfectis
exemplum. Use them, a-Gods-name. Do as they have done. A good thing cannot be
repeated too often. I do not know any Puritan will dislike it. I have known
as great Puritans as any were, use the Lords Prayer twice at every Sermon, in
the beginning, at the end: and yet I know, it was the Puritan opinion at
first, that The Lords Prayer was not so often to be repeated, as it is in our
ordinary Service. T. C. wrote this, lib. 1. pa. 136. What reason is this, we
must repeat the Lords Prayer oftentimes, therefore oftentimes in half an hour,
and one in the neck of another? Does your Proposition drive at this? Drive,
a-Gods Name, till you drive it down: we go with you. For, it is a singular,
vpstart, novel, Puritan quarrel; as, infinite other are against the Church in
all Ages, against the doctrine and discipline of the Church. But what is this
to Protestants? Against Protestants your Gag is directed, not Puritans: and yet
all your addresses, well-neer, are against Puritan Positions, maliciously
imputed to Protestants: and yet your selves among your selves make a difference
betwixt Protestants and Puritans; professing, If it were not for the
Protestant, you would not esteem what the Puritan could say: and truly. For,
the Protestant comes up to you on your own grounds, and undertakes you at
your own weapons; so that you have no help against him, but to belly him with
your Proselytes. So you began, so you continued, and so you end this petty
Pamphlet. For, otherwise you may know, that this very point of often repeating
the Lords Prayer, has by us been maintained against Puritan detraction, more
than by Papists; especially by those two Worthies of their time, the most
reverend Lord Archbishop, Whitgift, of blessed memory; and that incomparable
Hooker: concerning whom I may much rather say, than of his Works, of whom it
was said and made by Paulus Thorius: Praeter Apostolicas, post Christi tempora,
chartas,
Huic peperere libro, sacula nulla parem.


In whose words I conclude to this babbler. Twice we rehearse it ordinarily,
and oftener, as occasion requires more solemnity or length, in divine service;
not mistrusting, till these new curiosities spra^g up, that ever any man would
think our labor heerin misspent the time wastfully consumed, and the office
it self made worse, by so repeating that which otherwise would more hardly be
made familiar to the simpler sort; for the good of whose Souls, there is not
in Christian Religion any thing of like continual use and force, throughout
every hour and moment of their whole lives. I mean, not only because Prayer,
but because this very Prayer is of such efficacy and necessity. Know this, Sir
Gagger, that this is our opinion o^ repeating Prayers; this our doctrine
touching the Lords Prayer, repeated, or to be repeated. That giddy conceit,
taken up by the Puritan faction sometime, is none of ours, as the faction it
self is none of ours: no more then Donatists, Meletians, or Nouatians, were
anciently the Catholic Church, or their fooleries to be imputed to the
Church. The Factionists would, were the innouating humor predominant in them,
peradventure prescribe a form of Religion to Christ Jesus himself, were he on
earth again, though but to last for a day: unless happly they disagreed,
which fancy should have precedence. For every Crow thinks her own bird
fayrer then the neighbors.

But to conclude with your Fathers, that affirm God knows what: you are to
prove, which yet we desire you not to do, for there is no such need against
us; that It is not superstitious, nor yet superfluous to repeat one and the
same Prayer oftentimes. For this Lactantius is, cited lib. 4. de diuina
institut. cap. 28. but might have been spared. In that Chap. he disputes
against that deriuation which Cicero gave, of superstitiosus; That they were
called superstitiosi, qui totos dies immolabant et precabantur, vt sui liberi
sibi superstites essent. For says he, Quid mihi afferet causae, cur precari
pro salute Filiorum, semel religiosi, et idem decies facere, superstitiosi esse
hominis arbitretur? What reason can Cicero give me, why it should be counted
religious piety to pray once; and superstition, to pray often? Si enim semel
facere, optimum est; quanto magis saepius? Which testimony is direct as may be,
for praying often, but not for saying the said prayer often: yet this should be
proved, not that. This is after the Puritan Cut, not that. Howsoever, it may
touch our Factionists, who regard n o Fathers: it concerns not us, who respect
the one, and use the other: who profess, with the same Lactantius, Multiplicata
obsequia demerentur potius, quam offendunt.

The next is S. Amb. lib. de Sp. sanct. cap. 20. Howsoever you have played the
Idle-pack, Addle-head, Ignaro, or Negligent in the course of your book: yet, as
good Orators in a bad cause, lay the strength they have or can make, in the
beginning, and latter end, so should you: but who can have more of a cat, then
her skin; of a Blunderer, then that which is next hand? Saint Ambrose wrote
three books to Gratian the Emperor, de spiritu sancto. This poor Innocent
knew no such matter; supposing, he had wrote but one; nor caring, unto whom
he wrote it. Saint Ambrose lib. de spiritu sancto, cap. 20. says, Who can
tell what? I say, Who can tell? For, the first book has 20. Chapters just: in
the 20. nothing is that tends this way. In the second book there are but 12.
There can be nothing in any 20. Chapter there. The third has chapters 23. but
nothing touching repetition of Prayers, or Prayers at all. The truth is, beside
these books, there is in some editions another tract without Chapters at all;
a very very short one, de spiritu sancto; by some supposed, a fourth book to be
added unto the other three; by others, a several, headless discourse, none of
Saint Ambrose doing: howsoever it be, whose-soeuer, it should seem the book
which the man would design. For, not far from the end, having recited that
text of Esaias 6. Holy, holy, holy, Lord God of Sabbath, he infers the
custom of the Church for the Trisagium in their ordinary Letany; Vnde etiam
tractum est, per omnes fere Orientales Ecclesias, et nonnullas Occidentales, vt
in oblationibus sacrificiorum quae Deo patri offeruntur, vna cum sacerdote,
voce populus vtatur, id est, Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus, Dominus Deus Sabbath.
Which very words we use in our solemnizing of the holy Communion thus:
Therefore with Angels, and Archangels, and the company of Heaven, we laud and
magnify thy glorious name, evermore praising thee, and saying, Holy, holy,
holy, Lord God of hosts, Heaven and earth are full of thy glory. Glory be to
thee, O Lord, most high. Can this Goose gaggle against this?

Augustine is next, lib. 1. de Sermon. Dom. in Monte, cap. 5. in whom I find no
such division, nor any thing to purpose. And lib. de doct. Christ. cap. 7.
again; As if there were but one book, there being four, and no such matter
in any 7. Chapter. Who can brook such an ignorant or negligent companion, in a
point of controversy and imputation? Which is also observed by him in Saint
Gregory. Saint Gregory is to be seen, lib. 1. Moral. cap. 28. in which book
there are not so many Chapters; nor in the Chapters which are, any such thing.
The truth is, that which was meant, is lib. 29. Moral. upon the 38. of Job, the
same in effect with Saint Ambrose before. Esais quoque, cum Laudem Trinitatis
aperiret, Seraphini voces exprimens, ait, Sanctus, sanctus, sanctus: ac ne
tertio Sanctu^ nomina^s vni ^ate^ diuinae substantiae scindere videretur,
adtu^xit Dominus Deus Sabbath: which, almost word for word, is repeated, Homil.
16. and not 19. as we find it cited upon Ezechiel. To which he might have
added Psalm. 67. Benedicat nobis Deus, Deus noster: Benedicat nobis Deus; and
that in Romans XI. For, of him, and by him, and in him are al things: to him be
praise for ever, Amen. These are his Fathers that should affirm the same,
videlicet, that it is nor superfluous, nor superstitious, to repeat one and the
same prayer oftentimes. They repeat nothing: they affirm nothing: they only
speak what was done. That which they speak, we do. That which they are
supposed to affirm against us, if they did affirm any thing, needed not: For
we affirm, use, propose, and maintain the same, privately, publicly, in our
Liturgy, and Service of the Church. To conclude, Sir Gagger: bring me any one
Place of Scripture, any practice resolved of the Catholics, any decision of
the Church representative, any determination of the Church collectiue, in a
particular approved Synod; any Saying of any one Father of Credit, dogmatically
resolved for 500. years and better after Christ, to the end of the Council of
Chalcedon, against any thing established in the Church of England; that is, in
the Communion-booke, the book of Articles, the book of Consecrating Bishops,
and ordering of Priests and Deacons; and I will subscribe. Here is scope enough
to ramble in. Gagge me, if you can. As for private opinions, I am bound to
none, no not unto my own. Quisque abundet in sensu suo, so be it he trouble
not the Church therewith.

FINIS.

