A TREATISE OF MENTAL PRAYER.

IN WHICH Is briefly declared the manner how to exercise the inward Acts of
Virtues.

By Fr. Ant. de Molina Carthusian.

WHEREUNTO Is adjoined a very profitable Treatise of Exhortation to Spiritual
Profit. Written by F. Francis Arias of the Society of JESUS.

Together with a Dialogue of CONTRITION and ATTRITION.

All translated out of Spanish into English by a Father of the Society of JESUS.

Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.XVII.

TO THE REVEREND, AND RELIGIOUS MOTHER, MARY WISEMAN, Prioresse of the English
Monastery of the Order of S. Augustine in Louayne.
And to the rest of the Virtuous and Devout Sisters in that Covent.
REVEREND MOTHER, AND RESPECTED SISTERS,
Amongst the Religious Families of our Nation, I do not make the least account
of yours, though I salute you not with the first, having still expected a fit
occasion. Which being now offered, it may please you to accept in good part
this small Present, that I send you, in testimony of my abundant affection,
and reverence to your Person, and holy Family.

Two things I commend heerin to your prudent Consideration: to wit,
CONTEMPLATION, or Mental Prayer, which is the life and soul of Religion; and
SPIRITVAL PROFIT, the high way to Perfection. Wherefore I have joined them in
one little Volume, that you may have the use of both together; for the one
greatly helps the other.

Touching the Authors; the former, Fr. Antony de Molina, yet lives, a most
Devout, and Religious Carthusian in Spain. The second, F. Francis Arias, now
deceased, of the Society of ^ESVS, is a man so well known to the world for his
singular learning and Sanctity of life, as ^ shall need to say nothing, seeing
his works are extant and printed in many Languages, which make my testimony
and praise unneedful.

I have added also to these two little Treatises, a Dialogue of CONTRITION and
ATTRITION: which is so fit a Remedy against Temptations, and so easy, sure, and
ready a way to keep friendship with God; as I doubt not, but you will receive
particular comfort, and reap great benefit by the frequent exercise thereof.

I will not be tedious with a longer Epistle: only I desire that my good will
and zeal of your service, may be remembered in the practice of these holy
Docume^ts. And so craving pardon, with due Respect, I humbly take my leave,
resting.

Your ever devoted Servant. I. VV.
S. Omers. 25, Ian. 1617.
THE PREFACE OF THE AVTHOR to the Reader.
MANY years be now past, that some Religious of this holy house, especially
Lay-brothers whose exterior occupations affoard them less time to bestow in
reading books) requested m^ to write for them some co^pendious Treatise; to
guide them in their spiritual devotions. Charity and desire to serve, and help
my Brethren, bound me (though I knew well my own insufficiency, and experience
in spiritual affairs) to do my best to satisfy their importunity. Being
therefore to begin, I thought it needless to treat of Prayer, or of the
Parts, Preparations, Conditions, and Directions that concern the same, so
many Treatises, some at large some more brief, and both very sufficient having
been written of this Argument. Notwithstanding I have thought good to declare
one point which I had a long time wished I might see handled clearly and
distinctly: and the same, I knew to be the desire also of many persons that are
devoutly given to mental prayer; to wit, What meditation is, how the Powers
of the Soul are to be used, and the acts of the Understanding, and the will
directed to consider things with fruit, and to exercise affections and
internal acts of Virtue. The which is a most excellent kind of Prayer, and of
very great profit, principally for beginners, setting aside supernatural kind
of Prayer whereof we are not to speak at this time.

This point I intend to handle, and shall endeavor to do it with as much
perspicuity, distinction, and breuity as I may, making v^e of what I have read
of this matter, in Saints works, and Authors of ancient and modern times, and
of what our Lord has specially given me to feel my self; yet with such
plainness of style, as the quality of the persons, for whom it was written,
requires. For I never imagined that the Treatise it self should get out of
the gates of our Monastery.

As it was written with my own hand, I imparted it to my Brethren: and seeing
them much comforted and content therewith, I communicated the same to other
devout and spiritual persons. By this means the Treatise was delivered from
hand to hand, many co^ies thereof being spread abroad; and (as it commonly
falls out) with the multitude of copies many errors and corruptions
increased. For which reason; as also for that very many spiritual and
intelligent persons judged it might be profitable, because it declares briefly
and clearly the aforesaid argument, so necessary and important; I permitted the
same to be printed, that such as would might make benefit thereof, without the
labor of copying it out.

Neither have I added or changed any thing, but let it pass as it was first
diuulged in writing with so great content and profit of the Readers: nor do I
pretend any other thing, but only to assist those who use the exercise of
Prayer; to the end that some part of their devotions may be derived to my
self, and the whole directed to the greater honor and glory of God Amen.

Fr. Ant. de Molina.

A BRIEF TREATISE OF MENTAL PRAYER.
What Meditation is: and what parts it conteyneth. CHAP. 1.
MEDITATION is nothing else but a discourse made by the understanding, in which
it co^sidereth something or other, and from that draws other different
thoughts, conceits, or considerations, gathering one thing from another: In
the same manner as when one is alone, plotting some thing which he is to do,
and considering that he must do it in this, or that manner, for this reason or
for that; and that he must procure this thing, and take heed of the other, for
such and such reasons; and many other like things which the Understanding
frames, all directed to attain to the end which he pretends. In this very
manner is meditation of spiritual things, that the Understanding considering
one of the mysteries of our Faith, makes discourses upon it, and conceits, of
what it behooves us to love, and what to hate; of what we must seek to
procure, and what to fly and take heed of, and the like. And this is properly
meditation.

2. But we must note, that when this meditation stays only in the
Understanding, and in the knowledge of the things alone, it is not Prayer, but
study or speculation, which pertayneth to such as seek for knowledge only, or
to teach others. And therefore that it may be perfect Prayer, it is necessary,
that together with the discourses and considerations of the Understanding, the
acts of the will do accompany and follow, which must draw forth affectes and
acts of virtues: and this is that which here we desire to declare.

3. For in the meditation of the mysteries of Christ our Savior, principally
in those of his Passion, this form may be kept; supposing the preparation and
reading of the mystery in those who have need, and the rest of the docume^ts
which are taught by those who have written of this matter: for we pretend not
here to handle all these things, but only of the manner how to meditate.

4. The Meditation may be divided into three points. The first is to consider
the story of the mystery whereof we are to meditate. The second is to ponder
the circumstances which concur in it. And the third, is to draw the fruit,
and acts of virtues, which may be gathered out of them. But it is to be noted,
that although here we put these three points distinct, and in their order; it
must not be understood that in the meditation they go by this order, and
distinction every one by it self, but that they may be mingled and joined one
with another. As for example, we beginning to consider the story of one
mystery, if there it happen that we consider any circumstance thereof, or any
virtuous or devout motion shall offer it self; therein must we detayne our
selves, and afterward pass to another thing. And if in the first word there
occur consideratio^s and do move affects for the time prefixed for prayer, it
is not necessary to go any further, but to spend all the time in that. And the
same I say, if one circumstance suffice, or one affect, to spend all the time
of prayer, be sufficient; then it is not necessary to discourse of the rest.
But these things are set down here distinctly by themselves every one, that
they may be understood the better, and to give sufficient matter of meditation.

5. The first point is to consider the story of the mystery literally and
plainly as it happened, according as the holy Gospel says, or according to
what may be read of that mystery in good approved, and devout books, or
according to that which piously may be considered with good discretion, or
lastly according to that which was wont to happen in such like cases. As for
example; if you consider how our Savior was whipped at the pillar; you must
imagine your self present in a Court or Auditory, where the President, or
Judge is set in his Chair, or Tribunal seat, and with him many principal
men of authority, judging one poor man, a very Saint and Innocent, and yet
accused of grievous offenses, and great crimes, and the Judge although he
knows the accused to be guiltles, yet to condescend to the importunity of the
accusers, and to content them, he commands him to be whipped. And presently
some shameless wretches, and cruel ministers of Justice take, and carry him
away with great speed and gladness, command him to be stripped, and they to
hasten him the more, help him forward, but very discourteously; and in the
mean time, others prepare most cruel whipps and scourges with which they are
to whippe him; and being naked, they speak many shameful and discourteous
words unto him, and they tie him very hard unto a pillar of that Court, and
begin to whippe him most furiously with all the force they had, all his body
over, without any kind of pity: and some soldiers being wearied, there come
others with a fresh supply, with other kind of whippes, for the first were now
half broken or worn out, and perhaps they untie him, and turn his other side
from the pillar, that no whole place may be found in all his body; and these
also whippe him until they be weary, and for fear of not killing him (for
they had no order for that) they leave off and unbind him: and how he with very
great patience and fortitude, suffers such terrible, griefs and torments
which all this while he felt, and then with great humility and mildnes,
gathers up his garments on the ground, and rests himself again, without
once opening his sacred mouth to complain. And so in like manner you must
consider any other mystery, as piously we may believe it fell out.

6. The second point is to ponder with attention, the circumstances, which are
concerning that mystery how it passed, as we have said of the Pillar, to ponder
who is that President which is there with such authority; that he is but a
poor miserable man, a sinner, an Idolatour, without knowledge of God, that to
morrow he may die, and his body shall be converted into worms meat, and his
soul shall go to suffer eternal torments in Hell with the Devils. And who is
he that is accused, who is he that is so tied with so great humility, and
dispect: that he is Jesus Christ God and Man; according to his Divinity he is
Creator of al things; whom all creatures serve and adore: and according to his
Humanity, he is a person of so great authority amongst the people, who wrought
so many miracles, and made so many Sermons, that every one thought himself
happy, that could touch his garment. What would he think to see himself so
abused against Justice, and to see himself delivered into the hands of such
vile and cruel ministers. And when such a person, so venerable and chaste,
should be stripped before so many people, how great the grief would be which
he felt in so delicate a body, being whipped so unreasonably by such cruel and
unmerciful slaves: And many other such like circumstances which here passed,
as in all the rest you must proceed, pondering of them with particular
consideration.

Of the general circumstances which may be considered in the mysteries of
Christ our Savior. CHAP. II.
THE circumstances which generally may be considered in the mysteries of our
Savior Jesus Christ, especially in his holy Passion are these, Who? What?
For whom? For what? Of whom? How? and the declaration is that which follows.

. I. WHO.
2. The first circumstance is, to consider attentively, Who is the person that
does that work, or suffer that pain: that it is Jesus Christ God and man, who
being God from all Eternity, without any beginning of his Being, for the
salvation of the world came down from heaven, and was made man in the womb of
the sacred Virgin Mary.

3. And in as much, as he is God, he is the Word of his eternal Father, second
Person of the Blessed Trinity; and as eternal, as great as God, as powerful
as the Father and the holy Ghost, and finally one and the same God, and one and
the same Essence with the Father, and the Holy Ghost; who created all things,
and does conserve, and govern them, and whom all they serve, and praise; and
the praise which they give to him, and those which all creaturers can give, do
not come near by an infinite distance to that which he deserves, in praise
service, and love. And al creaturs together in his comparison are not an Ant
before him, nor so much as a sand of the sea, in whose presence the highest
Seraphims tremble and fear, as also all the rest of the Blessed Spirits.

4. As he is man, he is King, and universal Lord of all that is created,
because his eternal Father has put all into his hands, and all creatures ought
to obey him, and be subject unto him, and by right and authority he may do wrea
them as it pleases him, not only with natural but also supernatural things.
That he imparteth all the good included in grace and glory to whom he pleases.
And all the Angels, and sotiles in heaven, and they who are to go thither must
come into glory by his helping hand and by his merits. And that his most holy
Humanity only is more worth and more esteemed, and beloved of Almighty God, and
has received more riches, and gifts from God, then all creatures together,
with such and so great excess, that there is no comparison.

5. That his holy body, is formed, by the work of the holy Ghost, of the
purest blood of a Virgin, the most holy that ever was, or shall be; and
therefore has greater beauty and persection of nature then ever any humane
creature had, or shall have; and also more deli^ate and tender then any other
man; and he had the complexion of his body more sensible and delicate, then the
flesh of a child of four, or five years of age.

6. And that his soul being most holy from the instant of his conception, is
full of grace and charity, and full of al virtues and gifts of the holy Ghost;
and that in so high a degree, that it exceeds, without comparison, the graces
and virtues of all Angels, and men that ever were, are, or shall be. And that
not only for himself he has grace, but also to communicate, as head, to the
Angels and men already created, and infinite others who might be created; for
all the grace they have received, and shall receive hereafter, all do receive
it from the fullness and copious abundance of the grace of Christ.

7. And also from the instant of his conception, that most holy Soul of his,
is full of so marvelous science, and wisdom, that he knows, and can tell
perfectly the natures and essence of all things, which are, were, and are to
come, and the number and order of them all, and every one in particular and
distinctly; he knows their properties, conditions, qualities, and
inclinations; he knows how many stars be in heaven, and how every one is
called, and how big enery one is; and how many drops of water there be in the
sea, and how many sands. He knows and can tell all the thoughts and desires
of men and Angels, good and bad, as well those that now they have, as those
which they shall have for ever: all these he sees and knows more clearly, and
distinctly then I can see that which I have before mine eyes.

8. And above all from the said instant of his conception, his soul is full of
glory, for from that time he saw most clearly the Divine Essence of God, and
did enjoy it most perfectly: and all this glory and beauty, this our Lord would
of his own proper will and desire have to lie hidden, and as it were kept
there in the chiefest part of his soul, and for 33 years did defraud his most
holy body of all this glory which naturally was due unto it, that thereby he
might suffer labors and pains for us. And that in the inferior part of his
soul he might suffer sorrow, grief, and the like as he did very much, and he
would not use power and authority which he had over all things, nor his majesty
proper to his person, but be borne and live in poverty and despect, subject
unto so many labors, and so great wearines as he suffered in the same manner,
as if he had been a poor sinner.

9. And besides all that is said, even in this very same poverty, and humility
which he chose, you must consider the dignity of that most sacred Humanity,
that verity of working miracles, that he commanded the devils as his slaves,
and they obayed him and feared him; only with a voice he revived the dead, with
the touch of his hands he cured al infirmities; the great authority that he had
amongst the people, that he was held for a great Prophet, as never the like was
seen in Israel; that the Cities were emptied and great multitudes went after
him into the desert, only to hear his doctrine, and held themselves happy who
could come so near, as to kiss the hemme of his garment, for only the touch
of it cured all diseases. And being his authority was so great on the one side,
yet his humility one the other side was profound, such his plainness,
sweetness, and affability which he used to those with whom he conuersed, and
the facility and charity wherewith he did remedy their infirmities and
necessities, and many times not being called, nor invited, that with this he
won the hearts, and gained the good will of all.

10. All these things and many others, which are to be considered concerning
the person of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, it is just and fit, we should
ponder them very seriously, and commit them to memory; that in what thing
soever you meditate, that he does, says, or suffers, you may know how to
feel it as you ought: pondering who is the person, who does that work, or
suffer that pain, or speak that word etc. And this is the first circumstance
signified by the former word, Who.

. II. WHAT.
1. THE second circumsta^ce is to consider What he is that suffers for thee,
which is to be noted that it is the doctrine of S. Thomas, and of all the
Deuines, that the griefs and pains our Lord and Savior suffered in his
Passion, were the greatest which have been suffered, or ever shall be suffered
in this world, although all the torments of all the Martyrs should be
recounted, for many reasons which concurred in the pains of Christ, which are
not necessary here to be set down, nor to enlarge this point so much, for it
depends of the consideration very particulerly of every thing which our
Savior suffered, and to consider attentively that in every passage of his
Passion, you shall find him suffer something in excess and extraordinary, and
in those also may be found very great grief, dispect, injury, scoffs, and
ignominious speeches, and so he suffered in all sorts that a man may suffer;
that is, not only in the body, but also in the soul, that is, in the inferior
part of it, as presently I will declare. 2. He suffered in his face by false
testimony, and ignominious titles, with which he was condemned; in his honor
with so many floutes, scoffs, and injuries; in his goods, which were his ^oore
garments, for he had nothing else; in his friends, for unto all of them befell
part of his labors; in all his members, and senses of his body, for in every
one he had particular torment, from the very sole of the foot, unto the crown
of his head, and as we say, from top to toe, as is manifest considering every
passage by it self. 3. Mark, that to ponder we^ what our Lord and Savior
suffered and felt in his torments and grief, it is very good counsel^ that
which S. Bonauenture giuesh and other contemplative Saints which is, to prove
by experience something like to that which h^ suffered: as to know well what h^
suffered being whipped, to make^ good discipline that smartet^ well, and then
to make the co^par^ son: If I miserable sinner who hau^ deserved eternal
torments, hard^ned in my sins, do feel and grieve so much to be scourged by
mine own hands, and that so easily; what would so delicate a body as his
feel, so innocent, and holy, being whipped, and scourged by the hands of such
cruel villains with all their force, and all his body over, in public before
so many people. And to ponder that which our Savior did feel in the torments
of the Cross, let them hold their arms spread in the air, for the space of
an hour, or half, or a good while, and make comparison: If I feel so much,
for standing a while in this fashion, what could my Lord, and Savior feel
being threo hours upon the Cross; hanging thereon, whilst his hands and feet
were pierced with great nails, all the weight of his body hanging on them; and
so in other pains which we may suffer, that by these little things, which we
feel our selves, we may come to know how to consider, what our Savior felt in
so great griefs and sorrows. 4. And besides all this, by all those which he
suffered exteriorly in his body, we must ponder much those which he suffered
inwardly in his soul, which were far greater; and those may be reduced to
four, which were, as other four nails where with his sacred soul was
crucified. 5. The first consideration was, the representation which he had of
all the sins of men; for as his blessed soul saw on the one part the
Divinity, and how worthy it was to be beloved, and served of all creatures, and
he loved it with unmeasurable, and incomparable love, and desired very much the
glory of it, and that it might be served of al creaturs and obeyed: and on the
other side he saw clearly all the sins of the world, both past, present, and
to come, and these being so many, he saw that every one of them was a great
injury to the Divinity, and great despect and offense to his divine Majesty; he
received from hence so perpetual and continual grief that he was like a huge
sea of griefs, so great and so inward that no tongue can speak them, or
understanding think or imagine them: so as the love he had to the Divinity was
unmeasurable, so was the grief to see it offended and despised; in so much
that to see one only was enough to give him more grief, then all that he
suffered exteriourly, particulerly the sin of his disciple who had sold him,
and betrayed him, did much afflict him, and the sin of that ungrateful, and
miserable people that procured and give him his death with so great hatred and
envy. 6. The second conside ration was to see, and know clearly and distinctly
the condemnation of so many souls that had already been lost, and should be
until the end of the world: for according to the measure of the love of God,
so is the love of our neighbor, proportionably speaking: and as his blessed
soul did love Almighty God in the highest degree, so he loved, and desired
greatly the salvation of souls, and it grieved him much to see so many dead
with sin, and conde^aned to so terrible and eternal torme^tst and
particulerly he did feel great and in ward grief, for the losle of many bad
Christians, who knowing the mystery of his Incarnation, and Passion, would not
profit themselves of this so dear a remedy, but would chose rather death the^
life, and the captivity of Satan rather, then the liberty of the son of God,
and the condemnation of Hell, rather then the glory of Heaven. 7. The third
consideration was a clear and distinct representation of all the torments and
griefs of his Passion, and of his death, for he had them always as present as
when he suffered: and so we must consider that the grief of his whipping, of
the crown of thorns, and the torment upon the Cross, and the scorns of his
Passion were not suffered by him (...) were the four nails which inwardly
passed through, and crucified that most blessed Soul, and gave him griefs
without comparison, more excessive, then all exterior pains and torments. 9.
And with this interior Cross thou must consider that he was crucified all the
days of his life, and so thou will not marvel at what is written of him,
that he was never seen to laugh; yea it is a thing worthy of great
consideration, his fortitude, and magnanimity, that having his Soul inwardly
so drowned, and run through with so many sorrows and griefs, had
notwithstanding courage to show outwardly a good countenance, and to converse
with all, so mildly, and with so great affability; and all this he did to work
our Salvation. Let him therefore be ever glorified, loved, and served of all
creatures. Amen.
. III. FOR WHOM.
1. THE third circumstance is to consider, For Whom our Savior suffered all
this, for if he had suffered it for one who had deserved it, and would have
been thankful for it, it would not have been a thing so much to be admyred,
or if he had suffered it for persons of great account and dignity, as for
Angels, or S^raphims; but to suffer it for men, creatures of so base condition
that by their own will had lost themselves, and to suffer it generally for
all, without excluding any, which if it had been only for his friends, it had
not been so much, but to suffer it for his enemies, and those who actually did
offend him, and abhor him, without excluding even those, who were tormenting
him, accusing, and condemning him to death; this does extol very much the
charity of our most benign Redeemer, that men mad with envy, are some
accusing him, others bringing false witness against him, others whipping him,
others preparing the crown of thorns, and the Cross, the nails, and the
rest of the instruments of his Passion; and in this very time he loves them so
truly, that he suffers for them the same torments which they lay upon him,
and wishes them so much good, that if it were necessary to gain any one soul
of them, he would suffer again so much more: this is a thing worthy to be
considered. 2. And that which imports much to draw fruit out of this
circumstance, every one must consider, that he suffered these payns for him, as
if he suffered for him alone, for it is infallible truth that for every one in
particular he suffered those pains and torments; and so much they profit every
one, and so much his own is the treasure of Christ's merits which he gat with
them, as if for him only he had suffered. And so thou ought to consider this
one thing, which was so indeed, that when Christ suffered he had thee as
present in his memory, as if thou had been there really present, and he had
also present before his eyes all thy sins, and that he set his eyes upon
thee, and said with great love and tenderness: For thee, o man, and for thy
sins I suffer this, and I suffer it willingly for thy salvation and remedy of
thy Soul, with great desire that thon profit thy self by it: and know
certainly that if for thee only it were necessary to suffer all this and much
more, I love thee so dearly, that it is sufficient to suffer for thee alone.
And this being so it is most just, that every one take to himself that which
Christ suffered, and make account of it: so did the glorious Apostle S. Paul,
when he said: I live in the says of Christ Jesus, who loved me, and dyed for
me.
. IIII FOR WHY.
1. THE fourth circumstance is to consider For Why; that is, for what cause
our Savor suffered all this. The President who gave the sentence, after he had
very well examined his cause did affirm thrice, that he found no cause at al
either to condemn him, or give him any punishment: and indeed it was so, that
he had not any fault, for he was most innocent, not knowing what sin was,
never did harm to any, but good to all: so that the cause being well examined,
it is found that there was no other of his part, but his bounty and mercy, and
those bowels of infinite charity, with which he took compassion of the misery
of men, who were all condemned to eternal death, and had no possibility to be
delivered from this sentence. And all that he suffered was only to do good unto
men, and to deliver them from the evils of their offenses, and from eternal
pains which they deserved for them, without any necessity profit, or interest
of his part. 2. And conformable to this you must consider very well, as you
meditate any thing that our Savior suffered, that he suffered it of his own
free will, and might have excused it if he would; and he would not, but suffer
so great pain and torments only for our good. This is the cause which was of
his part, for which he suffered, to wit, his bounty, his mercy, his charity and
love: but of our part there were our sins, the cause of his suffering. And so
when you meditate how they apprehended our Savior, accused him, besett him,
spit upon him, whipped and scourged him, with all the rest, consider that thou
art the cause of all that, and that they be thy sins that accuse him, and
abuse him, and give testimony unto the process, that he may be judged to
death, and put upon the Cross.
. V. OF WHOM.
THE fifth circumstance is to consider, Of Whom he suffered; that is, who be
they that inflict those pains upon him, and in this we must consider the
points following.

1. First, that he suffered of his own Chosen and Elected people, of whom he
in particular was Lord and King; to whom he had been promised so many years
since; whom he brought out of Captivity of Egypt with so great miracles, and
prodigious wonders; to whom himself gave the Law written with his finger;
whom he sustained forty years with bread from heaven; to whom he gave the
Land of Promise; whom he honored so much as to take flesh of their lineage,
and came in person to preach unto them, and teach them. 2. The second: that he
suffered of them, to whom he had done so great good, and given so many
benefits, raising their dead, delivering their possessed, during their
diseased, and conuersing amongst them, with such love and benevolence. 3. The
third: that he suffered of his cruel enemies, who for the space of two years
had sought his life, and to dishonor him, and would have drunk his blood, so
great was their hatred and detestation toward him; and to these he committed
himself willingly, to the end they might use him at their pleasure. 4. The
fourth: that he suffered of most vile and base Vassales, of no account at all,
without any shame, measure, or any other respect; for doubtless they who did
torment him, were the public executioners, who were wont to punish the
malefactors; if it be not, that perhaps the Chief Priests did commit this to
some base servants of their own, that they might torment him with the more
cruelty. Of him, that gave him the buffet, says S. John the Evangelist, that
he was a servant of the High Priest; and so we may think others were also who
tormented him. But howsoever, we see they were base fellows and slaves, very
poor and abject, for they parted his poor garments in four parts amongst
them. 5. The fifth; that our Blessed Savior suffered of all kind of people,
Gentiles, and Jews, of great and small, of the principal, and of the common
sort, all it seems concurred against him; and those who six days before had
done him so great honor, receiving him with palms, and crying out that he was
King of Israel; now they persuade themselves, that all his miracles were
devises and crafts, and that he pretended to usurp the Kingdom, and now they
desire to have him crucified, and that the thief and homicide Barabbas should
be set free. 6. The sixth; that he suffered of his own Disciples, which was not
the least of his pain, to see, that the Disciple whom he had taught so long,
and brought up under his wing, and done him so many good turns, should sell
him, and betray him to his enemies: and another Disciple whom he had honored
about the rest, making him Head of the Church, that he should deny him
publicly with an oath; and that all the rest should forsake him and run
away, leaving him in the hands of his enemies. And finally he suffered even of
his own mother, for although the most Blessed Virgin Mary had no fault at all,
but very great merit, in being present at the passion of her son; yet with
her presence she did increase greatly his grief and pain, in so much that he
would have suffered them double, not to have seen that which his mother
suffered: and notwithstanding he would pass all this, that our redemption
might be more copious, although so greatly to his cost, and cost of his most
Blessed Mother.
. VI. HOW.
THE sixth circumstance is, How he suffered; in the which there be three points
to be considered.

1. The first: that he suffered with exceeding great charity; in so much that
although the works he wrought were so excellent and great, and so excessive the
pains he suffered; yet we must rather ponder the manner how he suffered them,
then what he suffered. For how much soever it was he suffered, far greater was
his charity by the which he was prepared to suffer much more, if it had been
necessary for us. And this is a circumstance which ought to be very well
considered. 2. The second point is, that our Lord suffered without any kind of
case or comfort, either of heaven or earth, which never fell out so to the
Martyrs, and others who have suffered for his sake; that how much the greater
the torments were, and the pains they suffered, so much the greater was the
comfort which from heaven was given them, that the greatest torments and pains
were converted into recreation and favor. But our Savior, that his payns
might be the greater, would willingly be forsaken of his Father, and of all
comfort and ease that might mitigate his torments, as himself signified when he
said: My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me? 3. The third point, is to
consider the manner that our Savior had, in that which he did, and suffered;
that is, the virtues which he exercised in all his actions; for if they be
considered with attention, in them we shall find most excellent examples of al
kind of virtue, and principally most profound humility, that so great a Lord
would be so despised and abased; his patience so admirable amongst so many
abuses, and injuries; his meeknes, in not contradicting any one, nor defending
himself, but suffer himself to be carried, drawn, and done with whatsoever
they would, like unto a lamb; his silence, which made the Judge himself to
admire, that amongst so many and so false calumniations he answered not one
only word; his most perfect obedience by which he fulfilled whatsoever his
Father had ordained, although it was so hard and difficulte to fulfill, as to
suffer death upon the Cross; his fortitude, by which he offered himself into
the hands of his enemies, and suffered so many torments without ever
co^playning, or desiring them to take pity, or compassion on him; his
perseverance, by which he brought to an end the work of our redemption,
although they said if he would come down from the Cross they would believe in
him: but his charity, is that which most does shine here, for he suffered not
only for his friends, but also for his enemies; and his mercy, by which he
took upon him all the penalties of man, and their miseries, to set them free
from them, and abhorring sin so much, he would take upon him all the sins of
the world, that men might be freed from them; his true despising of the world,
and the prosperities and favors thereof; and his rigorous austerity of life,
with voluntary poverty: and finally all virtues have most perfect examples in
the life, and Passion of our Savior. 4. All this pertayneth to the manner how
our Savior did, and suffered all these things: and these be the six principal
circumstances, which we must consider in all his works. To the which may be
added other two, that are of the Time, and Place wherein he suffered. 5. The
seventh circumstance is to consider, Where our Lord suffered, to wi^ in
Jerusalem, one of the most populous Cities of the world, that his floutinges
might be more public; und the City very Religious and Holy, where Justice and
Truth should have prevailed more; and the people unto whom he had been most
beneficial; where he had wrought so many miracles, and preached so many
Sermons; and finally he suffered on the Mount Caluary, which was an infamous
and public place, where malefactors were put to death. 6. The eight
circumstance, shall be to consider When he did suffer, to wit, at Easter, the
most solemn feast that the Jews had amongst them; when people of all the world
were come thither to celebrate the Paschal feast, who might carry back news
how they had seen him die; and in the time when every one was busied in
feasting and joy. And so we may consider that our Savior being put upon the
Cross, every one departed very well content unto their house, especially the
High Priests and Princes of the people, who doubtless invited one another and
feasted with great joy, that they had fulfilled their desire. And at the time
whilst every one is thus employed, our Savior suffered on the Cross such
cruel griefs and dolorous torments. 7. These be the circumstances which
generally may be considered in all the mysteries of Christ our Lord, besides
other in particular which occur to every one. But note, that although all
these be put down here in this order, yet it is not necessary to ponder them
all in every mystery, but those which are most to the purpose of what is
meditated; or those to which their devotion does most incline them, and the
particular affect of him that prays does most draw him unto. 8. But it will
be of great importance to have them all well considered, and the points they
contain very well printed in the memory, that whilst he meditateth anything of
those which our Savior did, or suffered, presently with facility, and without
diuerting himself from his meditation, he may consider who is the person which
does or suffers that, and what affect he had inwardly in his soul when he
did that work exteriorly, and what moved him to do it, and the rest of what we
have said before.
Of the affects which may be exercised in Meditation of the mysteries of Christ
our Lord. CHAP. III.
WE have said in the beginning, that Meditation consists of three points; to
wit, to consider the fact, or story of the Mystery; to ponder the
circumstances which concure in it; and to draw from thence affects and inward
acts of virtue. The two first are now declared: it remains therefore to
speak of the third, that is, of the affects which we must exercise in
consideration of the Mysteries of Christ our Lord; and the most principal and
general may be reduced to these eight, Compassion, Contrition, Thanksgiving,
Admiration, Spiritual joy, Confidence, Love of God, Imitation of Christ. All
which we will declare in order. But note as we said before in the
circumstances, that is it not necessary always, and in every mystery, to
exercise all these affects, nor to keep this order: but sometimes one,
sometimes another, according as the mystery meditated requires: for some are
more ready and fit for one, some for another, and also according to the
disposition of the soul; which sometimes is rather disposed and inclined to
one affect, then to another: and so every one must guide himself according to
that our Lord shall inspire unto him, and his master teach him; although it be
important to keep them well in memory, and the motives thereof, to be the
readier to exercise them: and for this the declaration following may serve.

. I. Of the affect of Compassion.
1. THE first affect is of Compassion: and to take compassion of another, is
nothing else, but to receive pain of his pains, and sorrow of his sorrows.
This affect is the easiest of al, and the most sensible, and so naturally it is
the first which offers it self: for we are wont to take compassion of some
pitiful cases, yea sometime though they be fabulous and void of truth; and
therefore we ought to be much ashamed, and acknowledge our hardenes of heart,
that this being so natural unto man, we have not more feeling, and compassion
of things so worthy of it, as those which our Savior suffered, and in a person
who so much belongs unto us. 2. The motives unto this affect, are almost the
same circumstances which we touched above but especially the two first, for
that which is wont to move us much to compassion, is to see that he who
suffers, or is put to any great plunge, is a person of Nobility, some
principal man, delicate and innocent, and suffers without any fault: and
that the pains be great, and that he suffers them for out sake: and all
these considerations have great place in the mysteryes of Christ our Savior,
as may appear by the circumstances spoken of before. And so that which we
ought to have compassion of, is, to see so Noble a Person, so Venerable, so
delicate, so worthy to be served, and reverenced of all creatures, to pass
through so many troubles all the days of his life, in so great poverty, and
discomodity of all temporal things, the heat, the cold, the hunger and thirst,
the wearines, the ways, and many other things of which his life is full. And
principally the great and greiuous torments of his Passion, not only the
exterior: but much more the interior, as it is said in the second
circumstance. 3. For if it be of great merit for us, to take compassion upon
any of our neighbors which we see cast into misery: how much more will it be
to take compassion of all the labors and pains of our Savior? And therefore
it helps much, for this affect to consider that we se our father or brother
to suffer those miseries, and labors, or else some other person whom we love
much. For verily Christ is more then father and brother; for our father,
brother, and friends do not love in so much as he does, nor have done so much
for us, as he has done; neither owe we so much unto them, as we do to him. 4.
Finally this affect of Compassion depends and follows naturally the
consideration of the circumstances above said; and therefore about the same
there is no more necessary to be spoken, but only to advertise, that the
Compassion which we ought to have of Christ our Savior must not be as a
natural affect, as we should take compassion of a person which we should see
driven to some great extremity, or calamity against, his will: for in this sort
he commanded the daughters of Hierusulem that they should not weep for him,
when he carried his Cross upon his back: but it must be as an affect of
Faith, considering that a person who deserved to be reverenced and served of
all creatures, would of his own proper will subject himself to suffer so many
labors, and pains to deliver me from them, and from eternal torments which I
had deserved: and this is the affect of Compassion, the door, or gate to all
the rest.
. II. Of the affect of Contrition.
1. THE affect of Contrition is an inward detestation of sin, great sorrow
for having offended All mighty God, and a firm purpose to sin no more. And
for this it is a great motive to know the malice and turpitude that a sin
conteyneth in it self, the which no way is known better, then by seeing what
Christ suffered to destroy the said sin; for by the pain we discover the
greatness of the fault. 2. If we should see some principal Noble man, and much
esteemed of the King to be drawn by sentence of Justice, to be publicly
whipped, and lastly to be put upon the Gallouse like a base slave or thief;
certainly we should understand that the fault he had committed was very great:
and if this who was so put to death should be the Prince himself, Heir to the
Kingdom, and knowing that his Father had no other child, and that he loved him
much; and being a just and prudent man commanded him to be put to death in that
manner; we should be certainly persuaded, that the sin he had committed was
very grievous. And much more if we knew the Prince himself had not committed
it, but some servant of his, and for only being his surety, and offering to pay
for him; yet all this to be done unto him, it would make us marvel more that
there should be a fault in the world that deserved such chastisment. 3.
Therefore in this manner we must exercise this affect when we consider Christ
our Savior in any passage of his life, or passion, to see that he is the only
begotten Son of God, natural Heir of all the goods of Glory, and that
thirty three years he was in banishment in this miserable valley of Tears,
suffering so many labors, and afflictions; and finally that his own Father
who loved him as himself, delivers him up into the hands of cruel
tormenters, who whippe him so cruelly, put on his head a Crown of thorns,
give him so many buffets, use him with such scorn and mockery, carry him with
public cries through the streets, and crucify him, as if he had been the
greatest and most vile malefactor in the world; and yet of his own part he
had committed no fault at al, but suffers it only because he offered to pay
for the sins of men. By this we shall know how grievous a thing sin is, and
how much God abhors it; for that to destroy it he chose to suffer so great
torments, and if it were needful would suffer them again to excuse one of us
only. And presently to cast our eyes upon our selves, and consider how many we
have committed, to conceive great hatred of them all, and great anger with our
selves, for having done them. 4. If we should see our Father, or Brother whom
we love very tenderly, dead before our eyes, all the body stabbed through, and
should know who it was that had so slain him by Treason, how angry should we
be with him? Thus when we see our Savior taken prisoner, and used so ill,
whipped and nailed on the Cross; we must consider that we be there present
amongst those villains, and that our sins be they who so abuse him, and take
away his life: and let us believe without all doubt that these gave him more
pain then the whipping, nayling, and all the rest of the torments: that we may
be very sorry and weep heartily, for having so offended him, and increased his
pains and griefs: and let us make very firm purposes, never more to offend
him for all the world. 5. Also this affect of Contrition is gathered out of the
true knowledge of our solues and follows thereof, considering the virtues of
Christ, and presently turning our eyes to our selves considering the contrary
vices which every one finds in himself: as considering the humility of
Christ, confound himself to see pride guide him so much, and with so much
vain glory; considering his patience, be confounded to see himself so
impatient: and the like of the other virtues.
. III. Of the affect of Thanksgiving.
1. Thanksgiving consists in three points. The first, to acknowledge the
benefit, and to be mindful of it, esteem it much, and acknowledge himself
bound to him that did it. The second point is, to give him thanks again; that
is, with word and heart for the benefit bestowed upon him, and in all occations
he must confess it, and praise it. The third; to recompense by works,
according to his ability the benefit received. 2. This affect is excercised in
pondering any of the mysteryes of Christ our Lord, the great benefit he has
done unto us: for by the sin of our first parents, and for our own proper
sins, we were by just sentence condemned to eternal pain of hell, and
banished for ever from glory, and given up into the power of the Devil: and
all the creatures in the world together were not sufficient to deliver us from
him, but only the Son of God. Neither was there any other remedy (supposing
the divine ordination of God) but his Incarnation, Death, and Passion.
Wherefore by every passage of his life, and by every action of his, we are
delivered from sin, from the Devil, from death eternal, from the pains of
hell, and from the subjection and Tyrany of all our enemies; and by the same we
are restored to the grace and friendship of God, and to be adopted children of
his, and all the graces and gifts of the holy Ghost are given unto us, and the
title to get the Kingdom of heaven, and to be members of Christ, and
participate of all his merits. All these benefits must be pondered very
particulerly, in every mystery of Christ, for every one by it self, and every
motion of him, was sufficient to gain us all this profit; but that his Majesty
would by reason of the abundance of his charity, that our Redemption might be
more copious, offer all his life, death, and passion, as a total price of our
Redemption. 3. And here must be pondered (besides the greatness of the benefit)
these four points. The first, Who is he that does it, to wit, the Son of God
himself, who troubles no creature to redeem and deliver us, but himself in
person would do it. The second, that he bestowed these benefits of us, greatly
to his own cost, suffering so much for us. The third, the love wherewith he did
it, and the desire of our salvation, and the mind prepared to do much more, if
it had been necessary for us. The fourth, to consider every one of these
benefits, as if they had been done only to thy self. And this is as much as
touches the first point, which is to acknowledge, and esteem the benefit, and
be mindful of it. 4. The second point must be to give thanks to God very
heartily for all he has done, and suffered for us, and for every passage of his
life; acknowledging that if all our members should be converted into tongues,
and hearts, and should praise him, we should not answer to the least drop of
blood, which he shed for us, nor to the least of his labors which he
suffered: nor if we should praise him, as much as all the Angels, and men, and
all creatures, yet we should come very short. And therefore we must desire very
heartily, that all, both heaven and earth will help us to praise him, and we
ought to inuit them to it, especially our Angell-Keeper, and the Saints to
whom we are most devoted. 5. The third point is, to answer with works to the
benefit received, how great in gratitude would it be if to any person, of whom
we have received great benefits, we might do some little service, and would not
do it; and so thou must make firm purposes to do whatsoever thou do
understand to be pleasing to Christ our Lord, and thou must be very sorry that
thou have not done so already, and these purposes must be very free from any
interest: for although he were to give thee no reward at all, it is sufficient
that it is so due unto him, and that he has so much descrued it, to show thy
self grateful. 6. Besides these three points, remember to be thankeful to God
the Father, and all the Blessed Trinity, for all the benefits bestowed upon the
Humanity of Christ, as it is reason that the children be grateful for the
benefits done unto their Father, as if they were done to themselves; and the
members must be thankful for the benefits done to the Head especially; for
all the benefits and graces which were in Christ; did turn to our profit, for
he made us participate of them all.
. IIII. Of the affect of Admiration.
ADMIRATION is caused at the sight of a thing that is rare, extraordinary, and
marvelous. For seeing it, and not knowing the cause of it, a man remains
astonished and desirous to know it; the which in nothing in the world has
place more, then in the divine mysteries. For all of them be in themselves very
marvelous: therefore the Prophet Esaias says; that Christ should be called
Admirable, because all things in him were so very great: and if they do not
cause admiration in us, it is because, though we belecue them by faith, yet we
do not consider them with attention. And heerof it proceeds, that when with
most attention we consider them, they seem new unto us, as if we had not
known them before, and then they cause admiration in us; and so much the more,
by how much we do consider them with attention.

2. And here upon it comes to pass also, that they who are very
contemplative, and whom our Saniour does illuminate, with particular light in
their souls, to see the divine mysteries, of pure admiration they remain
absorpt, and so elevated, that many times they remain without their senses;
and so this affect is proper to prayer, for every thing considered in it, is
worthy to cause admiration: as to consider the greatness of God, his majesty,
his power, his wisdom, his justice, his mercy and the rest of his attributes,
and perfections.

3. But particulerly in the holy mysteries of Christ our Savior, that which
must cause admiration, is to consider those inestimable riches of Charity with
which God loved men, who having one only Son which was al his delight, and
not having, nor being possible that he should have any other, gave him for our
remedy, and consented that he should suffer so many labors, and torments and
give his life for them, and that the Son himself loved them so much that he
would have offered himself with a very good will to have suffered all that he
suffered; for he esteems men so much, that the whole B. Trinity employ
themselves for their remedy. God the Father sends his son, the Son makes
him self man, and suffers and dies for them. The Holy Ghost works the
mystery of the Incarnation.

4. Admire also much to see the wisdom of God who could find such an
invention, and remedy for men: for when all the Angels should put themselves to
consider the conueniences of it, they would never cease to wonder. And every
passage of the life, and Passion of Christ, and all that he has done for man,
have so many things worthy of admiration, that it is not possible to reduce
them to a sum, but leave it to that which every one finds by experience,
having considered them with attention.

5. It causes also admiration to see the blindness of the world and the
ingratitude that the Son of God coming to help it, it would not receive him,
but laid hands on him, even until it killed him. The hardness of Christians,
who after they have faith and knowledge of these mysteries they are so little
grateful for them, and profit themselves so little by them.

6. The excellency of the glory of heaven, that God would suffer so much to
gain it for men. The grieuousnes of sin, that God did so much to distroy it.
The rigor of justice, since so he punished his own son for others sins
and offenses. The greatness of his mercy, for least men should perish he took
their sins upon him. The sharpnes of the pain of hell, for to deliver man
from all this the son of God suffered. These and an innumerable company of
others, are things which do cause admiration in the consideration of the
mysteries of Christ.

7. And the manner of excercising this affect is this: when the soul
considers these or such like things worthy of consideration, after he has
pondered as well as he can the reasons of the mysteryes, to cause admiration,
let him look as one astomished to see so marvelous a thing: And desire to
have more light, and clear knowledge of it, to praise and love our Lord more
worthily, who would work such things, and to cry out with the Prophet saying:
O Lord, I have heard thy words, and was astonished, and in a maze: O Lord my
God, how marvelous is thy name in all the world. And with this affect to
break into the praises of God, extolling his greatness.

. V. Of the Affect of spiritual Joy.
JOY and spiritual gust, is of great importance to conserve the spirit and
persevere in virtue: as also on the contrary, a great inconueniency, and
trouble in spirit, is too much sorrow and inordinate grief, especially that
which grows of temporal respects: and also the vain, and too much joy which
is taken in external things, is hurtful to the spirit very much, for it
distracteth it, and draws it to external things, and is cause of laughter,
and idle words, jests, curiosityes, plays, and such like things.

2. Against all this is the holy affect of joy, and spiritual delight: and for
this Saints have commended much that Religious persons, and spiritual men
should procure to acustome themselves, to carry great joy, and spiritual gust
in their souls, which makes a man more composed and more modest in the
exterior, and more recollected in the interior, and makes him despise all
the joy of temporal things, and endeavor to do exercises of penance, and
mortification, and casts out from his soul all idleness and sloth, which
comes of vicious sorrow and grief, and does many other great profits.

3. For this affect of spiritual joy is to be exercised in the mysteries of
Christ in this manner; first, in those mysteries which have in themselves any
joy, or prosperity to rejoice and be glad at his content and all his glory: as
if a man should see some prosperous and fortunate thing happen to his Father,
or Brother, or other person which he much esteemed, as it is said in the
Gospel of those persons, who with good and sincere intention followed and
heard our Savior his doctrine, that they reioyed, and were glad at al those
things which they saw him do with glory and honor.

4. So the soul must rejoice with Christ himself, to see the feast the Angels
make at his Nativity, how the Sheepheards come to adore him, and also the Kings
how they do praise him and glorify him: and how S. Simeon, and S. Anne do
publish his greatness; afterward how the Doctors admire in the Temple at his
doctrine: In his Baptism how his eternal Father did honor and authorize him:
in the desert how he overcomes the Devil, and how the Angels serve him: and
in all the time of his preaching, how the people honored him, how the Devils
obayed him: the power and authority wherewith he wrought so many miracles, the
majesty wherewith they received him on Palms sunday: and finally in all the
passages of his life, yea and in those of his passion, as often, as any
honorable thing shall happen unto him, of authority or prosperity, the soul
must be glad and joyful of it: because it is done unto our redeemer, or of the
content and pleasure he receives by it.

5. Also in the sorrowful things, troublesome and paynefull although
considered according to the pains, griefs, despects, and adversities which our
Savior suffered, they must cause sorrow in us and passion, as we said in the
first affect: but on the other side, and considered in another manner they must
cause us great Spiritual joy for the respects following.

6. First, considering the glory of God which from thence arises, more then
any other works done in the world, and that they were the most grateful
services ever done, or shall be done hereafter, and in which are manifested his
power, his wisdom, his bounty, justice, mercy, and the rest of his
perfections: and this is a title very sufficient for a soul that loves God,
to rejoice and be glad.

7. Secondly, for the glory of the Humanity of Christ, who in all the passages
of his life, gave most excellent demonstraction of his virtue: and therefore it
is great reason, that a soul receive great spiritual joy, to see their
redeemer with that fortitude of mind to overcome all those torments, with that
invincible patience to withstand all the cruelty of his enemies, and their
malice; to see that order, modesty, and gravity amongst so many mocks, and
scorns; that wisdom in answering so many demands and calumniations; that
power he showed when he would, throwing down his enemies with one only word,
and not consenting that they should so much as hurt any of his disciples; that
benignity and unspeakable charity in praying for those who tormented him, and
in healing the care of him that came to take him.

8. Of al these things and many such like, it is just, and fit that the soul
rejoice spiritually, to see their Redemer, how gloriously he proceeds in all
things; as it would be just, that a soldier should rejoice to see his Captain
fight valourously against his enemies, and to see him also weary himself, and
labor much: and although for this cause he should take pity of him, yet on
the otherside he would rejoice much, if he saw him overcome his enemies, and
destroy them, and put them to flight: especially if he knew, that of such
labor would follow great honor and glory for himself, and also much profit
for his souldiars. Even so a Christian must rejoice, to see that all those
labors are to redound to the more glory of Christ, and that for them his
eternal Father will give the greatest honor and authority that can be
imagined, as S. Paul says: He humbled himself being made obedient, even
until the death of the Cross, for the which God has exalted him and given
him a Name, above all Names, that in the Name of JESUS every knee should bow,
in heaven, earth, and hell, and all tongues should confess, and praise him.

9. Thirdly, joy must be gathered out of these mysteries of the passion, so the
great good, and profit that thereby comes unto al mankind, for by these the
debts of our sins are paid, which none else could pay. Furthermore we are
redeemed from the servitude of the Devil, and from the tyranny of vices and
passions, and delivered from eternal condemnation, and right is given us to
attain to eternal glory, and a title of Sons of God, and brethren of
Christ. By these our Sacraments were merited, and succor, with examples, was
given unto us, doctrine of all virtue, medicines for all our infirmities, and a
general remedy for all our evils: all these be motives to receive great joy
and spiritual comfort, seeing that Christ our Lord, although so much to his
cost, and with so great labor, he so copiously wrought our redemption.

. VI. Of the affect of Hope.
THE affect of hope is exercised in this sort and manner; the soul seeing how
much God does for it, and the great love he shows in suffering so much and so
willingly for her health, and the great desire he shows that it should be
saved, especially having made it partaker of al those goods by means of faith
and the Sacraments; rejoices in spirit that so happy a loft has befallen it,
as to be in the Church and enjoy these goods which the Patriarcks and Prophets
so much desired to enjoy and see, who only knowing that it should come to
pass, and seeing in spirit two or three thousand years before, they feasted
and rejoiced, and envied those that were to enjoy this desired time of the
Church.

2. And the soul must rejoice to see that God makes such an account of it,
and by this conceive great hope of her salvation, and that God will have it for
himself since he has given it such an earnest penny, and made it so fair an
offer; and say with the Apostle; if when we were his enemies (without any
defect of ours) God did reconcile us to himself with the blood and death of
his Son: how much more after we be reconciled shall we be saved by the merits
of his said Son.

. VII. Of the affect of the Love of God.
LOVE includes in it self and consists of three acts. The first is to be
glod of all the goods of the person that he loves. The second to desire that
he may have many more that he has not. The third is to do for him all that
possibly we can. For as S. Gregory says, the proof of love are the works.
And when the love is very perfect and inflamed, the other effect which is to
conform us in all things with the person we love, follows; to wit, to love
what he loves, and hate what he hates, and receive content in all things with
him. By these points, the love of God must be exercised: the first to receive
great content and pleasure that God be who he is, and has all the good he has;
that he be so great, so infinite, so powerful, so wise, and the like of all
the rest of his perfections and greatness.

2. The second, supposing that we cannot desire God more good then he has,
because in him are all good things, and his greatness can be no more then it is,
nor his glory more then he has in himself, but it may be greater exteriorly
in his creatures: and this is that which we desire he should have.

3. The third; supposing also that we cannot do any works that may be
profitable unto him, for he has no need of us, neither of all our goods can
any profit come unto him, but we may and ought to show that we love him in our
works fulfilling his commandments: for our Savior himself says, he that
has my commandments and keeps them, this is he who loves me; and so we
must make many acts and firm purposes to fulfill perfectly the commandments
of God, and not to break any of them for all the world. And this same love of
God we must exercise in a certain manner with the sacred Humanity of Christ,
which we have great reason to love more the^ al creatures, delighting much that
God has done so much good, and bestowed so many favors of that sacred
Humanity, giving him so much grace and so great glory, and so excellent virtues
and dignityes, and desiring that his name may be known, and reverenced
throghout the whole world, and propounding to fulfill faithfully all that he
co^ma^deth us, and do him all the service we can.

4. The fourth which follows of this love, when it is great and perfect, is
conformity and resignation, to conform us with all perfection we can to the
will of God, love what he loves, abhor what he abhorrethe, and desire that
in all things his will be done, as well in adversity and sorrow, as in
prosperity and joy, as well in this life as in the other, in time and eternity
without any respect of our own profit, gust, or commodity, but only to the
will of God, and that it be fullfilled; and in all things that shall happen or
can happen, say from the bottom of our heart, Thy will be done in earth, as it
is in heaven. This is the most perfect act of the love of God, and in which the
soul ought to exercise it self much, and in this must spend the greatest
part of it exercise.

5. And this affect of love of God in the meditation of the mysteries of Christ
is to be excercised considering the great and unspeakable love that he showed
us in these mysteries, doing and suffering so much for us, and with so great
affection and love, that it cannot be expressed. For there is nothing that
forces so much to love another, as to see himself loved of him, especially if
the person which loves be of great dignity and nobility, and that he has no
need of me, nor hope for any profit of me, and I who am loved, am of vile and
low condition, and very unworthy to be at all as I am.

6. And so the Christian must make with himself this account when he
considers what God has done for him, seeing that all proceeds from love: how
God being who he is, loves me so much, being so miserable and vile a creature,
and so worthy to be abhorred and despised of him; and only for the love he
bears me, does so much and suffers so much, and desires that I should love
him; for how can it be suffered that I love him not, being he is goodness it
self, and beauty it self, and the depth of all goods: how can I leave to love
one who has done me so much good, and does; and loves me so much. And so it
is reason to say with S. John: Brethren, let us love God much, because he first
loved us: and again he says, this is charity not that we loved God first, but
that first he loved us. Praised be he therefore of all his creatures. Amen.

. VIII. Of the affect of Imitation of Christ.
THE affect of Imitation of Christ and his virtues, is the principal fruit
which we are to draw out of the consideration of these mysteries, to procure
to conform our life with his, and direct all our works in such sort as we
understand to be most conformable, and like to those of Christ. And this affect
is excercised in prayer in this manner, to consider very particulerly and
leasurely the virtues of Christ our Lord which are discovered in the passage of
his Life or Passion which is meditated, and to affect the will with love of
that virtue, and make very firm purposes to procure it, and to put in
execution the necessary means for to attain unto it, and to exercise the
acts in which it consists, comfortable to the condition and estate of the
person who considers it, and according to the occasions that are wont to
offer themselves. Let is put an example in some virtues.

2. Considering the Humility of Christ, who being a Lord of so great Majesty in
as much as he was God, and as man, a King and general Lord of all the world, a
person of so great dignity and veneration, he would so humble himself, and be
unknown in the world, and be holden for an ordinary man, and ignorant; and
being Sanctity it self would be accounted as a sinner, and malefactor, and be
condemned, and chastised for such a one. Thus he must form great desires to be
little esteemed, despised, and depressed, and purpose to procure it as much as
he can, hiding all that he has of honor, and estimation, and manifesting his
faults and all such thing; as may humble him, as far as may be without scandal
and bad example; and finally desiring from his heart that all esteem him vile,
and despised, and unworthy of any honor, and truly judging himself for such.

3. Considering the poverty of Christ in all his life, and what want he had of
those things that were necessary for humane life, affect thy self much to
poverty, and make many purposes to procure it, depriving thy self of all
superfluous things, and such as be too much, and taking only those that be
necessary very moderate and scarcely, and have nothing with affection, but the
heart very free from all things.

4. Considering the patience of Christ in suffering so many adversities,
labors, and pains, and his mildnes in suffering so many injuries and abuses
without being angry with any body, neither wishing revenge, but rather loving
very heartily those who abused him and injured him, and praying for them. To
desire much these virtues, and purpose to suffer with patience any labor, or
adversity that may happen unto him, or injury that may be done to him, without
abhoring or being angry with any, nor desire to be revenged, but rather wishing
well to all.

5. Considering the Obedience of Christ, who without any obligation fullfilled
so perfectly the Law of Moses, even unto the least cerimony, and obayed the
judges although in just and wicked, and even the very Officers of Justice,
doing all that they commanded him not contradicting any; to make purposes to be
very obedient to all his Superious, to fulfill (if he be Religious) very
punctually all the statutes, constitutions, and ordinations of his Order, and
do most perfectly the will of all his superiors, without co^tradicting or
replying to any.

6. Considering the Charity of Christ, who so much loved men, and did so much
for them although ungrateful and unknown, without acception of persons, as
well to his enemies as friends; to propound with all efficacy to do good to all,
as much as he can, although they be his enemies, and although it cost him
labor; and the good he cannot do to desire it from his heart, and desire our
Savior to give them all such things as they have need of.

7. And in this same sort, let him do in all the rest of the virtues of our
Lord, which he shall confider and know, that it is of great importance, and
profit to use this exercise thus. For if these purposes be truly made indeed,
with these desires and inward acts of virtues, our Savior receives them, as
if they were done really indeed, and they dispose the soul when occasion shall
be offered, to put them in execution: and in this manner the habit of virtues
is gotten.

. IX. That the acts of Virtue must not only be exercised in general, but in
particular.
HERE one thing of great importance must be particulerly noted; that is, that
these affects and purposes of virtues, and desires of the acts of them, we
must not be content to do them in general; but that they may be of more force
and efficacy we must particularize them, according to the condition of his
person, and other particular circumstances, as putting example in some virtues.

2. Our Savior in his prayer gives him a desire of Humility, and a purpose to
procure those things which may help him to be humble: he must not content
himself with this desire so in general, for this is of less profit, but
presently he must come in particular to consider well, what can I do for this
end, and to see that this or that is wont to be an occasion that I have my
self in some account; the^ purpose to dissemble it, and cover it: and this
other may be occasion for men to despise me, and have me in less account; then
purpose to procure it, keeping in all the order that is convenient not to give
scandal for bad example to any. And in that sort purpose to humble himself to
all, as if he were their slave, and converse with aeuery one with great
reverence and submission: and thus also other acts like unto this which shall
occur to every one comformable to his condition, and the persons with whom
he conuerseth.

3. God gives him a desire to imitate the poverty of Christ; he must not be
content with making purpose so in general, but to come presently to the
particular and plot with himself: Well I will visit my chamber, and take away
all that is superfluous in it, and I will remain only with that which I cannot
want or excuse, yea and this I will diminish, that some thing may be wanting
which may be too much. And what I have shall be without any affection, yea
rather I will loose it al then commit one venial sin, and I will deny
nothing to any one who shall ask me, although it be needful for my self: and
so in like things.

4. God gives him a desire to content our Savior in all things; he must not
be content to propou^d it so in general but come in particular to consider:
But in what can I content him? In fullfilling better my profession, being more
obedient to my Superiors, more obseruant in all things of the Religion, in
giving good example to my brethren, in performing those things that obedience
commands me which more diligence and devotion, in loving my neghbours from my
heart, in serving them with great charity, and in procuring to give them content
in whatsoever I can for Gods sake, and propound to do all these things with
constancy.

5. God gives him a desire to go forward in virtue: see presently: Well what
is it that hinders me? And he shall find that self love hinders him, and too
much affection to himself, his sloth and negligence in the exercise of
virtue, his self will, not having mortified his senses and appetits and many
other things which eueryone in himself will find by experience. Then to
propound to amend all this and every thing in particular. And in the same
fashion he must make acts of all the rest of the virtues, particularizing of
them according to his manner of proceeding, and marking all ways the thing he
has most need of, to put there most force.

6. But mark well that these particular acts be not made so that they deuert
him from his prayer, occupying his imagination in framing the things which he
must do; or the persons with whom he is to converse. For in this there must be
much regard, that in such sort he attend to that which is virtue, that he
distract not his thought to things that be impertinent, and not to the purpose:
and in this sort this exercise is the most profitable that is done in prayer,
for all prayer is ordained to reform bad customs, and perfect virtues, and
this is not gotten with such efficacy in the general acts, as descending to
the particular.

7. For it is a thing very easy for a man to desire, yea and to propound with
himself, and purpose to be humble and temperate in general, and as it is
easily purposed, so it is easily left. But where the profit does consist, is to
come to the particular, and make the acts, as is before said. And afterward
when he shall make the examine of his conscience, see how he does fulfill
those purposes, to amend that which is wanting, and desire grace of our Savior
to fulfill it.

CHAP. IIII. Wherein briefly is repeated, and declared all that is above said.
BECAUSE it is of great importance for those who begin to pray, to learn and
know how to discourse of the circumstances which they are to consider and to
exercise the affects which they gather out of them; that they may the better
be kept in memory, and all that we have said before, I thought it would be of
great profit and commodity to reduce it all to a brief Sum as follows.

A Sum of the general circumstances, which may be considered in the
mysteryes of Christ our Lord.. 1.
1. THE principal circumstances be six, signified by these words, Who? What?
For whom? For what? Of whom? How? and the declaration of them, is this. The
first circumstance: Who is he that suffers? That it is Jesus Christ, God and
Man: in as much as he is God, he is the Eternal Word of his Father, second
person of the most B. Trinity, which created all things, and conserues and
gouernes them, and whom all serve, and obey. In as much as he is man, he is
King and universal Lord of all that is created; to whom all creatures owe
obedience and subjection. According to his body, he is conceived by the holy
Ghost, and so is the most beautiful and perfect of all men that God created,
and the most delicate and sensible of all that ever were, or shall be. According
to his soul, he is full of grace, and charity, and of all virtues, and gifts
of the holy Ghost; full of marvelous science and wisdom, by which he sees
and knows most perfectly every thing that is, were, or shall be; and that most
holy soul is full of glory, and blessedness. Beside this he is a great Prophet,
a most holy man, who made such excellent sermons, and wrought such great
miracles, whom all people had in great veneration, and esteem. 2. The second
circumstance: What is that which he suffers? That they were the greatest
torments, pains, and griefs, that ever were suffered in the world: joined with
most grievous injuries, scoffs and mockeries: and besides that which he
suffered outwardly, it was far more that he suffered inwardly in his soul, in
the inferior part of it. First, for the representation all the sins of the
world, particulerly those of that people in putting him to death. Secondly, by
reason of the knowledge he had, and the memory of all the souls that were to
be condemned, and especially of those that be Christians. Thirdly by reason of
the lively representatio^ that he always had of the griefs of his passion, by
the which he always suffered them altogether interiorly. Fourthly for the
most bitter griefs, and panges which he saw his most holy Mother to suffer, the
which he selt more then his own: with these four nails he was crucified all
his life, and tormented interiorly with them. 3. The third circumstance: For
whom does he suffer? That is, for all men generally, as well enemies as
friends, and for those who are actually accusing of him, tormenting and killing
him, and for thee thy self so in particular, as if only for thee he suffered;
which if it had been necessary he had charity enough, and more then enough, to
suffer for thee only, and had thee so present in his memory, and all thy
sins, as if for them only he had suffered, and such desire he had that thou
might profit thy self. 4. The fourth circumstance: For what cause he
suffers? That is only for his own goodness and mercy, and his infinite
Charity to deliver men from great Evils, from which none but himself could
deliver them, and to do them very much good, not having any need of his own
part, nor profit at all, but of his own will and liberality. And of man's part
the cause of his passion were all our sins; these were they which did torment
him, crucify him, and bring him to death. 5. The fifth circumstance: Of women
he suffers? First of his own chosen people, of whom he was King, and
natural Lord, and whom he had honored so much taking flesh of their lineage.
Secondly, of those, to whom he had done so many and great benefits. Thirdly,
of most cruel enemies, who did deadly hate and abhor him. Fourthly, of most
vile villains, discourteous, without all kind of pity, or good respect.
Fifthly, of all kind of people, Gentiles, Jews, great and little, and the very
same that a little before had honored him so much. Sixthly, of his own
Disciples, for one sold him, another denied him, and all fleed from him; and
even his Mother with her presence did increase his torments and griefs,
although without any fault of hers. 6. The sixth circumstance: How, or in what
manner he suffers? First, with very great charity and love of men, desiring
very inwardly that those merits might be profitable unto them, and being ready
to suffer for them much more if it had been necessary. Secondly, without any
kind of comfort or consolation, but forsaken of heaven and earth. Thirdly, with
most profound humility, patience, mansuetude, silence, obedience, fortitude,
perseverance, mercy, poverty, and despect of the world: and finally giving them
a most excellent example of all virtues. 7. To these six principal
circumstances, may be added two more. The one of the place where he suffered,
to wit a City so populous, and religious, and amongst the people where be had
wrought so many miracles, and made so many sermons, and received such honor,
and in the mount Caluary which was a most infamous and public place of
execution for malefactors. The other circumstance is, the time when he
suffers; that is, at Easter for which had come to Jerusalem people from all
parts of the world, and in the time when every one thought of feasting and
rejoicing.
. II. A Repetition or sum of the Affects, which must be exercised in the
meditation of the mysteries of Christ our Lord.
THE first affect is of Compassion. Considering that we see a person so noble,
so venerable, so worthy to be served, and reverenced, and so delicate, to
suffer so many and great labors, so many discomodities all the space of his
life, and so great griefs, torments, and abuses in his passion, not only
exteriorly in his body, but inwardly in his soul far more, and that he
suffer all without fault, for he never knew how to wrong any, but to do good to
all, and that he is a person which comes so near unto us, and touches us so
near, that he is more them our father, and brother and friend, and that of his
own will he would subject himself to suffer that for us.

2. The second Affect is of Contrition. Considering that sin is so bad a
thing, and so horrible, that for others sins Almighty God did deliver his
only begotten Son to such cruel torments, and that our sins be the
ministers of Justice which abuse him, and take away his life from him, and gave
him far more, then all the torments he suffers.

3. The third Affect is of Thanksgiving. Considering that by any passage of the
life, or passion of Christ we are delivered from sin, and from all the losses
that by reason of sin we had incurred, which are eternal death, the pains of
hell, the subjection and tyranny of all out enemies; and we are restored to the
favor and friendship of God, and made his children and members of Christ, and
heirs of the kingdom of heaven. And that all these benefits Christ our Lord
did for us, with exceeding love, and much to his cost, and for every one of us
in particular, as if only for one he had done it: with this the soul must be
encouraged to give him thanks, and desire that all creatures do the like, and
purpose to be answerable in works to so great a benefit, serving him in all
that he can, and giving thanks to God, for all that he did to the humanity of
Christ our Lord.

4. The fourth Affect is of Admiration. Considering the perfections of God,
which are discou^red, and known in the mysteries of Christ, the inestimable
charity wherewith the Father Eternal loved men, that he gave them his only
begotten Son, and the son himself, for he offered himself to death for
them; and all the Blessed Trinity, for it was occupied in this behalf; the
wisdom of God, that could find a remedy so convenient to deliver man, the
dignity of the souls, the excellency of glory, the grieuousnes of sin, the
rigor of Divine Justice, the greatness of his mercy: all these things are
discovered in these mysteries, and all cause admiration when they be considered.

5. The fifth Affect is of Joy and spiritual Comfort. For although considering
the toils and payns of Christ our Lord, we must take compassion of him, and
feel them as our own: on the other side we must rejoice much in the same
things, not only in those that be prosperous, joyful, and glorious which he
wrought in the whole course of his life, from his nativity till his ascension,
but also in the sorrowful, wearisome, and paynfull: first for the glory of God
which resulteth and arises thereof, and the great service, and so pleasing that
is done unto him. Secondly for the glory of the humanity of Christ, for the
excellent virtues that he showed, and exercised, for the victory he got of his
enemies, and because by those labors, he deserved great reward, honor, and
exaltation that can be imagined. Thirdly for the great profit that thereon
ensued to all humane lineage and mankind, and to all the Church, as well
militant as triumphant: and so a man considering as a member of all this
mystical body, must rejoice and be glad at all the good of the whole body.

6. The sixth Affect is of Hope. For a Soul considering how much God does for
it, and the willingness he shows that it should be saved, especially having
brought it to his Church, and made it partaker of al those goods by means of
faith and the sacraments; it must conceive great hope of salvation, and that
God will fulfill that which wants, and must it force it self to help, as
much as in it lies, for this work of it Salvation.

7. The seven Affect is Love of God. Considering the unspeakable love that he
shows in doing and suffering so much for us, it is just that we should be
moved to love him who loved us so much: and this love consists: first
inioyning all the goodness and perfections that God has: secondly, in desiring
that he may be known, loved, served and glorified of all creatures thirdly, in
proposing also on our part to serve him and please him in all we can, and
conform our selves in all things to his divine will, as well in adversity as
in prosperity, being glad that in all things his will be done.

8. The eight Affect is Imitation of Christ. The soul considering the Charity,
Humility, Patience, Poverty, Mildnes, Obedience, and the rest of the virtues of
Christ our Lord which do shine in all the passages of his Life and Passion, to
inflame the soul in great desires of these virtues, and make many purposes to
apply the necessary means to attain unto them; and this not only in general
and commonly, but descending in particular to the acts of those virtues
convenient to the condition, estate, and occations that are wont to occur,
putting the principal study and care in that virtue, that every one feels
himself to have most need of.

The form and manner, How to exercise the foresaid Affectes, and acts of
Virtue in other Meditations. CHAP. V.
THE same form that is set down to meditate the mysteries of the Life and
Passion of our Savior, must be kept in a certain manner in all other
meditations: to wit, procuring to draw out of them all affectes and interior
acts of virtue, which is the profitablest way to meditate: and that this may
be done with more facilies, the effects that may be excercised are here set
down, as they may occur ordinarily in every meditation.

. I. In the Consideration of Sins, these affectes and virtues following may
be exercised.
1. FIRST to ponder very well the greatness of a sin: Considering the insinite
Majesty of God, and his perfections, and the injury that is done him; how much
he abhores it, how much he has done, and does to destroy it, the great rigor
wherewith he chastises it, the pains of Hell and Purgatory, and the great
chastisments that he has done somtymes even in this life. 2. Secondly the
affect of Contritio^; that is great detestation of all sins, a great desire
never to have committed them, although he should have suffered all the evils
that in the world may be suffered, and make firm purposes not to sin,
although he aduentureth his life, his Honor, and all that may be, and procure
to extend this purpose to the venial sins, purposing to esehew all that he
understands to displease God, how little so ever it be, cost what it will. 3.
Thirdly, fear to return to sin, seeing that he cannot free himself by his
own forces, and that always the will is free, and may cast away all the
succors of God: and although God help yet always, he leaves man in his
liberty, to profit himself, to receive his favors and helps or not; and from
hence must grow to ask our Lord very affectuously grace and favor not to
sin. 4. Fourthly, knowledge of himself. Seeing how vile and abominable he is
who has committed such things, and how far out of reason it is to desire to be
honored or esteemed. And for this effect to consider that persons with whom he
conuerseth know all his sins, as well as himself, with all the circumstances
of the^ and particularityes as they be; and if so they know him, how dare he
lift up his eyes, or appear before them, or wish to be honored or esteemed.
And to consider that far better God knows them and his Angels, of whom he
ought to have more shame; and so walk always with the spirit of humility;
and that this may be true, he must desire from his heart that every body should
know his sins, and should despise him, and abhor him for them, as he
dese^ueth, and offer to our Savior with all his heart, that if it were his
pleasure he is prepared to confess them before all the world. 5. Fifthly,
hatred of himself considering the great losses that sin causes, and the good
that it takes from us, and that finally it puts a man in obligation to
suffer for ever the pains of hell. Mark how one would abhor any other that
should have done him so much harm, and put him in such danger; and presently
let him well consider, that he did himself all that harm, and that none could
have done it, if he himself of his own will would not have consented unto
sin, in such sort, that he has done more harm to himself, then all the
world could have done him. 6. Sixthly, a purpose to do penance, taking upon
him the hand of God, and chastising in himself the offenses that he has
committed against him, depriving himself voluntarily of the gustes, and
delights that lawfully he might take, in pain of those he has taken
unlawfully and with offense of Allmighty God. 7. Seauenthly, knowledge of the
bounty of God, and of his mercy, and of the love he bare to men; for abhorring
sin so much has suffered them so long to commit so many; and in the same
time that he sinned, he gave him life, and conserved him in it; and being his
enemy and offending of him, he did not take from him this portion of natural
benefits, of the light, of sustenance, of the influences of heaven, and all the
rest: and not only these general benefits, but did him others in particular.
See, if a King would use this Nobility with one that had offended him; how much
he would esteem him, and how much he deserved to be beloved for it. 8.
Eighthly, thanksgiving, for having suffered him so long in his sins, and
having given him so many inspirations to avoid and detest the^, and invited him
with his friendship, and drawn him to his service, and done him other
particular benefits, delivering him from many dangers: let him look how many
may be in hell for less sins the^ his, and that some or many of them might
dye at the same time that he did offend or sink in sin, and make this account
with himself, what have I deserved more then he, that he should be now lost for
ever without remedy, and I in the way to save my soul, and with so good
occasions for it: particulerly let him consider, that in the same time that he
offended God, he gave him inspirations and desires to be Religious, or such
like; in this sort God pardoned him his sins instead of casting him into hell
for them. 9. Ninthly, the affect of love of God, gathering out of all that is
said how much he ought to love God, who has done him so much good, and
delivered him from so much evil, without deserving it: and in this last affect
to detayne himself long, and conclude with it, asking our Savior grace to be
correspondent to so great love.
. II. In the consideration of Death may be exercised these Affects following.
1. FIRST, fear of death; seeing how worthy it is to be feared because of all
terrible things it is the most terrible, and because in it all accounts must be
concluded, and receive the Lotte of glory or pain eternal; and for many other
reasons, for which even great Saints did fear it much, and had it always in
their memory as a thing very important. And he must reprehend in himself the
carelessnes that he has of a thing that imports so much, and purpose to have
it always in his memory to animate him to the service of God, and to bridle
him from all sin. For this remedy Christ our Savior gave us warning,
admonishing us so often, that always we should be watchful, because we know
not the day, nor the hour we shall be called in. And the holy Ghost does
admonish us also in these words: In all thy works remember the last things, and
thou shall never sin. In every thing thou shall meddle with, consider if in
the hour of death it would content thee, or displease thee to have done it,
and with this thou will bridle thy self from sinning. 2. Secondly, knowledge of
himself seeing he is to come to end in dust and putrefaction, and mustly in
the hideous sepulcher so abominable, covered and eaten with worms. 3.
Thirdly, despect of the world, and all things in it, to take away his affection
from all creatures, seeing how little they can avail him for that necessity,
and to despise al pleasures and delights, seeing that quickly they must end. 4.
Fourthly, of poverty, despising all wordly things; for he sees how poor his
end shall be; and how that so much the more pain a man shall have, by how much
he has lived in abundance of things; and more comfort, by how much the poorer
he has been. 5. Fifthly, to leave off all superfluous cares of this life, and
put all his care only in things that then may profit him, for only that is of
importance, and all the rest is to be laughed at; and so pass though all the
things of this life as by things of complement; make account that all that
succeeds either of prosperity or adversity, is to be langhed at, as a Comedy or
a Mask; that those that weep, weep in test, and also those that laugh, for
presently it ends. 6. Sixthly, comfort in all troubles, and a courage to
embrace all difficulties which shall hapen of penance, mortification, or the
like, seeing it must end so quickly, and will give so much comfort and
confidence in the end. And all these affects must be ordained (as to their end)
to serve with more perfection our Lord; taking these means to bridle himself
from sin and to encourage himself to all things that belong to virtue.
Understanding, that it is very pleasing to God the exercise of disposing
himself to dye well: The death of Saints is precious in the sight of God, and
that it pleases him much to find us then disposed, to carry us presently with
him to his Kingdom. And so it is great service to him, that men put all their
study and diligence in this exercise.
III. In the consideration of the Judgment, these Affectes may be exercised.
1. FIRST, to conceive great fear of Judgment, and therefore our Savior would
signify it by words so significa^nt and fearful, as we may see in the Holy
Writ; and seeing how much holy men have feared it, so grown in virtue, as
David, Job, S. Hierome, S. Bernard, and other most holy men, who tie^bled to
think of the day of Judgment, and had it all ways in their memory: and to
this effect will serve to see the signs so terrible that shall go before it,
the being of Gods Judgments so severe, the Judge God himself, in whose
presence the Angellsare not guiltles, and from whom nothing is hid, the
Sentence being inreuocable, not to called back again by any means, and to be
of glory, or pain eternal, and the same Judge being the part offended, and so
powerful that none can resist him. 2. Secondly, great fear of offending God,
seeing that he is to be Judge in a cause of so great importance as salvation,
or eternal damnation, no man in the world would be so inconsiderate and so
void of sense who would not take heed to offend a man that was to give sentence
in a buisines of his, of so great importance. 3. Thirdly, great desire to
please Christ, and do his will in all things, for we shall have need of him, in
time of so great necessity, and in a matter of so great importance: what
diligence are men wont to use, to content a Judge that is to give sentence in
some business of their importance, and how many favors do they seek, and how
many pleasurs do they procure to do him, to have him favorable, and well
affected: therefore now we are in a time, where we may gain the friendship of
Christ our Lord, and win his will in doing him many services. 4. Fourthly,
purpose to avoid all sin, seeing that our account must be so rigorous, and so
near, that of an idle word he will ask account of it. 5. Fifthly, he very
rigorous in examining and judging his own works: for this is the way to excuse
the rigor of the divine judgment, as the Apostle says: If we will judge our
selves, we shall not be judged of God; great comfort it will be to be able to
say in Judgment, I have done Judgment, and Justice: give me not over to mine
enemies. 6. Sixthly, great thanks giving to our Lord, because being he shall be
our judge, is now our advocate, and communicates himself to us so familiarly,
and gives us of his own stock all his merits, that we may have wherewith to
discharge our faults, and offers himself so favorable, and advises us to
prepare our selves for the time when he may come angry and rigorous, for he
has no desire to chastise, nor condemn us. And above all to have put our
cause into the hands of sin full men as our selves be, who will find
themselves faulty in our own crimes, and such like (which are all the ghostly
Fathers) with his Word, that it shall pass in heaven as they judge on earth,
and have inculcated unto them so much that they should be merciful, and as
they judge us, he will judge the^ Blessed be such mercy. Amen.
. IIII. In the consideration of the Pains of Hell, these Affects may be
exercised.
FIRST, knowledge of the fowlnes of sin, for God being so merciful; and
loving man so much, has aprepared such terrible torments for one mortal sin:
and from hence must arise a great hatred unto sin, because it is a thing that
God so much abhors, and by which he is so much offended, since with such
pains he does chastise it, and from hence must spring another affect very
pleasing unto God, which is to desire rather to incur all those pains, if it
might be without offense, and without leaving to love God, then to commit a
sin, although I knew that no harm should come unto me for it, but that it
should be forgiven me: for much more worthy is a sin to be abhorred, then all
those payns.

2. Secondly, to conceive great fear of the pains of Hell: and for this
reason our Savior has pleased to reveal them, as well in the holy scripture,
as in other partiouler reuelatio^s, that we might help our selves by this
fear, and with it refrain from sin.

3. Thirdly, a firm purpose to eschew all sin, not only those that be mortal,
and deserve these pains but even yeniall sins, that dispose to these
torments, considering that every venial sin, although it condemns not to
hell, yet it is a stepp that way, and after many stepps where he shall least
think he shall find himself very near, and perhaps within; for he that
makes no account of little things, comes to fall into very great. And besides
this, they who are in Hell, are not punished only for their mortal sins, but
also for their venial sins, and for every one of them, with a particular
degree of pain; and it is so great, that if any of the damned might choose, he
would have suffered, or suffer in this life very great torments for many
years, to have diminished, or diminish that only degree of pain due to the
least venial sin.

4. Fourthly, knowledge of the great rigor of the divine Justice for an idle
word, a negligence, or not marking what he should do in the service of God,
must be so severely punished, that by this he may learn to walk with a
thousand eyes in the service of God, endeavoring to eschew any thing that may
be a sin, nor so much, nor principally to fly from those pains, but seeing it
offends so much Almighty God, since so heavily he chastises it.

5. Fifthly, he must draw from hence courage to despise all pleasures, and
delights of this life: seeing them to be but dispositions for those torments:
He that fears much an infirmity, and desires health, easily abstayneth from
the meat, that gave him gust, if he suspect it will hurt him: then, Why shall
not I refrain from all such things, as are delightful in this life, for they
be those, which engenoer idle humors, to fall into that eternal sickness and
infirmity.

6. Sixthly, to get courage and force, to embrace all the labors of penance,
and mortification; for by those he delivers himself from others far greater
and unequal; patience, indifferency, and suffering in sickness, and all other
adversity; and so this serves to consider all the differences of pains, to
apply them, and compare to others like them, which are suffered in this life.
When thou art in an ague, remember how different a thing it will be to stay
those ouens, and fornaces of Hell: when thou art afflicted with cold, what will
it be to stand in those lakes of frost and snow: when thy discipline smarteth,
how much will it greiue thee to be scorged so cruelly, and so furiously by the
Devil in hell: and so for ward in the rest of the payns and labors, and in all
of them thou must say with S. Augustine: O Lord chastise me here, and scorge
me with fire, with iron, and all kind of torments; so that thou deliuerest me
from eternal pains.

7. Seauenthly, gratitude that God has delivered thee from those payns,
considering and making this account with thy self: What had become of me, if I
had fallen into that depth, as I have deserved, and only the potent hand of God
could deliver me, being there be many others that deserved it lessethe^ my
self: look if thou were in company of other malefactors condemned to the
galleys, or other terrible torments, and the King should take thee from amongst
them, and receive thee into his house, into some very honorable office, when
thou should see the rest rowing, scourged, pinched or suffering other
torments, and should consider, that thou also were condemned with them, and
in their company, and only the clemency of God, casting his eyes on thee, more
then the rest delivered thee from this ill; with what eyes would thou look
upon him, and what reason would there be that should be grateful and
endeavor to give him content in whatsoever possible thou could: therefore
when thou shall be affrighted with the consideration of Hell, and shall see so
many souls crying and houling with torments, remember that thou also wentest
theither, and that the hand of God took thee out, without any desert of thine,
and put thee into his house with so honorable an office, as is to assist
ordinarily in his presence, occupied, and employed in his praises.

8. Eighthly, the affect of the Love of God has great place in this
consideration; seeing how he has dealt with thee, as a pious Father, for thou
that did go so madly to throw thy self into these pains, his divine
majesty sought means and invention to deliver the from them, and took pity
of thy blindness: and although thou have resisted so many times his remedies,
and have striuen to return back unto the dangers, he has not been wearied
to keep thee from them, although he himself was offended: look what Father
would have loved thee in such sort, and how much he deserves to be beloved for
this.

. V. In the consideration of Glory, these Affects may be exercised.
FIRST, thanksgiving for having created thee, to enjoy so great good; for as
much as touches him, he created us for it, and desires that al may enjoy it,
and is prepared and ready to give it to all that will: and so they who leave to
enjoy these riches of Heaven, for their own fault, they loose them. Look
therefore now much thou oughtst to love, and be thankful to God, who before
thou were borne bad built those Royal Palaces, and noble habitations for thee
to dwell, and planted those divine walks wherein thou might recreate thy
self: and prepared all those kinds of delights and recreations that thou
might enjoy them for all eternity.

2. Secondly, to strengthen much the confidence of inioying them, grounded in
the great bou^ty and merey of God and in the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord;
for thou know for this he created thee, redeemed thee, and brought thee to
the Church, and has done many other benefits for thee, and so thou oughtst to
say with great love and confidence: I see well, o Lord, that I have deserved to
enjoy these treasures of glory; but I trust much in thy mercy, that I shall
come unto them, since for this, thou have created men, and redeemed me with thy
blood, and have made me a member of thy Church, and delivered me from so many
dangers, and from so many times as I have deserved Hell, and done me infinite
other favors. I believe, o Lord, that thou have not done all this, that I
should perish, but rather I trust thou will end this work, which thou have
begun; and with this confidence, I hope to enjoy these heavenly treasures in
the land of the Living.

3. Thirdly, strengthen much the affect, and desire to enjoy that security, and
with this say with the prophet: Blessed are they, o Lord, who dwell in thy
house, for ever, and ever they shall praise thee. Like as the Heart desires the
fountaynes of water; even so my soul desires thee my God. One favor I have
required of my Lord, and this I will ask alwais: that I may dwell in his house
all the days of my life, and see his glory, and visit his holy Temple. And
mark that those desires must not be so much, because it is for thy good in
particular, as because thou know that our Lord is sorued with it, and it is
his will that all should desire, and enjoy that good and he is very well
pleased, that they should procure it with great dlligence, and for this reason
thou must desire and procure it, and not for thine own profit.

4. Fourthly, to conceiud high and generous thoughts, and great contempt of all
earthly things, an one that is in hope of so great wealth. If it should happen,
that the Prince, Heir of the kingdom (...) pines. And to pray heartily to our
Savior for them, that he may convert them, and that they loose not so great a
good.

. VI. In the consideration Of the divine benefits these Affects may be
exercised.
FIRST, gratitude which is an acknowledgment of having received all good things
from God, as from the fountain of them; and to remember them, and acknowledge
them, and praise him for them, and desire that all creatures do the like, and
inuit them very affectuously that they would help thee to praise so good a
Lord, as is declared more at large before.

2. Secondly, very firm purposes to serve our Lord and Savior, and keep very
perfectly his commandments, and his will. For in this manner only we may be
grateful unto him for the benefits he bestows upon us. Little would it
avail, that thou should say to one that had done thee many favors with
great courtesy, that thou thankest him, if on the other side thou beingable to
do him grost service, or give him content in any thing though of small
importance, thou would not do it. Wherefore true gratitude, and thanks
giving, does consist in serving of our Lord, and willingness to give him contet
in whatsoever he would have of us. Great shame it is to see the gratitude of
brute beasts, as the Ox and Ass, who for a little straw they receive of their
masters they serve them all their life, are content that thoy load them, and
make them plow, and bear so many labors; and other beasts although most
fierce and furious, they are made tame, and acknowledge those that do them good:
the^ with how much reason must our Lord complain that men do not serve him,
bestowing so many benefits upon them.

3. Thirdly, the affect of love of God, for there is nothing more natural,
then to love those who do us good, and so great good, not having deserved, yea
having demerited it very much: for this effect it will help much to consider,
that God bestows all these benefits on thee, with great and exceeding love,
and with great desire that thou profit thy self by them. And so the love he
bears us, is the first and principal good of all that he has done for us:
for all the rest began in time, but the love never began, but from all eternity
he bare us that love which now he does, as himself witnesses by his Prophet;
With perpetual charity I have loved thee. O how worthy a thing it is to love
much, who so much, and so long has loved us! Consider the love that a dog,
and other beasts do bear to their masters, how they follow them whither
soever they go, and never part far from them, and being absent, they (as it
were) complain and howl, and seek to find them, and show great joy when they
find them, and the lealty the keep with them. Remember this well, and be
ashamed, that a brute beast gets such love, and keep such lealty with one who
gives him but a peace of bread, and thou do not get this love toward him,
that has done thee so many and so great favors, and does every day, he
deserving so much to be beloved for himself.

4. Fourthly, great hatred unto thy sins past; seeing that by them, thou have
offended a Lord to whom thou have so many obligations to love and sorue; and
great purposes never more to offend him: for if it be so great an evil not to
love him, and serve him, how great will it be to offend him? The ^ogge, how
fiere and cruel soever he be, if his master come, he is tamed, and if he
beat him he does not dare to bite him: and there is no wild beast so savage,
that does offend those that do them good. Remember those words, that the Holy
young man Joseph spoke to his Mistres that solicited him to sin: my master
has left all his goods in my hands, and knows not what he has in his house,
for all is in my power only thee excepted, who art his wife; then how is it
possible that I should commit so great a fault, as to offend him. Look with
how great reason thou may say, that our Lord has put into thy hands al his
goods, the heavens the earth, the sun, and moon, and all other creatures are
made for thee, and even the Angels he send to guard thee, to accompany and
comfort thee, and above all, supernatural gifts, as grace, glory, the
Sacraments, and our Lord (...) gives himself to thee, and puts himself in
their power in the Blessed Sacrament; then with how great reason must thou
answer to the Devil: How shall I have hands, or how can I offend him, who
has done me so much good?

5. Fifthly, knowledge of the great bounty of God, and of his magnificence, and
liberality, the which appears much in doing so great benefits to persons so
unworthy, especially those he does to them that offend him, and will not hear
his inspirations; here does shine his patience, his mansuetude, his charity,
those fatherly bowels that he has for all, and many others proprieties and
persections of his.

6. Sixthly, a great desire to serve our Lord God, without intirest; seeing
that of all the good he does for thee, and has done already, no profit at all
comes to him, and that only he does it to do thee good; reason is thou
conceive a great desire to serve him without respect to thy own interest, only
to be grateful and acknowledge so great an obligation. And because he is who he
is let him be blessed, and glorified for ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A BRIEF AND PROFITABLE MANNER of saying the Rosary of our B. Lady, applying
it to all the Mysteries, and passages of her life, according to the days of
the week.
THE PREFACE
To the Reader.
THE devotion of the Rosary of our Blessed Ludy, from very ancient times until
now has been very much honored an desteemed to spiritual and devout men; to
many of which the B. Virgin her self has revealed that is was very pleasing
unto her, and to those that say them of inestimable profit. And leaving many
other revelations. I will only relate one of which many and grave Authors do
make mention, as the Reverend man Ioannes Lanspergiu^ the Carthusian, in his
lesser works, in the 7. book, and preface to the Goulden Hymn; and the most
devout Abbot Ludouicus Blosius, in his Spiritual Treasure. It is set down
thus.

2. A Venerable and Holy man, Prior of the Carthusians of Treuers, had a
devotion many years to say every day the Rosary of our Blessed Lady, applying
it to the passages of hers, and her most blessed Sons Life. And being once
(as it often happened unto him) in an ecstasy; he saw how the blessed in heaven
did rejoice much when the faithful on earth made mention of the passages of
the Life and Passion of our Savior, and of his sacred Mother, in saying their
beads; and that at the name of Jesus and Maria all made great reverence, and
that there were keept very rich Crowns of glory for those who devoutly said
this Rosary. And the Bessed Virgin told him, that this devotion was very
pleasing unto her and all they who devoutly did say the same every time did
gain remission of all their sins, and other great graces and blessings of
her Son, such, and so great, that no mortal man was able to comprehend them.
Thus that holy man left written and signed which his Name at his death; for til
then he would heuer speak of, it as it is recorded by the Authors aforesaid.

3. From whence it may, and ought to be gathered that the merit and profit of
saying the Rosary consists not in saying it vocally with the lips only, for
the prayer that purely is vocal and not accompanied with some attention, or
consideration of the soul deserves not the name of prayer neither is it (...)
y^^ properly speaking, and is of little or (...) is declared more all large in
(...) of the Instruction of ^riests (...) And therefore that (...) of (...)
profit, spirit (...) have (...) a method o^ ^^^nern (...) say it, applying it
to the principal ^^^^ier and passages o^ther^^^^, a^ (...) flour Saulour, (...)

4. The more common and ordinary, is to part it into fifteen mysteries, five
Ioysull, five Dolorous, and five Glorious in such sort, that in every whole
Rosary, memory may be made of the principal mysteries of the life and passion
of our Savior. Which manner is very good and profitable.

5. Others, that be given to contemplation, desiring to make more particular
mention of the life of our Savior, halse applied every Aue Mary to a different
mystery, applying prayers that must be said together with every Aue, in such
sort, that in every Rosary of fifty Aue Mary's memory is made of all he Life of
our Lord Pesus Christ, wherein is included also the Ir^e of his Blessed Mother.

6. This large Rosary, with all the prayers is set down by the grave and
spiritual man Ludouicus Blosius aforesaid, and more at large by the Venerable
Father Ioanes Michael General of the Carthusians, a man of great sanctity and
holiness of life and learning, as three books of spiritual Exercise can
wittnes, which he left written of great profit for all kind of persons.

7. This manner also is very profitable for those who shall accommodate
themselves to practice it, but it is some what hard. For they must say vocally
all the prayers that be put down to accompany every Aue Marie, which requires
a good time, and some persons can hardly spare so much: for excepting their
ordinary hours of mental prayer at morning and night (which must be preferred
before all other excercises, and never omitted) there will remain searscly
sufficient leisure to say their Rosary, in this sort.

8. Also it is hard to consider in every Aue Marie, a different mystery, for
much care is requiued to carry the understand so tied, and that in so short time
he should discourse on so many things being different.

9. For this reason these many years I have considered for my self, and for
some Religious who have asked me, a manner of saying the Rosary, more short and
easy, applying not every Aue Marie, but every ten to a different mystery,
divided for the days of ^he week, and not putting any assigned prayers
composed, but only naming the mystery to which every ten shall be applied
(...) few days to make them capable of them, and to remember the points or
mysteries they are to meditate every day, and to have them well considered, and
a custom to apply to every day the mysteries, and the words they say in the
Aue Marie and Pater noster, in a little time that they use this exercise, they
shall say their Rosary accompanied with mental prayer with great facility,
breuity, and profit.

THE Mysteries of the Rosary may be divided thus by the days of the Week,
that in every one particular mention may be made of the principal passages of
the Life of our Savior, and his Blessed Mother, applying to every day, five
mysteries for every Decade or Ten one, the which must be applied mentally in
the manner following.

MONDAY.
1. The first Decade, or Ten must be applied unto the immaculate Conception of
our Blessed Lady, for it is very pleasing the devotion of her Conception, and
the memory that is made, how therein she was preserved from al sin: 2. The
second, to her most blessed Nativity, that brought joy, and gladness to all the
world. 3. The third, to her Presentation, when being of three years of age, she
was offered by her parents in the temple, and to her most holy life that there
she led for the space of an cleauen years, and to the vow of her Virginity
that there she made. 4. The fourth, to her sacred, and Virginal Espousall,
when by revelation from heaven, she should be espoused unto the glorious Saint
Joseph, both of them together making vow to remain in perpetual chastity. 5.
The fifth, to her Annuntiation, when as four months after her espousall it
was denounced unto her by an Angel sent from God; that she should be his
mother: and she giving her consent withal humility, conceived him in her
blessed womb as her true Son; and gave him with most great h^^ity vary
humble thanks in (...) all mankind that he had made himself man, and in her
own name in particular, that he had chosen her to be his Mother.
TEVVSDAY.
1. The first Ten, to the Visitation, when our Blessed Lady with our Savior in
her Sacred Womb, went from Nazareth to the mountains of Judea a long way of
almost 30. leagues, and visited her kins woman S. Elizabeth, and was by her
acknowledged for mother of God, and remained in her house three months,
serving her with great humility and charity. 2. The second, to the great grief
which our B. Lady suffered when returning to her house, and her being with
child known, S. Joseph was very much afflicted, and suspected her, because he
knew not the mystery. And to the great joy that both of them received, and the
praises they gave to God, when it was revealed, and to all the time of nine
months that the Sacred Virgin had the Son of God in her B. Womb. 3. The
third, to the Journey that our B. Lady and S. Joseph took, from Nazareth to
Bethelem, with so much wearines, and bad time, and the labor they suffered, in
seeking an Inn and could find none. 4. The fourth, to the Nativity of our
Lord, when the most sacred Virgin in a poor Gatehouse in great want of all
things necessary, without grief or loss of her virginity brought forth the
Redeemer of the world, and wrapped him in poor clothes, and gave him suck, as
to her own son, and adored him as her true God, and he rejoiced at the
music that the Angels gave him at that time, and was glad at the coming of
the Sheepherds. 5. The fifth, to the Circumcision of our Lord, when on the
eight day he was circumcised, with great grief of his most delicate flesh, and
with many tears of his own and of his Mother, and he was called Jesus; and to
the coming of the Kings at 13. days after his nativity, and to their
adoration, and gifts that they offered, to wit, gold; franckindens^, and myrrh.
WEDNESDAY.
1. The first ten, to the Purification o^ our B. Lady, when at the forty days
after her childbirth without any obligation she went to be purified at the
temple of Jerusalem, and presented there her most blessed son, and offered
for him the gift of one that was poor, and redeemed him with five sicles
(which is five shillings and ten pence) and he was known for true Messiah by S.
Simeon, and the holy widow S. Anne, and it was prophesied to the B. Virgin of
the grief that should cut her heart, at the passion of her son. 2. The
second, to the flight into Aegipt, when the child Jesus had not yet two months
of age, the glorious Joseph being admonished, that King Herod sought to kill
him, and for this reason with the B. Virgin and the Blessed Babe, they stole in
the night secretly, out of their Country, and went to live in Egypt suffering
many labors in the way, and there also, because it was a strange country, and
full of Idolatrous and barbarous people, and after seven years by advice of an
Angel, they returned to their country, where they were received with great joy
and gladness of their kinsfolks and acquaintance. 3. The third, to the remaining
of the Child Jesus in the Temple, when being of twelve years of age, and going
to Jerusalem to celebrate the Pascha, at the return he remained there
unknown to his parents, and was sought by them with great grief and tears
for the space of three days, and on the third day found in the Temple, in the
middst of the Doctors, with incredible joy of his mother when she saw him. 4.
The fourth, to the obedience and humility of our Redeemer, who for the space of
thirty years was in his parents house, serving of them withal humility and
subjection, as a very humble and obedient child, helping them to gain his
meat with the labor of his hands. This is a passage much to be noted, in
which we ought piously to consider, the spiritual delights that the B. Virgin
would feel in her soul, with the continual conversation of her son in his
infancy, in his childhood, and his youth and riper age, and the great devotion
wherewith she did ever serve him in dressing his meat, his garments, his bed
and other things necessary for his person, and in like manner the humility and
obedience of our Lord in all this time, amd other innumerable virtues, in which
he gave admirable examples, and so in this passage many favors may be asked
both of the son and mother. 5. The fifth, to the Baptism of our Lord, and
his fasting, and labors in the desert, and his tentation, when being thirty
years of age, he took his leave of his mother to go to the desert, with much
sorrow and many tears of the sacred Virgin, and he went to be baptized of S.
John amongst other sinners and common people, and then came to a very hideous
desert, where he was amongst beasts forty days without eating one bit,
suffering many difficulties of cold, watching, and hunger, having no other bed
then the ground, no other house to recollect himself but some cave, or hollow
place in some rock, and in the end was thrice tempted by the Devil, and
having overcome him all three times, the Angels came to serve him.
THVRSDAY.
1. The first Ten, to the Peregrination, life, and miracles of Christ, who with
some disciples that he had chosen, went for the space of three years to diverse
parts provinces, and cities, preaching and working miracles, pardoning and
receiving sinners, raising up dead, delivering the possessed, healing all
diseases, and bestowing many other benefits of all that would receive them of
him. 2. The second, to the glorious Transfiguration of our Lord, who in the
second year of his preaching, to confirm the faith and hope of his Disciples,
being with three of them upon the mount of Tabor, he was transfigured, his face
appearing more beautiful them the sun, his garments whiter then the snow,
giving in this some certain show of the glory that the Blessed are to have in
heaven. 3. The third, to the entrance of our Savior into Jerusalem on
Palme-Su^day, when six days before his Passion he entered into that City,
sitting upon an Ass, as an humble King, and was received with a great
multitude of people, with great honor and joy: and after he had preached in
the Temple a great part of the day, there being none that would inuit him to
dinner, now toward evening he returned with his Disciples fasting to Bethania.
4. The fourth, to the last leave of our Lord, as very likely many pious and
holy men do consider. That on Thursday toward the evening before his Passion
being in Bethania alone, with his sacred Mother, he gave her particular account
of all that the next day he was to suffer in Jerusalem, and took his leave of
her with incredible sorrow and grief, and many tears of both. 5. The fifth,
to the washing of the feet, and institution of the most holy Sacrament. When
after our Savior had supped with his Disciples and eaten the Paschall Lamb,
he washed their feet with great humility, and with incomparable love and
charity he instituted the B. Sacrament of the Altar, giving his sacred Body in
food, and his Blood in drink.
FRIDAY.
1. The first ten, to the prayer in the garden and prison of our Savior, who
at 9. a clock at night went to the garden of G^thsemane to stay there for
those that were to come and take him, and prayed to his Father thrice with
great humility and devotion, being in so great an agony that he sweat drops of
Blood which ran down to the ground. And presently a company of armed men
coming to take him, he let himself voluntarily be taken by them, and was tied
with chains and cords, and very ill used, and carried so to Jerusalem, and
presented, and accused before the high Priests. 2. The second, to the pains
our Savior suffered all that night in which he received many buffets, and
blows on the neck, heard many iniuryes and abuses, yea and suffered them to
spit in his face so venerable, and that they should blindfold him with a
cloth, was denied thrice of his Disciple, and passed all the night with very
great pain, without any wink of sleep or rest at al, and with no less labor
and sorrow the B. Virgin passed it with consideration, suspicion, and fear of
what her Son might suffer. 3. The third, to what our Savior suffered in all
the Judgments, and Tribunalls where he was presented, accused, and judged,
going and coming, tied like a thief from one to another, receiving every where
great abuses, scoffs, and mockeries, and hearing against himself many false
witnesses. 4. The fourth, to the scorges that our Lord received at the pillar,
when after many other pains they commanded him to strip himself in the
Gallery, and being naked, with great shame and confusion, was tied very hard to
a Pillar, and there with very great cruelty, whipped by the hands of four
villanes, some resting whilst others whipped him, until they left not a whole
place in all his body. 5. The fifth, to the crown of thorns, when after he was
whipped they brought him forth in public, and stripped him again of his
garments, and vested him with a torn purple garment, very old for mockery, and
put a most cruel crown of thorns upon his head, that pierced it, and wounded
it all over, and they adored him in mockery and derision as a faygned King, to
laugh at him: and he thus crowned with (...) he was thirsty, they gave him
vinegre in a sponge to drink, and saying Consummatum est, and commending his
soul into the hands of his Father, gave up the Ghost, feeling as true man the
bitter and terrible panges of death. 4. The fourth, to the wound of the lance,
when after the death of our Lord, one of the souldiars opened his right side
with a spear, and great abundance of blood and water issued forth, to cure all
our infirmities, and wash all our spots: and after was vnnayled and taken down
from the Cross, received into the arms of his afflicted Mother with great
grief, bitterness, and sorrow of her heart. 5. The fifth, to the burial when
at the sun setting the dead body of our Lord, to which the Divinity was
united, was carried to the Monument which was near unto the mount Caluary, and
there he was anointed with myrrh and other precious spices, and woone in a
sheet, and laid in the Sepulcher, shutting it with a great stone; and the
Blessed Virgin returned to her house, and was there recollected in solitude and
prayer with much grief and many tears until Sunday.
SUNDAY.
1. The first Ten, to the Resurrection of our Lord, who after death his holy
soul, glorious and united to his Divinity, descended into Lymbo, and delivered
the souls of all the Saints that there expected him, from the beginning of the
world, and accompanied with them all on Sunday morning very early came to the
Sepulcher, and reunited it self with his most holy body, making it all
glorious: and so glorious in body and soul he rose again leaving there the
sheet and handkercheffe that he was wrapped in, and thus glorified appeared to
his B. Mother, with incredible joy and gladness of both; and after this, to S.
Mary Magdalen, and S. Peter, and then to the rest of the Disciples, with
exceeding joy and gladness of all. 2. The second, to the Ascension of our Lord;
who having conuersed forty days with his Disciples, appearing many and diverse
times unto them, at the last took them to the Mount Oliuet, and having taken
his leave very lovingly of his mother, and the rest, and giving them his
blessing, by his proper virtue, in sight of them all, he ascended into heaven,
where he was received in great triumph and joy, and set at the right hand of
his eternal Father. 3. The third, to the coming of the holy Ghost; who ten
days after the Ascension of our Lord came in figure and sape of fiery tongues
upon the B. Virgin and all the rest, filling them with great abundance of
himself, and all his gifts and graces. 4. The fourth, to the life that our
blessed Lady led from the coming of the holy Ghost for the space of fifteen
years, which commonly we believe she lived with great excess of love of God,
and very inflamed desires to see her Son, comforting her self in receiving
him ordinarily in the Blessed Sacrament, and to her most holy death, and most
happy passage, at the which by divine dispensation, all the Apostles were
present, and many other disciples, in whose presence with a joyful mind she
commended her soul into the hands of her Son, who came down thither to
receive it; and she paying the debt of death, her sacred body was buried by the
hands of the holy Apostles. 5. The fifth, to the Assumption of our B. Lady, who
by particular privilege after her death rose again glorious in body and
soul, and by the aid of Angels carried to heaven, and received with very great
feasting and joy of all that sovereign court, and placed in a Throne of great
Majesty above all the quires of Angels, near to her own Son, where she
sits praying for all sinners, especially for those who with devotion commend
themselves to her.
A Declaration of the manner which must be kept in saying the Rosary; applying
it to the aforesaid Mysteries.
THE manner how to use these considerations, is this: In the first Aue Marie
begin to think on the mystery that answers to those Ten, and consider what
happened in it; imagining as if you were present at it. For example; if it be
the Annuntiation, to consider how our Blessed Lady was in prayer, recollected
and devout, and an Angel came in, and saluted her with these words Aue gratia
plena, Dominus tecum: and how she being somewhat troubled, yet informed of the
will of God, gave consent, and conceived in her sacred Womb the Son of God,
and how she prostrated her self to give him thanks for so great a favor etc.

2. Or if it be the Visitation, to consider how the glorious Virgin goes her
journey, and how saluting her kinswoman Elizabeth, is known of her for Mother
of God, and also how with great Humility she ref^^^eth all the praise to our
Lord. And how after she serves her with so great Charity and Humility for the
space of three months, and in the end returns to her own house^ In all this
you must imagine, you were present at every one of these passages, and so in
the rest: and with this mind to (...) our Blessed Lady as one that speaks
with her these words Aue Maria etc. and when you say Sancta Maria Matter Dei
etc. direct you intention for all such things as you would ask of our Blessed
Lady. As if it be in the mystery of the Conception, pray her, that as she was
preserved from all sin, she will obtain grace for you, that you be delivered
from all your sins past, and to keep your soul in all purity etc. And so in
all the test of the mysteries, applying to every one some particular petition,
according to your devotion and necessity. And these petitions may be made with
the understanding, and the desire or affect, including all in those words of
the Aue Maria, which say, Sancta Maria matter Dei etc.

3. And when you shall say the Pater noster, direct your intention to our
Blessed Savior, desiring him, that for the merits of the B. Virgin Mary, he
will grant you those things for which you have directed your intention, desire,
and affect. And in this sort if there be deligence in the exercise of the
understanding and will, and care to apply the memory to the passages and
mysteries, as you ought to do, after a while it will be done with so great
facility, that without spending any more time then in saying the Aue Marie and
Pater noster, you will have meditated those mysteries. And indeed in mental
prayer all does consist in taking pains to exercise our selves therein: for in
the beginning it cannot choose but be something hard, yet afterward it comes to
be very easy, and they that do so, feel the profit gotten thereby.

4. Therefore for more commodity of those who will say their Rosary, according
to this manner and order aforesaid, and that the mysteries themselves and
method may be the better kept in memory, I will put them down more briefly as
in a sum.

A Sum of the mysteries of the Rosary, applied for the days of the week,
for every day Five, as follows.
MONDAY.
1. THE first Ten to the most pure Conception of our Blessed Lady. 2. To her
Nativity. 3. To her Presentation in the Temple; to her life that she led there,
and her vow of Virginity. 4. To her Espousall, and Virginal wedding. 5. To the
Annunciation and Incarnation of the Son of God.
TEVVSDAY.
1. To the Visitation of our Blessed Lady. 2. To the affliction of the sacred
Virgin, when her Spouse would have left her, because he knew not the mystery:
to the joy when it was revealed: and to the 9. months of her bearing our
Savior in her sacred Womb. 3. To the journey which she made to Bethlem, and
the labor of seeking lodging, and finding none. 4. To the Nativity of our
Lord, the music of the Angels, and coming of the sheepheards. 5. To the
Circumcision, and adoration of the Kings.
WEDNESDAY.
1. To the Purification of our Blessed Lady. 2. To their flight into Aegipt and
the time that they lived there, and to their return. 3. To all the time that
our Savior lived with his Mother, and what passed therein. 4. To the loosing of
our Savior in the Temple, and how our Blessed Lady sought him, and found him.
5. To the Baptism of our Lord, his fasting, tentation, and return to his
Mothers house.
THVRSDAY.
1. To the preaching and miracles of our Savior. 2. To the Transfiguration. 3.
To the entrance into Hierusasem on Palme-sunday. 4. To the consideration how
our Savior took his leave of his Mother, when he went to suffer. 5. To the
washing of the feet, and institution of the Blessed Sacrament.
FRIDAY.
1. To the prayer in the garden, and his imprisonment. 2. To the labors our
Savior suffered in the night of his Passion, and of those of his Blessed
Mother. 3. To all the Judges and Tribunalls where our Lord was accused and
judged. 4. To the scourges he received at the pillar in the sight of his most
sacred Mother. 5. To the Crown of Thorns, the mockeries, and the Ecce Home.
SATVRDAY.
1. How our Savior was condemned to death, carried his Cross on his back,
tasted the gall, and was whipped naked. 2. How he was nailed upon the Cross,
and lifted up in the sight of all the people. 3. To the three hours, that he
was alive upon the Cross, and to the seven words he spoke there, and of his
death. 4. To the wound of the spear, his descending from the Cross, and how
he was received in the arms of our blessed Lady. 5. To the burial of our
Lord, and to the solitude of our Blessed Lady.
SUNDAY.
1. To the Resurrection of our Blessed Savior. 2. To his Ascension. 3. To the
coming of the Holy Ghost. 4. To the life, that our B. Lady led after the
Ascension of her son, and to her most happy departure. 5. To the glory
wherewith she was received, and crowned in Heaven.
FINIS.
A SHORT TREATISE of Exhortation to spiritual Profit. Composed by the R.
Father Francis Arias, of the Society of JESUS.
THE PREFACE.
THAT we may the better understand how necessary and important a thing it is,
first to teach those who have begun to serve God, how they must mayntaine
themselves in his service, and still go forwards in the same; and then to
persuade them the means necessary and profitable for this end; it is
expedient, that in the beginning we declare how acceptable that man is to God,
who is forward in his divine service, how important he is to the spiritual and
temporal good of the whole Catholic Church, and how profitable to himself,
for the many and most precious benefits, that he daily obtains at the hands
of God.

How much that man is acceptable to God, who is diligent to go forwards in his
Divine Service. CHAP. I.
IT is a thing most certain, that a just and virtuous man who is in the grace
of God, in whatsoever degree of grace that he be, is most acceptable to the
eyes of his divine Majesty. But if we do compare those that serve God one with
another, it is also manifest, that he who is diligent and fervent in Gods
service, and does labor to profit daily more and more in the same, forcing
himself to do that which he knows to be most grateful to God, is by him more
esteemed and accounted of, then many others, who all-though they live in his
grace, have no care of their going forward, but are content with this only,
that they do not commit any mortal sin. We shall understand this better by
the example following.

2. Let us imagine that a certain Noble Man has in his house fifty servants,
and has commanded them all that they steal (...) and fall out at words, and
although they do some things of those that be commanded, yet others they will
not do.

4. The other Servant desirous to please and content his Master in every
thing, and not to give him any trouble or disgust at all, does not steal any
thing out of his house, be it never so little, is not so hardy as to tell him
the least untruth, goes with great speed in whatsoever message he is sent, and
if perchance he lingereth somewhat through forgetfullnes, remembering himself
he is sorry for it and does amend it, neither is he only careful to do
whatsoever his master has commanded, thereby not to discontent nor displease
him, but he does also endeavor to know such things as most please him, and to
put them in execution, yea he would willingly understand even his very
thoughts, so to do ineuery thing that which might give him most contentment.

5. By this example it is manifest that this Noble man governed by right
indgment and reason, does more esteem this one only servant the^ all the other
forty and nine, and that this one alone does give him more gust and
contentment then all the rest: and that in things depending of his good will
and favor, he will do more for respect and love of this one, then of all the
others. Seeing then that all right reason is to be found in God, with eminency
and infinite perfection: this is also to be acknowledged in him. And the very
same manner of proceeding is used toward those that in his Church do serve him.

6. All such as live in state of grace, and will not loose the same through
mortal sin, but yet be retchles of their profit and going forward, are like
unto these servants that will not commit any such fault, for which their
master may put them to death, or make them slaves for ever in the Galleys; but
for other things they neither be careful to content him, nor fearful to
displease him. Even so these are fully determined not to do any thing that may
be mortal sin, for which they know God will deprive them of his grace and
glory for all eternity, and cast them into the torments of everlasting ^i^r.
But they are not so much afraid as to fly venial sins, for which they
understand, that although God be offended by them, yet he will not condemn
them more then to the pains of Purgatory; and so they care not to do many good
works very acceptable to God, which they might do very well, and with great
facility or little labor: neither do they care to follow sundry good
inspirations that God does give them, nor to embrace many godly counsels which
our Lord does affoard the^, and which they might very well accomplish,
according to their state and calling. And albeit in committing those faults
which be not mortal sins, they highly displease and discontent Almighty God,
yet they feel not the matter much, but rather do often pass their time in
laughing at such offenses.

7. He that lives in the grace of God and procures diligently his own
forwardnes, is like the the servant who in althings does endeavor to do
faithfully whatsoever his Master does appoint, and all that which may best
please him. Also this faithful and diligent setuant does his best, not only to
eschew those sins that be mortal, but even those that be venial, by which
he does know and see that God is offended; and if by forgetfullnes he do fall
into any of them, he forth with conceyueth grief and sorrow thereof, and does
spedily amend them, and make account of the divine inspirations, by which God
does discover unto him his will and pleasure, and does endeavor to follow
them, and does greatly esteem of his holy counsel^s, and does fulfill many of
them, as also many works of mercy, and penance, and humility, which he knows
to be acceptable to God: and although he be not bound to them by any precept or
commandment, yet he does them with a very good will, thereby to please and
content his divine Majesty.

8. Of such servants God has many in his Church, yet some better, and more
forward then others: and he having regard to that which reason, and his
Eternal Law does require, whence good Reason was derived that moves men to
the like; he does more esteem and account of this diligent, and advanced
person in his divine scruice, then of a great number of others, that be slow
and retchles: and of the service done by this one only, he receaueth much more
contentment and pleasure, then of such service as all the others do for him:
neither is this to be meruailed at, because the servant of God, that is
diligent to profit, and go forward, as he daily increases in the grace and
love of God, so it falls out oftentims that he alone has more of his grace
and love, then a great number of them, who with negligence do serve him; having
no regard to advance themselves in his love. In this manner does S. Gregory,
and other holy fathers expound that saying of Christ: I say unto you, that
eiten so there shall be joy in heau^n upon one sinner, that does penance, then
upon ninty nine just, that need not penance.

9. This is to be understood not for whatsoever sinner; that is converted, but
of him which returns to God with great feeling of his life past, and
begins to serve him with great fervor in his new life. Many also do expound
the said sentence of any sinner, whosoever that is converted: and according to
this exposition, that greater joy is not to be understood of the essential and
principal joy, which rifeth our of the estimation and loud of that thing
wherein a man reioy^eth, because in this sort of any whatsoever just person,
who has more grace then the sinner that is converted, God does more rejoice,
and the Angels are more comforted: but it is to be understood of a new and
accidental joy, which springs up of this, that a thing is newly recovered,
which before was lost. But expounding the same sentence, as S. Gregory and
other Saints do understand it, not of whatsoever sinner, but of him who
returning to the state of grace, begins to serve God with great fervor, and
profit in his divine service. In this sort we must make comparison of this
seruent and inflamed penitent, not with whatsoever persons, but with such as
remissely, and slackly do serve God.

10. And the meaning of Christ in that sentence is, that God does more esteem
a servant of his, that with diligence and fervor, does serve him, although he
have been alittle before a most grievous sinner, then ninty and nine just, who
with coldness and negligence of their own profit, do pass their whole life.
This does holy S. Gregory declare in these words most worthy to be considered:
He does demand wherefore our Savior says; that in Heaven there is more joy of
sinners that be converted, then of just person^^ He answ er^th in this manner.

11. Vnde hoc, nisi quod ipsi etc. Whence comes this, if not that we our
selves by daily experience do see, and know, that oftentimes those who
understand that they be not charged with the buge weight, and burden of sins,
do ^land indred in the way of instire, and do ^ommit nothing that as unlawful;
but yet they do no^ labor carefully to come to the country of Heaven, but
rather do so much more grant themselves the use of lawful things, how much
more they remember (...) to have committed any thing unlawful. And for the
most part those men be negligent and slow to do any excellent good work,
because they do verily assure hemselues; that they have not offended in any
grievous; sins. But contrariwise sometimes those that be mindful to have done
villawfull things, stirred to compunction through their own grief, are
inflamed in the love of God, and do exercise themselves in heroical pertues;
they do greatly couetall manner of difficulties that spiritual war is
accustomed ^^ yield, they do leave all worldly things, they do fly bono^^^s,
they are glad when they receane contumelies, they burn with desire of
celessiall things, they d^ sighe after the heauerly country, and because they
^^ consider that they have strayed from God, they seek to recompense former
losses with later gains: There is then greater in made in heaven of a sinner
that is connerted, then of a iustonan that stands, because the Captain also
in the battle, does more love that soldier, who returning ofter flight, does
valiantly set upon the enemy, then him in^^o although he never run away, yet
never did show any valor or manhood.

12. So the husbandman does love more that ground, which after thorns, does
yield plentiful corn, then that which never had thorns, but yet never
brought forth plenty of grain. But now in this matter we must understand, that
there be many virtuous persons, of whose life there is so great joy, that
whatsoever penance of sinners cannot in any wise be preserred before them: for
many there be who neither are guilty to themselves of any evils, and yet do
penance with so great zeal and seruour, as if they were pressed thereunto with
all manner of sins. They do also resraine themselves from all things that be
lawful, they do with a cou^ ragious mind embrace the contempt of the world,
and will not that all be lawful for them, which they list after; they cut off
those good things which are even granted them; they despise these visible
things; they be inflamed with things inu^sible, and do rejoice in lamenting. In
all things they do humble themselves, and as others do bewail their sinful
works, so these do bewail their sinful thoughts. What then shall I call
these persons but both just and penitent, who do both humble themselves in
doing penance for the least offense of their thought, and yet also do
persevere righteous in their works? Of this then it may be gathered how great
joy aiust man does give God, when be humbly does penance, if an unjust man do
cause joy in heaven, when by penance he does condemn the evil which he has
committed.

13. All this is out of S. Gregory: in which with great light from heaven, he
does discover unto us, how much God does esteem that service of his, who does
desire to please him with diligence in going forward, and how much he is
contented with the alacrity and fervor that he has to profit in virtue. And
although he be but a Nouice and young beginner in his service, and newly
converted of a great sinner, yet does he prefer him before many that be just
but slow in his service, and altogether careless to benefit themselves. And
where he says, that no penance of any sinner converted is to be preferred
before the life of just men, who be fervent and very diligent, it is true,
speaking of that which falls out according to the ordinary course of things.

14. How great a motive is the knowledge of this verity, to make us have a
hearty desire to go forward in Gods service, and to use much diligence in the
same: who is he, if he have any least sparkle of love, that desires not to
give God this so great contentment and pleasure, as he receaueth, when he sees
us diligent and forward in his service, especially it being true which S.
Bernard says: That the meat of which this Lord is accustomed to take
exceeding pleasure, who seedeth amongst the Lillies, which does signify the
pureness and sweet smell of virtues, is the profit and forwardness of our
souls. Now if by profitting in virtue we be so acceptable to God, and do him
so great pleasure; what greater good then this may we desire, or what greater
glory, contentment, and profit can we pretend?

15. So great good is this, that not without much reason S. Chrysostom said:
If thou be worthy by the grace of God to do any thing that may please him;
seek not any other reward besides this, that thou have deserved to please him:
for if thou seek a reward, truly thou art ignorant how great good it is to
please God, because if thou did know it, thou would not seek any other
payment, or recompense besides the same. These be the words of S. Chrysostom,
in which that holy mandoth not forbid us to seek and pretend after the reward
of our glory, for certain it is that this is a lawful thing, although our
chiefest end must be to please God: but with manifest truth he does affirm,
that to please God is so great a good, that albeit no other profit, nor glory
were to be expected by us, yet this alone ought to suffice.

(...) maunded of Abraham in the old testament, he does request of all his
faithful and servants in the new testament, and exhorts them thereunto,
saying: Be you persect, as also your heavenly Father is perfect. Which is as
much as if he said, do what lies in you to move to the perfection of charity,
and of all other virtues that be joined with charity, that as children you may
imitate your heavenly father in such manner, as the creature may imitate the
Creator.

3. This vehement desire that God has of our profit in virtue, he discovered
unto us in the heart of the Apostle S. Paul, who as an heavenly instrument of
Christ that spoke in him, does write in this sort to the Colossians. We also
from the day that we heard it (to wit that you knew the grace of God in truth)
cease not praying for you, and desiring that you may be filled with the
knowledge of his will, in all wisdom, and spiritual understanding: that you
may walk worthy of God, in all things pleasing, sructifying in all good work,
and increasing in the knowledge of God.

4. This self same desire did God make known unto us, in that voice from
heaven which S. John heard, who said: He that is just, let him be justified
yet, and let the holy be sanctified yet. This is a most manifest testimony how
much God does esteem, and has for acceptable, that his servants rest not as
lukewarm in the way to heaven, but that they go still forward and profit in
all virtue, for so much, as that infinite and sovereign Majesty, has so
earnestly and particulerly discovered unto us this his desire.

5. Likewise it is a great proof of this verity, to see the great account that
God makes of those his servants that go forward in his service, and the great
respect that he does bear to them and the particular care that he takes of
them: so that in comparison of them, it seems that he little esteems, and
makes small accoumpt of those, that serve him but negligently: for although it
be certain that God has a peculiar and sweet providence, and such a fatherly
and pitiful care of each one that does serve him, and live in his grace, as
if in this wide world he had nothing else to do, not whom to provide for, nor
save, but him only; yet much more is the fatherly and friendly providence and
care which he has of those that be more diligent and forward in his service,
to provide for them, to honor them in spiritual things, to protect and defend
them, and to fulfill their hearts desires, and the requests that they do make
him; that it may well be thought that these are his true friends, and dear
beloved children. And it is so indeed, that albeital those that be in his grace
are his friends and children, yet these are his more especial and intrinsecall
friends, and his children most tender and best beloved.

6. Let us confirm this to be so by some examples. What a number of men were
there amongst the children of Israel, and in the whole world from Abraham till
Moses (for the space of four hundred years and more) who lived, and died all
in the grace of God, and yet he as it were forgetting of all the rest, speaking
to Moses when he appeared unto him in the desert, said, that he was called the
God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob; and warned him that he
should call him by this name before the children of Israel, and affirmed that
this should always be his Name, and that by this Name he would be known and
named with perpetual memory in all generations. Kings are wont to take the
title, and name of that City, which they do most esteem and most does please
them in all their kingdom: and God is accustomed to call himself the God of
those, whom especially he takes to be under his protection, defense and
divine providence. And so, for God to call himself the God of Abraham, of
Isaac, and of Jacob, was to declare unto the world how much he esteemed and
made account of those holy men, how much they had pleased him, and the special
care, that he took of them still to do them good, and to perform the promises
that he had made unto them, and to all their offpring.

7. And he much more disconcred how greatly he did respect and regard each of
these his servants, in that he named not himself the God of all three
together, but of every one of them in particular; for he said not the God of
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, but the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the
God of Jacob: and in that he was not content to manifest himself by this name
to Moses only in the desert; but also would, and ordained that amongst all the
people, and in the whole world, they should call him by this Name, and that
with this title they should call upon him and praise him, and preach him, and
that under this Name there should be perpetual memory made of him, as who
took it for honor, to have such servants and friends, as were Abraham Isaac,
and Jacob, and was greatly contented and very particulerly pleased with them.

8. So far does arrive the great account, which God makes that his servant
go forward in his service, and increase in all virtue: seeing that the reason
for which God did advance these three men with so great favors and with such
honorable mention above alothers of their time, is because they were those who
in that age in which they lived, did ferue him with more forwardnes in virtue,
and more perfectly fulfill his will, and were zealous of his honor and glory.

9. In Moses time there were many souls that lived in the grace of God,
because there was so great multitude of people when they came out of Egypt,
that the men of twenty years and upwards were above six hundred thousand,
besides women great and little, and besides men-children under twenty years of
age, and besides the Egyptians as well men as women, who forsaking Idolatry
did approach to the people of God, who were so many, that holy Scripture does
call them vulgus promiscuum innumerabile, an innumerable multitude of sundry
sorts of people. Now certain it is, that amongst so many thousands of
faithful souls, who had the Law and Sacraments of God, and who had seen with
their eyes the wounderfull miracles wrought by God in their favor, there were
men and women in very great number, both of age and discretion, who lived in
the grace of God, and served him with a conscience pure and free from mortal
sin.

10. And yet we see that of Moses alone, because he was a man of so perfect
virtue, that he was not content to fly that only which was mortal sin, but
was most diligent to eschew, what lay in him, every least offense of God, and
to do whatsoever he knew might be acceptable to his divine Majesty, and was
most mild in suffering the injuries and molestations of the people, and of most
fervent charity toward all men as well enemies as frinds: of this Moses
alone, I say, for that he was such and so good a man, we see that God made more
reckoning then of all the others that amongst those people lived in his grace.
For when the people had sinned and God would have consumed them all, without
having respect to the great number that amongst them were innocent, or because
they had not yet the age to sin, or because they had not consented to the
same sin, only for Moses sake he did not destroy nor kill them all, and to
him alone did he say, Dimitte me, vtirascatur suror meus contra eos, and deleam
eos. Let me alone that my fury may rage against them, and I may destroy them.
Who does hold thee, o Lord, that thou do not kill them all? not so many
innocents do withhold thee who never sinned, nor so many Levites zealous of thy
honor, and only Moses with his prayers does bind the hands of thine
omnipotency, and does suspend the fury of thy justice, that thou consume them
not all. O how acceptable is it to God that his servants daily go forward and
profit in good life, seeing he does make so great account of one man, who is
perfect in virtue!

11. In time of Elias there were many servants of God, whom amongst so many
others as were evil, our Lord himself had kept in his service, through his
divine grace, as holy Scripture does signify. And yet God had such regard of
Elias, that it seems he had in his hands the laws of times, and the
government of the clouds to dry up the earth, and consume the same with hunger,
when he would have it so, for chastisement of the evil; and to send rain and
make the earth fruitful, when he moved to mercy, did demand it: in so much,
that because Elias was a man of so excellent virtue, it seems God did bear
more respect to him alone, then to all other just persons of that time.

12. Whilst David, and Solomon were living, when the people of Israel was so
greatly dilated and multiplied, that, as Solomon said speaking with God, they
were innumerable as the dust of the earth, it is certain that there was in the
same, an exceeding great number of persons who lived in grace and service of
God. And for that David had been a perfect servant of God, and bent
alltogeather to his will, and sought his glory with great zeal; and albeit he
offended, yet touched of God, he rose again, purged with great penance the
former faults, and with much fervor recovered the grace he had lost: for this,
I say, as if God had wholly forgotten all the other servants he had in that
people, being offended with Salomou, and with them, and desirous to punish them
for the great enormit yes they had committed, he said to Solomon, Scindam
Regnum tuum, and dabo illud seruo tuo etc. I will rent thy Kingdom, and will
give it to thy servant; notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it, because
of David thy father: Out of thy sons hand will I rent it, nor will I take
away all the Kingdom, but one Tribe I will give to thy son, because of David
my servant.

13. And to King Ezechias who was sick and looking to die, he sent to tell by
the Prophet Isay, as follows, Ecce sanauite etc. Behold I have healed thee,
the third day thou thalt go up to the Temple of our Lord. And I will add unto
thy days fifteen years: and also out of the hand of the King of Assyria will
I deliver thee, and this City, and will defend this City for mine own sake,
and for David my servants sake. Who is able to declare worthily that which is
discovered in these heavenly testimonies, concerning this point, how much God
does esteem a man eminent in virtue, who does greatly abhor all sin
whatsoever, and much love all works of justice, is very humble and patient in
injuries, very diligent in deeds of charity, and wonderful zealous of the
glory of God? seeing that he takes himself to be so much honored by one of
these, that he gives him his Name, calling him his God, and not to displease
him leaves the execution of his justice against a whole Kingdom, and is
pacified with his prayer, and in a certain manner does make subject unto him
the very laws of nature, to do with his creatures that which pleases him; and
does for him alone that he does not for many just men that do serve him
imperfectly: and he being infinite and eternal Majesty, and man but a creature
made of nothing by his only will, he does vouchsafe in a certain manner to
make him equal to himself, saying: I will defend this City for mine own
sake and for David my servants sake.

How much they do import, and help the Church, who do serve God and profit in
virtue. CHAP. III.
ALBEIT all just men and servants of God who live in his grace do help the
mystical body of the Church, because with their good works and prayers they
obtain spiritual favors and gifts, by which sinners are converted and just
men are maintained: yet men that have gone forward and be perfect in virtue are
in this respect of singular profit and vtility. For although all just men be
living members of the Church, and children of light, nevertheless those other be
as the eyes in a man's body, and as in this world the greater stars of the
firmament, and the sun and moon that be as the eyes and light of this
corporal world.

2. So does holy Scripture call them in sundry places. S. Paul to the
Philippians says: In the midst of a crooked and perverse generation, among
whom you shine as lights in the world. And our Lord Jesus Christ declared unto
S. John, that the stars which he held in his hand, were the Prelates and holy
Doctors, whom there he does call Angels of the Churches, for that these men
of excellent virtue with their learning, and principally with their example do
awaken and wonderfully animate all others to the love of virtue. In so much
that only one of these is able to convert a whole City and Kingdom, and keep
the same in the fear of God, which the example of those who be neither hoate
nor could never does: for although on the one side they eschew all mortal
sins, yet on the other, if a man see them commit of purpose such things as
are evidently sins, but not mortal, and that they be careless to do works
of penance and charity, they move him very little to the love of virtue.
Wherefore to raise up those who are fallen into mortal sin there is necessary
for the most part an example of great power and efficacy; and to inflame those
that be cold, is necessary an example that has great advantage over them. And
because this example is found in those men who have profited in virtue; hence
it is, that they do so much move their neighbors, and that God does use them
as fit instruments for so great works.

3. So does S. Gregory say, that the examples of holy Fathers do help us
excedingly to the renouation of spirit, because by viewing and considering the
works of holy men, we be inflamed to the love of virtue, and our heart does
cast of her luke warmness, provoked thereunto by the imitation of Saints. An
excellent testimony of this truth, is that which holy Scripture does recount in
the Book of Judges. It is there set down how the children of Israel did for
long time after the death of Moses keep themselves in the service of God, but
at length did forsake and depart from the same; and the cause of this is said
to be, for that, whilst there were amongst the people ancient and grave men,
zealous of the glory of God, who had seen the meruails that God had wrought
with the people, they were with the learning and example of these men kept in
the fear of his divine Majesty; but these being once dead, the people forth
with forsook God, because they wanted men renowned in virtue, who with their
words and examples might maintain and prescrue them.

4. Besides this a worthy restimony of the same truth is that which holy
Scripture does set before us in the fourth book of Kings, to wit, that when
Ioas reigned in Jerusalem forty years, in the beginning thereof he was a good
King, and did walk uprightly in the sight of God, and all the people remained
in the service of the true God, and it is said that the cause of this their
good was that there lived in Jerusalem a holy-Priest named Ioiada, who in his
life time held with his doctrine and example both the King and people in the
scruice of God; but as soon as he was dead and departed, the King swarued from
the truth, and the people forsook their God.

5. This is then that profit so admirable, that Gods good servants do in the
common wealth and in the universal Church of the faithful. All just persons
who live in Gods grace although they have but little virtue, are living stones
of the Church of Christ, and do help the building of this house and spiritual
Temple of God and the conservation of the same, as S. Peter tells us: but
good men that go forward in virtue are the pillars of this building which next
after God they do bear up and maintain, and keep the same united with the
corner stone and head of all the building, which is Christ the Captain and
Prince of the whole Church, and so does holy Scripture name them. God speaking
to leremie said: I have put thee this day for an ^ronpillar, that is, I have
given thee great power and force amongst my people, to keep and support the
good, and to resist the cuill. And to S. John, Christ said. He that shall
overcome, I will make him apillar in the Temple of my God, which is as much as
to say, I will give him virtue and strength to support others.

6. By this may be understood how much those scruants of God do import in the
Church, who are very diligent in their spiritual forwardnes and profit. For as
in a material building, when some pillars want, great part of the building
falls down: so when there want these servants of God that be f^ruent and
zealous of his glory, there is wont to follow great damage in the Church: as
that in some city, or kingdom either good manners be depraved and corrupted,
and abuses and vices brought in, or faith be lost, or the same Kingdom be
destroyed and abolished by Gods wrath, because it has no one to make
resistance against the same. Such dangers are accustomed to follow in
Christian Commonwelths, and Kingdoms, when the forsaid men are not to be
found. And for this our Lord God, who so much desires our good, when he is
angry for the sins of the people, and his justice does demand vengeance of
them, does wish and desire that there were such men to oppose themselves
against his anger, and for whose sake he might not destroy the people that had
offended him.

7. This to be so, is signified oftentimes by the Prophets: for when God by the
Prophet Ezechiel had rehearsed the most grievous offenses with which the people
had provoked the fury of his justice, declaring this his will and desire, he
said: I have sought amongst them a man that might put a hedge between, and
oppose himself againnst me for the land; that I should not destroy it, and I
have found none: I have powered out mine indignation upon them: in the fire of
my wrath have I consumed them. Here God does not mean whatsoever good and
just man that was in his grace, for of such it is certain that there wanted
not some in all the people of God; but he does speak of men of excellent
virtue, as S. Hierome does explicate, because these indeed are those who with
their prayers and godly life do greatly resist the anger of God, and those who
as pillars do sustain and bear up the people.

8. Another time God desiring to punish Jerusalem, and to deliver the Kingdom
of Jury to the Chaldeans, to the end the^ should destroy and spoil it, and put
all to the dint of sword, for the great evils that they had committed against
his divine Majesty, he first speaks in this manner by the Prophet Jeremy: Go
about the ways of Herusalem, and behold and consider, and seek in her
streets, if ye can find a man doing judgment, and seeking truth, and I will
be mercisull to her; as if he said, Go up and down with diligence thorough all
the places and streets of Jerusalem, and mark and inquire w^l if ye find
but one only just man, that does execute upright judgment toward himself, and
that is very faithful and uses true dealing toward God and his neighbor;
and if ye find such a one, for his sake I will pardon the City of Jerusalem,
and the Kingdom of Jury, and will remove the chastisement and destruction that
I have threatened to bring upon them.

9. O what great account does God make of a man that goes forward in virtue! O
how acceptable a spectacle is he to his divine sight! when to find one such man
in the minds of innumerable sinners, who deserve to be destroyed, he destroys
them not; and his justice requiring that he forgive them not, he does yet for
his respect pardon them, and suspend the punishment which they deserved. With
great reason does S. Hierome upon the forealleged place of Scripture exclaim
and say: Wonderful is the love that God does bear to the righteousness and
virtue of a just man, seeing that not only for ten just that were to be found
in the City, as in time past he spoke to Abraham, he would deliver the same,
but for one only such, as he now demands by Jeremy, if he be found in the
City that he desired to destroy, he would pardon the same.

10. Of this verity we find many examples in the History of Saints. In the
time of that blesled man Laurence Justinian Patriarch of Venice, God was very
angry against that City for the sins that reigned therein. This holy man
prayed for the City in which he was resident, and the Venetians went to make
war against those of Millan, at what time there dwelled in the isle of Corcyra
a very principal Cittyzen of Venice, and near unto that place in an hermitage
most austere, did make his abode a certain Hermit of great holiness, and endued
with the spirit of Prophecy, who because he dwelt so far of, and kept
himself so secret, could not by any humane means came to the knowledge of
those things that passed in Venice, nor have notice of any person thereof.

11. To this holy man, came the aforesaid Venetian, and demanded of him
whether Venice in this war should receive any damage? to whom he answered:
God is wonderfully offended against you of Venice, because you have not taken
any profit by his divine word; but rather have rejected the same, and were it
not for the prayers of your Bishop, you had by n^now destroyed by God, as were
those of Sodoma. Here it is manifest that at the same time there were in
Venice many just men, and virtuous servants of God, and yet it appears that
God made more accoumpt of Laurence Justinian alone, who was a perfect man, then
of them all together.

12. Very famous is in histories the holiness and wonderful life of S. Symeon
Salus, whose life is written by S. Laurentius Bishop of Naples, as is recou^ted
in the fourth Council of Nice, in which honorable mention being made of this
holy Leontius, it is said, that he is the man who wrote S. Symeon Salus, his
life. This S. Symeon remaining in Emesa, and covering his holiness what he
might, did wounderfull works, as well of humility, and contempt touching
himself, as of charity and mercy toward his neighbors, and all the night
time he spent in prayer watering the ground with many tears. A certain man of
Emesa going to Jerusalem, encountered in the desert the holy Abbot John, and
very earnestly requested, that he would pray for him: but the Abbot asking him
whence he was, when he heard that he was of Emesa, said unto him in these words.

13. Seeing thou have the Abbot Symeon at Emesa, do thou request me, who am a
wretched man to pray for thee? Both I my self, and all the world have need of
his prayers. O how much does a man of perfect virtue importe the universal good
of the Church and how much does he forward the salvation of souls, and the
co^seruation of commonwealths and kingdoms; when holy men who baue so great
knowledge of dinine, and heavenly things, do confess, that God so much
esteems, as here has been said, these men, and works by them such things,
as we have related for the good of commonwealths, and of the whole Church.

14. A most faithful witness of this verity is S. Ambrose, who confirms all
that we have said with these words: How happy is the City, that has many
just, how it orthy to be praised of all men, how is it all blessed of God for
this part of it, and how happy and perpetual is the state thereof to be
esteemed? How do I rejoice when I see thosemen, that be mild and indeed wise to
live long, when I see chaste virgins, and grave widows attain to old age, as
who with a certain countenance it self and semblance of gravity do represent
a certain sage and discreet Senate (...) the Church, that they may have them
in reverence that they may follow them, that they may be trained up to all
virtuous manners, and behavior. For I am not glad for their own sakes,
because whiles they live here, they endure many distresses in this world; but
for that they do good to very many. Likewise when any one comes to die, albeit
they be very aged, I am sorry for it, because a number of the younger sort
remain destitute of old help, and defense.

15. Moreover he does add that those men and women of excellent virtue, are to
sinful men, and such as be of less virtue, even as those Cities of resuge
appointed by God in the old Law, to which such as had offended might betake
themselves for sanctuary and safeguard: and finally he does conclude in these
words: To be short, this is the first sign that a City is to perish and be
lost or that great dangers are imminent or, of some destruction to come, if
wise men, or grave matrons be taken out of the world. Hence first is opened the
gate of all evils that do rush in aften: Hather to be S. Ambrose his words.
And this is sufficient to understand how important and profitable a thing it is
to the Church of Christ, that the faithful who have once begun to serve God,
endeavor as much as they may to go forward in good life, and be diligent to
increase, and profit in all virtue.

How necessary and profitable it is, to every one that serves God, to go
forward in his service: And of the gifts and benefits, that he does impart to
those that so go forward. CHAP. IIII.
ALTHOUGH for every one to take at heart, and earnestly embrace this affair of
going forward in Gods service, it ought to suffice, that this endeavor and
diligence to increase in virtue, is so acceptable to God, and important to the
Church: nevertheless because it is expedient that each person know what commodity
himself gets by the same, we will declare in brief, as well the profit
that he does receive who is diligent in going forward, as also the damage that
he does incur, who in this is careless and negligent.

2. To find the way to heaven it greatly imports that a man know his sins,
and feel the grieuousnes of them, and the occasions he has to fall; and the
tentations and snares of our souls enemies. Now, God bestows this so great a
benefit upon that man, who with carefulnes goes forward in virtue, for he
gives him the knowledge of these things. Before, when he lived retchlefly, and
used no more diligence then to fly only such sins, as he held for heinous;
although he knew those sins that be evident and manifest to all: yet many
other things that be sins did not seem so to him; others that were grievous,
seemed to him but light; and diverse things, which were great occasions and
temptations to sin, and a noursery of many vices, he esteemed not: neither
did he see any danger in them: and in the very same things which he knew to be
grievous sins, he neither did feel, nor weigh the harm, and damage that
lies in them, nor what it is to offend the infinite majesty of Almighty God.

3. But after that he has broken the chains of sloth, and with diligence
begins to serve God eschewing all that which he understands to be ill, and
doing that which he knows to be most acceptable to God; then does our Lord
open the eyes of his soul, and give him light to see that which before he did
not see: and he knows now many things to be sins, temptations and
occasions, of all which before he was ignorant, and he is afraid of the danger
in which a man lives in this world, and he sees the great necessity that he
has to be watchful over himself, and to run always to God for favor.

4. This is that which Holy Scripture does signify in these words: The way of
the just, as a light shining goes forth, and grows unto perfect day. The
meaning heerof is, that as the light of the day at the break thereof is little,
and as the day enters more and more, so the light increases until it comes
to that perfection which it has even at midday: so the life and conversation
of the just at the beginning has some little light to know what is evil and
good; but as they go forward growing in virtue, the light does increase in
them, even until it arrive unto that most bright day of Eternity, where God is
manifestly seen in his own light. This benefit that God bestows upon those
who go forward in his service, S. Isidore confesses in these words: The
sins, which to those that begin to serve God do seem light, to those who go
forwards in his service, do see me grievous.

5. And hence follows that which the self same holy man avouches, that
those who have begun to profit in Gods service, do not only fly vain oaths,
but also simple lying: and those that have profited more, do not only fly
lying, but also with very great care eschew idle words. Thus much S. Isidore.
And that the desire of going forward thereby to attain to this knowledge more
manifest of good and evil, which God does communicate to those that profit in
his service, may the better be printed in us, let us consider the words with
which S. Augustine does declare the same, in a certain psalm, setting before
us a man, who having led a sinful life is now converted, and begins to
serve God, and is so changed, that those that see him, do wonder at it, and
praise God, saying. This man that before was of so evil late, how lives he
now so void of sin?

6. He adds that this man albeit he leave those sins which he knows to be
such; yet he knows not, for the most part, the occasions and danger of sins,
nor does he avoid them, nor understand many other sins which he ought to
eschew: and if he go not for ward, he sees them not: but profiting in virtue,
through tribulations, he comes to know them, and the more he profits the
more he sees the scandals and sins of the people. And as he now beholds
many evils, which before he did not see, he cries unto God, saying: Woe unto
me, that my banishment is prolonged! And this he says, because he desires to
see himself free from sin, and in company of those, that neither do, nor can
sin at all.

7. Of this benefit which God does bestow upon those that profit in his
service, there follow diverse other benefits which he does offoard the^, and
divine gifts which he does impart unto them: for as they grow in knowledge and
hatred of sins, and light of things appertayning to God, so do they grow in
force and strength to do good; and as they go forward, God does more increase
the same in them: and he that in the beginning of a good life, because he had
little strength to do well, did feel difficulty and wearines, yea and great
repugnance in many things belonging to virtue; when he has gone forward, be
finds easines and sweetness in the self same works, and in others also more
difficult and hard then those; which comes not of this, that there is any
change in the good work it self, but of this that there is a changement in his
heart, because his forces and courage are increased to do all good.

8. This does the Prophet Isay affirm in these words; God is an everlasting
Lord, who has created the bounds of the earth: he neither shall faint nor be
weary, nor is there searching of his wisdom, who gives strength unto him that
is weary, and unto them that be not, he multiplieth force and courage. Young
men shall faint and be weary, and young men shall fall in weakness. But they
that do trust in our Lord shall change strength, they shall take wings as
Eagles, they shall run and not be weary, they shall walk and not be faint;
that is to say: God is our everlasting Lord, who has created the limits of
the earth, and in creating and governing the world, he is not faint, nor
wearied. And he has this good property and condition that he gives force to
the fainty that they may work, and to those that in this world be little, yea
seem to be nothing, he does increase and multiply courage and strength to do
good.

9. And young men who be in the flower of their age, and strong men who trust
in their own forces, shall be faint and weary as weakelings; but those that
trust in our Lord, which is to give themselves wholly and withal their heart to
his service, hoping all good of his divine mercy, these shall renew and change
strength, and of weak and fearful shall become strong and courageous to all
virtuous and good works. And as the eagle is renewed by changing his feathers,
and albeit he be of a heavy body, yet with his new feathers he soareth through
the air with great lightness and swiftnes; so those that do give themselves
wholly to God, this new force which our Lord does allot them, shall be renewed
and pass on in the way to heaven, without any faintnes, and shall run in the
same without being wearied.

10. This is the great fire of a generous mind which God does give to those who
profit in his service; he does increase in them the taste of spiritual things,
the pureness and joy of a good conscience, patience in trauails, efficacy in
words and good examples, dexterity and desire the better to help our
neighbors; he does increase in them supernatural aides and favors, he makes
them grow abundantly in his divine grace and love, and in other innumerable
gifts and virtues, which grow with the grace and love of God: because, for a
just man to go forward in the service of God, is to use well the gifts and
graces received at Gods hands, and to be indeed grateful for the mercies and
benefits of God; and God has given this his word, which he will not fail to
observe, that he will increase his gifts to such as use them well, and his
graces and mercies to such, as be thankful for them.

11. This did our Lord signify when he said in a parable that a certain noble
man delivered to his servants ten Talents, and bid them traffic with them,
that is to say, that God does communicate and distribute his gifts to his
faithful servants, and commands to use them well and to the profit of their
neighbors. And to him that had traffiqued well, gayning ten Talents with one
that he had received, the noble man commanded to be given the one Talent of
him who had gotten nothing with the same: which is to say, that God does
increase his divine gifts, graces, and mercies in those that use them well, and
do profit by them.

12. And so he does confirm this, co^cluding the parable with this mysterious
sentence: To him that has, shall be given, and he shall abound, and from him
that has not, even that he has shall be taken, which is as much, as if he
said to him who uses well the gifts he has received at Gods hands, God will
increase and multiply his gifts: and from him who does not use well the gift he
received, even this shall be taken away, as by that which follows shall be
manifest.

How expedient and necessary it is to go forward in Gods service, thereby to be
delivered from the perils and domages that ensue of retchlessenes. CHAP. V.
IT is the common sentence of holy Fathers, that not to go forward and profit
in Gods service, is to go backward and loose what was gotten. Their meaning is,
that of this omission and carelesnes to go forward, it follows that a man
leaves to do many good works which he was bound to do, and commits many
faults which he was bound to eschew, and so loses the fervor and devotion of
good life, and falls to be cold and careless, and disposes himself to commit
offenses, whereby he loses the grace of God, and indeed oftentimes does commit
such faults, and utterly undo himself.

2. This sentence does S. Gregory avouch in these words: Such as begin good
works, and do not accomplish them, are to be admonished, that with wary
circumspection they consider, because whilst they do not perform their, good
purposes, they disanul even those things that were begone. For if that which
seemed good to be done, do not grow and increase by diligent intention, even
that which was well done is diminished and decreased. And in this world the
soul of man, like a ship striving against the stream of a river that runs
down, is not in any wise permitted to stand still in one place, because it is
driven back and runeth down, unless it endeavor to go on forward. If then the
strong hand of him that works, do not lift up to perfection the good works
begone, the self negligence of working does fight against that which was
wrought. Thus much S. Gregory By which words is easily understood, how greatly
it imports all those that serve God, that they procure to go forwards and
profit daily in virtue and goodness.

3. But yet how necessary a thing this care of going forward is to all those
that serve God, and how assured the danger is of turning back, and how
disposed those be to undo themselves, who have not this care, S. Bernard does
declare very clearly, saying in this manner: We have not here a City of
abode; it is necessary that either thou mount up, or go down: if thou attempt
to stand still, it is impossible thou fall not. It is most certain that he is
not good, who is not willing to be better. And where once thou beginnest to
loath to become better, there also it is, that thou leauest to be good. And in
another place he says: So will I live to my self, say thou, and remain in
that whereto I have attained; neither do I suffer to become worse, nor desire
to become better. Thou do then desire that which at all cannot be. But if
thou stand still when Christ does run, thou do not approach near to
Christ, but do remove thy self further from him, and thou ought to fear
that which David says: Behold those that withdraw themselves, o Lord, from
thee, shall perish. I here be S. Bernards words.

4. And although it be true, that not straightway when one leaves to profit in
virtue, he loses the goodness he had to be virtuous, nor the grace to be in
Gods service; yet as we have said, he disposes himself to lose the same, and
to signify the great danger in which he stands to loose it, and how near he
is to fall. S. Bernard says, that not to go forward, is to cease to be good,
and that is to fall. And also he speaks in this manner, because that
negligence and carelesnes to go forward, although it be not in the very
beginning a mortal sin, which takes away all goodness and grace, yet is it
in part to leave to be good, and it is a certain kind of fall. This is that
which holy Fathers do say of the great damage, that not going forward in virtue
and the service of God, does work in him who has begone to serve God, but yet
goes not forward.

5. Neither does holy Scripture leave to tell us the great danger in which
these retchles men do live, and how near they be to fall, and lose whatsoever
they have gotten. In one place it says: Qui mollis est and dissolut us in
opere suo, frater est sua opera dissipantis: He that is slothful, and
careless in his work, is the brother of him that scatters abroad his works.
The sense whereof is, that he who profits not in forwarding the good he
begone, and procuring to do with due diligence and perfection the good works
he takes in hand, is like to one that destroieth all the good he had wrought.
For as this man loses it wholly, so that other is in danger and disposition to
lose it. And in another place the same Scripture says: Slouthfullnes brings
sleep, and a negligent soul shall be famished. That is, as S. Gregory does well
declare the same, that as sloth fulness is cause why the body sleeps
without necessity, and negligence in laboring is cause why a man indureth
hunger, and wants what is necessary for his sustenance; so slacknesse and
coldenesse in good life, and in going forward in Gods service, comes to cause
in our soul a spiritual sleeping that makes it as it were insensible for all
good things, and want all spiritual repasts, comforts, and lively desires of
heaven, and suffer hunger of earthly consolations.

6. This is another damage very great indeed, which the negligence of a man's
own profit does work in the soul, for that it makes it lose all affection
and comfort of heaven, and that now it takes no pleasure neither to think nor
to speak of God, nor has any taste of recollection and prater, or reading of
devout lessons, nor has savor in spiritual and virtuous exercises, but it
powers it self out altogether in desires of temporal things, and seeks
contentment in reading and hearing things that be curious; in speaking of
things that be vain, and in recreating the senses with exterior things,
whence easily it comes to give consent to such faults, as wholly separate the
same from al friendship and grace of God.

7. This is that so dreadful punishment which Christ threatened to one of these
retchlesse persons in the Apocalypse, saying: I would thou were cold or hoate,
but because thou art luke warm and nor cold nor hoate, I will begin to vomit
thee out of my mouth. Hoate he here calls him says S. Gregory, who is
diligent and fervent in good life, and cold him, who has not forsaken mortal
sin, but yet gives great hope that he will forsake it: and lukewarm he
calls him who has begone to serve God, but yet lives remissely, and
endeavors not to profit, and go forward in goodness.

8. And his meaning is, that albeit, if we regard the grieuousnes of the fault,
that of the cold is greater then that of the lukewarm: yet the danger of the
lukewarm is in a certain manner greater, which is, if we consider, that which
falls out to these men in time to come, for of him that is cold and in
mortal sin, there is great hope that he will be perfectly converted to (...)
those do incur who be retchlesse to go forward in the service of God, and in
the good life they have once begone: and it is a just punishment of their
ingratitude. For as it is thankfulness to use well gifts received, and to
profit by them, and has for reward that the merciful hand of God with great
largeness and liberality does increase and multiply the gifts and graces, as
we have said: so not to use well the gifts received, nor to profit by them, is
very great ingratitude, and has for just punishment of God, conformably to the
grieuousnes of the sin, to take from him the favors, succors, and gifts,
which for his mercy he gave him, even to bereave him of all in the death and
judgment, which must be done upon him, and to deliver him to the pains that
his vnthankfullnesse has deserved; which is the chastisment that is to be
given to the unprofitable servant, from whom his Lord took the talent which
he had given him, and cast him afterward into everlasting darkness.

How the Care of going always forward in virtue, is conuentent for all the
servants of God; not only for those that begin, but also for those that have
profited much, and are perfect. CHAP. VI.
IT might seem to some one that the necessity and obligation of going forward
pertained only to those who of new, begin to serve God, and that such as were
much advanced might excuse themselves from this necessity: but it is not so,
for it pertains to all to go forward in the service of God, and they who in
this point do use more diligence, are those that have profited most and be
perfect; these I say, be those that have great desire and hunger to go forward,
and use great vigilance and care to profit; and for this, use al means which
they know may help them, not only such as be of obligation, as is to eschew
what lies in them all that which they understand to be offensive, be it never
so little, and to do well whatsoever work of commandment, which they will
fulfill to excuse themselves of blameworthy negligence: but jointly with this
they do use for their profit other means that be counsels, although they be
difficult and hard, knowing well that these, will help them to go forward in
the service of God.

2. For albeit it be true, that holy and virtuous men, as S. Gregory says, do
understand their going forward in virtue, as well for that they do daily examen
themselves, and comparing their present behavior with that which is past, they
find themselves free from many, faults and passions to which they were subject
before, and find that now they do many works of virtue, both inward and
outward, to which before they had not will, nor force to do them, so also for,
that holy men do know, the gifts they hauereceaued of God, to esteem them, and
be thankful for them.

3. And this does the Holy Ghost work in them, ^a S. Paul says: that they may
know that which God has given them; which knowledge touching some gifts is
clear and evident, and touching some other, pertaining to supernatural grace,
it is but probable, and not very clear, comfortable to the quality of the
gift: and because amongst the gifts received at Gods hand which be very great,
one is the going forward and profit in virtue, they know also this gift, so to
refer the same to the mighty and liberal hand of the Author of all good
things, and to inflame themselves more in his love, who has so much loved
them, that instead of the punishments and disgraces which they had justly
deserved for their sins, he has bettered them with so great mercies.

4. And although it be so that holy men for these reasons do know their going
forward, yet do they not therefore make more accoumpt of themselves now, then
they did in times past, but rather esteem themselves less, and more despise
themselves; neither for this do they become careless to go forward and profit,
but rather daily do labor to go forward more in the service of God. The reason
of this is, because whilst holy and godly men do go forward and profit more in
virtue, they receive more and greater light of God, with which they come to
discover in themselves such faults as before they knew not, and come to feel
much more the grieuousnes of the same faults then they knew before. And as the
baseness and misery of man is a depth without bottom, because he was made of
nothing, and is subject to sin, he now comes to know more of this
vileness, and unworthiness, and misery, and nothing: and as he grows in
virtue, he comes to grow more in contempt of him self, and so when he has
much profited, he holds himself for less then when he began to serve God.

5. This is that which S. Gregory auouceth in more places then one; to wit,
that the servants of God, whilst they do profit more, and through exercise of
good works, do approache nearer to God, do more arrowly, ab^illy and clearly
know the spots of their fowls, and so much more feel th^ll indignity, and
hold themselves in many things for abominable, and so much more blame and
reprehend themselves, and do not only fear, and despise themselves for the
faults, which they know and reprehend in themselves, but also for that they
understand that God does see in them many faults which they do not know. And
for this respect does the self same holy man affirm, that God has mercifully
ordained, that his Servants of perfect virtue, against their will come to deal
and converse with their neighbors, who make them take charge of government,
or other offices which bind them to this, that by profiting others through
occasions offered them, they come to discover their own defects, and so humble
and contemn themselves the more.

6. And so it comes to pass with them, that whilst they think that in this
they receive harm, and that they loose much, and destroy that which they had
built, they come through Gods mercy, in this usage toward the^, to get more
virtue, and wax more rich in spiritual goods. Moreoeuer with the same light,
which does increase in holy men, as their profit does increase, they know
better and with more cleerenesse, the greatness and infinite bounty of God,
and of all his divine perfections, and how worthy he is to be beloved and
served with highest perfectoes: and so they know and hold themselves for more
imperfect then before, and do think more basely of themselves then before
they did, because they see better how far off they be from that perfection
which they ought to have to serve God, as he deserves to be served.

7. This is that S. Augustine would signify when he said. He has much profited
in this life, who by profiting has known now far he is from the perfection of
righteousnee. Hence it is that they so little account of themselves, and
contemn themselus so greatly, as if they were the dust of the earth, as S.
Gregory does confess when he says, That godly men the more they profit in the
knowledge of God, the more they contemn themselves, as if they were nothing,
or almost nothing. These then are the reasons wherefore godly men whilst they
profit more in virtue, although they know this their profit, do yet less
esteem themselves, because they know more their imperfections, and how much
virtue and pertection they want.

8. Hence follows a second thing that the more they go forward, the more
desire they have to go on still, and they use more diligence in their profit,
because they know better the obligation they have thereto, and have more force
for the same, and for that they know how much God does desire their profit, and
how much he is pleased therewith, and how much they win by going forward. How
will not that just man labor to profit in Gods service, who with pure eyes of
his soul does know the infinite goodness of God, and the mercyes he has showed
him, and the love he has borne him? And understands that in going forward he
gives unspeakable contentment to this infinite goodness of God, and that when
he profits more, he does more please and content him? How will not a servant
of God endeavor what possible he may to grow in virtue, having a clear and
unpassionate judgment to understand and weigh how much one degree of Gods love
is worth, seeing it the price of God himself, who is won with love, and is
possessed with change of love?

9. And knowing that this love is an infinite treasure without tax or measure,
because in the love of God there is no mean, and that when he shall have
profited more in virtue, he does grow so much more in this love and gain more
of it, and so much the better shall be by grace and glory possess and enjoy
God, who does give himself in change of love. Eyes that see in this manner, how
will they not covet such beauty? Heart that understands and feels in this
sort, how will it not burn in the desire of so great good, as is gotten by
going forward in the service of God?

10. Well did that holy King, and Prophet understand these gains which be
contained in spiritual profit, who said: I said, now have I begun, this
change is of the righth and of the most high. After he had served God many
years, after he had well considered his miseryes, and the causes he had to
grow in his holy service; he determined with great courage and confidence to
begin to serve him a new, renewing himself altogether with new fervor, and
he confessed that this change, to better and renew a good life, he had not of
his own store, but of the mighty hand of God. And albeit he had served God so
long time, he affirms, that he now begins. For as that learned man
Ambrosius Ansbertus says upon these words, The profit in virtue which those
men do make who are chosen of God, is as it were a beginning to serve God: And
every day they are said to begin, because by moments of times they pass from
some virtue to others.

11. The good souldiars that be in war, and have begun to fight, although the
enemy come against them, and make resistance and hurt them, if on their side
they have help to overcome the^, and hope to get rich spoils, do not turn
back nor be dismayed, but pass forward fighting with labor and danger,
until they have the victory. And the matriners that sail on the sea, although
there rise against them great tempests and contrary winds, will not turn back,
nor leave their voyage begun, but do seek all the remedies they know to pass
on their way, until they come to a safe harbor. If then men do this for so
light hope of temporal things; how reasonable is it that the servants of God,
who have taken in hand, and begune the voyage of heaven, turn not back for
any contradictions or difficultyes, nor be dismayed, but go always forward,
profiting from virtue to virtue, seeing that on their side they have Christ
true God who gives them strength, and the merits of his passion wherein they
may repose and have confidence, and also besides have all the powers of heaven
to help them, and the Saints who be their aduocats, and have so great and
steadfast hope of the victory, and to enjoy the reward of heaven which is given
to those that be vanquishers.

12. It is reason that they should learn of the Apostle S. Paul, who having
labored and merited so much in the service of God, and all that he had done
seeming unto him little in respect of that he desired and ought to have done,
he began a new to labor and merit, as he does avouch in saying: Brethren, I do
not account that I have comprehended yet one thing, forgetting the things that
are behind; but stretching forth my self to those that are before, I pursue
the mark to the price of the supreme vocation of God in Christ Jesus. The
things behind, says S. Chrysostom, be calls the good works of his life
past, but by things before, he understands the good works he is to do for the
time to come in the service of God, growing in this manner with great fervor
and diligence in good life, thereby to come nearer to the mark and aim of
perfection, even until he ariue unto it, and get the reward of heaven, to
which we are called.

13. These are the principal reasons that persuade and move the hearts of such
as serve God, as well of Nouices, as of those that have much profited, to force
themselves to go daily forward and profit in his divine service. Other reasons
there be like unto these that do persuade the same, which hear we will recount
very briefly: and it is very reasonable that we all do consider the^ with
leisure, that animated with divine virtue, and force of these reasons, we still
increase in all virtue, for so much as God is, as he is, that is to say,
because he is unmeasurable Majesty, and bountifullnes, and infinite in all
perfection, he is worthy of infinite service, and of infinite honor and glory.
And it is very reasonable, seeing we cannot yeald him this service and glory,
for so much as we are not capable of infinite virtue, that at the least we give
him all the service and glory, that we be able, conformable to the forces which
we have received from the same God animating our selves daily to do him new
services, and to give him new glory with the increase of all virtues.

14. The love with which God does love us, and has loved us even from all
eternity, is infinite, because it is his divine essence it self; and it is a
thing much grounded on reason, that, seeing we cannot now be correspondent with
infinite love, that at the leastwise we put no measure to this love, but go
daily increasing in the same, with exercise of prayer and good works, which be
the fiery coals with which the flame of goods love is increased. Also because
the benefits that houe flowed out from this infinite fountain of love, are
incomprehe^siole in their greatness, and in multitude innumerable, specially the
benefit of Redemption, which comprehends all the works that Christ has
done, and words that he has spoken, and all the pains and reproaches that he
suffered for us, and all the gifts, graces, virtues and favors supernatural,
which by this means he has communicated unto us, it is a thing most just,
seeing we cannot be thankeful and repay according to the dignity and value of
them, that we be thankful in the best manner we may, using them always well
and to our profit, and fullfilling the commandments and counsels of this our
Lord, because this is the thankesgining and payment that he demands of us
for all these things; and for as much as all that hitherto we have done, is
very little in relpect of that which such benefits do deserve, that daily we go
forward and profit in the good use of all these benefits and divine gifts, and
in the observing of the precepts and counsels of our Lord.

15. God by his most holy law does oblige us to have so great pureness of
soul, and cleanenesse of heart, that in it we give no entrance to any sin, be
it great or little. And it is a thing very due indeed, because we by reason of
our ordinary weakness cannot arrive to so great cleanliness as is this that
God does require of us, by resisting all offenses, that at the least, as much
as may be possible for us, we procure the same, purging every day our soul
with penance from such sins into which it has fallen, and daily renewing
our good purposes, and increasing diligence and fervor in good works, so to
eschew the defects into which we might fall. The excellency and beauty of the
inward grace, which in this life is gotten with exercise of good works, helped
by the same grace, is so great that it cannot be explicated; and the reward of
glory that in the life to come is won with the merit of good works, is so
excellent and precious, that it does far exceed whatsoever by us can be
imagined, or thought.

16. And so true prudence and wisdom does require, that daily with care we
profit in good works, and increase with fervor the merits of good life, that
daily the gracy of God may be increased in us, which does enrich and beautify
our souls; and that the reward of glory may be augmenttd with which in the
life everlasting we may glorify God, and more perfectly enjoy him; much more
considering that the time of this life in which we can merit, is so exceeding
short, and the hour of death which takes from us all means to merit, is so
uncertain and doubtful, that it would be an exceeding great fault of wit and
judgment, to let pass any moment of time lost, without fruit and merit of some
work, seeing that in every moment of time well employed, we do profit more in
virtue, and do augment more the treasures of grace received; and of everlasting
glory which we expect. We have committed in this life most grievous sins,
with which we have provoked God to anger, and bound our selves to eternal
pains: and so it is a thing most just and of great importance, that we make
him recompense, being very diligent to profit in virtue, and to embrace
whatsoever pain and labor for Gods sake, that so, as much as lies in us, we
may please our Lord whom we have so grievously offended. And that through his
divine grace we may give full satisfaction to his divine Justice, in such sort,
that no pain of the life to come hinder us the entrance in to heaven, nor
separate us long time from the clear vision of the infinite beauty of God.

How necessary and profitable that doctrine is, which teaches and persuades
to go forwards in good life once begone, and to profit in the same. CHAP. VII.
SEEING how necessary a thing it is for those, that have begone to serve God,
to go forward in his divine service, and how acceptable this is to God and
profitable to the Church; it may be well understood of how great necessity and
importance the doctrine is that helps toward this. Certain it is, that it
is a thing very necessary and profitable to persuade and encourage the faith
full in familiar talk, sermons, and books, that they forsake mortal sins,
which do separat them from God, and that they turn unto him, and to give them
the means that may further them to do this: Yet it is not a thing of less
necessity and prosit for the faith full, who are converted, and have begune to
serve God, to animate them that they go forward in his service, and to give
them the means and aduises that may help them to this; because it would be of
little profit that one had begun to serve God if soon after he returned to the
vices which he left, or to others worse then they: and, as we have proved by
holy Scripture and doctrine of Saints, those that being converted to grace, do
not go forward in the service of God, are in manifest danger to turn back:
and oftentimes it so falltth out that they fall again to their ill life.

2. And albeit we confess that some do persevere in their coldness, yet we
have seen most evidently that as well in respect of that which concerns the
glory of God, as of that which pertains to the good of the Church, a sew
servants of God who go forward in his holy service do much more import then
many that serve him with coldness and negligence. To the end then, that those
who have begun to serve God may persevere in his grace, that so in the Church
of Christ we may have many of his servants that have profited in his divine
service, it is necessary, that in sermons and exhortations made to the people,
there be oftentimes mention of those things that help to this purpose.

3. And because among the hearers some there be that are not yet converted to a
good life with a steadfast determination to serve God, there must be mentioned
those things which move to leave mortal sin, and to begin to serve God: and
for that there be others who are resolved in goodness, and have begun to serve
God, it must be treated also very seriously of that which moves to follow the
counsels of Christ, as given by the everlasting wisdom, and to do well those
works that be of commandment, to exercise mental prayer, mortification,
frequenting of Sacraments, reading or devout books, and to practice the
virtues of humility, patience, charity, and others in their most high and
perfect degree, and to fly the occasions and dangers of sin; for so much as
all these be means by which souls are maintained in grace, and go forward
still in the service of God.

4. And specially it is necessary that, that betreated and taught, which moves
to fear and eschew venial sins; for so much as amongst all the means which
that man has to keep himself in grace, and increase in the same, and in all
virtue, who has begune to serve God, this is very principal and important, to
cleause and purify the soul, as much as is possible, from venial sins which
do weaken the same and dispose it to mortal sin. And that which men ought to
do in sermons, that ought they likewise to do in books which are written for
the furthering of souls; that as there be some who of full intention and
purpose do handle that doctrine which is necessary and very proper to draw
sinners from ill state, and affectionate them to virtue; so there be others
that of set purpose treat of that doctrine which is necessary and convenient
for those that have begune to serve God, that they may keep themselves and
increase more and more in his divine service.

5. This difference of doctrine necessary in the Church conformable to the
different disposition of the faithful, the Apostle S. Paul does declare, when
writing to the Hebrews he teaches us, that there be some faithful who are
little ones and young beginners in things pertaining to God, and have need of
milk, which is the doctrine that teaches the beginning of good life, which
are to do penance, to fly mort all sin, to receive the Sacraments necessary
for salvation, and that those are not capable of the Sermons of Justice.
Sermons of Justice he calls, as S. Anselme does interpret, the doctrine that
is convenient for those that be perfect; or as Cardinal Caietan does expound,
that doctrine which treats of going forward in virtue. And S. Paul says that
there be others faithful in the Church who are men of perfect age, and have
need of strong meat, that is, that learning which teaches how a man must
profit in virtue, and attain to the perfection thereof; and exhorts and
encourages every Christian man to aspire to this, by profiting in virtue and
walking in the perfection of charity.

6. For even as to little children they give milk, not that this should be
their ordinary meat, but to sustain them therewith until they become able to
eat stronger meat, with which they still grow till they be perfect men: so
likewise to the faithful in the beginning of their conversion they give that
doctrine which moucth them to the hatred of mortal sin; but after that they
have once begune to serve God, they must give the^ that doctrine which teaches
and animateth them to increase in all virtue.

7. And although it be a thing grievous and difficult to per swade men with
good doctrine that they forsake their ill life, and be converted to God with
all their heart; yet is it no less grievous nor less difficult with doctrine
and aduises to persuade those who have begune to serve God, that they go
forward in his service: nay rather it is a thing of greater difficulty, because
one act of contrition, and one steadfast purpose never more to commit any
mortal sin for ought that is in the world, which is conceived in a moment,
and of one word that is heard, is sufficient to begin to serve God: but to go
forward and persevere, there needs longer exercise in all virtues, and to
fight longtime with strength against vices, and passions, and temptations of
the enemy. And so experience does teach, that of many who begin to serve God
few there be that go forward and persevere in the good begun.

8. This does S. Bernard confess to be so in trial (and S. Bonauenture does
confitme it) in these words: More easily shall a man find many secular men to
be converted to do well, then one religious man to go forward from good to
better. So much S. Bernard. Seeing then, that this affair of going forward in
Gods service, and maintaining a man's self in the same, is on one side a thing
so necessary and profitable for the good of each one, and so important to the
world, and on the other side a thing so difficult; it is necessary and very
convenient that there be books written, which sincerely, and of set purpose do
handle these things: and that amongst others, there may be some also in the
vulgar tongue, we make offer of this, with desire that it help somewhat to a
thing of so great glory of God, and good of souls.

Of the fruit which those, who begin to serve God, must reap of the doctrine
that teaches the going forward in virtue, and the perfection thereof. CHAP.
VIII.
IN the end of this Treatise it is convenient to advise a thing very necessary
to be known for some that begin, or have a will to serve God: and it is, that
as of sermons and books written to persuade the faithsull, who as yet have not
begun to serve God truly, that they fly every thing which is mortal sin, and
determine with themselves not to do the same for any interest, or fear of the
world; those that now have begun to serve God, and are resolved not to offend
him, must not be cold and sloth full, to content themselves with this purpose,
without passing forward to avoid other sins although they be not mortal,
and doing many good works very acceptable to God, abeit they be not commanded
under pain of eternal damnation, there by not to incur the most grievous
dangers which follow of coldness as we have said: So of Sermons and Books
which teach and persuade the going forward in virtue and profit thereof, those
that begin or have a desire to begin to serve God, are not to take discourage
or diffidence, seeming to them selves that the way of virtue is difficile and
hard, and that they cannot walk in the same, because these things that do
persuade the going forward in virtue are not propounded to them with obligation
of mortal sin, but with reward that they shall have more pureness of soul,
and shall more assure their salvation, and shall merit more grace and glory
before God, and shall enjoy in this life the peace and comfort which God gives
to the clean of heart, and with reward of other innumerable goods of price and
value incomparable, which God does communicate to those that do go forward in
his divine service, as we have before explicated, and shall declare more
hereafter, and therefore they are not by this to take discouragment or
diffidence of their salvation.

2. That which they must select out of this, is on the one side Humility and
Contempt of themselves, considering how sarre off they be from doing all that
which they ought in the service of God, and that which the supreme and divine
Majesty does deserve and demand, and rejoice with all their heart that God has
in his Church such his servants, who serve him with so great profit and
perfection, and give him thanks that he has given to those such a desire and
strength: because to be glad of the profit and perfection of others for the
glory which heerof redoundeth to God, is in some part to be partaker of the
profit and perfection of others.

3. On the other side, there must be great care had to put themselves before
God in prayer, and there to represent unto him their weakness and
pusillanimity, to request him that he give them a strong and efficacious will to
go forward in his divine service, and then let them hope in the mercy of God,
that if they persevere demanding in this manner, he will grant them this
gift; and the going forward in virtue, which now does seem very hard unto them
and a mounting up inaccessible, and that the only thinking thereof does breed
discourage in them, will come to seem an easy and light thing: and by thinking
that they be abse every day to go forward, and grow in a goodness so
unspeakable as is the love of God, they will receive great comfort and joy in
their heart.

4. Let them consider that this is not an affair which is brought to pass
with only natural force of man, but that the chiefest dooer of this work must
be Christ our Loid: and the most principal means which he does use for this
end is his divine grace, which he of very good will and with great liberality
does communicate and affoard to all those that have desire to profit themselves
by the same; and with this grace things that be hard become easy; those that be
bitter become sweet, and the heavy become very light. Let them consider that in
the Church of Christ there have been always, and there be at this present
innumerable men and women of all states, who have profited much in the service
of God, and be of perfect virtue, who, time was, did feel the same
difficulties that they do feel; but having begun this course of spiritual
profit, hoping in Christ, and helping themselue with his grace and favor, they
found it very plain and pleasant to walk in.

5. And let each one in particular consider that which God has wrought with
him, and how in some things he has changed him, and made him another man from
that he was before; in time past he loved that which was ill, now he does
abhor it; in time past he could not say as much as one prayer with repose and
quietness of mind, nor hear one mass nor sermon with contentment, now he
takes pleasure to pray with good will, and to be present at the divine service
and sermons. Out of this then that God has done with him without any merit of
his, he must reap this knowledge and trust, that seeing God has changed him
from quid to good, he being so farrt off from the same, and having so contrary
desites, because he did give consent to his divine inspirations; he will like
wise change him from good to better, if he will use the gifts of his divine
grace.

6. This temptation of discouragement had S. Augustine in the beginning of his
conversion, and with these considerations did he overcome the same. It seemed
unto him that it was a very hard thing to keep the purity of the Law
Evangelical, and particulerly to live in perpetual continency, and much
mistrusted that ever he could bring to effect so glorious an enterprise: and
being in these fears and dismayes, he began to consider with attention, that
in the Church of Christ there were not only grave and strong men of a most
penitent life, who had attained to perfect virtue and did observe perpetual
chastity, as S. Anthony, and other his followers, but that also there were many
companies of young men and virgins, and ancient widows, youths and maids of
tender age who kept perpetual continency, and went in the way of Evangelical
perfection.

7. Thou may also with the help of God be able to do that which these did:
consider that they did not these things relying upon their forces, but upon the
power and grace of our Lord: cast thy self then into his hands with security,
and fear not that he will withdraw himself to make thee fall, but be assured
that with mercy he will receive thee in his arms, and save thee. He did
likewise consider the changes that Christ had made, and did daily make in his
Church, turning great sinners into most holy men: and this thought did consume
his coldness, and drive away the discouragment he had, and gave him a great heart
to go forward in virtue, hoping that God would do the like with him. So does he
confess talking with God in these words: The examples of thy servants whom
thou of black have made white, and of dead living, gathered into the bosom of
my thought, did burn and consume the heavy drowsines that I fell not down,
and did wonderfully inflame my heart. These be the fruits which men of good
understanding do reap of the doctrine that teaches and persuades the going
forwards in virtue.

8. Those to whom God has imparted lively desires of their going forward, who
are those that have great need of this doctrine, and of whom there be still
many in the Church of God, do reap of this to know with certainty and
cleerenes wherein does consist the going forward and perfection of every virtue,
the means by which they must obtain it, and courage and resolution to
practice it; and they reap great comfort considering the wonderful good that
is in every virtue, and they reap remedies against temptations of negligence,
or coldness, and weapons to resist all the contrarietyes of virtues and their
perfections, and light to know and eschew all the deceites and frauds, with
which the Devil goes about to hinder the going forward of the faithful in
the service of God.

9. Those that have neither courage nor desire to profit in virtue do gather
and reap out of this doctrine humility and confusion of themselves, as we have
said, which fruit is so excellent and so greata disposition to all goodness,
that by the means of it God will give them lively desires of their going
forward, which yet they want. And to the end that by the reading of this book
they may gather fruits like unto these, we demand of the Christian Reader,
that setting aside all curiosity, he read the same with desire to gather some
profit for his soul, because this book is compounded of Sentences of holy
Scripture, and of holy Doctors of the Church: and that which of our part we
have added, is to put them together in order, and to accommodate them with
more perspicuity to the capacity of the Readers. And for so much as our Lord
has so great desire of our spiritual profit, there is very great reason to
grow, and hope well in his goodness, that by such means as these are he will
awake, in the hearts of those that with upright intention shall read them, a
desire and care to go forward in his divine service, to the greater honor and
glory of his divine Majesty.

FINIS.
THE KEY OF PARADISE, OR A DIALOGVE CONCERNING Contrition and Attrition.
Wherein are briefly declared the Reasons, why we must labor to exercise the
Acts of Contrition, and Examen of our Conscience. Very profitable for all sorts
of Persons. Translated out of Spanish into English.
Demand. I HAVE heard much speech of Co^trition, as of a thing very greatly
importing the saving of the soul: tell me, I pray you, how necessary it is:
for I have a great desire to know?


Answer. Contrition is a matter of so great regard and moment, as whosoever
has it truly and indeed, though he shall have committed the greatest sins in
the world, he shall have pardon of them, and be reconciled again to the grace,
favor, and amity of God; and if he should dye on a sudden without confession
(for want of the means to do it) or without the receiving of any other
Sacrament, he must not make any doubt of his salvation. Again if any have his
soul burdened with any mortal sin whatsoever, if he should come to dye
therein, though he have Attrition (in case he receives not some Sacrament) he
shall questionles be dammend for ever.


Demand. What difference is there between Contrition, and Attrition, for I
cannot yet distinguish the one from the other: and yet your answer gives me
enough to understand, that there is a very great difference between them?


Answer. You shall never understand this difference, unless you know first what
Contrition is, and what Attrition also, and what the desinitions of them both
be.


Demand. You say very well. What then is Contrition?


Answer. Contrition is a perfect sorrow, and horror, that a man has for
having committed sin, and this for that he loves God with a sovereign and
singular love. By which words I say, that the principal foundation of
Co^trition, is the love of God above all things, and this love of God, and
consideration that a sinner has his, being of the Goodness and Perfections
divine, causes that whosoever has this Contrition, is sorry from his heart,
that he has offended so good a God. But in all this a man must presuppose
faith in Jesus Christ our Lord, without which impossible it is to please God.


Demand. And what is Attritio^?


Answer. It is a sorrow, that a sinnor has of his sins, which is not
founded principally in the love of God above all things, but in the fear of
the pains of hell, or in the consideration of the foulenes of sins, or in
some other the like thing: you now understand the difference of Contrition and
Attrition, the Contrition is founded principally in the love of God, and
Attrition in the fear of hell, or in some other the like thing.


Demand. But I desire further to understand, if the sorrow to have offended God
for fear of damnation, or for the respect of the other considerations you have
alleged, be good or ill?


Answer. No: it is not ill, but good, and it is Gods gift, and disposes the
soul to the purchasing of grace, because it goes accompanied with the hatred
of sin, and with a purpose of amendme^t. But yet such a sorrow is not perfect
contrition, because it has not so perfect a foundation, as true Contrition
requires, and therefore such sorrow is called Attrition, or (which is the same)
imperfect Contrition.


Demand. If one should confess himself actually and Sacramentally with
Attrition alone, should he obtain pardon of his sins, and should he be put
thereby into the grace of God again?


Answer. Yea: for by the virtue of the Sacrament, the sinner of attrite
becomes contrite: and therefore, among other reasons, it imports much to go
often to Confession, for as much as what Attrition cannot effect by it self,
it effects by the virtue of the Sacrament of Confession.


Demand. Of that which you say, I conclude, that to obtain the grace of God,
it is enough for me to do the acts of Attrition, and for the rest to have a
care to come often to confession: and therefore I will content me with it,
without further troubling my self to do the acts of Contrition, which, me
thinks, are very hard to do.


Answer. You shall do well to confess often, as they do also well who do
accustom to exercise the frequent acts of Contrition. For though a man by
doing these acts of Contrition, may obtain the grace of God, without going to
confession (though he must have a purpose to do it, at least when the precept
byndeth him to go to confession) yet in regard of the difficulty of having true
contrition, and consequently of the incertitude that there always is, as long
as we are in this life, to know whether we be truly contrite or not, a man must
join contrition with frequent confession, to be the better assured of that
which imports us so much, as is the act of our salvation. And how much more
requisite then is it for him to go to Confession, who seems not to have any
other sorrow, then that of Attrition or imperfect Contrition. Wherefore touching
that which you said a little before, that you would content your self by the
making of the acts of Attrition alone, you deceive your self very much.


Demand. Give me so me reason of that which you say, and of my mastaking, if I
be deceived.


Answer. I will do it very willingly, and the reason of that which I say, is
manifest. For if by your own miscarriage you offend God mortally, you shall
not have your ghostly father always at hand, to make your confession unto him
presently after, you have sinned. And it may further happen, that you shall not
have time to go to confession: for you may dye upon the sudden (since none
knows what may befall him afterward) or you may by some secret Judgment of
God be taken away without Confession.

And though you should have a commodity to confess, this is the greatest evil
of all to continue an enemy of God (considering attrition alone, though it
should go accompanied with a purpose of confession, makes us not his friends)
and to loose all the principal merit of all the good works, that you shall do,
from the time that you have offended God, virtill the time you shall go to
confession, and receive his grace again. And what greater damage, and loss
can there either be occasioned, or imagined, then this?


Demand. I am satisfied with the reasons that you have brought, but I would
understand, if you have any more?


Answer. Yes: I have many more, though now I will not bring more then this
one, for the conclusion of all: this it is. Though it be certain, that
Attrition joined with the Sacrament of Confession, be enough to obtain Gods
grace, yet this is not so certain, as if it were an article of Faith (as it is
an article of faith) that a man purchases the grace of God by the means of
Contrition. And seeing there is question about a business so important, as is
that of our salvation, reason teaches us, that we should choose what is more
certain, and more assured. And who now understands not all that we have said,
how much it imports him to have contrition, if he desire to be saved?


Demand. You have told me so great privileges of Contrition, as I much desire
to know, how it is to be practiced, and therefore let me entreat you to teach
me, and to declare in particular the way to exercise it, and the particular
Acts that it comprehends in it self.


Answer. Contrition comprehends three particular acts.


Demand. What is the first act?


Answer. The first act, is a sorrow above all other sorrows, for having
offended the Majesty of God, because he is God, and so worthy to be loved,
obeyed, and honored above all things.


Demand. With what considerations may a man help himself, to obtain this
sorrow, and to confirm it in his soul?


Answer. It will profit to consider the good that is lost and forgone by one
mortal sin, which is the grace and amity of God: a good, that surpasses all
other goods, and therefore the loss should cause much greater sorrow, then the
loss of all other goods put together, as be the temporal goods, the health,
life, honor etc. Secondly, it will profit to consider the damage and hurt that
but one mortal sin brings us. For it makes us the enemies of God, the
slaves of the Devil, foul ugly and abominable as be the Devils, and damneth
us to hell, there to broyle and be tormented for eternity: evils by infinite
degrees surmounting all the evils, hurts, losses, and torments of this world,
though they should be put all together. And therefore it were very requisite,
that we should be more sorry for having committed one sin, then for all other
evils; that may possibly happen unto us: and if one mortal sin draws so
many, and so sore evils after it, what will it then be to have the soul
charged with many such sins?


Demand. What is the second act of Contrition?


Answer. The second act is, a firm purpose, founded upon the love of God
above all things, never to offend him any more for any respect; that is,
neither for the love of any good, that I may hope for by committing sin, nor
for fear of any evils, that I may Fear toward me by refu^ing to sin:
seeing, as I have said, the good that I loose by offending, is greater then be
all other goods put together, that I might gain by my sinning, and the
domages and evils, that the sin brings me, be greater then be all the
evils and losses, that can happen unto me, because I am resolved not to offend
my God.


Demand. But tell me, what be those particular purposes, that are to be made,
and entertained in this general purpose, whereof you have spoken?


Answer. This general purpose must comprehend in it self a purpose to make a
resolution (in case a man be bound thereunto) to keep all Gods commandments,
and to discharge all the obligations of his office, with a resolution and firm
purpose perfectly from thenceforth to accomplish and perform all that he is
able: and in particular, he must have an intent to confess himself
Sacramentally at least, when he shall be bound by commandment so to do, and
to shun all occasions of sin, to the end God who is so good, may not be any
more offended by him. He must further have a resolution to perform his
penance: and to the end he may the better satisfy for his sins, he must
offer unto God his life, his pains, his trauayles, and all the good works he
shall do.


Demand. What is the third act of Contrition?


Answer. It is a petition accompanied with the hope of obtaining pardon for
all his sins, and of procuring grace for the amendment of himself, and of
perseuering in it till the very end.


Demand. In what is this petition, and hope founded?


Answer. In the goodness, and mercy of our Lord God, and in the merits of the
most precious Blood, and Passion of our Savior Jesus Christ.


Demand. Tell me now the practice of all that which you have said, that I may
upon all occasions help my self with it.


Answer. The practice of this so excellent an Act of Contrition, must be
exercised in this manner, by saying this prayer.


An act of Contrition.
O MY Lord Jesus Christ, true God; and Man, who art my Creator and my
Redeemer, I am sorry from my heart, that I have offended thee; and this for that
thou art my God, and for that I love thee above all things: and I purpose,
steadfastly never to offend thee any more, and to keep my self from all
occasions of sin: I purpose to also confess my sins, and to do the penance
that shall be in joined me. Moreover: I offer unto thee for satisfaction of all
my sins, my life, my travails, my pains, and all the good works that I
shall do. And as I humbly crave of thee to pardon me my sins; so I hope in
thy infinite goodness and mercy, that thou will pardon me, by the merits of thy
most precious blood, death, and passion, and give me grace to amend, and
persevere to the end. Amen.

Demand. O this is a most heavenly and divine doctrine. But tell me, I pray
you, how often should a man exercise this act of Contrition?

Answer. As often as a man shall fall into mortal sin, it will be good for
him the very same instant to exercise this act of Contrition, for fear least
death might take him in so bad a state away, and he be adjudged to the
everlasting fire: and also that he may not stay even but a moment, in so
abominable a state. Moreover, it is very good to exercise this act of
Co^trition twice a day at the least, in the morning at our vprising, and at
night at our going to rest, and this not to hazard so important a busynes, as
is that of our eternal salvation.

Demand. I purpose, good willing, to do all this, that you have told me,
without omitting any thing: and I beseech God to grant you the reward of that
comfort, which you have caused to me, by teaching me so good and healthful a
doctrine: and for recompense of such a benefit, bethink your self, wherein I
may do you the like service.

Answer. God youchsafe to give you his grace, that you may be perseuerant in
this good purpose. Pray also to God for me, that I may do the same, and that by
this means, we may obtain to see one another in heaven, in the society and
company of all the Saints, where we may enjoy God for all Eternity. Amen.

A brief declaration touching Contrition, wherein be proposed the reasons, that
ought to move every Christian earnestly to seek to make acts of Contrition, and
to repent himself of his sins, at least twice a day, in the morning, and at
night.
THE first reason is, seeing the fear of God is the beginning of true
Wisdom, therefore the first effect that it works in a man, is to reconcile
himself to God, which is performed by Co^trition. And so it is very fit, that
this should be the first, and principal care and thought, that every one ought
every day to have.

The second reason is, for that all other devotions, though they be good, holy,
and commendable, yet needs must they be founded upon Contrition; for as much as
without it they serve not the turn before God, for the saving of our souls;
whiles on the contrary, Contrition alone is enough without them, when we cannot
have them. Wherefore every one ought to a coustome himself more to the virtue of
Contrition, then to any other, seeing it imports so much, and is so necessary.

The third is, for that other devotions are by an imprudency sometimes
recommended overmuch, in such sort as the simple may be deceived, being
persuaded that that is enough for them, and that they have gained all, when
they exercise themselves in such devotions. Whence it comes that they take
not any care about the reforming of their manners, and amending their life. And
on the contrary, this devotion of exercising the frequent acts of Contrition
and repentance, is so profitable and necessary, as it cannot be recommended
enough. For when the soul is truly contrite, it cannot endure to entertayne
any mortal sin within it, and it must needs be, that there is an amendment
of life in him, who goes on, continuing in this exercise, to iterate the
frequent acts of Contrition, and sorrow for his sins.

The fourth is, for that, following the doctrine of some very grane and learned
Deuines, it is an opinion very likely, that at the hour of death every one is
bound by commandment, not to satisfy himself with the having of Attrition
alone, but be must further dispose himself to have true and perfect
Contrition; whence we will deduce the causes in the seventh and eight reasons.
Wherefore whosoever is not accustomed to this, whiles he is in good health, he
will find much difficuity to practice it at the time of so troublesome a
passage, that goes accompanied with so many pains, griefs, cares and
anguishes of mind. Wherefore we must, whiles we are well disposed and in good
health, encourage one another (with the help of God) every day to exercise this
art and trade, at the least twice a day, when we rise in the morning, and at
night when we go to bed: and more then that, to teach as many others, as we
(...) to exercise, and frequent the same act of Go^trition every day.

The fifth is, for that as we are not one, moment assured of our lives, and it
is an article of faith, that none can be faued, who has bommitted but one
mortal sin, of a cast he has not true Contrition and Repentance, with
purpose to go to Confession at the time, that binds; for this nothing is more
necessary to assure us of the state of our soul in this behalf, then to
exercise this act of Contrition often, and every moment, if it were possible.

The (...) is, for that though following the common doctrine of Deuines, a than
a^^ried before confession, be comes doctrine by means of the sard Sacrament
of Confession; yet all have not ever this time and commodity of coming to
cofession. And more then that, it often happens, that who^ the penitent comes
to confession, he has not only no contrition at all, but also no true
attrition necessary; or not (following the doctrine aforesaid) is enough with
the Sacrament of attrite, to make him dontrite. Wherefore every one sees well,
how necessary it is for him to endeavor every day to make the seruent acts of
Contrition. For peraduen ture even with all this diligence there will be found
many, who shall have great difficuity to arrive to true Aitrition, and to that
which is necessary with the Sacrament.

The seventh is, for that, though this common doctrine (that faith that the
Sacrament makes him who is but attrite, to become contrite) be more then
propable, and speaking morally, certain also; yet it is not an article of
faith. And therefore in a busynes or so great consequence, as is our Salvation,
a man must not content himself with this certitude, but he must secure his
own souls good with the help of God, as much as he can possibly, and that is,
by doing an act of true and perfect contrition, by means whereof, and with
purpose to confess, as has been said, this is a thing so certain, as an
article of faith that he shall be saved.

The eight is, for that though God our Savior has a particular and paternall
providence in behalf of his holy Sacraments (and especially for those that be
altogether necessary) to the end there should not ordinarily be any default of
the part of him who administreth them, which would be to the exceeding great
prejudice of him who should receive them: yet it cannot be denied, but that
somtymes there happen some defaults, and then the true contrition of the sinner
supplyeth all the faults that happened, without any fault of his own in the
Sacrament, which faults could not be sufficiently supplied by any other thing,
without Contrition.

Thenin this, that, as it is gathered by what has been said, there is nothing
found in the world, that can (Contrition excepted) make us certain of our
salvation: and on the contrary, (when all other things sailed (so it should be
without our fault) it alone with a purpose and intention to go to confession at
the time required, assures us sufficiently of everlasting bliss. And by this
it manifestly appears, that a man is not to have any thing more in
recommendation, then this contrition. And as it is the office of preachers, and
of ghostly fathers, if we believe the Apostle, to reconcile souls to God; it
is not to be doubted, but that their greatest care ought to be to endeavor,
that we ever have in mind true and perfect contrition, considering that by it
we be immediately, and instantly reconciled to God.

The tenth is, for that seeing God does the will of them who fear him; and
that for the love of ten just persons alone he had a will to pardon the
Sodomits and Gomorrheans: certain it is, that in teaching us all this so holy
and healthful doctrine, and so acceptable unto good, and in exercising us in
it, his divine Majesty will withdraw his revenging hand, and the scourges which
he threatens us for our sins, and will fill us with all the benedictions,
that can possibly be desired, both temporal and spiritual.

The eleauenth is, for that to amend the life, to root out the vices, to
subdue the body and bring it into subjection by mortificatio^ and penance, to
go on forward in the exercise of virtue, to suffer aduersityes both patiently
and cheerfully; frankly and with a noble mind to forgive the iniuryes done us,
to increase day by day in the love of God and our neighbor, and in the
knowledge that we owe unto God in regard of his benefits, and to profit in the
practice of the works of mercy, and to persevere till the end in the exercise
of al sorts of good works: to come to all this there is not to be found a spur
more sharp, or a more vehement incitation, then a spirit and mind lively,
fervent, and continued with true and perfect contrition, which spirit and grace
a man comes to get by little and little, by accustoming himself to the
exercising these acts of Contrition. And we also see on the contrary side, that
many of them who seem to have profited well, come after some years spent in
the exercise of virtue, to fall so miserably, as is every day to be seen: which
for the most part proceeds of nothing, but that by little and little by their
negligence they lose this spirit of Contrition and fear of God, and
contradicting and doing against the counsel of the holy Ghost, they will not
fear and trouble themselves for their sins already pardoned them. And
therefore every one shall do exceeding well, to exercise, and every day often to
renew and reiterate this spirit, and these acts of true Contrition.

An short and profitable Examen of the Conscience, to be made thrice a day,
Morning, Noone and Night.
IN the morning, Every one must know the principal vice whereunto he is most of
all inclined; seeing that, that is it, which makes sorest war upon him, and
most of all troubles him. Having found it out, he must first give God thanks
for having preserved him that night from evil, and mishap, and then he must,
upon his knees exercise an act of contrition, which done he shall make in
particular this purpose, or the like, I desire, o Lord, and I steadfastly
purpose, and crave thy grace, that I may spend all my life in thy service, and
that I would rather dye a thousand times, then offend thee in anything, and
above all, in this sin whereunto I am most of all propense, and inclined.

At noone, he must be upon his guard, and have a care to execute and perform
what he proposed and purposed in the morning, and he must renew that his
purpose as often as he possibly may. For example, when he hears the clock,
at the beginning of any work or action, when he goes out of the house, or
when he is tempted, or in danger to be tempted And in this later case, besides
the renewing of his good purpose, he must arm himself with the sign of the
Cross, or with the name of Jesus and Maria, saying also some prayer, wherein he
finds most devotion. To be short he must strive and fight against the
tentation until he go away with a glorious victory. If you fall sometimes of
frailty, be not over much afflicted or grieved for it, neither be you the more
negligent therefore, but seek instantly to rise again, and to stand upon your
feet, crave pradon of God, knock your self upon your breast, or lay your hand
upon it, saying. O my Lord, what evil have I done? pardon me for it, by the
merits and price of thy most precious Blood, I am sorry from my heart, that I
have oftended thee, for that thou art my God, and goodness it self. O that I
had died a thousand deaths, then done that I have done. Give my the grace to
confess my sins, and that I may never offend thee any more. Every time that
a man falls, he must do this, as I have said, and that in very good earnest,
and with a most hearty affection; and he must continue the same cogitation and
care, that he had, and proposed to himself in the morning, and greater if it
may be, with an intent in all things not to offend the divine Goodness. And
though all his care, and study ought to be not to fall into any sin; yet if
it happen that he should fall, he must not be negligent therefore, but he must
endeavor estsoons to rise again, as he would do, if he should often fall into
some mire, where he would take heed and be sure not to lie, but would soon get
himself out of it, and would go to wash himself clean from all the dirt.
Holy men advise, that he keep some sign, or secret mark about him, that may
serve to note the number of times that he fall^th into the sin whereunto he is
most inclined, and how often he overcomes it; and this for that in his Examen
at night, he may the more ea^^ly give an account to his Soul of all that which
happened the day before.

At night, before he goes to bed, he must fall upon his knees, if he can
kneel, if not, with the greatest reverence that he can use, and must examen
his conscience in manner following, how he has carried himself the day past.

First he shall say thus: Lord, I give thee thanks for all the benefits, that I
have this day received, for my life, soul, body, temporal goods, and for all
other the favors, that thou have done me till this present: and I give thee
thanks in particular for this short time, that is so precious, that thou give
me for the making of this my short Examen. Secondly, he shall say: O my Lord,
give me light, that I may know my faults, and grant me grace and force to
overcome them. Thirdly, he shall call to remembrance, and mark how often he
has fallen, or how often he has overcome the principal vices, whereunto he
is most inclyned. After that he shall pass over all the hours of the day,
reflecting upon the sins he has committed against God, his neighbor, and
himself, in thoughts, words, works, omissions, diligently searching and
finding out the occasions and dangers, that shall have caused him to fall.
In the fourth place, he shall acknowledge with most great humility his own
poverty, insufficiency, and malice, and with confounded countenance and eyes
looking down, he shall say: O my Lord, I am ashamed of the little service I
have done thee, and of the many faults I have committed against thee, besides
those, which either by my own negligence, or ignorance, I know not: yet I most
affectuously and most humbly thank thee for this, that thou have preserved me
from an infinite number of other greater sins and transgressions, wher-into I
had fallen, if thy Majesty had not held thy hand over me.

In the fifth place, he shall knock himself upon the breast, and with very
great sorrow and repentance he shall ask pardon, and make a firm purpose to
amend for the time to come, and to leave, and shun all the occasions and
dangers of sin, doing in a most earnest and hearty manner some act of
Contrition, saying, as is put down before, O my Lord Jesus Christ etc.

Three very importa^t Instructions.
THE first is, because this Examen is a most rich treasure, every one must be
very diligent to practice it, and well understand how it is to be practiced,
and after put it in execution. He must further demand grace often of our Lord,
and light for the well doing of it.

The second is, that he have not any impediment, or business, though never so
great, that may hinder him from making of this examen. And if it should happen,
that he should go to bed without making of it, he must make it as soon as he
should awake by night.

The third is, that every Saturday he exact an account of his soul of the
whole week past, and in the end of the month, of the whole month that went
before, and at the end of the year, of the whole year also.

A TABLE Of the Contents of all contained in the former Treatises.
In the Treatise of Mental Prayer.
WHAT Meditation is: and what parts it conteyneth. Chap. 1. page 1. Of the
general circumstances which may be considered in the mysteries of Christ our
Savior. Chap. 2. page 11. Of the affects which may be exercised in Meditation
of the mysteries of Christ our Lord. Chap. 3. page 50.. 1. Of the affect of
Compassion. page 52.. 2. Of the affect of Contrition. page 56.. 3. Of the
affect of Thanksgiving. page 62.. 4. Of the affect of Admiration. page 68..
5. Of the Affect of spiritual Joy. page 74.. 6. Of the affect of Hope. page
82.. 7. Of the affect of the Love of God. page 84.. 8. Of the affect of
Imitation of Christ. page 90.. 9. That the acts of Virtue must not only be
exercised in general, but in particular. page 96. A brief Repetition and
Declaration of all that is abouesaid. Chap. 4. page 102.. 1. A Sum of the
general circumstances, which may be considered in the mysteries of Christ our
Lord. page 103. 2. A Repetition or sum of the Affects, which must be
exercised in the meditation of the mysteries of Christ our Lord. page 110. The
form and manner, How to exercise the foresaid Affectes, and acts of Virtue in
other Meditations. Chap. 5. page 118.. 1. In the Consideration of Sins, these
affectes and virtues following may be exercised. page 119.. 2. In the
consideration of Death may be exercised these Affects following. page 126.. 3.
In the consideration of the Judgment, these Affectes may be exercised. page
130.. 4. In the consideration of the pains of Hell, these Affects may be
exercised. page 134.. 5. In the consideration of Glory, these Affects may be
exercised. page 142.. 6. In the consideration of the divine benefits these
Affects may be exercised. page 148. Of the Rosary of our B. Lady. p. 157. A
Declaration of the manner which must be kept in saying the Rosary; applying it
to the aforesaid Mysteries. page 189. A Sum of the mysteries of the Rosary,
applied for the days of the week, for every day Five. page 193
In the Treatise of Exhortation to Spiritual Profit.
THE Preface. page 199. How much that man is acceptable to God, who is diligent
to go forwards in his Divine Service. Chap. 1. page 200. Of the testimonies by
which God does declare, how much it pleases him that we be careful to go
forwards in his holy service. Chap. 2. page 220. How much they do import, and
help the Church, who do serve God and profit in virtue. Chap. 3. page 237. How
necessary and profitable it is, to every one that serves God, to go forward in
his service: And of the gifts and benefits, that he does impart to those that
so go forward. Chap. 4. page 255. How expedient and necessary it is to go
forward in Gods service, thereby to be delivered from the perils and domages
that ensue of retchlessenes. Chap. 5. page 268. How the care of going always
forward in virtue, is convenient for all the servants of God; not only for
those that begin, but also for those that have profited much, and are perfect.
Chap. 6. page 281. How necessary and profitable that doctrine is, which
teaches and persuades to go forwards in good life once begone, and to profit
in the same. Chap. 7. page 304. Of the fru^t which those, who begin to serve
God, must reap of the doctrine that teaches the going forward in virtue, and
the perfection thereof. Cap. 8. page 314.
In the Key of Paradise.
A Dialogue concerning Contrition and Attrition. page 327. An act of
Contrition. page 342. A brief declaration touching Contrition, wherein be
proposed the reasons, that ought to move every Christian earnestly to seek to
make acts of Contrition, and to repent himself of his sins, at least twice a
day, in the morning, and at night. page 346. A short and profitable Examen of
the Conscience, to be made thrice a day, Morning, Noone, and Night. page 357.
Three very important Instructions. page 364.
FINIS.

