A TREATISE OF THE HOLY SACRIFICE OF THE MASS, And Excellencies thereof.

Written in Spanish by the R. F. Ant. de Molina, a Carthusian Monk, and
translated into English by I. R. of the Society of JESUS.

With Order, how to be present at the said Holy Mystery, with Devotion and
Profit.

IHS

Permissu Superiorum. M.DC.XXIII.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE AND MOST VIRTUOUS Gentlewoman, Mrs. MARY PETRE etc.
THE CONstant report of your Devotion to the most holy Mystery of the Mass,
has emboldened me to present unto your Service, this Infant of a Spanish
Descent, clad in English Attire, to attend upon you in your Chapel at such
public or private Solemnities. Not doubting but that he shall receive such
Entertainment at your devout Hands, as his Educatio^ deserves; and especially
at this Time, when so happy a Union, and firm Friendship is now most happily
concluded, between two so mighty Kingdoms, by so Fortunate and Hopeful a
Marriage. Whereto, if I should add my commendacions of his worth, I might thereby
rather do him Wrong then Honor; knowing his Tallents, and other good parts to
be such, as may beseem his Service; though perhaps not so familiarly
acquainted with the fashions of your English Court, as is required: yet because
I know your Disposition to be Noble, and your Mind greatly addicted to Piety
and Devotion, and also that the Present cannot be but acceptable; I do in the
best manner I can, commend him to your Honorable Custody and Protection, and
my self to your virtuous Prayers, resting

Your assured Servant in Christ Jesus. I. VV.

THE TABLE Of the Contents of the Ensuing Book.
CHAP. I. THat in the Catholic Church there is a true and proper Sacrifice,
which is that of the Holy Mass. page 1. CHAP. II. That the name of Mass was
given unto this sacrifice by the Apostles, ever used in the Church: And the
signification thereof. page 18 CHAP. III. That the Mass is an Embassage unto
the most holy Trinity, in the behalf of humane kind, about the most important
affairs in the World. page 32 CHAP. IIII. That the Mass is a lively
representation of the Mysteries of our Savior, which are renewed and
mystically performed again therein. page 49 CHAP. V. That the Mass is a true
and proper Sacrifice, the same, and of the same value, as that which Christ
offered on the Cross. p. 76 CHAP. VI. That the Sacrifice of the Mass, has
all the titles and reasons for which sacrifices are offered unto God. page 100
CHAP. VII. That the Mass is a most perfect Holocauste. page 113 CHAP. VIII.
That the Mass is a most perfect Sacrifice of Thanksgiving. page 123 CHAP. IX.
That the Mass is a most perfect Sacrifice of Propitiation for sins. page 129
CHAP. X. That the Mass is a most efficacious Sacrifice to obtain whatsoever
we demand. page 139 CHAP. XI. That the Mass is the thing most Venerable which
is in the Church. page 152 CHAP. XII. That the Mass, is a thing of greatest
honor unto God. p. 167 CHAP. XIII. That the Mass, is a Present most grateful
unto our Saviors Humanity, and unto the most Blessed Virgin. page 187 CHAP.
XIIII. The external Reverence and Worship, to be used in the holy Mass. page
206 CHAP. XV. Of the Reverence, due unto Churches, and holy Places. p. 233
CHAP. XVI. Of being present, and hearing the Holy Office of Mass, which has
always been in most high esteem, and publickely celebrated every where, both
among the Syrians, the Grecians, and the Latins, ever since the time of the
Apostles. page 259
Approbatio.
HVNC pium Tractatum in Anglicanum Sermonem ex Hispanico versum, magnam
legentibus Consolatione^ afferre posse, iudico.

Io. Floydus Soc. Jesus Theol.

A TREATISE OF THE Holy Sacrifice of the Mass, and the excellencyes thereof.
That in the Catholic Church, where is a true and proper Sacrifice, which is
that of the Holy Mass. CHAP. I.
IN the first place we must lay for foundation, That in the Christian Church,
there is some special and proper Sacrifice to be offered unto God; which is a
truth, so certain and so clear, that no doubt can be made thereof, but by men
impertinent and without judgment, whereof the Heretics of our time may seem
destitute.

For amongst diverse absurdities unto which through rashness and pertinacity they
are fallen, this is one: That there is no true and proper Sacrifice in the
Christian Church. Wherein they stand not only against the venerable antiquity of
the Fathers and Doctors of the Church, against the definitions of the sacred
Councils, against the manifest testimonies of the Scriptures, which can be
understood in no other sense; but also against the very light of reason.

For it is a thing necessary and essential to every well ordered Commonwealth
to be furnished with Sacrifices whereby to honor God, Plato Dialog. 8. de
legibus. Arist. l. 8. Ae^ 1. c 9. Cice. de natura Deoru^.
as even heathen Philosophers acknowledge, Plato, Aristotle, Xenophon, and
others. Neither was there ever in the world any Commonwealth, howsoever rude
and barbarous, that had not some kind of Sacrifice for the worship of God, or
of that thing which they were persuaded to be God. How then can any man with
reason imagine, that Christ our Lord, has left his Church which is the most
perfect of all Co^mo^-wealths, imperfect and defectuous in a matter so much
importing and essential? Specially the Doctrine of S. Thomas received by the
consent of Deuines, S. Tho. 22 q. 88.^.1.
being most true, that men are bound to offer sacrifice unto God eue^ by the
law of Nature, why shoud our Savior leave no means to his faithful how to
comply with this Law? Seeing also according to true Theology, Grace destroys
not nature, but adds perfection thereunto.

And seeing these three things Law, Priesthood, Sacrifice, are so joined and
combined together, that change or innouatio^ being made in any one of them,
the same must needs redou^d to both the other, as the Apostle proves
effectually, writing unto the Hebrews, That the Priesthood being translated,
the translation of the Law must also needs be consequent thereupon; Heb. 10.
It is clear that Christ our Savior as he changed the old Law into another,
new and better, the ancient Priesthood into another new and more perfect: so
likewise in the same measure and proportion, he ordained another Sacrifice to
succeed the elder, by so much more excellent then those were, by how much the
new Law surpasses the old.

It being also a thing so certain that in the Law of the Gospel there be
Priests, that even Heretics cannot deny it, (though they understand the same
amiss, and pervert the meaning thereof:) certain also it is there must be a
Sacrifice which these Priests are to offer, otherwise what need or use should
there be of Priests? The like argument is drawn from the Altar, which to be
found in the Christian Church is a thing most certain, being affirmed by S.
Paul, by the third Canon of the Apostles, and uniformly by all the Saints: it
is most undoubted that there is a sacrifice to be offered on this Altar,
because for this end is the Altar built, Altar and Sacrifice being
correlatiues.

Wherefore the error of unfortunate Heretics, is in this particular so
strange, and so contrary to the light of reason, that it could have entered but
into minds, before through malice obstinate, and through infidelity blinded, who
from errors run into error still greater and more foul. But heerin they are
Ministers of the Devil, who by their mediation endeavors to do the holy
Church all the mischief he is able; and the cursed Caytiffe knows the
greatest mischief he can do, is to drive away or hinder the most holy
sacrifice of the Altar, as de facto he has driven away and exiled the same,
out of towns and countries wherein prevail these errors and pestilentiall
doctrines.

Wherein also they declare themselves Percursors of the most wicked Antichrist,
concerning whom the Saints of God commonly affirm, that the first and
principal thing he shall attempt to the detrime^t of the Church, is with most
extreme rigor to inhibite the exercise of the most holy sacrifice of the
Altar.

Iren. l. 5 c. 25. Hilar. Auct. imper. in Matt. ^4. Hieron. Beda. Dan. ^.
Thus many Fathers and grave Authors understand that which Daniel says in his
prophecy, That in the thousand two hundred and ninety days, that is, in the
three years and half, that Antichrists reign shall continue, the continual
sacrifice shall be taken away from the Church; and he shall cause his image to
be placed in the Temple, that himself alone may be adored as God: the text
says: Dan. 12
He shall take away the continual Sacrifice, and destroy the place of
sanctification: and strength against the continual sacrifice is given him, in
regard of sins.

This drift which the Devil shall then prosecute by the means of Antichrist he
now endeauours to settle by the help of these Heretics, who by procuring to
take from the Catholic Church the most holy Sacrifice, bring therewith
innumerable and inestimable mischiefs: and would have the Christian people,
which has received more of God, and greater benefits, to be more ungrateful
unto their God, then any other Nation in the world. This the holy and venerable
Abbot Petrus Cluniacensis, living in the same age with S. Bernard, well noted,
and signified in these words: They that attempt to take from the Church of
Christ the sacrifice, by the Devils suggestions, do their best, that that
nation which has been graced of God with more singular benefits and favors,
should be less thankful to him, and yield him less worship and honor.

But I will leave these Heretics, as men without discretion and common sense
to themselves, my purpose not being to dispute this controversy with them, but
only to give a warning unto the faithful of their errors and impertine^cies.
Al Catholic Christians are to believe, as a most sure and infallible
principle, that in the Catholic Church there is a proper, true, and most
excellent sacrifice, which is offered unto the eternal Father by the hands of
Priests, as being Minister of Christ Jesus, the high Priest and sovereign
Bishop. For this has ever been the belief of the holy Church since the time of
the Apostles, this the doctrine perpetually delivered by the holy Fathers, this
the faith determined and established in the sacred Councels, and last of all in
the holy Council of Trent, in these words: Sess* 22. c. 1. and Can. 1.
Whosoever shall say, that in the mass is not offered a true and proper
sacrifice unto God, or that the sacrifice is no other then the giving of Christ
to be eaten, let him be accursed.

The holy Mass then is the only, and most holy Sacrifice of the new Testament,
instituted by Christ our Lord, not when he did offer himself on the cross,
(though then he offered a Sacrifice, but that was a bloody sacrifice, consumed
with pain and wounds, and the conuulsions of death, in which manner only, he
would offer it that time) but in his last supper when he consecrated his
precious body and blood under the forms and accidents of bread and wine. For
then he not only gave it unto his Disciples, as a sacramental food, for the
sustenance of their souls, but also offered the same unto his eternal Father
as an unbloody sacrifice, and made them Priests, with faculty to offer in the
like manner, granted unto them and unto their successors unto the worlds end,
saying: Do this in remembrance of me, that is, the same thing that I do, you
likewise do in my name and memory. Wherefore two doctrines as most firm and
Catholic truth are settled by the premises; the one, that in the Christian
Church there is a true and proper Sacrifice, the other that this sacrifice is
offered only in the Mass, of the excellencies whereof we now are to treat.

That the Mass was given unto this Sacrifice by the Apostles, ever used in the
Church: And the signification thereof. CHAP. II.
HERETICS not only deny, and would take from the Church the most holy
Sacrifice of the Mass, but also cannot endure the very word and name of Mass:
and so they have declared to affirm with sacrilegious mouth, that the Mass
is the invention of the Pope and his followers. The most impious Martin Luther
Captain of these wicked sectaries, has written a book with this title, De
abroganda Missa. The title is like the book, and the book like the Author,
and the whole like the matter handled therein, De Missa priuata tom. 9. Ger. fol
28.
wherein he does acknowledge that by conference had with the Devil appearing to
him, he was persuaded to abrogate the best thing, the most sacred and venerable
that is in the Church. And though neither my drift, nor the aim of this
Treatise be to dispute with Heretics, which thing grave writers of this age
have fitly performed: yet for the confirmation of Catholics, as also for
confusion of Heretics who stick not to utter whatsoever they can imagine to
be disgraceful to the Church, without care whether they speak true or false,
I think it reason briefly to set down the truth of this matter.

It is therefore to be known, that not only the Sacrifice of the Mass was
instituted by our Savior in his last supper, but also the name of Mass was
given unto it, by the Apostles themselves, and from that time has ever been
used by the holy Church. The first that said Mass after our Saviors
Ascension, is thought to have been S. James the you^ger, termed Brother of our
Lord. For though S. Peter were superior and head of all, as being the
sovereign Bishop, yet he would yield that honor unto this glorious S. James,
because he was Bishop of Jerusalem, which was the first Church in the world:
and it is thought, this Church to have been the sacred Cenacle where Christ kept
his last supper, and where afterward the holy Ghost came down upon the
Disciples. In this Mass did the holy Apostles and Disciples communicate, and
the most sacred Virgin, then first received in the most holy Sacrament, her
glorious and immortal Son, whom before she had received and apparelled with
flesh in her immaculate womb. This Blessed Apostle did ordain a certain
form of service or saying Mass, and gave it the title of Mass, as Baronius a
most learned and exact Hystorian affirms and proves.

Of this Liturgy or Mass, composed by S. James, mention is made in the sixth
general Synod, in 32. Canon thereof, and by S. Proclus Bishop of
Constantinople. The same title of Mass is used by S. Cyrill Bishop also of
Jerusalem, Catec. mystag. 5.
who received and amplified the Office or Liturgy left by his predecessor the
Apostle S. James. Clem. Epist. ^
S. Clement Pope and Martyr disciple of S. Peter, in one of his Epistles
commandes that Clergymen and Priests do nothing but with the Bishops leave;
in particular, let them not say Mass without his consent: and again, It is
not lawful to sacrifice or celebrate Mass, but in the places which their
proper Bishop shall appoint. Abdias Bishop of Babylon ordained by the Apostles,
(who does affirm of himself, to have seen our Lord Jesus Christ in flesh) in
his history of the Apostles, says of S. Matthew that he was martyred by the
Altar, having celebrated the Mysteries of our Lord, and said the Mass of the
Church.

S. Alexander Pope and Martyr, the sixth after S. Peter, Alex. Epist. 1 4.
says, that with the solemnities of the Mass, the Passion of our Lord is to
be mingled, so to celebrate his Passion, Epist. ad omnes xpi^fideles.
S. whose body and blood is consecrated. Telesphorus also Pope and Martyr, in
his Epistle unto the faithful ordaynes that in the Mass, the Angelical Hymn
be said, and that three Masses be solemnized in the night of the Nativity of
our Lord. All this was appointed in the primitive Church within the first
hundred years, and afterward the holy Fathers and Doctors of the Church, ^e
Bellarm l. 1. de Missa c. 1.
as S. Cyprian, Ambrose, Gregory, Leo, and many sacred Councels have used the
said word.

This supposed, let us now declare the signification of this name derived by
successiue tradition from the Apostles, which may give light toward the
understanding of the Excellencyes of the Mass: concerning which, laying a side
some significations of less credit, I will only prosecute two that are most
followed by grave and learned Authors.

The first makes the word Missa to be latin, derived of the word Mitto, which
signifies to send, because in the holy Sacrifice of Mass the eternal Father
sends us his only begotten Son that we may offer him in sacrifice. As in the
beginning he sent him to become man, and to offer him for men on the Cross, so
now he sends him, that under the sacrame^tall forms, he may offer himself an
unbloody sacrifice: and also the holy Church retournes him, and sends him unto
his eternal Father offering him in Sacrifice unto him, as S. Thomas signifyes
saying, ^ p.q. ^3. a. 4. ^d 9.
That the sacrifice is termed Missa, because the people by the Priest, the
Priest by the Angel sends prayers unto God.

The second explication makes the word Missa to be derived of the hebrew word
Missach, which signifies, a voluntary oblation, as appears by the 16. Chapter
of Deuteronomy v. 10. where our translation having Spontaneous Oblation; the
Hebrew word corresponding thereunto is Missach. This explication, or Aetymology
is also of great credit approved by grave Authors, amongst whom Cardinal
Baronius says, Baron. an Ch^. 34.
that he does not doubt but the Blessed Apostles took this name of the Hebrew,
and the Latin Church receiving it of them has still co^serued the same. And
seeing the Apostles and their Disciples even before Mass was said in latin,
used the word Missa, as has been proved, it is very probable, that Missa is an
Hebrew word signifying a voluntary offering made unto God, in gratitude for his
benefits, and specially for that of the freeing his people from the servitude
of Egypt.

For this signification does very properly agree to our most holy Sacrifice of
the Mass, in which is offered unto the eternal Father, his only-begotten
Son, who voluntarily, and of self-accord offered himself, as Esaias testifies,
he was offered because he would: and our Savior to his enemies that were
solicitous to lay plots how to bereave him of life: Isa. 53. ^ 7. ^oa. 10. ^.
17. and ^.
I give my soul, and take the same again, no man is able to take it from me,
but I of my self give it. For I have power to give it, and power to take it
again. On men's behalf likewise the oblation is voluntary, because with free
and liberal heart they offer unto God that most holy Sacrifice, in thanks
giving for all the benefits received from his bountiful hand, and singularly
for the benefit of man's redemption, which this Sacrifice does represent: Either
of these explications or etymologies, is probable, and of authority, and from
each of them, doctrines and co^sideratio^s may be drawn, of great importance
to make the Excellency of the sacrifice of the Mass understood, as we shall
now declare.

That the Mass is an Embassage unto the most holy Trinity, in the behalf of
humane kind, about the most important affairs in the World. CHAP. III.
THE Mass contaynes in it so many, so high, so Divine, so Sovereign
mysteries, that one definition is not sufficient to declare the same, nor to
make manifest the notion thereof. Wherefore to explicate what the Mass is, we
shall use the way used in declaring things that are immense, and embrace
within themselves a kind of infinity, which are declared by many and different
descriptions; because many put together may discover what one only by it self
were not able to do. Let this the^ be the first description gathered from the
first Etymology of the word Missa, to wit, that the Mass is an Embassadge sent
by mankind unto the most holy Trinity, that is, unto the true and living God.
By mediation of the Priest, that in the name of all, he treat the affairs of
most weight and moment that ever were or can be treated of in the world, as now
we shall declare

First the Mass to be an Embassadge sent unto the most B. Trinity is clear,
because to God only sacrifice is to be offered, and not to any creature, no not
unto the most holy virgin Mary, the most Excellent of all creatures. So the
Priest when he begins to offer says, suscipe Sa^cta Trinitas hanc
oblationem, accept o holy Trinity this Oblation: which in the Cano^ he repeats
again, To thee they offer their vows and prayers, the true eternal living God.
That this embassage to be sent by mankind, or by the whole Catholic Church,
the Priest himself signifies, saying in the Canon, This oblation of our
service and of thy whole family. It is termed the offering or sacrifice of our
service, that is, of us Priests and Ministers of the Altar, who are peculiarly
your servants dedicated unto your divine worship and service, and we offer this
sacrifice in acknowledgment of the service and subjection we owe you. And it is
not only our offering, that as consecrated Ministers offer it, but of your
whole family, that is, of the whole Catholic Church, and all your faithful
who by our hands and ministry offer, and in whose name we make this oblation
unto you.

The same the Priest repeates again straight upon consecration saying,
wherefore being mindful, we thy servants and thy holy people. We Priests that
are peculiarly thy servants and ministers, and thy Christian people all joining
together do offer this holy sacrifice. This also the sacred Council of Trent
declares, defining all Masses though private and not said in public, are and
ought to be estemeed common, because the Priest, as public Minister offers
them not for himself only, but generally for all the faithful that belong unto
the mystical body of Christ. In sum, is it the most certain and universal
doctrine of the holy Fathers and Deuines, that the Mass is said in name of the
whole Catholic Church, and of the whole Christian people; not only the
faithful that live yet in the world, but also the deceased that are detayned
in purgatory, because they have their proper part of fruit in the Mass, being
in so great necessity thereof; all which the company of the faithful both
living and departed send the Priest as Ambassador to deal their affairs with
God.

Yea which is a thing to be pondered, the Priest goes this Embassadge in name
not only of the faithful that are in the Militant Church, but besides of the
Saints that now rest in the triumphant, because also to them reaches part of
the fruit of the Mass. For though they have no need to satisfye for their
sins, from which they are already perfectly cleansed, nor to demand favors
for themselves, being in the blisfull possession of whatsoever they can desire:
yet the Mass auayles them unto accide^tall glory, and helps them to give
thanks unto God for the Benefits he has bestowed and still bestows upon
them; which thing is to them occasion of very special content, because they
still acknowledge themselves charged toward God with an infinite debt of
gratitude, and that they can never fully and perfectly discharge themselves
thereof. This is that, which the Church signifyes in the service of the Mass,
saying that she offers the Sacrifice, to the glory of the most holy Virgin
Mary, and the Blessed Apostles, that the same may avail unto the honor of
them, and all saints. So that by the Mass honor and accidental glory comes
to all the Saints, and a special joy which they conceive in regard of the
glory that is therein given unto God, and of the thanks so effectually
presented unto him.

The affairs in like manner which the Priest treates in this Embassadge, are
of highest importance, as any either be, or can be in the world. For the
business treated is the acknowledgment of subjection and vassallage, which all
creatures owe to their Creator, and of the Majesty and Dominion which the same
Lord has over all: and in acknowledgme^t heerof to pay him the great tribute,
and present him with a gift of inestimable price: to give him thanks for
benefits that from him they receive, to obtain pardon of their offenses
committed against them, to request great graces and favors and relief of all
necessities, and finally to crave aid and assistance to attain unto glory and
blessedness everlasting: which things without any contradction or question, are
the greatest that are possible.

Hence we may gather and ought much to consider, the great authority of a
Priest being at the Altar, how great a personage he bears, being as it were
the Sollicitour general of al human kind, and (as S. Crysostome says) like a
common Father of the whole world; Chrysostom. hom. 6. super. 1. Tim. 2.
and so it is his duty to have care of all, as God has whose vicegerent he is:
or as the same Father says in another place, Hom. 5. in c. 6. Esa.
as a mediator betwixt God and humane Nature, bringing from thence benefit
unto us, and conueying from hence our prayers thither. S. Hierome affirms,
that for this respect the Priest is termed, The Angel of our Lord, because he
is the messenger or Ambassador, Hieron super c. 1. Malach
that carries men's negotiations unto God, and bringes back again answers
from God unto men. S. Laurence Justinian confirms the same, auerring, Sermon. de
xpi^ corpor.
that the Priest in the celebration of the Mass, has the office of mediator,
and therefore ought to be intercessour for all sinners. Which office of
Ambassador S. Paul attributes to himself and other Priests saying; 2. Cor.
5.20.
pro Christo legatione fu^gimur, we are the Legates or Ambassadors in the name
and place of Christ. For Christ is the principal Ambassador, chosen to be the
intercessour and mediator of all mankind, to obtain them pardon of all their
offenses, and all other benefits they have need of, which office Priests now
exercise in his name.

And the Fathers note, that for this reason that the Priest of the old
Testament who was a figure of the Priesthood of the new, in his sacerdotall
garment did carry pictured the whole world, as the holy Ghost does clearly
signify in the book of Wisdom. Sap 18.24.
Because as S. Hierome, and others note, by the color, matter and fashion of
the Priestly garment were signified the four Elements, of which this inferior
world does consist, as also the celestial Globes, the stars and planets,
even unto the Caelum Empireu^, which is the Court and Hall where the Blessed
assist. By the leaf of Gold, which he wore on his forhead, wherein was ingraue^
the ineffable name of God, was represented the Lord himself and Creator of
all, who as Monarche, stands and rules over the whole Hierarchy of creatures.
All this does declare the majesty of a Priest, adorned in his Sacerdotall
Robes, when he celebrates the most holy Mysteries as the messenger or
sollicitour General of all mankind: which considerations are deduced from the
first signification of the word Mass, which signifyes a message, or a thing
sent.

That the Mass is a lively representation of the Mysteries of our Savior,
which are renewed and mystically performed again therein. CHAP. IIII.
LET this be another definition of the Mass. The Mass is a lively and perfect
representatio^ of the Mysteries of Christ Jesus our Lord his Incarnation,
Nativity, and most holy life, his Passion, Death, glorious Resurrection and
admirable Ascension into Heaven. Al which is done with so much truth, life,
propriety and perfection, that Christ Jesus himself really is there present,
and by himself, acts his own person and part, performing by himself the most
Divine and sacred mysteries, a thing worthy of all veneration and reverence,
and of most high and attent consideration.

That this may be better understood, we must call to mind a point of most
certain Christian Theology, to wit, that Christ our Lord, is the supreme and
principal Priest, who by himself really, properly, and efficiently works the
effect of all Sacraments. Thus though the Priest say I baptize thee, yet Christ
is the person, that as principal and efficient cause, washes the soul,
cleansing it from the stayne of sins: and though the Priest in the Sacrament
of Penna^ce say I absolve thee, yet Christ is he that absolueth and releaseth
men, freeing them from the gives of sin, by the mediation and Ministry of
the Priest, and of that sacrame^tall action. This is yet more properly and
singularly true in the most sacred mystery of the Eucharist. Christ is he that
works that wonderful Transubstantiation, and conversion of bread into his
Body, and of wine into his Blood, and the Priest is no more but the instrument
and Minister that pronounces the words, in the place and name of Christ
himself. And so when the Priest saying in the Canon, He took bread into his
sacred and venerable hands, himself takes the bread into his own sinful
hands: and though he say, This is my body, and this is my blood, yet the
conversion is not made, into the body and blood of the Priest, but into the
body and blood of our Lord.

Wherefore the holy Fathers teach expressly, that he by himself works these
mysteries and offers that sacrifice, yet by the hands and ministry of the
Priest, as S. Chrysostom affirms. Hom. 83 in Mat.
These be not works of human power: He that did them in that Supper, the same
now also does them: we have the office of Ministers, but he that works,
sanctifies, changes, is Christ himself: which thing is also defined by the
Council of Trent. Trid. Sess. 22. c. 1. and 2.
And for this reason is Christ in the Psalms termed Priest for ever,
according to the order of Melchisedech. Psa. 109. v. 4.
For he should not be termed perpetual Priest according to the order of
Melchisedech, if he offered the sacrifice but only once; but he is perpetual
Priest, because he still offers the sacrifice by the ministry of Priests, and
never cease to offer, and shall not cease to offer unto the worlds end. Yea
to speak more properly, he only is the sole and principal Priest, for though
we be termed, and are verily Priests, yet we are so only as his instruments
and deputies, not his successors in Priesthood but his substitutes, who offer
in his name sacrifice, yet the principal offerent is only himself.

Hence we may understand that difficile passage of S. Paul to the Hebrews where
he says; That in the old Law, it was need there should be many Priests,
because they were mortal men, and there was a necessity that one should
succeed another, that so Priesthood might be continued: But in the new Law, we
have an eternal Priest which lives and continues for ever, and so there is no
necessity there should be more then one, as in very truth there is no more, but
only one that as principal cause, and in his own name consecrateth the
Mysteries, and offers the divine Sacrifice. And according to this the
difference is, that in the old Law, the children succeeded in the Priesthood,
unto their Fathers, not as their deputies or Ministers, but as their successors
in the Sacerdotall office, exercising the same with the self-same authority as
their Predecessors. But in the Evangelical, Christ only is the prinlicall
Priest, who still actually offers sacrifice where and when he will have the
same offered. Other Priests though they have the name and office of Priests,
yet they be not successors of Christ, nor do offer in their own name, nor by
that authority as he did use, but as his instruments and Ministers. For this
reason the Council of Trent affirms, in the prealledged place, that though
the Priest be naught and a sinner, this can not destroy nor diminish the value
and efficacy of the Sacrifice, for this dependes of, and is answerable unto the
worthynes of the principal offerent, and not of the instrument, as is made
clear by this example. If a Prince give a great alms and send it by the
hands of his servant; though the servant be naught and a sinner, and give it
with an ill will, yet the alms thereby loses nothing of his goodness and
merit, because this depe^ds of the will and virtue of him that is the
principal giver thereof, though he use another hand. In this sort we, how
wicked soever we be, cannot hinder or impair the virtue of the Sacraments,
because we are no more the^ Ministers and instruments, celebrating in the
person of Christ Jesus our Lord.

Hence it follows, that it is a great honor and privilege of the sacred
mysteries of the new Testament, that such a Priest and Bishop does consecrate
and perform them. This S. Paul pondered when he said: It was decent, that we
should have such a Priest, holy, innocent, unspotted, severed from sinners, and
higher then the heavens: for the law appoints Priests subject to infirmity, but
the Word of the Father appoints the Son for ever perfect. Oh let all
creatures bless our God for ever, that would honor and grace us, by giving us
for our Priest and Bishop, not any person less then his only begotten Son,
and making us his Ministers in working so sovereign Sacraments. But it is to
be noted, that Christ our Lord is said to be the sole High Priest and
principal Offerent of the holy mysteries, not only for the reason declared
already, because all oother Priests offer and consecrate them in his name, by
his authority, and as his Ministers: for though this cause be good and
sufficient in case there were no other, yet the more principal, excellent, and
admirable cause is, because Christ himself truly and really is present, at as
many times, and in as many mysteries, as the most sacred mysteries are
consecrated, and he concurres thereunto as principal and efficient cause, to
work and bring them to effect, by means of the Priest who is his instrument
and vicegere^t.

Hence also proceeds that the representatio^ of the mysteries of the life and
death of our Savior made in the Mass, is so lively, proper, and natural,
that many Fathers not co^te^t so say that the Mass is a representatio^ of the
mysteries of our Savior, as has been said; but exaggerate the thing further,
affirming that the said mysteries are celebrated and wrought a new. Blessed S.
Gregory in one of his Homilies says, Hom. 37 in Eua^g.
that Christ our Lord dyed once in mortal flesh, but now being raised from the
dead, and that he cannot return again to die, nor to suffer in fashion as
then he did, he will have his passion and his death renewed and repeated in the
mystery of the Mass, in which he suffers and undergoes again his Passion in
mystical manner, for our profit and perfection. In which sense S. Cyprian also
sticks not to say, the passion of our Lord is the sacrifice we offer. S.
Martial one of the seauenty-two Disciples, and S. Peter's companion, says that
what the Jews in hatred of Christ to rid him and his name out of the world did
massacre upon the Cross, the same, unto our own salvation, do we perform
upon the sanctified Altar, this being the means of giving life and chasing
away of death, commanded by our Lord himself saying, Do this in remembrance of
me.

In like sort, if we cast a right account, the whole life of our Lord Christ
Jesus from the instant of his Incarnation, until he last breathed on the
Cross, was no other thing, but as it were the saying of a Mass. In the
bowels of the most Blessed Virgin, as in a celestial Sanctuary and Divine
Sacristy, he vested himself with humane flesh, the Pontifical and sanctified
ornament, in which he was to offer his Sacrifice: and from thence girded which
fortitude, he came forth full of joy, as a giant the run the race of
redemption^ The whole time he lived in this life, was a continual preparation
of the sacrifice he was to offer, in so much as he made not a step which was
not guided to this end, as himself signified saying, I am to be bathed, and how
am I straitened until be performed, to wit, the bath of his precious Blood
wherewith he was bathed, shedding the same when he offered sacrifice on the
Cross. The seauenteen hours that his passion endured, to wit, from his prayer
in the garden when falling into mortal agonyes he was covered with sweat of
blood, until he gave up the ghost on the Cross, all this time he spent in
offering up the sacrifice. The three hours he lived fastened with nails to
the Cross, consuming away through most cruel pain, and much more through the
fire of his burning love toward man. These hours he spent in the Consumation
of that Divine Holocaust, and in the concluding of that sacred Mass, until
having taken the ablution of gall and vinager he came to say Ite missa est,
when he pronunced the words, It is consummated, and bowing down his head gave
up his spirit. These things so great and magnificent, so divine and sovereign,
are represented lively and properly, or to speak with more force and
expression, these things we celebrate, we repeat, we perform in mystical
manner, in the most sacred mystery of the Altar: and this is properly to say
Mass.

Moreover the former definition of the Mass, by all the mysteries of the life
and death of our Savior, may be made particular, and determinat by application
thereof to one only mystery in this sort. To say Mass is to celebrat really the
Supper our Lord made with his Disciples, in the night of his passion, and to
sit with him at table, and receive from his hand his sacred Body and the cupp
of his precious Blood; and this not by representation, not by figure, but
truly, really, properly, as if he were sitting with his Apostles. For the
Company of the Apostles cannot be wanting where is personally the very Master
and Lord of the Apostles consecrating his Body and Blood, and giving the same
to his Apostles with that very love and affection as he then gaue^ it: Hom. 83
in Mat.
and so S. Chrysostom had reason to say: This is the same table, the same
banquet: the Lord that there gave his Body and Blood to his Apostles, the very
same now gives it to his faithful: he that did consecrate then, consecrates
now, the same meat is given to be eaten, the same cup is given to be drunken
of.

And so we must consider, that speech of the Canon, which we use when we take
the Chalice to consecrate it, In like manner, when supper was ended, taking
also this excellent Chalice, which signifies that the Chalice we now drunk, is
the same that Christ consecrated and gave to his Apostles, not the same chalice
of silver, for that these are different, and this, be it the same or not the
same, makes not much to the purpose, but Chalice is taken for the drink
contained therein, as we commonly say, that a pot of water is drunk up not
the pot it self, but the water thereof. And this speech is used because wine
cannot be taken into our hands but in the cup, and so it could not be said,
that he took the wine into his hands in the manner as he is said to have
taken the bread; and for this reason we say he took the chalice. And because
that which is contained in our Chalice, when we take it into our hands, is a
thing of the same kind, as that was contained in the chalice our Savior took
into his, to wit wine, made of grapes of the wine, and that which is given
afterward to drink, is the self same not only in kind, but also the same in
number, to wit, the true Blood of Jesus Christ: hence it is that with reason
and truth it is said that our Savior took into his hands the selfsame
Chalice, we now use, and as he did consecrate it then, so does he consecrate
it now, and give it saying, This chalice is my Blood which is offered in
remission of all sins Wherefore seeing our LORD that keeps the feast is the
same, seeing the meat that is taken is the same, seeing the chalice of drink is
the same, finally seeing the intention and drift of supping is the same, it is
clear that the supper and banquet is the same. And so our Lord supping with
his disciples said unto them, Do this in remembrance of me: He said not,
represent this, nor do another thing like unto this, which may signify this,
but do this very same that I now do, in remembrance of me. Let him be for
ever praised by the Angels in Heaven, that left us such a memorial upon earth.

That the Mass is a true and proper Sacrifice, the same, and of the same
value, as that which Christ offered on the Cross. CHAP. V.
ANOTHER Definition of the Mass is gathered from the second Etymology or
signification of the word, which is, as has been said, a voluntary Oblation
made unto God. The Mass is a true Sacrifice offered unto God the most perfect,
the most excellent, and the most acceptable unto God that was ever offered, or
can be offered unto him. This is the proper definition, and that which does
most essentially declare, what the Mass is; all other definitions that have
been, and may be brought, being made complete and perfect by the Oblation unto
God of that most Divine Sacrifices, for the true purposes and ends thereof. And
this is the most proper office of the Priest, and for this, peculiarly and
singularly is given the order and power of Priesthood, and in his soul is
imprinted a character or spiritual mark, whereby he is designed to offer unto
God sacrifice in the Mass. For declaration whereof we are to remember, that
mankind being lost by the fall of their first Father, God out of the bowels of
his inestimable mercy resolved to repair the loss, by making men able to
offer unto God a sacrifice of such value, as might even in rigor of justice
require pardon of their sins, reconciliation with God, the bestowing of grace
and favor, as much as they should need; that so they might seem to have
deserved their pardon, as they were lost by their own fault.

This was an invention of infinite wisdom; but in all mankind, yea within the
compass of all created things, there was no possibility to offer such a
sacrifice. For, sin against God concluding within it self demerit and
malice, in manner infinite, it was requisite, that the Sacrifice for the
Redemption of sin, should be of infinite worth and value, which was not to be
found in the whole universe of creatures, much less within the bounds of only
mankind, who were all by sin enemies of God. To overcome these many
difficulties and impossibilities, Gods infinite wisdom and goodness, inclining
him from the beginning to love men, (love being the master of strange devises)
sound out a wonderful way and stratageme, so strange that the like was never
seen in the world, and even the very Seraphims were put into admiration
thereof. For in the supreme Court of the most Blessed Trinity, it is resolved,
that the Word of God and his only begotten Son should become Man, that being
made partaker of the nature of men, their losses and their restitution might
concern him as their kinsman, and brother of them all. Hence flowed an
obligation in him to be the Priest and Sollicitour general, of all huma^ kind
and their surety, taking upon him their debts, and their discharge by offering
a propitiatory sacrifice unto God. This sacrifice, being offered by a man of
the same nature as are the rest, was a true and proper sacrifice, and might be
of merit and satisfaction, specially being offered by the party indebted and
engaged, or by his age^t and surety. And on the otherside, the person offering
the sacrifice, being the true God, (for this never ceased nor could cease to
be) the sacrifice came to be of infinite value and merit, to reconcile men unto
God, and to satisfy for their sins, and to obtain whatsoever their manifold
necessityes might require.

And as the Priest was of so supreme dignity, the true and natural Son of
God, and the cause of offering sacrifice so main, and of such high importance,
it was reason also, that the Victime to be sacrificed, should also corresponde
and have proportion heereunto. This proportion was not found in any creature
existing, nor in any that could be made creatures, being inferior and without
any comparison or proportion unto the dignity of Christ the Priest. And so it
was convenient that this Priest should offer no other Oblation or victime,
besides his own human flesh, taken of man, which as being united personally
unto the Eternal Word, without any comparison, exceedes all creatures, and
being true nature of man, mortal and passible as others are, was very fit to
be offered in sacrifice, as S. Augustine observes in these words. l. 4. de
Trin. c. 14.
What Priest more just and holy then the Son of God? What could be more
conveniently offered for men, and by men, the^ flesh? and what thing more fit,
and apt to be sacrificed or immolated then mortal flesh? What thing more
clean could be given for the cleansing of sin, then the Flesh of God borne
of the Virginal womb? And what gift could be more gratefully either offered
or received, then the flesh of our sacrifice, made the body of our Priest.

This was the counsel and design of the Divine Wisdom, so much lo^ging, and
so entirely wishing the delivery of mankind. And the Son of God straight
accepted of this office and Priesthood, and took to his charge the Redemption
of men, and to offer himself in sacrifice for them. And from that instant he
offered unto his eternal Father all that which in due subsequent time he was
to perform or suffer for men: which oblation was so pleasing in the sight of
the eternal Father, that eue^ the^ straight he pardoned the sins of men, and
received them into his friendshipp, bestowing on them great benefits and
favors, all in trust, and in the virtue of that sacrifice which was to be
offered for them: a sacrifice already offered and accepted in the aforeseing
knowledge and goodness of God. And though it be a most certain truth, that all
the favors God showed unto men were showed the^ in trust, and confidence of
that sacrifice that was in the end to be offered for them, yet his Divine
Majesty was pleased to require of men for the receiving of these graces, that
themselves should still be offering pledges and pawnes, that at the time
appointed the full and sufficient price of their ramsome should be paid. This
was the cause of the sacrificing of brute beasts, and other things unto God,
which were figures and representations of this most Divine sacrifice, and a
kind of protestation, that all these favors they received upon trust and
confidence thereof.

Hence came it to pass that just and holy men by the instinct of God, even
from the beginning of the world, still offered him sacrifices, as did the
Innocent Abel of the best and fattest of his flock, Gen 4.
whose sacrifice God approved, showing his approbation thereof by a visible
sign, se^ding from heaven fire that consumed the same, In qq. Hebra.
as S. Hierome writes. Afterward the just Noe, the great continuing storm of
the universal flood being blown over, built an Altar and offered thereon a
sacrifice of the clean beasts that had been preserved in the Arc. The sacred
Text says, that God was pleased with the sweet odor of the sacrifice, and
that thereupon he promised by oath, never more to destroy the world by water,
and that in testimony thereof he would place his raynebow upon the Clouds, for
the comfort of men, and their assurance that God was still mindful of his
promise. After this again, Noe his Son the Great Priest Melchisedech offered
the mysterious sacrifice of bread and wine, as also the great Patriarch
Abraham, Noe his Nephew in the eight degree of descent from him, is read to
have made Aultars, and offered sacrifices in diverse places. So likewise did
Isaac, Jacob, the just and patient Job, and other Saints. In the law of Moses
given him imediatly of God, the greatest part thereof contaynes the ceremonies
and manners of offering sacrifices, which without question were acceptable unto
God, not in respect of what they were in themselves, but as they were figures,
and representations of that true and most excellent Sacrifice, that was to be
offered by his only begotten Son. For this reason the Law so often repeates,
that her Sacrifices were a most sweet odor unto God, certainly not for their
own natural odor which rather was strong and noisome, as proceeding from
the blood and entralls of brute beasts, but because they figured and
represe^ted the sacrifice of his only begotten Son, of whom S. Paul says,
That he loved us, Ephesians. 5.2.
and gave himself for us an oblation unto God, and a sacrifice of sweet odor.

When the time of grace was come, Gal. 4.
which S. Paul fitly terms the perfection of the Law, and Christ now had
offered that most Divine Sacrifice of the Cross, and thereon built, and
established his Church, it was not dece^t that this most perfect Religious
Commonwealth should want proper sacrifices to give honor and worship unto God.
Nor was it convenient or suitable with the dignity of the new Testament to offer
the ancient Sacrifices, seeing these were but figures of what now was put in
execution: and truth being come, the figure was to cease. Therefore Christ
Jesus our Lord the day before he offered this bloody Sacrifice upon the Altar
of the Cross, in his last supper with his Disciples, doing the office of the
true Priest, according to the order of Melchisedech, Sess. 2. c. 1.
(as the Council of Trent notes,) ordained, that perpetually in his Church
should be offered the same sacrifice he was to offer on the Cross;
notwithstanding he would not have this perpetual sacrifice bloody, nor with
those fits and accidents of death, but unbloody under the forms, and accidents
of bread and wine, yet in such manner that in substance and in essence it
should be the very same. And to the end that the defects and unworthiness of
Priests might not prejudice in any kind, or diminish the value and dignity of a
sacrifice so high and Divine, he would himselfs still remain with the office
and style of eternal Priest, really, and in truth sacrificing, by himself, as
principal Priest, other Priests being but his instruments, performing the
exterior ministry: and this is that we do, in the Mass, offer unto the
eternal Father, as Ministers of Christ, the same sacrifice his son offered
on the Cross. And in saying, We offer the same sacrifices, we say a world of
magnifice^ces, dignities and excelle^cies. For being the same, it must needs
have the same virtue, the same value, the same sufficiency, the same merit, as
it then had, and other innumerable honors worthy of much consideration.

Now that the Mass is the same sacrifice really and essentially, is a truth
most certain seeing the same victime is offered, the same Priest is the
principal offerent, the same God unto whom it is offered, and the same reason
of offering, as the Council of Trent defines, only the manner of offering
being different, Sess. 22. c. 2.
that of the Cross being bloody, and with the extremities of death, this
unbloody covered with the externalls of bread and wine, without wounds or
sores, or accidents of mortality. To this purpose pertain the words of S.
Ambrose, saying, Super Hebra. c. 10.
One and the same is our sacrifice with that Christ offered. For he is our
High Priest who offered the cleansing victime for us; the same we offer now
that was offered then. Do this (says he) in remembrance, not another
sacrifice, as did the Priests in the old Law, but the same we still offer.
Homil. 2. in 2. Tim.
And S Chrysostom, The sacred Oblation what Priest soever offers, it is still
the same with that Christ gave his Disciples: neither has this any thing less
then that had. For men do not sanctify this Victime, but Christ himself: who
consecrated that, does in like manner sanctify this: which are words of great
comfort, and worthy of the noting. And for this reason S. Paul affirms so many
times in his Epistle to the Hebrews, that we have not in the Church, and that
we have no other sacrifice, besides that which Christ offered on the Cross.
And it is the truth, that that sacrifice was most sufficient, and that we
neither need nor have any other, but the same sacrifice we daily repeat and
renew on the sacred Altar, for a continual memorial and thanksgiving as our
Lord himself ordained, to the end that the virtue of that most sufficient
sacrifice, may be in particular, with efficacity, applied to every one, as the
Council of Tre^t faith, That the wholesome virtue thereof be employed, Sess.
22. c. 1.
and applied for the remission of such sins as we daily commit.

That the sacrifice of the Mass, has all the titles and reasons for which
sacrifices are offered unto God. CHAP. VI.
THAT we may better understand the dignity and excellency of the Mass, we must
note, that besides the reason alleged, why men did aunciently offer
sacrifices unto God, to wit, to figure and represent the true and most perfect
sacrifice that was to be offered for the redemption of mankind, in which reason
the Mass without comparison, surpasses them all, as being not a mere
representation, but to the very works of our redemption mystically performed,
as has been said. Besides this reason (I say) there were many other, binding
men even by the law of Nature to offer sacrifices unto God, as they were taught
by the very instinct of the light of natural reason, as also by the special
inspiratio^ and releuation made to some just and holy men. Which reasons
gathered out of S. Thomas, 1.2. q. 102. and 2.2. q. 85.
and other grave Authors though in themselves they be many, yet they may be
reduced unto four.

The first, to acknowledge and profess the Majesty, sovereignty, and
Excellency of God, and the supreme absolute Dominion he has over all, as being
the Creator and universal Lord of all, and to pay him the tribute of honor
and veneration, due unto him for these respects: This is the highest and most
perfect reason of offering sacrifices unto God, which only regardes him,
according to that he is in himself, and for this respect is due to him all
honor and veneration, that creatures can possibly yield. And for the
satisfying of this reason was instituted peculiarly that kind of sacrifice
termed Holocauste, in which some brute beast was offered, burnt and consumed
with fire, wholly and entirely, nothing remaining thereof, to signify that
whatsoever a creature is, all is due unto God, and all to be offered for his
honor and glory.

And if God would use his uttermost rigor, and not regard men with a loving
and gracious eye, he might most justly chale^g that they should offer him in
sacrifice their very lives, or the lives of their dearest children, or other
things (if they have any) more dear and precious unto the^. For this cause he
commanded in his law, that to him should be offered all the first begotten of
man or beast, in acknowledgment that he is Lord of all, and the best and most
beloved thing is due unto him, Exodus 13 Genesis 12.
often repeating this reason thereof, Mea enim sunt omnia: For all is mine.
Thus he charged his friend Abraham to offer in holocaust his only Son, whom
he loved as his own soul, yet being satisfied with the promptitude of his
obedience, and readiness to offer even his own life, if had God made request
thereof, he procured him a Ram, to be offered in liew of his Son. And with
his people, he was contented with that complement and ceremony of offering
their first begotten Sons, with protestation that they were Gods and due unto
him, and his Majesty took possession of them and received them as his own,
but straight restored them back again to their parents, never permitting that
in effect any huma^ person should be sacrificed unto him. Only God gave his
consent, that in his only begotten Son, this rigor should be used of being
offered in sacrifice, because he alone did suffice for all, as being the first
begotten of all creatures. On the other side, the Devil, as being proud and
ambitious of Divine worshipp, and a cruel enemy of mankind, required of people,
deceived and brought under his tyranny, that they should adore him by
sacrificing and massacring their sons and daughters unto him, as also they
did in effect sacrifice a great multitude of Innocent Infants unto their Idols,
according to that of the Prophet David They did immolate their sons and
daughters unto the Devils and spilt innocent blood.

The second reason or title, that men should offer Sacrifice unto God, is, to
give them thanks for the favors he does them, and to acknowledge that all good
things come from him, and in gratitude and in place of tribute, to give him
some part of these goods, as Solomon, What from thy hand we received, we have
offered unto thee, and this kind of sacrifice is termed pacificall and
sacrifice of praise, and of thanksgiving. In this sacrifice though the beast
were wholly offered unto God, yet all was not burnt, but only the fatt and
entralls, and the remaynder was for the food of the Priest, and of the
Officers, to signify hereby, that the goods which GOD gives us, he will have us
offer them up to him, referring all to his glory, with a good heart and inward
content; and that the rest be for us, and for our profit.

The third reason is satissatisfactio^ for sins, which is called propitiatory
Sacrifice, or sacrifice for sin, or for offenses. This kind of sacrifices
were very ordinary in the old Law, where are set down peculiar sacrifices for
every sin, which are ordained, and recorded at large in the book of
Leuiticus.

The fourth title and reason of offering Sacrifice is, to request, and obtain
of God the favors and benefits we stand in need off. For eue^ God is of this
disposition, that with him gifts and offerings are of great importance and
force to purchase us the graces, for which we are supplia^ts unto him. And this
sacrifice is termed Impetratory, or Victime of salvation.

Now if all this that has been said, be well considered, and put by meditation
together, it will most evidently appear, that this most holy Sacrifice we
offer in the new Testament, has incomparable dignityes, and unspeakable
eminencies above all the Sacrifices that auncie^tly were offered. For in this
only sacrifice, with great advantage and excellencies, concur the former
four reasons and tytles, and innumerable other that may be called to mind, as
the holy Church judges and signifies in one of her collects or Oraisons
saying: O Lord that by the perfection of one Sacrifice have fully established
and set down unto us all the differences of the legal Victimes. And so we
shall more largely and perfectly declare how fully the four aforementioned
reasons agree unto our Sacrifices.

That the Mass is a most perfect Holocauste. CHAP. VII.
AS concerning the first title, of acknowledging the Majesty and greatness of
God, what Holocauste, to profess and signifye the same, could there be offered
more full and complete the^ this, wherein is sacrificed the first begotten of
all creatures, whose life alone, is of more esteem without comparison then all
the creatures joined together. And so by this sacrifice we protest, and
acknowledge the Majesty, magnificence, and dignity of our God to be so great,
that no less is due unto him then a sacrifice of infinite worthynes and value.
The Prophet Isaias, did much exaggerate and magnify the Majesty of God, in
saying, that all the Nations of the world are before him as a dropp of morning
dew, and as the smalest grain of weight, put into the balance, to
counterpoise the contrary scale; yea that before him they are as if they were
not. And that so great is his worthynes, as that to offer a sacrifice
answerable unto his greatness, all the flocks of sheep and heardes of cattle
that feed on the Mount Libanus would not be sufficient to make such an
Holocaust, nor all the trees that grow thereon able to make fire great enough
to consume the same, Esa. 40
Libanus non sufficient ad succendendum, and animalia eius non sufficient ad
Holocaustum. The Prophet said much, yet without falsehood he might have said
more, that the whole world and what soever is comprehended therein, would not
be sufficient for this end; though all men should offer their lives in
sacrifice, though with me^ the Angels of Heaven should enter into the
Sacrifice, though all creatures joining together should consume themselves in
one Holocaust; yet this would not be condign, yea this would be much short of
Gods greatness and Majesty.

Wherefore we may herein ever admire the wisdom, goodness, and power of Christ
Jesus shining in this mystery, that could devise, was able to effect, willing
to give, and indeed has given unto his Church such a sacrifice, as has not
only a conformity or proportion, but also equality with Gods greatness and
Majesty: so that with truth we may affirm that we offer a sacrifice as good,
and as excellent as even infinite Excellency deserves. And this is also another
dignity, this Sacrifice has, to magnify God, because therein we make a most
high protestation of his infinite power, wisdom and goodness, the three more
principal Divine attributes unto which the rest are reduced. Gods power and
supreme Lordship over all creatures we profess, in this Sacrifice, by
believing that all, without contradiction, obey his word and will, and that he
may at his pleasure dispose of all both in Heaven and in earth; seeing at the
only signification of his will, the substance of bread, is changed into the
body of Christ, and the substance of wine into his precious Blood, the
accidents which naturally are still in some substance, and have an essential
relation thereunto, remain by themselves single, without any substance wherein
they inhere, as if themselves were substance. The body likewise of our Savior,
exalted unto the Empyreall Heaven, above all creatures, garnished round about
with immense glory puts it self, (by the power of Gods word commanded) under
the accidents of bread to be eaten of the faithful.

The Divine Wisdom likewise wonderfully showed it self, in inuenting a most
full and convenient way, how to compass things most difficile, and in the
judgment both of men and Angels impossible. This invention is, that the whole
offspring of me^ being in sin, and enemies of God, a man of this stock, should
be found to offer unto God a sacrifice so grateful and acceptable, that even
in rigor of justice the same deserves: the redemption of man together yieldes
unto God the whole worship and reverence that is due to him with great
advantage and excess, repayring the losses incurred by sin, so many reasons
of profit and conueniency concurring therein, that they can neither be declared,
nor imagined.

Now it seems that the goodness of God cannot present unto men greater
demonstrations of it self. For the nature of goodness being to communicate it
self, who can imagine, a more full communication, or a more strait union then
this is, where God made man under the forms of bread and wine, gives himself
to be eaten of all men, and of every one in particular shutting up himself
within their breasts, united unto them as perfectly and inwardly, as meat is
conjoined with the person that feeds thereon.

So that we may now well conclude, that the Mass is a most perfect holocaust,
and that therein in highest manner we acknowledge our Creatours most sovereign
infinite Majesty, with the rest of his Divine excellencyes, and yield him the
honor and worship that is his due.

That the Mass is a most perfect Sacrifice of Thanksgiving. CHAP. VIII.
AS touching the second reason of sacrificing, to wit, thereby to give thanks
unto God for his benefits done us, it is apparent with what eminency thanks
are given unto God by this our most holy Sacrifice, above all other that have
been at any time offered in the world. For in other sacrifices, howsoever great
and precious the oblatio^s were, yet me^ did not offer all that they had, but
only a small portion, reserving the far greater part for themselves: as Jacob
said in his Vow unto God, I will offer thee the tithes, or the tenth part of
all the things that thou shall give me. What great thing is it, that a man,
unto him that gives all, return back again the tenth part thereof by way of
gratitude, retayning nine parts for himself? wherefore this kind of gratitude,
is more esteemed by the inward affection of tha^kesgiuing, in toke^ whereof the
Sacrifice is offered, the^ by the value and sufficiency of the gift. But in our
most Divine Sacrifice we offer a thing, of far greater price, the^ is all
that which he has given us, because we offer him his very Son, whom also he
gave us that we might offer him, and by this oblation repay whatsoever we owe
him, seeing he does no less discharge the debt that pays it by that which is
freely given him, then he who pays it out of his own stock.

And if respect be had unto the inward affection, it is certain, that the
gratitude of all creatures put together is less then the benefits they
received of God; to supply which defect we offer the affection and the
gratitude of our Lord Jesus Christ. For he knowing our insufficie^cy in this
behalf, himself gave thanks unto his Father for all the benefits done us,
and particularly for the gracious gift of this most soueragne Sacrament, when
he took the bread into his hands to consecrate the same, he did as the
Evangelists write, lift up his eyes unto heaven and gave thanks unto his
Father, hereby preventing and by anticipation, making recompense for the want
and default of our gratitude. And as often as we celebrate, we repeat this
action of our Savior, and when we take the bread into our hands we say of
him, He took the bread, lifting up his eyes unto Heaven, and giving thanks,
as if we said unto the Eternal Father, that if we be not sufficient to give
him worthy thanks for this soueragne mystery, that he remember his Son our
Lord, who rendered unto him most perfect thanks, in the name of us all; and
that he receive these thanks of his Son, to supply the defect of ours, who
for this reason offer him this sacrifice, because it contaynes all that is due
to him: and for this cause it is called Eucharist, or Sacrifice of the
Eucharist, that is to say, of thanksgiving.

That the Mass is a most perfect Sacrifice of Propitiation for sin. CHAP. IX.
AS concerning the third Title of Satisfaction for sin, the difference is
perspicuous betwixt the ancient Sacrifices and this, because they were not
sufficient to satisfy for one only sin, as the Apostle Saint Paul many times
affirms, specially in his Epistle to the Hebrews, where he says, that it is
impossible that by the blood of bulls or goats sin should be abolished. And
in the same Chapter he writes to the same effect, Every Priest is occupied in
offering again and again the same Victimes or Sacrifices; but this Priest
(Christ Jesus) having offered one Sacrifice sits for ever at the right-ha^d of
God. For this respect the same Apostle calls them many times weak
sacrifices, impotent and defectuous, Infirma and egena elementa. And not only
this is so, but also all creatures put together are not able of themselves to
satisfy for one only sin: whereas our great High Priest Christ Jesus, by one
only Sacrifice satisfied for all the sins of the world, and of a thousand
worlds were there so many: and this satisfaction is not only sufficient, but
also abundant, not only equivalent and equal, but also obtaying pardon even in
rigor of justice as is the most common true Doctrine of the Theologers: for
(as S. Paul says) Vna oblatione consummauit in aeternum sanctificatos, by one
Oblation he consummated for ever the sanctification of men; which most
sufficient, and superabundant satisfaction, he applies efficaciously unto us,
as often as we do offer the most holy Sacrifice of the Mass. This is the
reason that the most holy Council of Trent defines, that this sacrifice is
truly propitiatory: because God by this Oblatio^ appeased, by granting the
grace and gift of Penance, pardons main and heinous crimes. Hence it is, that
a most grave and Devout Author affirms, that a man having committed many and
most grievous sins, by one only Mass, which he should say, with the
convenient disposition, if there be no default on his part, might be as
perfectly freed from them all, by virtue of the sacrifice, as he was before he
sinned: so that he might straight enter into Heaven without any impediment. And
herein he vtters a most certain Truth, because the virtue and efficacy of the
Sacrifice, as for within it self, has no limitation nor any measure, but that
which the meannesse of man's disposition gives unto it.

Wherefore the holy Counsel of Trent says absolutely, and without restraint,
that by the virtue of this Divine Sacrifice, all our sins are pardoned how
heinous soever. In the form of consecration Christ likewise says, and we
repeat the same daily in his name, That this is the Blood of the new
Testament, which was shed and offered for the remission and pardon of sins: and
Pope Julius, Decret. d. 2. c. Cum omne.
as Gratian relates, says: Omne crimen atque peccatum oblatis Deo sacrificijs
deletur, that every sin and crime is cancelled by the oblation of Sacrifice
unto God. Greg. 4. Dial. c. 5.^.
S. Gregory in his Dialogues writes in this manner: This Victime, does
singularly save the soul from eternal destruction, which mystically
represents unto us the death of Gods only begotten Son. And in another place
the same holy Doctor reports of a man that was captive in the hands of his
enemies lode^ with fetters and yrons, whose wife hearing no news of him, and
therefore believing him to be departed this life, caused every week upon a
certain day Mass to be said for him. And as often as the Sacrifice of the
Mass was offered on that day, the fetters and yrons fell off from him, and he
remained free for them, to his great admiration, he not knowing the cause of so
great a wonder, until retourning into his Country, and relating this strange
thing, he found by conferring together the days and hours, that it was the
very time that Mass was said for him. Hence the holy Doctor inferres, what
great force and efficacy is in this most Divine Sacrifice, to release men from
the spiritual fetters of sin, wherein was so great strength to undo and break
the chains of the body. The ancient forms of Mass deliver the same truth:
that of S. James, speaking with GOD, thus prays, that the sins we have
committed may be abolished; that thou, o Lord, be propitious and merciful unto
thy people; that by the Oblation of this gracious and Divine Sacrifice, we may
be held worthy of eternal life. The Mass of S. Basil says: Let this
Sacrifice be acceptable for our sins, and for the ignorances of the people.
S. Chrysostomes: Make us worthy to offer the gifts, and this special Sacrifice
for our sins, and grant that we may find favor in thy sight. And now in the
Canon of the Mass we say, that we offer this Sacrifice, for the Redemption of
our Souls.

That the Mass is a most efficacious Sacrifice to obtain whatsoever we
demand. CHAP. X.
AS concerning the fourth title, and reason of offering Sacrifices, to the end
to obtain of God, that which we demand, it is clear, that our Sacrifice does
far excel all other. For if the offering unto God of a lamb, or kidd, or
some other brute creature, was so efficacious a means, to obtain the thing
desired, and therefore such kind of Sacrifices were ordinarily offered; how
much greater efficacy is there in the offering unto him, his very Son with the
whole treasure of his merits? Without doubt this is greater beyond co^pariso^.
If God made such promises unto Abraham, confirmed by Oath to do favors unto
him, and to all his posterity, only in regard of the will he had to sacrifice
his Son; what benefits, and graces will he bestow on the^ that offer and
sacrifice unto him, really and truly, his only begotten Son? what favors
will he not grant? what can one ask with such a present that he will not give?
with reason we may here use the words of the Apostle Saint Paul: He that
spared not his only Son, but gave him for us all, how can it be, that he has
not given us all together with him? Or how can he deny us any thing that we
can ask?

If the Laws both human and Divine, so strictly prohibit unto Judges, and
Princes (whose office is to govern the affairs of the Commo^-wealth, and to
pronounce sentence in cases of difference) to receive gifts or presents,
because receiving them they remain even in nature obliged to requite them, and
to gratify such as gave them, so that it seems impossible that they should not
favor them; why may we not presume that God is in a certain manner bound to
do us favors, having received of us a gift so great and precious as we offer
him in the Mass? And if the Proverb, that Gifts break rocks, be true, as
experience shows it is, there being no heart so hard, which presents do not
make relent and yield unto the giver; how can we think that God having an
heart, not of stone, nor hard, but most sweet loving, merciful, and inclined to
do us favors, will forbear to do us any thing we shall request, having taken
of us such a rich gift as we present him in our sacrifice? Certain it is, that
the holy Sacrifice of the Mass is a most efficacious means to obtain of God,
all that we desire, so that the Church did ever use to say Masses, to ask of
God Health, Peace prosperity, and other benefits general, and particular, as
well corporal as spiritual, neither need I stay longer in proving so clear
and received a truth.

Wherefore I will only here set down a most prudent and pious consideration of
a grave and learned Divine of our age, most true, and conformable both unto
Theology and holy scripture. This is, that Christ our Lord now in Heaven though
he be not in the state to merit or satisfy for us a new, yet he is in a state
where he may pray and make intercession for me^, as in verity he does, Suare 8*
Tom. 3. in 3. p. Disp. 79. sect. 2.
according as the Apostle does witness, that he does plead for us, Romans ^
Hebr. 6.
and at the judgment seat of God is our sollicitour, and as S. John says, 1.
Ioa. 2.
We have an Advocate unto God the Father, Christ Jesus the Just. Hereupon this
learned Author says, that it is a thing very credible and likely, that Christ
our Lord, as often as the Sacrifice of the Mass is offered, does intercede and
pray for them that offer it, and also for the^ for whom it is offered. A
consideration most true: For seeing it is most certain, that Christ our Lord
does actually and in truth exercise the office of our Priest and Advocate,
seeing also that the proper office of Priest is to pray and intercede for the
people, we may rest in this persuasion without any doubt, that our Lord being
in all his actions most perfect, will completly perform this office, not only
by offering the Sacrifice particularly for them, for whom it is offered,
whereof there is no question, but also by praying and interceding actually for
the^, that they may obtain what they request and desire, if the same agree
with their Salvation, and Gods glory.

And it may seem that the Apostle S. Paul, in his Epistle to the Hebrews, does
signify, or insinuate this truth, where treating of the Eternal Priesthood of
Christ, he says, That he can save for ever them, that by him have access unto
God, who lives ever to intercede and plead for us: and thereupon he straight
adds, It was convenient that we should have such an High Priest. Heb. 7.
Where he seems to conioyne praying and interceding for us, with the office of
Priesthood, signifying that to discharge that duty perfectly it is necessary
that he pray, and intercede for them that are under his charge, and more
particularly for them for whom he offers his Sacrifice: which thing is no
ways inconvenient in Christ, but very agreeing with reason, as the Venerable
Father Dionysius Carthusianus notes in his declaration of this speech of the
Apostle, Qui etiam interpellat pro nobis. Which also is the Doctrine of that
great Saint Laure^ce Patriarch, who wrytes thus in a certain Sermon. When
Christ is sacrificed upon the Altar, our said Redeemer cries for us unto his
Father, showing the sacred marks of his Wounds, to save men from eternal
punishments by his intercession.

This being so (as I do firmly believe it is) what a sovereign and excellent
thing, and full of reverence and veneration is the holy Sacrifice of the Mass?
If we do highly esteem that some Saints in Heaven pray particularly and
actually for us, or some person living upon earth whom we know to be virtuous
and in singular favor with God; how much more ought we to prize the only Son
of God his praying and intercession for us unto his eternal Father? Out of all
which it is sufficiently proved, that this one Sacrifice of the new Testament
contaynes in it, most excelle^tly, and with great excess all the perfection,
sanctity, and efficacy of all the Sacrifices of the old, as the same afornamed
Saint does elega^tly and briefly set down in these words. It is clear that no
Sacrifice can be offered more acceptable unto God, either to give him honor,
or to render him thanks, or to obtain pardon, or to deserve glory, then the
most holy Sacrifice of the Body, and Blood of Christ.

The Mass is the thing most Venerable, that is in the Church. CHAP. XI.
OVT of that which has been said we may conclude, that the Mass is a thing of
greater reverence, gravity and sanctity then any other in the Catholic
Church, there being nothing either equal or comparable to it. So that neither
the Benediction of the Agnus Dei, which the Pope does with so great solemnity,
nor the Consecration of a Bishop, which with so many grave, and solemn
ceremonies is performed, all which of necessity three Bishops are to present,
besides him that is consecrated; nor the Dedicatio^ of a Church, nor any other
thing, done with the greatest and solemnest Rites, none of these things are
comparable for Reverence, Gravity and Sanctity with the Mass. This is the
reason that the Saints adorn this Sacrifice with so many choice and exquisite
Epiphets and terms, calling it a Mystery, Dreadful, Terrible, Divine,
Deificall, Sacro-saynt, full of Divinity, Honorable, Supreme, Singular, and
other such Names, that every where occur in the writings of the Holy Fathers.
Out of whom omitting many very excellent things which they say of the dignity
of the Mass, I will only set down two or three short sentences, which to me
seem most notable.

S. Chrysostom writes, that being present at Mass, we must not imagine we are
upon earth, but that we are carried up into Heaven, and that we are seated
amongst the Quires of Angels, and Seraphims. His words are these. Chry. l. 3.
de Sacerd.
When thou do behold our Lord sacrificed, the Priest performing his office
therein, and the people bedewed, and as it were grained and purpled with his
precious Blood, do not think that thou art amongst men, nor that thou do
abide upon earth, but rather that thou art transtated into Heaven: and so
casting away all carnal imaginations and earthly thoughts, with a pure mind
contemplate the things of that Celestial Court. Oh Miracle! Oh Benignity of
God! who sitting aloft with the Father, at the same time is taken into the
hands of men, and gives himself unto such as will receive him. To the same
purpose S. Gregory writes in this sort. What Christian can doubt but that in
the time of Consecration, the Heavens open at the voice of the Priest; and at
this very Mystery of Christ Jesus, the Quires of Angels assist; Earth is
conjoined with Heaven; this wale of tears with the palace of Bliss; and that
visible and invisible things meet together in one. A wonderful, dreadful,
and venerable thing, that at the voice of a Priest the Heavens should open,
that the glorious Court should come down unto earth, that with the Faithful of
the Militant Church, though poor and sinful, the Triumphant Church should
join, the King of glory and his Courtiers desce^ding, so that of Heaven and
earth is made one Company and Church. What thing of greater veneration or more
strange, then that when the Priest is at the Altar, many millions of Angels
kneel with great reverence about the same, adoring the most holy Sacrifice,
and the hands of the Priest that holds it; acknowledging his dignity in this
regard to be greater then theirs, seeing to none of them such power and
authority was ever given; praising our Lord, giving him the thanks, which we
through our grosnes do not render unto him; and supplying other defects which
we in this duty commit. Oh holy Angels, how often am I ashamed, and do I blush
to consider that you are present, seeing you shall be at the day of Judgment
witnesses of our ingratitude and rudenes, that God having placed us in so high
a state of honor, we do neither know it, nor esteem it, nor exercise it with
the decency and reverence that is due.

In fine, that quires of Angels assist at the time that Mass is said, is a
most settled and received doctrine of the Saints, namely of S. Ambrose in his
Books written of the dignity of Priesthood. And S. Chrysostom. deposes to have
heard the same of venerable and holy men, to whom God granted the favor to
see this, even with corporal eyes. S. Cyrill in the life of S. Euthimius
relates of him, that at the time when he said Mass, he saw Angels assisting
about the Altar, some ministering unto the Priest, some prostrate adoring the
Sacrament, and all showing great reverence. And the Apostle S. Paul may seem
to insinuate this thing making a comparison and difference between the
Mysteries of the old Testament, and these of the new, and between the Majesty
wherewith God descended to give the Law on the Mount Sina, and that Majesty
wherewith now he comes down upon the holy Altar in an invisible manner, he
says thus. You are come not unto a Mountain, that is felt with the hands,
nor unto a fire which is seen with the eyes, nor unto storms and mystes,
tempests and the sound of trumpets, but you are come to the Mount Sion, and the
City of the living God, and the Heavenly Jerusalem, and unto the company of
many thousand Angels, and unto the Mediator of the new Testament Jesus, and
the sprinkling of his Blood, speaking in better manner then that of Abel. 4.
Reg. 4.
And without doubt if God should open our eyes, as he did unto the servant of
Elizeus, we might there behold celestial Armies, and we should learn the
veneration and reverence wherewith they assist unto their King and Lord, and
perceive how much they are offended at our irreuerence and rudenes.

And to conclude this point, omitting many other sayings of the Saints,
concerning the veneration and reverence due to the holy Sacrifice of the Mass,
I will only relate the words of the most devout, learned and elegant Father
Saint Laurence Patriarch of Venice, who wrytes in this manner. There is not any
oblation greater, none more profitable, none more amiable, Sermon. de Xpi^ corpore
none more gracious in the sight of the Divine Majesty, then the holy Sacrifice
of the Mass, which restores honor unto God, company unto Angels, Heaven unto
banished men, which causes the worship of Religion, the right of Justice, the
rule of Sanctity, the obedience of the Law, gives Faith unto Nations, joy unto
the World, comfort unto Belieuers, peace unto People, light unto the mind,
hope unto them that travail, the sight of God unto them that run out their
race. For by the celebration of these Divine Mysteries is renewed the memory of
the torments of our Savior, the contumelies he endured, the scourges he
received, the drafts of vinager and gall, the wounds of the nails and lance.
Christ Jesus his assumpted Humanity is offered unto the eternal Father, that
he may acknowledge whom he begot, and whom he sent into this world, and by
his Mediation grant pardon unto sinners, his hand unto the lapsed, life unto
the justified. We may well believe that at the time of this Sacrifice the
Heaven is opened, the Angels behold with admiration, the Saints singe with joy,
the Just exult, the Captives are visited, the fettered are released, Hell
mourns, and the holy Church our Mother rejoices in spirit. Hence is gathered
with what veneration the Priest ought to assist, to whom the office and
authority is given, to consecrate this Sacrifice, and to intercede and pray for
the whole world, who therefore ought to be a lover of Gods honor, religious
toward himself, humble of heart, and full of compassion toward the sins of
his Neighbors. Words worthy of the great spirit of this Saint, and sufficient
to comfort and inflame him that reads them, and to make him conceive great
respect and reverence toward the most holy Mystery of the Mass.

That the Mass, is a thing of greatest honor unto God. CHAP. XII.
SVCH is the Excellency of the MASS, that the greatest worshipp of Religion
and Divine honor is contained therein, and the most grateful unto God, and
that gives him most content of all things that are done, or can be don in the
world. Which is auerred by the same most holy Patriarch in these words. Verily
by no Sacrifice is God more praised and honored then by this immaculate Victime
of the Altar, which, to the end that complete worship and perfect praise might
be given unto God, Christ did institute in his Church, wherein the mysteries
and passages of his holy Passion are mystically renewed, so that nothing can be
more acceptable unto God. The truth of this saying is perspicuous by that which
we have showed before, that in the Mass is offered unto the eternal Father
the Sacrifice of his only begotten Son, with the whole treasure of his
merits, which without question is a thing of more value and dignity then were a
Sacrifice consisting of all creatures put together, and by this only Sacrifice
more honor and worship is given unto God, then if all creatures were offered
unto him at once, and a greater protestation of the eminency and Sovereignty of
the Divine Nature, seeing hereby we acknowledge him worthy of a Sacrifice, of
infinite perfection, value, and dignity.

And not only this Divine Sacrifice is more grateful and acceptable, then any
other, but also, to speak with more propriety, nothing is, nor has ever been
pleasing unto him but in virtue of this Sacrifice, which is signified by the
speech of the eternal Father in the Baptism and transfiguration of his Son,
Matthew. 3. and 17
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, as if he had said, He
only pleases me for himself, and all other please me for his sake, and for
his merits, and for as much as they be like unto him, and not in other sort, as
the Apostle declares in his Epistle to the Ephesians saying: Ephesians. c. 1.
He made us gracious in his beloved Son, all the grace we have of God, stowes
as from the fountain from that most abundant and copious grace wherewith his
most beloved Son is gracious in his sight. To this effect, the holy
Evangelist S. John having said, That Christ our Lord is full of grace and
truth, as the only begotten Son of the Father, adds out of hand, saying,
Out of his fulness have we all received grace for grace. Joan. ^.
From this plenitude, and height of grace which makes the Son gracious unto
the Father, is communicated unto us all the grace we have, without want of any.
Yea it is a generally received truth, that all the grace which has been given,
or shall hereafter be given, either unto men, or Angels, proceeds from the
grace of Christ; and that no creature has ever been, or shall ever be
gracious unto God, but in him and through him. And answerably hereunto, it is
very clear and certain, that nothing can be so grateful and acceptable unto
him, as this Sacrifice wherein Christ himself is offered, together with all his
merits: which truth may be yet further declared in this sort.

If the charity which me^ have had from the beginning of the world, unto this
day, or shall have hereafter until the consummation thereof, with all their
merits, and all the praise and honor which they have given unto God, be put
together; If the torments and sufferings of all the Martyrs, who with such
excessive charity and heroical fortitude, offered their lives for the honor
of God, if the pious and virtuous exercises of holy Confessors, Patriarchs,
Prophets, Monks, Anchorets, Eremits and other who by another kind of
Martyrdom, of longer continuance, and in some sort more painful and
difficult have crucified and massacred themselves with fastings, wearing of
hayrecloth, watchings, penance, and mortifications: finally if all the virtue
and perfection both of men and Angels, be laid together in one, yet all this
put together does not please God so much, as does one only Mass, said by the
poorest Priest in the world. And to proceed yet further, the charity of the
Blessed, is much more perfect and excellent, then that of the greatest Saint
that lives in the world, because it is charity proceeding from the clear and
perspicuous vision of the Divine Essence. For this respect our Savior having
extolled the sanctity of the glorious S. John Baptist so far, Mat. ^^
as to say of him amongst the Sons of women there never arose any greater,
nor more holy, he straight added, Yet the last in the Kingdom of Heaven, is
greater then he. Now this being so proceeding higher in the foresaid
consideration, I say, that though unto the merits and virtues of all Saints
that have been, or ever shall be, be added also the charity of the Blessed in
Heaven, both of men, Angels, and of the most sacred Virgin Queen of the^ all,
all these put together cannot give unto God so much honor, nor so much
praise, nor so much content as a Mass does, offered by any Priest.

And the reason hereof, has been signified before, to wit, that in all, and
every MASS, Christ our Lord is the principal Priest, who actually makes the
oblation of that Sacrifice: and the proper office and duty of Priesthood is to
give praise and honor unto God. So that Christ in every Mass is the chief
worshipper and honor of God, and to make amends for our defects, he, as the
chief and supreme Offerer, gives the thanks, the honor, praise, and worship
that is due unto him: and most certain it is, that all creatures put
together, cannot yet yield unto God so great honor, praise, and content, as
his only Son alone can do. Whence it is conseque^t that the Sacrifice of the
Mass, as well in regard of the thing offered, as also in respect of the person
that offers: incomparably exceedes all Religion, worship, and glory which may
be rendered unto God, by all the creatures, both of Heaven and earth, that thus
Priests may understand what sovereign treasures and richesse God has put into
their hands, whereby they may supply their wants, and enrich their poverty. It
is great pity to behold with what facility and carlessenes many deprive
themselves of such inestimable treasures, only because they will not take a
little pains to prepare themselves, and make pure their consciences.

This most high and noble consideration, I find to my great content, in an
Author very spiritual and contemplative of this age. And because his style
and manner of writing makes me probably judge, F. John de Angelis. Tract. 2 of
the Spiritual conflict the 13. Chap.
that he received that doctrine by special inspiration of the holy Ghost, I
will set down his very words.

Considering with my self many times, the most high Mysteries of the holy
Mass, and the office which God, out of great love has bestowed upon us, to
consecrate his most sacred Body and precious Blood, and handle the same so
familiarly, and receive the same into our bowels: I have judged, and do daily
more and more clearly and assuredly judge, that the glory and pleasure which
the eternal Father receaues, when the Priest offers unto him, his most beloved
Son, covered and enclosed within the most venerable Sacrament, is so great,
that the glory and pleasure which all the Quires of Angels, and of the rest of
the Blessed in Heaven offer him, in comparison hereof is as nothing. For the
works of creatures how noble and high soever that they be, have no proportion
with the works of the Creator: and the Priest that offers unto the Eternal
Father, and unto the whole most Blessed Trinity, the most venerable person of
the Son, in the Sacrament, offers God unto God, and consequently infinite
praise, infinite glory, infinite content, and finally all goodness that is, the
true and eternal goodness. And the Angels with the whole celestial Court, how
great soever their services are that they do unto God, how great soever the
honors and contentments they yield him, though they continue for all Eternity,
yet do they not offer God unto God, and consequently all is little or nothing
in respect of this most Divine Oblation, in the which God himself is offered.

To this Consideration, another succeedes no less excellent then this, of the
great favors that God does continually bestow upon men, and the motives men
have to love him, and to render him infinite thanks, honor, praise and
contentment. Being in this cogitation, I felt within my self a certain
internal voice, saying, that if I wished and desired this, that then no means
could be found more fit for that purpose, then to receive in the state of
Grace, and with due preparation, the most holy Sacrament of the Altar: and
after that I have received and laid hold thereof, having it within my breast
and in my power, being at is were Master and owner thereof, to give and offer
it again unto the Eternal Father; retyring my self for this end, unto some
quiet place, or recollecting my self with quiet of soul, in the place I
should find my self. This Oblation is to be made with the most inward desires
of the heart, and with most affectious acts of the will, and with all the
humility and reverence that is possible. For giving and offering unto the
Eternal Father this gift and oblatio^, infinite glory, praise, and content is
given and offered unto him in regard of the dignity thereof, which neither the
Angels of Heaven, nor all the Blessed Saints, can give unto God by any other
way.

Hitherto be the words of this Author, God of his mercy make us able to
understand them well, that we may practice accordingly.

That the Mass, is a present most grateful unto our Saviors Humanity, and
unto the most Blessed Virgin. CHAP. XIII.
ANOTHER Excellency of the MASS that is conseque^t out of what has been said,
is, that the Mass is a thing that most pleases, and gives greatest content
unto the most sacred Humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ, and whereby we do him
more service and honor, then by any other service, or services that we can do
him. This truth is clear out of the doctrine that has been set down. For the
will of our Savior being so united and conform unto the will of his Father,
he knowing that his Father by this Oblation, receaues so much honor and glory;
in like sort his Blessed Soul cannot but receive the same pleasure and
content, seeing that (as he said) even whylest he lived in this world, all his
pleasure and content was to fulfill the will of his Father. Joan. 4.


Besides which, there is another special reason of this doctrine, to wit, in
regard of the representation which is made in the Mass, of the Life, Passion,
Death, and all the Mysteries of our said Lord Jesus Christ. For declaration we
must know, that all the Blessed that are in Heaven receive great joy,
complacence, and content in all the things that pleased God, and gave him
content in this life, and herein their content is so much the greater, by how
much the things they joy in, were more grateful and acceptable in God his
presence. And this is amongst the^ so settled an affection, that any of the^ if
it were possible, would leave the glory whereof he is possessed, to do, or
suffer the same again and again many times over. The Martyrs rejoice and be
glad of their former torments and pains, the Monks and Heremits and the rest
of the Confessors of their fasts, watchings, Pennances and Mortifications: and
they would all have done and suffered more for God his honor. And seeing it is
not possible now to return into this World to suffer again, they receive new
joy and accide^tall glory, that we upon earth make Co^memoration of their
Martyrdomes labors and merits: and that we offer them unto God, and that we
give him thanks that he gave them such grace as they might do him such
excellent services.

That which to none of the Saints is granted, is granted unto the humanity of
our Blessed Savior, which being united unto the Divine Person, may have, or do
whatsoever the same will wish to have, or do. And he finding that his Passion
and Death, so pleased, and gave such joy content and glory unto his Father, he
both was able to invent, and sufficient to affect a means, whereby the same
may be renewed, and repeated over many times in such manner, as his Father at
every repetition thereof should receive no less joy, content, and honor, then
he received the first time the same was suffered and offered on the Cross:
which manner is this, that seeing he now being risen from death, and glorious in
Heaven, cannot return to suffer and die again, he has ordained the most
sacred Mystery of the Mass, wherein his Passion and Death is so lively
represented, as if he did eue^ now suffer and die again. And this is not only
represented, but also in mystical manner performed, effectuated, and repeated
the very same Sacrifice he offered on the Cross, being offered a new unto the
Eternal Father, with the same value, merit, and powerfulnes as it then had,
and as able to give him pleasure, content, glory, and honor. This we do when
we celebrate Mass, and consequently we yield unto Christ our Lord the greatest
pleasure and content, and we do him the best service, that can possibly be
given unto him, and (if we may so speak) we do him the greatest charity that
may be, and herein show ourselves to be his servants and friends more then in
doing for him all other things in the world.

And verily we should esteem this, as a great felicity and treasure, and our
selves herein most fortunate, that we have some things wherein we may do
service, and yield pleasure and content unto our most loving Lord and Master
Christ Jesus, specially a thing that we may have so good cheap, a thing so dew
unto him, who with so much pain, and at the dear rate of his precious Blood
procured the same for us, not sparing any labor, nor stying any difficulty to
make the same profitable unto us. And what is said of the most Sacred Humanity
of our Lord Jesus Christ, may be extended unto, and with a kind of proportion
understood of the most sacred Virgin his Mother, and every other Saint, that we
can do them no better service, we can give them nothing of greater content,
nothing can we more show that we are their most affection at friends, then in
offering unto God the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, in their name and honor.
For though we may not offer Sacrifice unto any Saint, no not to the most
Glorious Virgin Mother, Queen of Heaven, for this the sacred Council of Tre^t
declares to be unlawful, yet we may make commemoration of their merits, and
give thanks unto God for the benefits he bestowed on them, and for the glory
wherewith now they are made Blessed; offering also their meritts unto GOD, which
they together with us also offer unto our common Lord and Master, F. John de
Angelis. col. citato.
to supply our defects in their name, as the aforesaid most devout and
contemplative Author declares in these words.

If we be, (as it is reason we should be) desirous to give unto the most
glorious Queen of the Angels, as much honor and glory, as is due unto her, we
must coming from the Mass, or holy Communion with the like ardent charity,
humility and reverence, offer unto her most pure arms her most sweet and
loving Son, whom we have in our custody. For this Oblation she receaueth with
more content, and the same is to her of more honor and glory, the^ any
whatsoever other, that either all men or all Angels can offer unto her, if it
be not likewise the gift and oblation of God, and of her Son as this is. And
thus we may at any time so long as we have our Savior within our breast, that
is, until the Sacramental forms of bread and wine be consumed by the
natural heat of the stomach.

The like Oblation may be made unto any Saint, or unto all the Saints in the
aforesaid manner, in their honor, and the honor of God. Wherefore, it being a
thing clear, what great glory, honor, praise, and content Priests, and all
other Christians may give unto God, and unto the soueraign Virgin Empress of
Heaven, and the other Saints of the Celestial Jerusalem, by means of the most
holy Sacrament of the Altar; Let all that have notice hereof, consider what
great cause they have to spend themselves, and to do the uttermost of their
power to be continually so prepared and disposed, that no day may pass, wherein
they do not either celebrate the holy Mass, or receive the most holy
Mysteries. Whereunto besides what has been said, this consideration may
likewise encourage them, that they may assure themselves, that by the means of
this rich present, sooner then by any other, they shall obtain of the Father of
Mercyes, and of the Blessed Virgin Mary our B. Lady, and all the Saints of the
Heavenly city, whatsoever they shall demand. Which confidence may justly be
the greater in this respect that by this Oblation made in the manner aforesaid
unto the Saints, we get the^ to be our Aduocats, and Friends obliged to pray
and intercede for us. All these are the words of the aforementioned Author,
worthy, that all consider and practice the things counseled therein, and
benefit themselves by an advise so important, facile and profitable.

Other innumerable dignityes, excellencyes, and magnificencies, may be said of
the holy Mass, and are gathered of the former definitions, declarations, and
explications given thereof, which if we should particularly declare, this
Treatise would grow of too great a bigness. For example, that the Mass is of
greater glory joy, and comfort unto the Saints and Angels of Heaven, the^ any
other thing that is don, or can be don in this world. That the same is of
greater profit and vtility, to the Milita^t Church, of greater force to help
and relieve the souls in Purgatory, of greater importance and efficacy for our
spiritual progress and increase in perfection; and this with so great
excess, that if we put in one side of the balance, all that we do in the day
and night, supposing we spend them wholly in virtuous and holy Exercises, all
this together weighs not so much as a drame, in comparison of one Mass,
that we say with the due required disposition. Wherefore, though for no other
reason, yet at least in respect of our interest and profit, and to spare
greater pains and labor, and to enrich our poverty, to supply our wants out
of treasury of the merits of our Lord Jesus Christ, we ought to procure with
all diligence to dispose our selves, to celebrate, and to assist at the most
sacred Mysteries of the Mass, and to receive the most Divine Sacrament, with
all purity and perfection possible.

The external Reverence and Worship, to be used in the holy Mass. CHAP. XIIII.
HITHERTO we have set down considerations that may stir up in us inward
reverence, and devotion toward the holy Sacrifice of the Mass as well in
Priests that celebrat, as in other Christians that assist thereat. And although
where inward reverence and worship is found, there external Reverence,
Gravity, Composition, and all other decent gate will not be wanting, yet to
make this Treatise more full, it will be convenient to add something also
concerning this second kind of Reverence, the want whereof is scandalous, and
occasion to many to think less reverently of the holy Mysteries. Also the
time we live in, may seem to require, both of Priests and Laymen, that in this
external Reverence, they be most punctual and exact concerning the sacred
ceremonies, and external Rites of this Divine Oblation, because the Heretics
of our time do oppose specially against these Ceremonies, and impugn the
External Rite and Worship used by the Catholic Church in the Divine service.
Wherefore it is good reason that we, who think ourselves happy in that we are
Catholic Christians, and by Gods singular mercy, true children of the said
Catholic Church: it is good reason, I say, that we should think it part of
our honor to be opposite unto the foolish fancies of Hereretikes, as much as
may be: and by how much they more reprehend and despise the said ceremonies, by
so much we ought to be more careful and religious to perform them with the
greatest reverence and exactnes that may be.

And to understand the ground of these external Ceremonies and Rites, we are
to note, that man being compounded of two substances, to wit, soul and body,
and God being Creator and Author as well of the one as of the other, is bound
to acknowledge worship to God, and adore him not only with soul, but also with
body, for with the heart one belieues unto Justice, and with the mouth he
confesses his faith unto salvation. So that it is not enough to believe with
our hearts, but also we must make profession thereof with our mouth, and so
religion binds us not only to worship God internally with our soul, but also
to yield unto him external reverence and honor with our bodies. Thus we see
that from the very first beginning of the world just and godly me^, began to
honor God with external ceremonies, bending their knees, lifting up their
hands, casting up their eyes unto Heaven, Romans 10. Genesis 4.
building Aultars, and offering Sacrifices, as did the Just and Innocent Abel,
which practice went still continuing and increasing in all just men and
Religious toward God, as does appear by diverse Hystories of holy Writ.
Profane Hystory likewise shows, that the Gentills in their impious worship of
Idols, used sundry and diverse crremonies. For the Devil, who was adored by
the^ in those Idols, as he still perseuered in his first pride, and sottish
envy, seeking to usurp to himself the honor and adoration due unto God,
knowing that external Reverence is a sign and a character of the interior,
and in this respect most due unto the true God; required of his deceived
adorants, and ordained that they should adore him, and sacrifice unto him with
great variety of external Reuerences, Rites, and Ceremonies. And in the holy
Scripture we read, that those most unfortunate Priests of Baal, did invoke
him with Sacrifices, and with clamors, bending their knees, prostrating
themselves on the ground, and being barbarous and inhumane, like to the Devil
they served, with knifes did lance themselves till they were all embrued in
blood.

The difference which in this point has been according to the variety of lives
and states, is that in the first state called, The Law of Nature, as God had
not given them any written form of Religion, or Law, there was no set order of
these kind of Ceremonies, but every one followed the internal instinct and
inspiration of God, who taught them in what manner he would be honored and
worshipped by them. But afterward when God gave unto his people a written Law,
a most principal part thereof pertayned unto the ceremonies, and diverse sorts
and fashions of Worship to be by them used, in their offering Sacrifices;
praying, and other duetyes belonging to the Divine service. Also there were
appointed diverse kinds of Ministers for the more full accomplishment of these
things, some being Priests, some Leuits, some Singers, some Porters, some
Exorcists, and diverse other kinds, every one having his office and Ministry
assigned him, with most strict and severe commandments, that each of them
should be most punctual and exact in his own office, without meddling with the
office of others, enacting most grievous punishment unto any that should fail,
though but in small matters: all which appears by the Books of the Law,
specially by that of Leuiticus, and Deuteronomy.

It is true that all these Precepts and ceremonial Laws are now ceased and
abrogated by the Law of the Gospel, that now is not necessary, yea now it
were a sin to observe them; but in their place other ceremonies do succeed,
better and perfecter, more proportionable and convenient, with the perfection
of the Law of Grace, which the Church governed by the ho. Ghost has
established, as received and derived by tradition from Christ and his Apostles.
For though some particular ceremonies have been altered and changed, according
to the state and conueniency of times, yet most certain it is, that some of
them were used by Christ himself in time and place, and as they were
convenient to his person. Thus we read, that sometimes he prayed on his knees,
positis genibus orabat, Luc. 22.
sometimes standing, as in the prayer he made after his last supper, sometimes
prostrate on his face, Mat. 26.
Procidit in faciem suam, sometimes lifting up his eyes unto Heaven, Joan. 17
Subleuatis Jesus oculis dixit. And when he instituted the most venerable
Sacrament, having ended the ceremonies of the old Testament, he washed the
feet of his Disciples, sat down at the Table, took bread into his hands,
cast up his eyes unto Heaven, gave thanks unto his Father, blessed the bread,
consecrated it, divided it, gave it to his Disciples, which were the ceremonies
for that time, place, and season.

After our Savior was ascended unto Heaven, the Blessed Apostles having
received the holy Ghost, began presently to use ceremonies in the Mass, and
ordained such as were to be observed, as appears by most ancient forms of
Mass by the^ composed, and by S. Clement their Disciple, and successor of S.
Peeter, and by the decrees of other Popes, and Councels very ancient, which to
avoid prolixity I omit. The Apostle S. Paul in his Epistle to those of
Corinth, 1. Cor. 14.
appoints that Women be in the Church with their heads covered, and Men with
their heads bare, as also many things concerning the order that they were to
keep, when they did meet together to receive the most Blessed Sacrament,
saying in the end, Cetera cum venero disponam, I will give order by word of
mouth, about the rest of these things when I come my self. Certain it it
that the Apostle was not to appoint the things essential unto the Sacraments,
(for these our Savior ordained, and he only could, and had power to ordain
them) but only certain ceremonies concerning the use of the Sacraments. And so
it is a most certain truth, that the ceremonies of the Church speaking of them
in general be very ancient: and many particular ceremonies come by tradition
from Christ and his Apostles, others from the chief Bishops, and Counsels.

For it was not convenient that the use of ceremonies and exterior Religious
Rites in the holy Sacrifice of Mass, should be left to the liberty of every
one, because such liberty might be occasion of many errors, ignorances, and
superstitions, but that the Church should have the appointment of them. The
ground of which exterior obseruances is found in the holy Scripture set down
by S. Paul in the first Epistle to those of Corynth the 14. Chapter, Omnia
secundum ordinem fiant in vobis, Let all things be don with order amongst you,
which shows that it is requisite that the Church should ordain and appoint
order to be kept, even about the least things that concerns this most holy
Sacrifice. For if this were left to the choice and judgment of every one, many
indiscreet and unseemly ceremonies would be used: neither ought any thing that
co^cernes so high a Mystery, be thought little, or of small esteem, as not to
be done with gravity, and decency: the direction S. Cyprian gives, being here
of special use, we ought to endeavor the pleasing of the Divine eyes, even in
the outward gate and composition of our body. And this uniformity in external
ceremonies, serves more to set forth the Majesty of the Ecclesiastical office,
shows the unity and consent of the Church, together with the care and
solicitude of her Pastors.

And if God in the old Testament, did with such rigor and severity exact the
perfect keeping of the ceremonies thereof, as appears by the words of
Deuteronomy the 7. Chap. verse 11. Keep my Precepts, Statutes, and Ceremonies,
which I this day command unto thee. And in the 8^ Chapter the 11. Verse, Take
heed thou do not forget thy Lord God, nor neglect his Commandments, Ceremonies,
and Judgments: Deuteronomy. ^. 10. v. 13 and 11. v. 1. Leuit. 5 v. 15. Ezech. 44. v.
5. and 15.
and the same Precept is in other places repeated and inculcated; If I say, God
did require so perfect and punctual observance of those ancient Rites, and
Ceremonies, that were but figures, and shadows of the mysteries of the new
Testament; how Sacred, Venerable, and worthy of observance, are these
ceremonies of the Church, which wait and attend immediately upon the most
sacred Mysteries themselves now present and effectuated? These Ceremonies were
used to the end that with due exterior decency might be performed the
sacrifice of a lamb, or calfe, or of some other brute beast, or were
exercised about the handling and honoring of the Arc of Covenant, the
bread-loues of Proposition and other such things; but our ceremonies are used
about the sacrifycing and co^secrating the most holy Body of Jesus Christ, and
his precious Blood, and to handle and worship with due and religious reverence,
the same true and living mysteries, which by those dead figures and shadows
were signified. Wherefore look what excellency truth challenges above the
figure, the body above the shadow, the prototype above the picture, the new
Testament above the old; the same excellency have the ceremonies now used above
those that then were received. And so we may and ought to reason, that that if
of those ceremonies, and the observation of them, God made so great an account,
greater account without question he makes of these, seeing they are (as has been
said) in many respects much more excellent then the other were.

We may also give a guess, at great and Divine things by consideration of
what passes human things, that in respect of them are vain vile, and
childish. It is a wonder to see Noblemen, and Knights that live in the Court,
how perfect they are in the knowledge of Ceremonies, how curious and punctual
to keep them. All is reduced unto Rules and Principles, every one knows who
is to be covered in the presence of the King, and who is to be bareheaded, the
terms of salutations and courtesies that are to be used, and many other
curiosityes; then reason it is that in them and their exact observance, we
learn what is to be done and kept in a thing of truth and importance, such as
are the ceremonies of the holy Mass. When the King drinks it is a sight to
behold the respect, the order, the leisure, the attention used, one of the
greatest Princes takes the goblet, and with a certain number of ceremonies he
makes his reverence, and kneeles whylest the Prince is drinking, with such an
humble kind of reverence that it may seem he would even put himself under the
ground. And yet what is a King compared with God? Surely, but a corruptible
worm, that has the name of King made fast unto him as it were with pins,
which yet are not so strong, but a little blast of infectious air is able to
take it from him. On the other side considering what we do, or rather what we
omit to do, through negligence, rudenes, want of careful exactnes in the
worship and service of the immortal King of all worlds and ages, who has not
imbrodered in his garments, but also written in his flancke King of Kings,
Apoc. 19.
and Lord of Lords, served by thousands and thousands, Dan. 7.
before whom ten times an hundred thousands of Angels, and Seraphims, and
Princes of glory assist, all with great reverence and most profound
humiliation, as before their Creator, and the universal and true Lord of all.
Let all these praise him for ever, seeing notwithstanding this his so great
Majesty and highness he does not disdain, to choose such poor creatures as are
men for the exercise and celebration of mysteries so sovereign and Divine.

Of the Reverence, due unto Churches and holy Places. CHAP. XV.
I will conclude this Treatise with this point of the respect and Reverence,
that is due unto Temples, Churches, and other holy places, where the holy
Sacrifice of the Mass is offered. To stire up in us this Reverend affection,
it may suffice that we open our eyes of faith and consideration, and mark that
Churches are truly and properly the houses of God. By this title they are
honored by our Lord himself, in many places of holy Scripture, and
particularly in the second Chapter of S. John, where he says, Make not the
house of my Father, an house of negotiation. And in the one and twentieth
Chapter of S. Matthew, our Savior alleges in confirmation hereof the saying
of the Prophet, Isa. 56.
My house is the house of prayer. The fact of our Savior related by both these
Evangelists in those places, is very notable, and of great consideration for
our purpose. For the modesty and mildnes of Christ JESUS, being exceeding great
and wonderful, that in all the time of his life, we do not read, that he
chastised any offense with his own hands; having seen and daily seeing so
many, and so grievous, and having had so many occasions to do it, that once
they would have cast him down headlong from a mountain, and an other time
they took stones to stone him to death, and diverse times they used unto him
rude and blasphemous words: In all these and many other like occasions, our
Savior behaved himself with very great modesty and mildnes: and toward all
sinners in general he showed this meekenes in great excess, scarce ever in
any occasion showing displeasure or indignation. Yea he did sharply rebuke at a
certain time some of his Disciples, because they asked him leave, that they
might make fire come down from Heaven, upon the Samarita^s that had been so
discourteous toward him, as not to let him have any lodging or entrance into
their City. All this being so, yet the first time that he ascended unto
Jerusalem with his Disciples, finding some that had lost all respect and
reverence toward the holiness of the Temple, buying and selling, and
negotiating in the same, though these negotiations were about things belonging
unto the Sacrifices that were therein daily and howerly offered, yet he took
such indignation and displeasure against the^, that he made a whippe of
certain cords he there found, and therewith set upon them, and drove them out
of the Temple, threw down their tables, cast their silver and moneys on the
ground, rebuked them sharply and with hard terms, in a manner calling them
thieves, saying, Make not of the house of my Father a den of thieves. This
happened not only once in the beginning of his holy Predication, but also the
second time he did the very same, toward the end of his life, the very last
time, or the last saving one that ever he entered into the Temple. By this fact
giving us to understand, what great account he makes, that all decency and
religious respect should be used toward his house, and holy Temple, because
only against the breach hereof he showed such extraordinary displeasure, and
with demonstration of anger against the prophaners of his house, he would
begin and conclude the course of his preaching. Whereupon the holy Evangelist
notes, that his Disciples reflecting upon this his fact, called to mind and
understood, that to him agreed that which is written in the Psalm sixty eight,
The zeal of the house of God, eats up my very bowels, and the disorders of
them that bear not respect unto it, fall upon me, and are an heavy and
burdensome load unto me.

Now we are to note, that our Churches are termed the house of God, not only
for the reason in regard of which the Temple of Jerusalem was so entitled,
which many times, and absolutely is termed in holy Scripture, the house of God,
because there lodged the Ark of Covenant, there God was worshipped and adored,
there Sacrifice offered unto him, there he gave audience unto men, and heard
the petitions they made unto him. Not only for these respects Christians
Churches be termed the House of God, but also upon greater reasons, in regard
of which this honorable style, does belong unto them, much more properly then
it did unto the ancient Temple, to wit, because God himself dwells in them
really and personally in the most Blessed Sacrament, in which the person of the
Word, and only begotten Son of God abides in more particular manner then in
any other part, or creature in the world. For not only there he is according
to his Divinity, in regard of which he is every where, by Essence, Presence,
and Power, but also the most sacred Humanity of our Lord Jesus Christ, the
which is seated in Heaven at the right hand of the eternal Father; this
selfe-some Humanity with the self same Glory, Majesty, and Greatness is really
and personally in the most holy Sacrament, though covered with the sacramental
forms of Bread, so that his presence is invisible, but only unto eyes
enlightened with faith, who see his words verified, This is my body, and his
promise accomplished, Behold I am with you all days, unto the consummatio^ of
the world.

This is the glory, and most singular privilege of the Christian people, to
have Jesus Christ the true GOD for their Neighbor, and a soiourner in all the
Churches of Christianity, in such sort that there is not any Catholic Town,
or Villadge, how small and contemptible soever, wherein our Lord has not his
proper and peculiar house: so that, if in a Village there be but twelve
Neighbors, he makes the thirteenth. Thus God would honor and favor the
Christian people, a thing most worthy to be esteemed and honored in far more
excellent manmer then we do honor and esteem the same. For this cause I said
in the beginning of this Chapter, that there is no need to say much of this
point, but only that we open the eyes of faith, and consider attentively, that
Temples be the house of God, and that in every one of them JESUS Christ our
Lord is really, and personally present with all his Glory and Majesty; a truth
most sure and certain, yea that also many thousa^ds of Angels accompany him,
making the Church his Court therein, yielding him perpetual praises and
continual honor. And so in the prayer of the holy Divine Office, wherewith
the last Hour and Compline is concluded, says in this manner: Visit we
beseech thee o Lord, this habitation, and let thine Angels who dwell therein,
keep us. The glorious Apostle S. Paul in Epistle to the Hebrews seems to
affirm no less where he says, Heb. 12.
You are not come to a material mountain, nor unto a fire that may be seen,
but you are come to the mountain of Syon the City of the living God, the
Heavenly Jerusalem, the resort of many thousands of Angels, the Church of the
Primitiues. If this be so, as without question it is, to the end that we bear
due respect, reverence, and veneration unto holy places, no more is needful,
but that we open our eyes, and consider the great reverence and veneration that
is due unto the Holy places, which are the true houses of God where he is
present, and has his aboade, together with his Celestial Courtyers.

And if we look into holy Scripture we shall find it a very ancient custom
of holy Men, to bear great respect unto such places where God was present, or
did manifest himself in particular manner. In Genesis is written of the
Patriarch Jacob, that flying from the house of his Father to avoid the wrath
of his Brother Esau, the first days journey he was benighted, in a forlorn
place. There falling a sleep he saw a great Ladder which did reach from Heaven
unto earth, upon the which Angels went up and down, and God stood on the top
thereof. The holy Jacob awaking out of his sleep, conceived so great reverence
unto that place, because he had seen the former vision therein, that full of
fear and astonishment he said: How dreadful is this place, verily here is
nothing else but the court of God and gate of Heaven. In testimony whereof, he
consecrated the said place as far as he could, raising up the stone that he had
laid that night under his head, anointing it with oil (which was still taken
for the sign of consecration) and leaving the same there as a toke^ that the
place was sacred, and honor and veneration due unto it, because God had therein
showed himself: and unto the City that was near unto that place called Luza,
he gave the name of Bethel, which signifyes House of God.

In Exodus, it is recorded that holy Moses leading the flock of his
Father-in-law through the most solitary and woodiest part of the Mount Horeb,
God appeared unto him in a very stra^g and meruaylous manner, to wit, in a Bush
which did burn with a great fire, but did not consume. And when Moses did
approach to see the said Miracle more distinctly nigh at hand, the Angel that
represented the person of God cried unto him: Stand still, approach no nearer
for the place where thou art is holy land. Moses hearing the voice declaring
God to be there present fell prostrate on his face, not dearing to lift up his
eyes, nor to cast them toward the place where God did abide. And from that
time ever after the Mountain was held in great veneratio^, and called the holy
Mountain, the Mountain of God, as appears by the third Book of Kings, the
ninteenth Chapter. In this respect the Apostle S. Peter calls the Mount
Thabor the holy Mountain where our Savior was transfigured, because there he
once, showed his Majesty and glory.

Now if these places, because God once appeared in them became so specially
venerable, and reverenced, how much more ought our Temples to be honored where
our Lord himself makes his mansion and his aboade, as in his ordinary
residence and palace, where he works daily so many wonders, and bestows on
men so many favors? If those holy Patriarchs worshipped with such humble
respect the place, where once or twice they saw God, or an Angel that spoke to
the^ in his name; what honor would they bear, what respect would they show to
our Churchs, had they lived in so happy an age as we live in, but through
rudenes and ingratitude, do not esteem nor acknowledge our happiness? If the
holy Patriarch Jacob conceived such dread and reverence to the place, where in
his sleep he saw a lader on which the Angels went up and down, what reverence
and dread would he conceive should he see (as we daily see with the eyes of
faith) the very Son of God to come down, and place himself in the hands of
Priests. And this not seen in sleep or in a dream, but by sight more
certain, and more infallible then any thing can be, that we see with eyes, and
feel with hands; with how far greater reason would he exclayme: Verily
dreadful is this place, verily God is in this place? And with much more truth
have said, verily this is the house of God and entrance of Heaven? If holy
Moses conceived such fear and reverence, not daring to look on the Bush out
of which an Angel spoke unto him in the name and person of God, what reverence
would he conceive, what devotion would he declare, if he should enter into our
Churches and see the most venerable Sacrament, knowing as certainly as we do*
that there God is in person being made Man for our sake, and so sweet and
courteous toward men, that he is received and eaten of them. Oh holy
Patriarchs, me thinks, that from your seats of Heavenly glory you behold us
on earth, and are ashamed to see our stupidity and rudenes, who know not how to
esteem and honor such sacred and venerable places as are our Churches, nor
how to enter into them, and stay in them with the dread and reverence, as
reason requires of us. One day you shall be our Judges, and condemn us as rude
and unmannerly, seeing we do not imitate your example in worshipping holy
places, our Temples being with great excess, more venerable and glorious then
those which you did so highly esteem and honor.

Of being present, and hearing the Holy Office of Mass, which has always been
in most high esteem, and publicly celebrated every where, both among the
Syrians, the Grecians, and the Latins, ever since the time of the Apostles.
CHAP. XVI.
A Prayer before Mass.
LORD Iesu-Christ, the pure light of hearts, and the Eternal truth, stay I
beseech thee, and collect mine euer-wandring and distracted mind, that I, may
be attentive, and with reverence present in the sight of thy infinite Majesty,
whiles this holy office of Mass is celebrated, and reap thence true fruit,
healthful to my soul and others, and especially that I may with
thanksgiving call to mind thine unspeakable charity, wherewith thou
offered'st thy self to a most cruel death for my Redemption. To thee be al
praise and thans-giuing, thou being the Priest and the Host, and our Bishop
according to the Order of Melchisedech, who have taught Priests to offer a
clean oblation, and every where to sacrifice unto the Eternal God, under the
likeness of bread and wine.

Then blessing thy self, begin with the Priest thus.
IN the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost. Amen.

I will enter unto the Altar of God; to God, who makes my youth joyful.

The 42. Psalm
IVdge me, O God, and discern my cause from the nation not holy: from the
wicked, and deceitful man deliver me.

Because thou art God my strength: why have thou repelled me? and why go I
sorrowful, whiles the ennemy afflicts me?

Send forth thy light, and thy truth: they have conducted me, and brought me
into thy holy hill, and into thy tabernacles.

And I will enter unto the Altar of God: to God, who makes my youth joyful.

I will confess to thee on the harp, O God, my God, why art thou sorrowful,
O my soul: And why do thou trouble me?

Hope in God, because yet will I confess to him: the salvation of my
countenance, and my God.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son etc. Even as it was in the beginning,
and now, and ever, and world without end. Amen.

I will enter unto the Altar of God: to God, who makes my youth joyful.

Our help is in the name of our Lord: who has made Heaven and Earth^

The General Confession.
I Confess unto Almighty God, unto the B. Virgin Mary, to B. Michael the
Archangell, to B. John Baptist, to the holy Apostles Peter, and Paul, to all
the Saints, and to you, O Father, because I have grievously sinned in thought,
word, and deed, through my fault, my fault, my most grievous fault. Therefore I
beseech the B. Virgin Mary, the B. Michael the Archangell, the B. John Baptist,
the holy Apostles Peter and Paul, all the Saints, and you, O Father, to pray to
our Lord God for me. Ame^.

Almighty God have mercy upon us, forgive us all our sins, and bring us to
life everlasting Amen.

Thou, O God, converted wilt give life unto us* and thy people shall rejoice in
thee.

Lord show unto us thy mercy: and give us thy salvation.

Lord, hear my prayer: and let my cry come unto thee.

The Prayer.
TAke from us, O Lord, we beseech thee, all our iniquities, that having heart
and mind pure and undefiled, we may deserve to enter into the Holies of Holies.
Though Christ our Lord. Amen.

Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.
Christ have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon us. Christ have mercy upon
us. Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us. Lord have mercy upon us.

Add here three times, Pater Noster etc. for thy sins committed in thought,
word, and deed, that the holy Trinity, in whose Name thou art baptized, may
pardon thee thy offenses; and that being dead to sin, thou may for the
time to come live to justice.

The Angels Hymn, Gloria in excelsis.
GLory in the highest to God, and in earth peace to men of good will: we praise
thee, we bless thee, we adore thee, we glorify thee. We give thee thanks for
thy great glory. Lord God, King of Heaven. God the Father Almighty. Lord the
only begotten Son Jesus Christ, Lord God, La^be of God, Son of the Father.
Who take away the Sins of the world, have mercy upon us. Who take away
the sins of the world receive our prayers. Who sit on the right hand of the
Father, have mercy upon us. Because thou art alone holy, thou alone our Lord,
thou alone most high, O Jesus Christ, with the holy Ghost in the glory of God
the Father. Amen.

S. Augustines brief Confession, touching the holy Trinity.
WE do with our whole heart and mouth confess, praise and bless thee God the
Father unbegotten, thee the only begotten Son, thee the holy Ghost the
Paraclete, the holy and undivided Trinity. Glory be to the Father, who has
created us. Glory to the Son, who has redeemed us. Glory to the holy Ghost,
who has sanctified us. Glory to the most sovereign and undivided Trinity, one
God world without end Amen.

After the Epistle is read, which commonly co^prehe^deth the admonition of the
Apostle, when the Priest comes to read the Gospel, stand up, and be
attentive unto it, and in the beginning make the sign of the Cross upon thy
forehead, mouth and breast, and say from thy heart these words: Glory be to
thee O Lord. And when the Gospel is ended, Praise be to thee, O Christ, who by
thy self, and by thy Apostles, have vouchsafed to preach the gospel to the
world, and to give the incredulous and unbelieving, the true light of faith.

Say the Creed with the Priest.
I Believe in God the Father Almighty etc.

When the Priest has made the oblation, say thus.
LEt us give thanks to our Lord God, for that it is truly a worthy thing, and
just, and meet, and healthful that we always and every where yield thee
thanks, holy Lord, Father omnipote^t, eternal God, by Christ our Lord. By whom
the Angels praise thy Majesty, the Dominatio^s adore it, the Powers tremble
before it, the heavens and the Virtues of the heavens, and the blessed
Seraphims do with joint exultation celebrate it. With whom we also beseech
thee to command that our voices maybe admitted and heard, with humble
confession saying: Holy, holy, holy Lord God of Sabbath. The heavens and the
earth be full of thy glory, Osanna in the highest. Blessed is he who comes in
the Name of our Lord. Osa^na in the highest.

Here, in honor of the five Wounds of our Redeemer (which cannot be honored
enough) say, Pater Noster five times, that both living and dying thou may
receive the abundant virtue of them, and of all our Saviors passion, and
thereby obtain the remission of sins, and all manner of grace, both for your
selves and others.

A Prayer to Christ.
BLessed be thou, o Lord Iesu-Christ, Son of the living God, who having
compassion upon us, came down from heaven, and being a true Sacrifice for
our sins, liberally offredst upon the altar of the Cross thine innocent body
and blood, which thou tookst of the B. Virgin. Praise and glory be to thee,
because of the same body and blood of thine, thou have instituted not only the
bread of life, which we are to receive in the Sacrament, but also a sacrifice
to be offered upon the altar by the Priests: and have left it to be celebrated
till the worlds end, that thy Church might have a perpetual and pure sacrifice
to celebrate all the world over. Jesus of Nazareth crucified for us, be
merciful to me, and to all sinners, and grant that we may receive the
effectual fruit and virtue of the Sacrament, and of this Sacrifice, to the
profit of both body and soul, and to all prosperity and consolation of the
faithful.

At the Elevation of the holy Host, and Chalice.
WE adore thee, o Lord Iesu-Christ, our King and high Priest, and we bless
thee, who by thy holy Cross, and bloody oblation of this thy sacred body and
blood have redeemed us, and reconciled us, being lost creatures, to God the
Father. By thine infinite goodness I beseech thee, make me, and all thy Church,
participant of all thy redemption, and to receive in us the fruit of thy death,
resurrection, and ascension to life everlasting. Amen.

Hayle the worlds salvation, the eternal word of the Father, the true host,
living flesh, perfect Deity, and life everlasting. Thou art my Lord, and my
God, whom I humbly adore, and faithfully invoke, being present upon this
Altar in body and blood, that I may have thee my Redeemer, propitious and
favorable unto me in prosperity and adversity, in life and in death; and
finally may behold thee face to face, raygning in Heaven. Who with the Father,
and the holy Ghost, live and raygnest world without end Amen.

The soul of Christ sanctify me, the body of Christ save me, the blood of
Christ inebriate me, the water of Christ's side wash me, the passion of Christ
strengthen me. O good Jesus vouchsafe to hear me, and permit me not to be
separated from thee. From the malignant Angel defend me. In the hour of my
death call me, and will me to come unto thee, that together with thine Angels I
may praise thee for ever and ever. Amen.

For whom we ought most of all to pray in Masse-tyme.
MOst soueraygne Bishop, and Redeemer of the world, Iesu-Christ, who
discouerest thy self unto us not only on the Cross, but also in this venerable
Sacrament, together with thy body and blood, in so much as thou suffer thy
self to be touched, offered, and eaten by sinners: have mercy upon us, who
without thy grace are not able to do anything, and give thine assistance to thy
Catholic Church, spread over the whole world, that by thee the true Catholics
may have peace, and by thy conduct may be safe and defended against their
enemies whersoeuer. Establish sufficient Pastors over thy flock, and contain
all Magistrates in their office, that they may rule, and profit the Christian
Commonwealth, conformably to thy will and pleasure. Convert, O Lord, all
miserable sinners, who are strayed from their faith, that by thine inspiratio^
they may return to the way of truth: give the light of faith to Infidels,
comfort the afflicted, restore the sick to their health, help the miserable*
succor the needy and poor: protect also our parents, kinsfolks, benefactours
and friends, conserve the^ that they may carefully embrace and love those
things that appertain to faith and Catholic obedience. And through thy
goodness and clemency, take away from us whatsoever is displeasing unto thee,
and give us strength and virtue to avoid all sin, and embrace all good, that
we may fulfill thy will and our own vocation. Admit this healthful Sacrament
offered by the Catholic Priest, in full satisfaction of our sins, for an
abundant supply of our negligences, and for a particular thanksgiving for
all thy benefits whatsoever bestowed upon us: and grant pardon and everlasting
rest, not only to the living, but also to the faithful departed.

For the obtaining of peace.
Lamb of God, who take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us.

Lamb of God who take away the sins of the world, have mercy upon us.

Lamb of God, who take away the sins of the world, give peace of time, of
heart, and of eternity: to wit, that we may have a perfect vnio^ with our
Neighbors, enjoy a peaceful conscience, and come to that eternal repose in
heaven, whereunto all the elect do aspire.

For the public peace of the Church.
Grant peace, O Lord, in our days, because there is not any other who
fights for us, but thou, O Lord. Verse. Peace be made in thy virtue. Resp. And
abundance in thy towers.

The Prayer.
O God, from whom flow all holy desires, right counsayles and just works;
give unto thy servants that peace, which the world is not able to give: and
that our hearts being bent to the observance of thy commandments, and the fear
of our enemies being taken away, the times may be through thy protection
profitable.

O God the author and lover of peace, whose knowledge is life, and whose
service is a kingdom, protect thy servants from all oppressions and assaults,
that we, relying upon thy defense, may not fear the force of any hostility,
and may be delivered from all tentations that trouble us. By Iesu-Christ thy
Son our Lord. Amen.

At the end of the Mass, when the Priest blesses the people, reverently
kneel down, and as one who expects an Heavenly benediction and blessing
from God, with an ardent faith, say.
OMnipotent and most merciful God, the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost,
bless us and keep us. Jesus of Nazareth, King of the Jews, the title of
triumph, bless and defend us from al evil. Amen.

This done, bless thy self, and say with the Priest, S. John's Gospel, in
these words.
IN the beginning was the word, and the word was with God, and God was the
word. This was in the beginning with GOD. All things were made by him: and
without him was made nothing that was made. In him was life, and the life was
the light of men; and the light shined in darcknes, and the darcknes did not
comprehend it. There was a man sent from God, whose name was John. This man
came for testimony, to give testimony of the light, that all men might believe
through him. He was not the light, but to give testimony of the light. It was
the true light, which lightneth every man that comes into this world. He was
in the world, and the world was made by him, and the world knew him not. He
came into his own and his own received him not. But as many as received him,
he gave the^ power be made the Sons of God, to those that believe in his
name. Who not of blood* nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but
of God are borne. AND THE WORD WAS MADE FLESH, and dwelt in us (and we saw the
glory as it were, of the only begotten of the Father) full of grace and verity.
Resp. Praise be to thee, O Christ.

FINIS.

