IOYFVLL NEWS out of the newfound world, wherein are declared the rare and
singular virtues of diverse and sundry Herbs, Trees, Oils, Plants, and Stones,
with their applications, as well to the use of Physic, as Surgery: which
being well applied, bring such present remedy for all diseases, as may seem
altogether incredible: notwithstanding by practice found out, to be true.

Also the portrature of the said Herbs, very aptly described: Englished by
John Frampton Merchant.

Newly corrected as by conference with the old copies may appear. Whereunto
are added three other books treating of the Bezaar stone, the herb
Escuercomera, the properties of iron and steel, in Medicine and the benefit
of snow.

Imprinted at London, in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of the Queen's Arms, by
William Norton. 1580.

To the right worshipful Master Edward Dier Esquier, John Frampton wishes
much health, with prosperous and perfect felicity.
REturning right worshipful, home into England out of Spain, and now not
pressed with the former toiles of my old trade, to pass the time to some
benefit of my country, and to avoid idleness; I took in hand to translate
out of Spanish into English, the three books of Doctor Monardes of Seuil, the
learned Physician, treating of the singular and rare virtues of certain
Herbs, Trees, Oils, Plants, Stoner, and Drugges of the West Indias, for that
the same book is of high commendation in Spain, and other countries, in such
sort, that in deed it might bring in time rare profit, to my Country folks
of England, by wonderful cures of sund^^ great diseases, that otherwise then
by these r^^edies, were incurable. And having finished ^he same translation, I
determined to dedicate my travail therein, to some rare lover of knowledge,
for the worthiness of the work: and not finding any Gentleman of mine
acquaintance, that was more studious, and more delighted with learned works, or
that more cherished travelers, and lovers of all good knowledge, determined to
dedicate the same to your woorshippe before al others, requesting your
woorshippe to accept the work, and to be a patron of the same, and to take it
into your protection, since the matter is of good substance, and of much value,
and of me, truly and f^ithfully translated into English. And since the
aforesaid Medicines mentioned in the same work of Docto^ Mo^ardes, are now by
Merchants and others, brought out of the West Indias into Spain^, and from
Spain hither into England, by such as do d^ily traffick^ thither, and that
the excellency of these Herbs, Trees, Oils, Plants, stones, etc. have bin
known to be so precious a remedy for all manner of diseases, and hurtes, that
may hap unto Man, Woman, or Child, they have le^t of and forsaken very much
the old order and manner of Physic, which was used before that this was
known, as things not of so present remedy for all manner of diseases, as
these now late found out, are; which by great experience made in Spain, and
other Countries, were thoroughly and effectuously proved and experimented, to
work the effects which are contained in this Book. And thus I leave your
woorshippe to the Almighty, beseeching him to give you long life, and for the
Commonwealths sake that advancement, that your good nature, and rare virtues
do well deserve. From London the first of October. 1577.

Your worships during life to command: John Frampton.

THE FIRST PART OF THIS BOOK TREATS OF THE things that are brought from the
Occidentall Indias, which serve for the use of Medicine, and of the order that
must be kept in taking the root called Mechoacan, wherein are discovered great
secrets of Nature, and great experiences: made and compiled by Doctor
Monardus, Physician of Seuill.
IN the year of our Lord God, a thousand, four hundredth ninety two, our
Spaniards were governed by sir Christopher Colo^, being naturally born in the
country of Genoua, to discover the Occide^tal Indias, that are called at this
day, the new world, and they discovered the first land thereof, the xi. day of
October, of the said year: and from that time unto this, they have discovered
many and sundry Islandes, and much firm land, as well in that country, which
they call the new Spain, as in that which is called the Peru, where there are
many Provinces, many Kingdoms, and many Cities, that have contrary and diverse
customs in them, in which there have been found out, things that never in
these parts, nor in any other parts of the world have been seen, nor unto
this day known: and other things which now are brought unto us in great
abundance, that is to say, Gold, Silver, Pearls, Emeraldes, Turkeies, and
other fine stones of great value. Yet great is the excess and quantity that
has come, and every day does come, and inespecially of Gold and Silver,
that it is a thing worthy of admiration the great number of Melons, which have
come from thence, besides the great quantity of pearls which have stored the
whole world: also they do bring from those parts, Popingaies, Griffons, Apes,
Lions, Gerfaucons, and other kinds of Hawks, Tigers wool, Cotton wool, Grain
to die colou^es with all, Hides, Sugars, Coppar, Brasill, the wood Ebano Anill:
and of all these, there is so great quantity, that there comes every year,
one hundred ships laden therewith, that it is a great thing, and an incredible
riches.

And besides these great riches, our Occidentall Indias do send unto us many
Trees, Me^icines that our Occidentall Indias do send us.
Plants, Herbs, Roots, Juices, Gummes, Fruits, Licoures and Stones that are
of great m^dicinall virtues, in the which there be found, and have been found
in them, very great effects that do exceed much in value and price all the
aforesaid things, by so much as the corporal health is more excellent, and
necessary then the temporal goods: the which things all the world does
lack, the want whereof is not a little hurtefull, according to the great
profit which we do see, by the use of them to follow, not only in our
Spain, but also in all the world.

And this is not too be meruelled at, that it is so, for the Philosoph^r does
say, Aristotle.
that all Countries do not yield Plants and Fruits alike: for one Region
yields such Fruits, Trees, and Plants as an other does not: we do see
that in Creta only grows the Diptamo, and the Incence only in the region of
Saba, and the Almaciga only in the Islande of Chio, and the Sinamom, Cloves,
and Peper, and other spices only in the Islands of the Maluca, and many other
things you have in diverse parts of the world, which were not known until
our time, and the people of old time did lack them, but Time which is the
discouerer of all things, has discovered them unto us greatly to our profit,
considering the great need that we h^d of them.

And as there are discovered new regions, new kingdoms, and new Provinces,
by our Spaniardes, The discovery of the Indias.
so they have brought unto us new Medicines, and new Remedies, wherewith they
do cure many infirmities, which, if we did lack them, would be incurable,
and without any remedy: of which things although that some have knowledge,
yet they be not common too all people, for which cause I did pretend to treat,
and to write, of all things that they bring from our Indias, apperteyning to
the art and use of Medicine, and the remedy of the hurtes and diseases that
we do suffer and endure, whereof no small profit does follow to those of
our time, and also unto them that shall come after us: in the bewraying
whereof I shall be the first, that the rather the followers may add hereunto,
with this beginning, that which they shall more know, and by experience
hereafter find out.

And as in this City of Seuill, which is the Port and skale of all the
Occidentall Indias, we do know of them more, then in any other parts of all
Spain, for because that al things come first hither, where by better
intelligence and greater experience it is learned: so do I, with practice and
use of them this forty years, that which I do cure in this City, where I
have informed my self of them, that have brought these things out of those
parts with much care, and I have made experience thereof, with many and
diverse persons, with all diligence and foresight possible, and with much happy
success.

Of the Anime and Copall.
THey do bring from the new Spain 2. kinds of Rosine, that be both much alike
one to the other, Of the Copal.
the one is called Copall, and the other Anime. The Copall is a Rosine very
white, and of much brightness, it is brought in certain great pieces, which
are like too pieces of Diacitron very clear, it has an indifferent smell, but
not so good as the Anime: with this Copall, the Indians did make perfumes in
their sacrifices, and so the use thereof was frequented in the Temples, by
their Priests.

And when the first Spaniardes went too those parts, the Priests went out to
receive them, Hi^torie.
with little firepots, burning in them this Copall, and giving to them the
smoke of it at their noses: we do use here to perfume with it in diseases
rising upon coldenesse of the head, in the place of Incence, or Anime: it is
hot in the second degree, and moist in the first, it is resoluatiue, and
softneth by some watrish parts, that it has.

The Anime is a gum or Rosine of a great Tree, it is white, What Anime is.
it draws near to the color of Incence, it is more oily then the Copall
is, it comes in grains, as the Incence does, although somewhat greater, and
being broken, it has a yellowe color, as Rosine has: it is of a very
acceptable and pleasant smell, and put upon burning coals, it does consume
very quickly.

It differs from our Anime, that is brought from Leuante, H^w it di^fereth
from ours.

Of the congeled amber.


which is not so white, nor so bright, insomuche that some do say, that it is
spice of Charabe or Succino, which is called Amber congeled, wherewith they do
make Beads, but it is not so, for that the Charabe is a kind of Pitche, that
is found in the Germayne Sea, and it is taken out of the Sea in great pieces,
with a dragge of Iron, so that it seems to come forth of some Fountains,
into the Sea, after the manner of pitch, and being come forth unto the cold
air, it congeleth, for because there is s^ene in the same, pieces of sticks,
and other superfluities of the Sea, cleaning unto it, and in this they shall
see the error of them, that say that it is Gum of Alamo; and of others, that
it is of the Pinetree.

He^m^^au^.
Of our Anime Hermolaus Barbarus, a man most excellently learned does say,
that it is gather^d about the place where Incence is found, and that land or
soil, A ^arba^ian auth^ur. A place that is called Animitin, where our A^ime is
gathered.

The ve^tue thereof.


is called Amintin and therefore the thing is called Anime.

That which is brought from the new Spain, is gathered from certain Trees,
of a reasonable greatness, by way of incision, as the Incence, and Almasiga
are ga^hered: we do use thereof for many infirmities, and principally for the
grief of the head, and pains thereof, caused of humors, or of cold causes,
and for sluffyng in the head, that thereof does proceed, after euacuation,
perfuming therewith the chambers in the Winter season: and where as are
general infirmities, it does purify and correct the Air, and they do
perfume therewith their head kerchers, when that they do go to sleep: for
them that do suffer pains in the head, and occasions thereof, it does
profit to perfume the head of him that is so diseased, it does comfort the
head unto such as have it debilited, or weakened, and do suffer pains by
occasion thereof: they do put it also in plasters, and in seere clothes,
where as is need of comfort, and to dissolve, especially cold humors, or
windiness: they do use it also in place of Incence, as well in the perfumes,
as in the aforesaid.

It does comfort the brain, The complexion that it has.
applied in the form of a plaster, and even so likewise the stomach, and all
parts being full of Sinews, made after the fashion of a Sere cloth with the
third part of Wax: it takes out the cold of any member, whatsoever, being
applied therevntoo for a long time, with refreshing it. It is hot in the
second degree, and moist in the first.

Of the gum called Tacamahaca.
AND also they do bring out of the new Spain an other kind of Gum or
Rosine, Of the Tacamahaca.
which the Indians do call Tacamahaca, and the same name did our Spaniardes
give it, it is Rosine taken out by incision of a tree, being as great, as a
Willow tree, and is of a very sweet smell, it brings forth a red fruit,
as the seed of Pionia.

How the Indians use it.
This Rosine or Gum, the Indians do much use in their infirmities, chiefly in
swellings in any part of the body, wheresoever they be engendered, for that
it dissolueth, ripeneth, and maruellously desolueth them. And even so, it
takes away any manner of grief, that is come of a cold cause: as humors,
and windiness: this the Indians do use very commonly, and familiarly. And for
this effect the Spaniardes has brought it.

The property that it has.
The color is as the color of Galuano, and some do say that it is the same,
it has white parts like to Amoniaco, it is of a good smell, and the taste is
like, insomuch that being cast upon hot burning coals, and giving the smoke
thereof at the nose of a woman that does swoone, or else has lost her feeling
by suffocation of the Mother, it does cause her to come quickly, and easily
to her self. And the Rosine put to her n^uell, Good for the diseases of the
Mother.
after the manner of a plaster, causes the Mother to keep in her place: and
the use thereof is so much amongst women, that the most part which is spent
thereof, is for this effect, for that they do find themselves very much eased
by it, taking away from them all manner of chokinges of the Mother, and
comforting the stomach. Some that be curious do add thereuntoo Amber and
Musk, and so it is better then alone. It is always fixed, without melting of
it self, until that it be al wholly wasted.

And where it does most profit, is for to take away any manner of grief,
caused of cold humors and windy, and being applied unto them in manner of a
plaster, In any manner of grief.
it takes them away, and dissolueth them with great admiration: it does
clean in such sort, that until it has done, and wrought his effect, it can
not be taken away, and the self same it does, being laid upon swellings,
for that it consumes and desolueth them, and if there be any desire to ripen
them, it does it, and that very quickly.

It is also a remedy verified, and experimented, The virtue thereof.
that it does profit much in Reumes, and Runnings, wheresoever they go, for
it takes them away, putting a small piece of linen cloth with this Rosine,
behind both the ears, or the ear on the part which runs, for that it
does restrain the running of them: and applied unto the temples of the head,
in manner of a plaster, it does withholde the runnings and the flux, that
runs to the eyes, and to the parts of the face: In the toothache.
it takethaway the tothe ache, although that the tothe be hollow, by putting
a little of this Rosine into the hollow, and if therewith the rotten tothe be
burned, it makes that the corruption goes no further: and being laid after
the manner of a plaster in the hollownesse of the neck, or grief of the
shoulders, it takes away the pains: mingled with the third part of storax,
and a little Amber made in a plaster, for the stomach, it does comfort it,
and causes appetite to meat, It comforts the stomach.
it helps digestion, and dissolueth windines: after the same sort put upon
the moulde of the head, it comfort, and takes away the pains thereof. In
the Sciatica, or pains of the hippes put thereunto, the effect thereof is
great: In the grief of the h^ad. In the Sciatica.
and likewise it is so in all pains of the joints: and in any pain of the
body whersoeuer it be, chiefly if it come of cold humors, or mixed: For because
with his resolution, it has parts of binding, which do give a marvelous
comforting in joints, or in hurtes of Sinews, In the grief of the ioints.
putting that alone, it does heal and cure them, for great is the
experience, that we have of it, i^genderyng forth with matter: it takes away
an extreme cold: In the hurtes of Sinews.
ordinarily it is applied to all griefs: I do mingle therewith the third
part of yellowe Wax, for that will be applied the better, and the use thereof
is so celebrated, that the people know no other remedy for any grief, but only
the use of this Rosine, In all griefs.
so that it be not inflammations very hot, and also in them after the first
fury is past, The complexion thereof.
and the fearcenesse thereof, it does profit much for to dissolve the rest: it
is hot in the beginning of the third degree, and dry in the second.

Of the Gum Caranna.
THey do bring from the firm Land, by the way of Cartagena, Caranna.
and number de Dios, A Rosin of the color of Tacamahaca, somewhat clear, and
thin, called in the Indians language, Caranna, and this word and name our
Spaniardes have given it, and it has in manner the smell of the Tacamahaca,
although it be somewhat more strong of smell, it is very oily, and it
cleaves fast without melting, for the clamminesse that it has. It is a new
Medicine, and brought hither about a ten years past, and the Indians do use
it in their infirmities against swellings, and in all manner of griefs, and
now in our parts it is much esteemed, for the great effects that it does work.

It does profit and heal the same infirmities, that the Tacamahaca does, The
virtues.
but it woorketh more speedily, so that many infirmities, wherein the
Tacamahaca does not so much effect, the Caranna does easily heal. There was
one that did suffer pains in his shoulders, the wc pains he had suffered a
long time, It heals an old grief of the shoulder.
in such sort, that he could not stir his Arms, and having used a great time
the Tacamahaca, yet he was not healed, until he had put thereunto the
Caranna, and thereby in three days he was made whole. In the griefs of the
Iointes, In the griefs of the ioints.
and the Go^t Arthetica, it has a marvelous effect, being applied unto the
grief, so that it be not an inflammation, of very hot humor, for it takes
it away, with much easiness. In old swellings, as well in humors as in
winds, In swellings.
it dissolueth, in griefs caused by defluxe or running of cold humors or
mixed, it works a meruellous ^ffect: in all pains of the Sinowes, and
griefs of the head, and griefs that thereof do proceed, it profits much.
In griefs of Sinews.
Surely, it is a medicine to dissolve and to take away griefs of great
efficacy, and does make his work with great certainty in new green wounds,
especially of the Sinews: it does much profit, and greatly in joints, In
new wounds.
in the which I have seen done only therewith very great works: it is an
intercepting to state the flux and running of the eyes, and other parts
applied behind the ears, It staieth the running of the eyes

Note.


and in the temples of the head. It is very fattie and oily, and hot more then
in the second degree.

And it is to be noted, that all these Rosines the Indians do gather by way of
Incision, by giving cuttes in the Trees, of which forthwith the licour does
drop out, and from thence they gather it.

Of the Oil of the Fig tree of Hell.
FRom Gelisco, a Province in the new Spain, they bring an Oil or Licour,
Oil of the Fig tree.
that the Spaniards have called, oil of the Fig tree of Hell, for that it is
taken from a tree that is no more nor less the^ our Fig tree of Hell, as well in
the Leaf, as in the Fruit: it is the same that we do commonly call
Chatapucia, or Cherua, it is also milkish as ours is, for that it is more
burning in the Indias for the grosnes of the earth.

The Indians do make this oil, as Dioscorides does show, in the first
book, the xxx. Chapter, that is, How this oil is made.
do pound the seed, and sees it in water, and after it is sodden, then they
gather the Oil that swimmeth upon it, with a Spoone, and this is the manner to
make Oil of fruit and Seeds, and Bows of trees: It is very much frequented
and used of the Indians. As for expression or wringing out the juice, they do
not know how to do it, for lack of knowledge, this kind of oil principally
is better drawn out this way, than by expression. The virtues and effects.
This Oil has great virtues, as by the use thereof has been seen, as well
in the Indias, as in our parts, and all that I will say, is of very great
experience, and much use thereof in many persons: it does heal and cure all
infirmities caused of cold humors, Cures in general.
and windines, it does dissolve al hardness with mollification, and all
inflammations being windy: it takes away all manner of pain in what part
soever it be, chiefly if it come of any cold cause, It takes away pain.
or windines, for that in this, it makes a meruellous work, dissoluing
great windiness, wheresoever it be, and especially in the belly: and with
this they do heal a windy Dropsy, It heals a windy dropsy.
and likewise al kinds thereof, annoyuting there withal the Belly, and Stomach,
taking some drops thereof with wine, or other licour appropriated, that it may
avoid the citrine water, and make the wind to be expelled: and if they do
put it in any manner Glister, or Medicine, given so it does avoid out the
citrine water, and does expel Winds with more assurance than any other
Medicine. In griefs of the stomach and Colike.
In the griefs of the Stomach of cold humors, and winds, and Colicke, it
works great effect, anointing therewith, and taking some drops thereof, and
principally they do this in that mortal disease called the Ileon, which is a
cetrayne filthiness that purges at the mouth. It does avoid fleame
principally, In griefs of the Iointes.
in griefs of the Iointes certain drops of this oil taken with the broth of
some fat foul, it does empt away the humor that causes the pain, it does
heal the old sores of the head, It heals soars. History.
that does yield much matter.

A Gentleman that did vomit his meat the space of many years, did anoint his
stomach with this oil, and therewith did recover and never v^mitted again: It
undoes opilations.
It does undo Opilations of the inner parts of the body, and of the stomach,
and of the Mother, anointing it therewith. And unto young children and Boys,
that cannot go to the Stool, It makes them go to the stool.
anointing the lower part of the Nauill with this oil, it does provoke them
to the stool: and if they have worms, it does expel and kille them, chiefly
if they give them a drop or two with milk, or with some fat gross thing.
And for those that have lost their hearing, For the^ that have lost their
hearing.

In griefs of the Joints. For the members drawn together.

It takes away the Morphewe, marks or signs of the face.

The co^plexio^ thereof.


it causes it to be restored to them, with a marvelous work, as it has
been seen by many experiences. In griefs of Iointes, and in griefs of
swellings, so that they come not of a very hot cause, it takes them away
and does dissolve them: any of the members being drawn together, and
anointed with this Oil, they do extend and the Sinowes are mollified with
it, taking away the grief if that there be any: it takes away any marks or
signs, wheresoever they be in the face, principally, and the Morphewe which
women many times be troubled withal, the anointing with this Oil, does take
it away, and consumes it, not with little content to them that use it. It is
hot in the first part of the third degree, and moist in the second.

Of the Bitume^ which is a kind of pitch.
THere is in the Islande of Cuba, Bitumen.
certain Fountains at the Sea side, that do cast from them a kind of black
Pitch of a strong smell, which the Indians do use in their cold infirmities.
Our people do use it there to pitche their Ships withal, for it is well
near like unto Tar, and they do mingle therewith Tallowe, to make it Pitch
the better. I do believe that this is Napta, Napta.
which the ancient writers do speak of. Possidonio says, that there are
two Fountaynes thereof in Babylon, one white and the other black.

That which is brought from the Indias, The virtues.
we do use against griefs of the Mother, for that it does reduce the Mother
to her place. And if it rise on high, then put it to the Nosethrilles, and if
it come down to the lower parts, putting thereto a wet tent with this Pitche,
it causes it to go upward, to her place: and likewise it does profit, being
applied to cold Infirmities, as the other Medicines do which we have spoken of.
It is hot in the second degree, and moist in the first.

Of liquid Amber, and the Oil thereof.
FRom the new Spain they do bring a Rosine that we call Liquid Amber, and
one like Oil that we call Oil of Liquid Amber, that is to say, a thing that
we do most set by, and as precious as Amber, or Oil thereof, both of them
being of sweet smell and of good savor, and especially the Oil of Liquid
Amber, which is of savor more delicate and sweet than Amber. What liquid
Amber is.
A Rosine taken out by incision from certain trees very great and fair, and
full of leaves, which are like to Iuie, and the Indians do call them Ococol.
They carry a thick rind, of the color of Ashes, this rind being cut, does
cast out the Liquid Amber thick, and so they do gather it, and because the
rind has a smell very sweet, they do break and mingle it with the Rosine,
and when it is burned, it has a better smell, in so much, wheresoever the
trees are, there is a most sweet smell through all the fields.

History.
When the Spaniardes came the first time, to that place where it grows, and
did feel such a sweet smell, they thought that there had been spices, and
trees thereof.

There is brought much quantity of Liquid Amber into Spain, The use of it.
insomuch that they do bring many Pipes, and Barelles full thereof to sell for
Merchaundise, for here they raise profit thereof, to perfume in things of
sweet smelles, wasting it in place of Storax, for that the smoke and smell
does seem to be the same: and also they do put it into other confections of
sweet smelles to burn, and such like things. It casts from it so much
smell without burning of it, that wheresoever it be, it cannot be hidden, but
does penetrate many houses and streets with the sweet smell, when there i^
quantity of it.

It serves much in medicine, and does therein great effect, for that it
heals, comfort, dissolueth, The works and effects of it.
and mittigateth pain applied unto the Moulde of the heads by it self, or
mingled with other things Aromaticall, it does comfort the brains, and takes
away the pains of any manner of grief, proceeding of a could cause laid
after the manner of a Plaster thereunto, it does also mitigate, and take away
the pains, and griefs of the stomach, wherein it does a marvelous ^ffect,
applied after the manner of a Stomacher. For that it does comfort the Stomach, A
meruellous plaster.
and does dissolve winds, and help digestion, and take away rawnesse it
causes the meat to be well digested, it gives lust to eat: it is made of
Liquide Amber, spread abroad upon a sheeps skin, in the form of a
breastplate, mingled with a little Storax, Amber and Musk, it is a Plaster
which does profit much in all that I have said. There is known of this
plaster very great experience, in this City, for the good effect that it
works: it is hot in the end of the second degree, and moist in the first.

Out of this Liquid Amber, is taken the Oil that is called the oil of Liquide
Amber, Of the Oil of Liquide Amber, and how it is taken.
the which in his smell is more sweet, it is taken out of the Liquide Amber when
it is newly gathered, putting it in part where it may distill of it self,
(the more subtle) is the perfectest and best of all.

Others there be that do press it, because the more quantity thereof may be
taken out, and they bring it for merchaundise, for that they use to dress
Gloves therewith for the common people, and in this trade there is much spent.

It is used in Medicine for many diseases, and it is of great virtue to heal
cold diseases, The use of it in medicine.
for it heals excellently well al parts wheresoever it be applied, it
dissolueth and mollifieth any manner of hardness, taking away the pains: it
dissolueth the hardness of the Mother, and opens the opilations thereof. It
provoke the Monthly course in women, and it makes soft any manner of hard
thing. It is hot welneere in the third degree.

And it is to be noted, that many do bring this Storax very thin from the
Indias, Note.
which is not so good, for because that they make it of the bows of the trees,
cut in pieces, and sodden, and they gather the fatnes that swimmeth upon: and
the Indians do sell the buddes of the trees whereout the Liquid Amber is
taken, made in handfulles, and do sell it in their market places, for to put
amongst their clothes, which causes them to smell, as of the water of Angels,
and for this purpose the Spaniards do use it.

Of the Balsamo.
THey do bring from the new Spain that licour most excellent, which for his
excellency and meruellous effects, is called Balsamo, an imitation of the
true Balsamo, that was in the land of Egypt, and for that it does such great
works, and remedy so many infirmities, there was given to it such a name. It
is made of a tree greater than a Powngarnet Tree, it carries leaves like to
Nettles: the Indians do call it Xilo, and we do call the same Balsamo. It is
made two manner of ways, the one is by the way of incision, cutting the rynd of
the Tree, which is thin, giving many small cuttinges, out of the which there
comes a clammish licour, of color white, but it is little and most
excellent, and very perfect. The other fashion is, whereby the Indians do use
too take out licour of the trees, which is a common use amongst them is this:
they take the bows and the great pieces of the trees, and make them as small,
as they can, and then cast them into a great kettle, with a good quantity of
water, and so boil them until they see it sufficiently done, and afterward
they let it cool, and gather up the oil that does swim therevppon with
certain shelles, and that is the Balsamo that comes too these parts, and
that commonly is used: the color thereof is Alborne, which is likened to
black, it is of most sweet smell, and very excellent. It is not convenient, nor
it ought to be kept in any other vessel then in silver, (Glass or Tin, or
any other thing glassed, it does penitrate and does pass through:) the use
thereof is only in things apperteining to Medicine, and it has been used of
long time, well near since the new Spain ws discovered, for that incontinent
the Spaniardes had knowledge of it, because they did heal therewith the
wounds that they did receive of the Indians, being advised of the virtue
thereof by the same Indians, and they did see the said Indians heal and cure
themselves therewith.

When it first came into Spain, it was esteemed as much as it was reason it
should be, The estimation that it i^ had in.
for that they did see it make meruellous works, one ownce was worth ten
Duccates and vpwardes, and now it is better cheap: the first time that they
carried it to Rome, it came to be worth one ounce, one hundredth Duccats: and
after that they brought so much and such great quantity, that it is now of
small value: this comes of the abundance of things. And when it was very
dear all men took profit of the profit of it, and since it came to be of
so low a Price, Note.
it is not so much esteemed being the self same Balsamo, that it was then
when it was worth one hundredth Duccates the ounce. Surely if the Indias had
not been discovered, but only for the effect, to send us this meruellous
licour, Note.
the labor had been well employed which our Spaniardes (...) until the wounds
be whole, and for this cause the use thereof is a common medicine in all surgery
for poor folks, seeing that as with one medicine all effects are wrought
therewith, that are necessary: and it is a common thing to say, that when one
is hurt, let Balsamo be put thereunto, and so they do, and it does heal them.
In the wounds of Sinews it woorketh a meruellous effect, for that it does
both cure and heal. It heals better then any other medicine does, it
resists cold, the wounds of the head it heals very well, not having the
Skull broken, nor perished.

Any manner of wounds being fresh it does heal in any part of the body
wheresoever they be, so that there be no more in it but a simple wound. In
joints what manner of wound soever it be, it does make a marvelous work:
The use thereof is very common in this City, in wounds. For that you have
few houses, but you have Balsamo in them for this effect, so that in wounding
of any person forthwith they go to the Balsamo, for with little quantity
thereof they do cure and heal, and many times with putting of it once every
third day, they find the wound whole. In old sores applied by it self, or
with any other ointment, it does mundifie, and fill them up with flesh.

In large fevers Paroxismales being laid half an hour before the cold does
come, upon the moulde of the head^ very hot, the patient being very well
covered with clothes, and taking forthwith (...) or six drops thereof in
wine, it takes away the cold, in three or four times doing it. It is of a
sharp savor and somewhat bitter, whereby are seen the d^y parts and
comfor^atiue that it has: it is hot and dry in the second degree.

Of the berbe John I^fante for wou^des.
I will not let to write of a certain Herb, which the Conq^erours of the new
Spain do use for the remedy of their wounds, and shottes of arrows, which
unto them was a great remedy in their troubles, and it was discou^red by an
Indian, which was Servant too a Spaniarde called John Infant. He was the first
that used it, they did call it, and do call it at this present day, the Hea^be
of John Infant: this herb is little, they gather it green, and beat it, and
so they lay it simply upon the wound: it does restrain and stop the blood,
and if it be a wound in the fl^she, it does cause it to grow together, and
heal^th it by glewing the parts. The wounds of the Sinews, and other parts
it does comfort, mundifie, and ingendreth flesh in them until they be whole,
and because they do not find this herb in all places, they bring it made into
powder, for that it woorketh the same effect as well as being green, and the
powder, as some say, does it better than the herb.

As this herb, so likewise have you many other in all the other parts of the
Indias, that have the same and other properties and do work meruellous
effects: and to write of every one of them particularly, it were needful to
make a greater volume, then we do pretend of this that we shall entreat of.

Three things they bring from our Occidentall Indias, which at this day be
celebrated in all the world, and with them they have made and do make the
greatest works that ever were made in medicine, and there were never the like
made, by any other medicine that unto this day has been known, for that the
nature of al three is to cure infirmities which without this remedy be
incurable, and to work the effects that do seem to be things of wonder,
and these are notorious, not only in these parts, but in all the world: the
which things are the wood that is called Guaiacan, the China and the
Sarcaparillia. And for that it seems that the China does come from
Portingall, and that the Portingales do bring it from their Oriental Indias,
and not from ours, I will say what is to be said herafter when we do speak
thereof. And therefore let us begin with Guaiacan, as of ^ remedy that first
came from the Indias, and as first of the best of all, as experience has
showed, and the use thereof in so many years.

Of the Guaiacan and of the holy Wood.
The wood of the Indias.
THe Guaiacan, that is called the wood of the Indias was discovered forthwith,
when the first Indias were found, which was the Island of Sancto Domingo, where
is great quantity thereof. There was an Indian that gave knowledge thereof to
his Master, in this manner. There was a Spaniard that did suffer great pains of
the Pox, which he had taken by the company of an Indian woman, b^t his servant
being out of the Physicians of that country (...) unto him the water of
Guaiaca^, wherewith not only his grievous pains were taken away that he did
suffer, but he was heal^d very well of the evil: with the which many other
Spaniardes, that were infected with the same evil were healed also, the which
was communicated immediately, with them that came from thence, hither to Seuill,
and from thence it was diuulged throughout all Spain, and from thence through
all the world, for that the infection was sown abroad throughout all parts
thereof: and surely for this evil it is the best, and the most chief remedy
of as many as hitherto have been found, and with most assurance, and most
certeintie, it heals and cures the said disease, if they be well handled:
and this water gi^en as it ought to be, it is certain that it heals it most
perfectly, without turning to fall again, except the sick man do return to
tumble in the same bosom, where he took the first infection.

Our Lord God would from whence the evil of the Pox came, from thence should
come the remedy for them. Since it is known that they came into these parts
from the Indias, and first of all from Sancto Domingo. The Pox be as common
amongst the Indians, and as familiare, as the Measelles be unto us, and well
near the most part of the Indians, both men and women have them, without
making thereof any scruple, and they came first in this sort.

In the year of our Lord God 1493. in the wars that the Catholic King made
in Naples, with King Charles of France, that was called Greathead, in this time
sir Christofer Colon, returned from the discovery that he had made of the
Indias, which was Sancto Domingo, and other Islands, and he brought with him
from Sancto Domingo, a great number of Indians, both men and women, which he
carried with him to Naples, where the Catholic king was at that time, who had
then concluded the wars, for that there was peace between the two Kings,
and the hosts did communicate together, the one with the other. And Colon
being come thither with his Indians, the most part of them brought with them
the fruit of their country, which was the Pox. And the Spaniardes began to
have conversation with the Indian women, in such sort, that the men and women
of the Indias, did infect the Camp of the Spaniardes, Italians, and Almaines,
for the Catholic king had then of all these Nations, and there were many that
were infected with the evil. And after the hosts commoned together, the fire
did kindle in the camp of the king of France, of which it followed, that in
short time the one and the other were infected with this evil seed: and from
thence it has spread abroad into all the world.

At the beginning it had diverse names: The names that they gave to the evil
tre^.
the Spaniards did think that it had been given them by the Frenchmen, and
they called it the French evil. The Frenchemen thought that in Naples, and by
them of the Country, the evil had been given them, and they called it the
evil of Naples. And they of Almaine seeing that by conversation with the
Spaniardes, they came by it, they called it the Spanishe Skabbe, and other
called it the Measelles of the Indias, and that very truly, seeing that from
thence came the evil in the beginning.

Opinions of this evil.
Amongst the great Physicians of that time, there were sundry great opinions of
the cause, and original of the infirmity. The one sort said that it came of
the evil melancholy meats, that the hosts of necessity had eaten, as wild
herbs, and many gardeine herbs, and roots of herbs, Asses, and Horses,
and other like things, that engender such like infirmities, corrupting and
burning the blood. Others there were, that did attribute it to the conjunctions
of Saturn and Mars, and they did apply it to the heavenly influence, and gave
thereuntoo diverse and sundry names. Some called it the Leprosy, others Swine
Pox, other Mentegra, others the Deathly evil, others Elephansia, without
certain assurance what disease it was. For they were ignorant that it was a
new disease, and they would reduce it to some already known and written of.
Guaiacan an Indian name.
And now we come to our Guaiacan, whose name was given by the Indians, and of
them very well known, and so they have called it and do call it, in all the
world, calling it also the woodde of the Indias. Of this woodde many have
written and much, one sort saying that it was Ebano, others that it was a kind
of Box, with many other names whereby they have named it. It is a new tree and
never seen in our parts, nor in any other of the discoueries, and as the
country is new, so is the tree a new thing also.

The description of the Guaiacan.
Whatsoever it be, it is a great tree, of the greatness of an Oak: it casts
out many vows, the rind it does cast from it being dry, great, and full of
Gum, the heart thereof is very great, it is well near like to black, all is
very hard as much and more then Ebano is. It casts forth a little leaf and
hard* and every year it brings forth yellow flowers, out of the which is
ingendered a round fruit, with little kernelles within it, of the greatness of
a Medler: of these Trees there is great abundance in Sancto Domingo.

And after this they have found an other Tree, of the kind of this Guaiacan,
in Saint John de Puerto Rico, which is an other Island near to that of Sancto
Domingo, such an other tree as that is, saving that it is less, and the body
of the tree and the bows are smaller, and it has scarsely any heart, or if it
have any, it is very little, and that is in the body of the tree, for that the
bows have none at all: It is of more sweet smell and more bitter then the
Guaiacan, that is now used in our time, I mean that of Sancto Domingo, and
for his marvelous effects, they call it the holy Wood, and surely with
reason: for that it is of a better working then that of Sancto Domingo, which
is seen by experience, but even as well the one and the other is a marvelous
remedy, to cure the disease of the Pox: of the which and of every one of them
a water is made, and is taken for this infirmity, and for many others in this
form.

They take twelve ounces of the wood made small, and two ounces of the Rind
of the same woodde broken, How the water of the woodde i^ made.
and they cast it to steep in three Pottels of Water, in a new pot, that will
hold somewhat more, for the space of xxiiii. hours: and the pot being well
stepped, they sees it over a soft fire of kindled Coals, until the two
Pottels be sodde away, and one remaining. And this is to be noted at the time
the water is put to it, putting therein one Pottle, they dip in a little Rod,
and do mark how high the water of one Pottle reaches, and by that measure
and mark they shall see when the two are sodde away, and the one Pottell
remains. After the water is sodden, they set it to cool, and strain it, and
keep it in a glassed vessel, and forthwith upon the said sodden woodde, they
pour four Pottels of water, and sees it till one be sodden away, and this
water must be strayned and kept apart, and it must be taken in this form.

After that the sick man is purged by the counsel of a Physician, The manner
of taking it.
let him be put into a warm Chamber, and kept from the cold and from air,
and being laid in his bed, let him take early in the morning ten ounces
of Water, of that which was first made well warmed, and let him be covered so
that he may sweat well, and let him keep his sweat at the least two hours, and
after he has swet, let him be made clean from his sweat, and take a warm
Shirt, and the rest of his Linen clothes, and four hours after he has
swette, let him eat Reasings, Almonds and Biscuit, and that in reasonable
quantity. Then let him drink of the water that was made at the second time,
the quantity that he has need of, and of the self same let him drink in the
day time, and eight hours after he has eaten, let him return to take the
first water, and let him take other ten ounces well warmed, and then sweat
other two^ hours, and after his sweat let him be made clean, and then be
covered again with warm clothes, and one hour after he has swet, let him
make his supper of the same Reasings, Almonds, and Biscuit, and drink of the
second Water. This order he must observe the first fiftiene days, except he
have some notable weakness, and in such case her must be succored with
giving him to eat of a young Chicken, jointly, with the rest of the Diet: and
in them that be lean, that cannot bear so precise Diet, it is sufficient that
they take it for nine days, and at the end of them they may eat a little
Chicken roasted, and if in case the sick person be debilited, and that he
cannot suffer the Diet, let him have from the beginning a very small Chicken,
going forward increasing in the process of time, and being past the 15. days,
let him return to purge himself at the sixtiene days end, and let him take
the weight of five shillinges of the substance of Canafistola, taken out by
Strayner or other thing respondent thereunto, and that day let him drink no
strong Water, but of the simple, and the next day after the Purgation, let him
return to the aforesaid order, taking in the morning and evening the strong
water with his sweatinges, and eating and drinking the same. Saving that in
place of a Chicken he may eat half a roasted Pullet, or somewhat more, and
this second time let him take it for other xx. days, in the which time he
may rise, and walk about his chamber, being apparelled and kept warm. And at
the end of them, he shall return to purge him self an other time, and must
have a special care to keep good order, and after he has taken the water
for other forty days, must keep himself from women and from wine
especially: and in place of wine, he must drink the simple water of the
woodde, which if he will not do, then let him drink of water sodden with Anise
seed or Fenell seed, supping little at night and eating no flesh.

This is the best way that the water of the wood ought to be taken, which does
heal many infirmities incurable, The diseases that this water does heal.
where other Medicines could not work the same effect, and this water is the
best remedy that is in the world, to heal the disease of the Pox, whatsoever
or of what kind soever it be, for that it rooteth it out for ever without any
more coming again, and in this it has his principal prerogative and
excellency. This water is also good for the Dropsy, for the shortness of
breath, for the Falling sickness, for the diseases of the Bladder, and of the
Raynes, for the pains of the Joints, for all evils caused of cold humors, for
ventositie, and other dangerous and importunate diseases, where the ordinary
benefits of Phisicions have not profited. Chiefly it excels where the evil
dispositions be, that have proceeded at any time from the disease of the Pox.
There be many that with this wood have made sundry mixtures, making Syropes
thereof, and surely with good effect. But my judgment and opinion is, that he
which shall take the water of the wood, ought to take it in the manner as is
above said, without any mingling thereof, for that by expeperience it has
been seen so to make the better work. This water is good for the teeth,
making them white, and fastening them, by continual washing of them therewith:
it is hot and dry in the second degree.

Of the China.
THe Second Medicine that comes from our Indias, is a root called the China.
It seems that I should slander it, to say that the China grows in our
Occidental Indias, since commonly the Portingales do bring it from the
Oriental Indias.

By this you shall understand, that Sir Frauncis de Mendosa, a wor^hy Knight,
when he came from the new Spain and Peru, showed to me a great Root, and
other little roots, who asked me, what roots they were? I answer ^o that
they were roots of the China, but that they seemed to me to be very fresh.
China of our Indias.
He said to me, that so they were, and that it was not long since that they
had been gathered and brought from the new Spain. I marvelled that they had
it there, for I did believe that in the China only it had grown: he said unto
me, that not only there was in the new Spain the China, but that also we
should see brought great quantity of Spicerie from the place which that
China came from. History.
And I believed it when I saw the contract that he made with his majesty, to
bring into Spain great quantity of spicerie, that he had begone to set and to
plant, and I saw green Ginger brought from thence, as also the China.

This China is a root like to the root of a cane with certain knottes within
it, white and some with the whytenesse has an alborne color: it is red
without, the best is the freshest, that which has no holes, if it be
weighty, and not worm eaten, and that it have a fatnes as if it were
congeled, and it has an unsavory cast. This Root does grow in the China,
which is the Oriental Indias near to Siria and Sirciana. It grows near to
the Sea, only with the root they help themselves, with the which the Indians
be healed of grievous diseases. And therefore they have it in great estimation:
they do heal al manner of large diseases therewith: and also the sharp
diseases: especially Agues, with the Water of it, provoking Sweats, and by this
way they heal many. It provoke sweat maruellously.

It is well near xxx. years since that the Portingales brought it to these
parts with great estimation, History.
for to heal al manner of diseases, and especially the disease of the Pox, in
the which it has wrought great effects, and the Water is given in this form.

The sick person being purged as is most convenient, The manner how to give
the water of the China.
must take one of the Roots and cut them small unto the thickness and
greatness of a three penny piece, and so being cut, shall way one ounce, and
cast it into a new Pot, and thereupon shall pour three Pottels of Water, and
so shall lie a sleeping there xxiiii. hours, and the Pot being stopped, let it
sees at a soft fire of kindled Coals, until half be sodden away, and one
Pottel and half remain, and this is to be known by the order of the Measure
as aforesaid, in the water of the Wood. And after that it is cold, let it be
strained and kept in a glassed vessel. There must be care taken, that it stand
in some hot or warm place near to the fire, for that therewith it does
preserve the virtue the better, and dureth longer time, before it be corrupted.

The sick man being lodged in a close convenient Chamber, How it must be
taken.
must take in the morning fasting ten ounces of the said water, as hot as
he can suffer it, and he shall procure sweat, and keep it two hours at the
least. After the sweat he shall be made clean, and shall take a Shirte, and
clean clothes, and warm them, and shall lie down again two or three hours
in the bed quietly, after he has swet. And afterward let him apparel
himself, and being well warmed remain in his Chamber, in the which he shall
be kept from cold and the open ay^e, with all the pleasure of good company and
conversation: he shall eat at xi. of the clock, half a Chicken sodden, or a
quarter of a Hen, with a little Salt. At the beginning of dinner he shall
drink a dishfull of Broth, and forthwith eat of the Pullet, eating at the
beginning a little, and he shall end with Marmelade. His drink shall be of
the water he took in the morning, for that here is no more then one water,
he may at the beginning after the Broth is taken, begin too eat Reasinges,
without their little Graynes, or Prunes without their stones: their bread must
be Crustie, well baked, or Biscuit. If he will drink in the day time, he may
do so with taking of a little Conserua, and drink of the same water, and
being ^ight hours past his Dinner, let him lie down in his Bed, and take
other ten ounces of the same water, the which being hot he may drink, and
procure sweat: two hours after he has sweat, let him be made clean, and
take a clean shirte, and clean clothes warm, and after one hour let him sup
with Co^serua, Reasinges and Almondes, with some Biscuit, and drink of the
self same water, and last of all eat Marmelade, upon the which he may not
drink. Thus he may continue xxx. days continually, without need of any more
Purgation then the first, and he may sit up, so that he go well clothed, using
in this time all content and mirth, and keeping him self from all that may
offend him.

Note.
After that he has taken this water in this sort, he must keep good order,
and good government for forty days continually. And he must drink no Wine,
but water made of the China, that was before sodden, the which he shall keep
after it is sodden, setting it to dry in a shadowie place, and that China being
dry, must be kept to make water for other 40. days, to drink after the taking
of the first water: seething one ounce thereof in three Pottels of water vn^il
one half be sodden away, and this water let him drink continually. And above
all things let him keep himself from women: and he must always have care,
that as well in the water of xxx. days, as in the water of the forty days,
that the China be steeped in the water xxiiii. hours before it be sodden.

There be many diseases healed with this water, The disease that be healed by
this water.
al kinds of evil of the Pox, all old Sores, it resolves all swellings and
knobbes, it takes away the pains of the joints which they call the Arthetica
Gout, and any other kind of Gout that is in any particular member or place,
and especially the Sciatica, it takes away old pains of the head and of the
stomach. It heals all manner of runninges of Rewmes, it dissolueth Opilations
and heals the Dropsy. It makes a good color in the face, it takes away
the Iaundies, and all evil complexion of the Liver and rectifieth it, and in
this it has a great prerogative. And by this means these infirmities are
healed. It heals the Palsy and all infirmities of the Sinews, it heals
all diseases of Urine, it takes away Melancholy, and all infirmities coming
of cold diseases. It does comfort the stomach, it does dissolve winds
meruellously, and also Agues long and sharp, as quotidians: the taking of this
water as it is convenient, so does it root them out, and take them away. The
which thing it does by provoking of sweat, in this it does exceed all other
Medicines, and some will say that in Pestilent Agues, by provoking sweat it
heals them. It is dry in the second degree with very little heat, The
complexion thereof.
the which is seen by the other waters of the wood. And as Sarcaparillia which
does heat and dry, so this does not, nor leaves any impression of heat.

Surely it is a notable Medicine, in the which I have found great effects
for the Diseases which I have sp^ken of. Note.


Of the Sarcaparillia.
THE Sarcaparillia is a thing brought into our parts since the China. The time
since that the Sarcapillia, came unto us.
It is xx. years since yt the use thereof came to this city. It first came
from the new Spain, and the Indians did use it for great medicine, with the
which they did heal many and diverse diseases.

It is a plant which does cast many roots under the ground, being of a yeard
long, and of the color of a clear Tawny, The description, of the Sarcaparillia
and sometimes the roots shoot so deep, that to take them out all, it is
needful to dig a Man's length. It casts forth certain bows full of
knottes, that quickly do dry, and we know not that they have carried flowers
or fruit at all.

After that the Sarcaparillia of the new Spain was found, Sarcaparillia of
the Hunduras.
there was also found in the Hunduras, an other sort that was better, and of
better effects: it is known to be of the Hunduras, because that it is of
color Tawnie, and grosser than that of the new Spain, the which is white,
and somewhat like to yellowe, and more small, and so the Sarcaparillia that is
most like to black is best.

It ought to be fresh, and in this is all the goodness thereof, The choosing of
it.
it is known to be fresh by not being Worm eaten. For that at the fresh
breaking of it long wise, in the midst it makes a running out to the end,
and casts out no dust, and the heavier it is, the better it is.

The Spaniardes did call it Sarcaparillia when they saw it, Of the name.
for the great likeness that it has with the Sarcaparillia of these parts. I
have it for certain, that the Sarcaparillia of these parts, and of the
Indias, is all one, and the very same that ours is. The which I have
experimented many times, and ours works the effect that the Sarcaparillia of
the new Spain does, and it is like unto that of the Hunduras, but it is of a
bitter taste, and not very sharp, and the water that it yields has no more
savor then barley water has.

The use of this herb at the first did differ much from that which is now in
experiment, H^w it was used in the beginn^^g.
for that they gave it as the Indians did, in the healing of their sick
folks, and surely it did work very great effects. But the delicateness of
our time does require that it should be used and given as the water of the wood
is. At the beginning they took of the Sarcaparilla much quantity, more then
half a pound, and did cut it small and break it, and cast it into a
quantity of water, and being well wet they beat it in a Mortar a good while,
in such sort that it was made like a Iellie, and then did strain it,
pressing it very well, for there came out of it the likeness of a thick
drink. And of that they took in the morning hot, one good Cup full, and then
the Pacient clothed him self well. And sweet two hours, and if in the day
time they would drink any thing, it should be of the self same thick
drink, so made by expression hot, and then they sweet as much in the morning.
This order they observed for three days continually, without eating or
drinking of other meat, saving only that thick drink, Take this for three
days.
taken out by pressing or straining of the Sarcaparillia: and after this sort I
gave it at the beginning many times, and surely it wrought great effects, and
many sick people did better recover, then they do now with this other
fashion.

After there was invented an other form and manner to give it, and is that
which is now used, in this sort. The ^^s^^on how it is now used and given.
They take two ounces of Sarcaparillia, and wash it and cut it small and then
they put it into a new earthen pot, and there upon they pour three Pott^ls
of water, and set it in the water to steep twenty and four hours, and
after the Pot being well stopte, it must sees on a soft fire of kindled
coals, until the two Pottels be sodden away, and the one remain, the which
may be known by the order of the measure, that we spoke of, and when it is
cold, let it be strained into a glassed vessel, and upon the selfsame
Sarcaparillia that is sodde^, let there be so much water powered in again that
the pot be filled, and let it boil a reasonable time, and kept in a vessel
glassed.

Now the sick Man being purged, as it seems most convenient, The manner how
to geu^ ^t.
and placed in a warm Chamber, he must take in the morning ten ounces, of the
first water of the Sarcaparillia, and must sweat at the least two hours, and
after sweat he must be made clean from his sweat, and take a warm shirt,
and warm clothes, and the like he must do at night, eight hours after he
has eaten his Dinner, changing his shirt and hot apparel. He must dine at
eleven of the clock, and suppe one hour after he has sweat, at night eating
nothing but Reasinges, Almondes, and Biscuit, and drinking of the second water.
Let him keep this order fifteen days, and if he be weak, give him a little
roasted chicken, increasing it in process of time, and at the least he must
keep his bed niene days at the first beginning, and the rest of the time in
his chamber, kept from cold, and from air, and on the fifteen day he must be
purged, with a soft and an easy medicine, and likewise on the thirty day, in
such sort, that all the order that we have prescribed, be kept, as in the
manner of the taking of the water of the wood is already declared. And likewise
after the 30. da^es, he must have good government, for other forty days, not
drinking any wine, but simple water made of the said Sarcaparillia, and keeping
himself from women. This is the ordinary manner in taking of the water of
Sarcaparillia, which at this day is used. And because I have experience of
other ways that be of great secret, and of great effects, I will write them
here, to the end that all the virtues which are in the Sarcaparillia, may be
set down and declared, seeing it is the Medicine that is most used, and that
we do see in it so great and rare effects.

I do make a Sirupe, that many years has been celebrated, and had in
estimation in this city, A Sirupe or drink of Sarcaparilla most excellent.
and in all Spain for that it is xxvi. years since I used it first for the
disease of the Pox, and for other infirmities: which Syrup does not heat nor
inflame, but with great temperature, according to the graduation, woorketh his
good effects. The first, for whom this thing was ordained and devised, was for
Pantelion de Negro Ienoues, who was had in cure by many Physicians, and having
taken the water of the Wood, and other Medicines, was well near consumed: and
with a grievous swelling sore upon his shinne bone, and great pains in it,
he took it, and was healed very well. This sirupe I have used in many people
for the infirmity that the Sarcaparilla does profit for, and the wood and for
many other, and it has a good effect in woorking by degrees: for that the
dryness of the wood is taken away, and the heat of the Sarcaparilla: and it
is made in this form.

There must be taken two ounces of Sarcaparilla, and four ounces of Paulo
Sancto, which is the holy Wood, The description of the Sirupe or drink.
prepared as it is said, and three Doozen of Acoseifas, a fruit of Spain,
without their stones, and two Doozen of Prunes, without their stones, and half
an ounce of the flowers of Borage, and an other half ounce of Uiolettes and
some graynes of Barley made clean, that is too say, the husks taken away. All
these things let them be cast into three Pottles of water and let them be
sodden on a soft fire, until it come to one Pottell, and then let it be
strayned, and unto ten ounces of this decoction let there be put one ounce of
the Sirupe of Uiolettes. Let it be taken hot in the morning, and at night in
the order above said. In the rest of the water, keeping sweet if there be any,
and although there come little, yet they be healed. They may eat a little
Chicken from the first day, with the rest of the diet, and drink the simple
water of the Sarcaparilla, which is to be made with half an ounce of
Sarcaparillia, sodden in four Pott^ls of water, until one or somewhat more,
be sodden away.

This order does heal all kind of evil of the Pox, and all the infirmities
that we have spoken of, The diseases that this drink does profit in.
that the water of the Wood does heal, and the China, and the Sarcaparillia.
Which to repeat, it shall be too long and too prolixious, because it it is
sufficiently declared before. For surely in this simple water, and in the
foresaid decoction, I have found great effects, a^ well in the infirmities
wherein is suspected the evil of the Pox, as in large and importunate
diseases, in the which the common remedies of Phisic^e have not profited, which
although they proceeded not of the French Pox, yet does it cure and heal
them, as it is seen by the work of him that uses it.

There is an other Sirupe to be made of the Sarcaparillia, Another drink of
the Sarcaparillia
which is: taking eight ounces of Sarcaparillia being broken or cut, and
seething it in four pottelles of water, until three be sodden away and the
one remain, and into the water that shall remain, to put to four pound of
Sugar, and make a perfect Sirupe. And of this Sirupe too take three ounces in
the morning and three at night, eating good meats, and to suppe little, and
drink only the simple water of the Sarcaparillia, The diseases that this
drink heals.
and going abr^ade out of the house, and doing his buisinesse. There are healed
therewith many diseases without giving any molestation in the healing of them.
And this must be taken till the Sirupe be all consumed.

Also this Sarcaparillia is taken in powder, in this manner. They take the
Sarcaparillia, Sarcaparillia in powder.
and pluck away from it the hear within it, and dry it and grynde it, and
then sifte it through a syue of silk, and make it in Powder. Of this Powder is
taken in the infirmity of the Pox, or spice of them, the weight of six pence,
drinking it with the simple Water of the Sarcaparillia taking it in the
Morning, and as night, as much when he goes to bed. He must eat good
meats, and drink no Wine, but the simple water thereof. It shall do well he
be purged that shall begin to use it.

And although that this powder does heal many diseases large and temporal,
one cure it does meruellously, which is the salt Fleume of the hands and
feet, in this form. The sick man being purged, and also without purging, if
he cannot otherwise do, he shall take the Powder as it is said, and upon the
salt Fleume, he shall lay with a Feather, The Salt Fleume is cured herewith.
a little of the water of Sublimatum, delayed with Rosewater, that it be very
simple, and after it is laid on all parts where the salt Fleume is, then let
there be put upon it a plaster, that is called of William Ser^e^tis, or Dia
Palma spread abroad thin upon Satin or Taffeta, too be applied in all parts
where the simple water of Sublimatum was put. This must be done every day, for
that in fifteen days he shall be perfectly whole. This does mundifie and
incarnate, and skin without having need of any other medicine, jointly with the
Powder and the simple water of Sarcaparillia, which we have spoken of. This is
of so great effect, and experimented, as they shall see by the work that shall
use it, for surely they shall be whole thereby.

The use of the water of the Sarcaparillia is so great at this day in this
form, as is said, The virtue of the water of Sarparillia.
that it is applied in any disease, and it is come into so much credit, that
in any manner of Reumes or runnings, or windiness, the evil of Women, of the
Mother, or any other cause or occasion whatsoever, so that it be not in Fevers
or other sharp diseases, men take the use of the simple Water of the
Sarcaparillia: and this is at this day so put in use, that in like sort you
shall find the simple sodden Water of Sarcaparillia in many houses, as
ordinary water in yearthen vessels, and surely it woorketh great effects, and
does remedy large and importunate diseases. Truth it is, that the persons
that be hot of complexion, it does beat them more then is convenient, and
so they cannot drink it, and most of all if that their Liver be very hot,
for that it heateth too much.

In women's diseases as well of the Mother, as of cold humors, it woorketh
good effects, and does m^ruellously dissolve winds. And in persons that be
subject to many euilles, and especially of Reumes, and old greeffes and
diseases caused of the evil humors, if they run this course, with the
continuance thereof, they shall receive manifest profit and benefit, and it
does heal all deseases which they never thought to be healed of. The
complexion thereof i^ hot and dry, well near in the second degree. All
these waters must be given in Summer, or in the end thereof: it is better that
the season exceed in heat then in cold.

Of the blood Stone, and of the Stone for the diseases of the Stone of the
Kidneies and Reins.
Of the blood stone.
THEY do bring from the new Spain two stones of great virtue, the one is
called the Stone of the Blood, and the other is a Stone for the desease of the
Stone in the Kidneis and Raines, The Blood Stone is a kind of Jasper of diverse
colors somewhat dark, full of sprincles, like to blood, being of color
read, of the which stones the Indians do make certain Hearts both great and
small.

The use thereof, both here and there, is for all fluxes of blood in what
parts soever it be, of the Nose, or of the Menstrues, or of the Piles, and of
Wounds, or of that which is cast out at the mouth. The stone must be wette in
cold water, and the sick Man must take it in his right hand, and from time
to time wette it in cold water. In this sort the Indians do use them. And as
touching the Indians, they have it for certain, that touching the same stone,
in some part where the blood runs, it does restrain, it and in this they
have great trust, for that the effect has been seen. It does profit also
having it holden, hanged, or tied in the same part where the blood runs, so
that it touch the flesh. Of this stone we have seen great effects, in
staunching of blood. And some that do suffer the Hemeroidall flux, have
remedied themselves with making Ringes of this stone, and wearing them
continually upon their fingers. And likewise in the Menstruall flux of women.

The other Stone, The stone for the disease of the grauel and stone in the
kidneys or reine^.
which is for the disease of the stone in the Kidneies or Reins, the finest of
them are like unto Plasma of Esmeraldes, which are lykened to green with a
Milkishe color, the greatest are the best: they bring them made in diverse
forms and fashions, for so the Indians had them in old time, some like to
fishes, other like to the heads of byrds, other like to bills of Popingaies,
other like to round Beadstones, but all pearsed through, for that the Indians
did use to wear them hanging for the effect to take away the grief of the
stone or stoma^ke: for in those two sicknesses it shows marvelous effects.

The chief virtue that it has, is in the pain of the stone in the Kidneis and
Reins, and in expelling of Sand and stone. In so much that a Gentleman which
had one of them here, the best of them that I have seen, having laid it to
his arm, it made him to expel and cast out much sand, insomuch that many
times he does take it away, for that he thinks that it does hurt him for
to void so much, and in taking it away, he cease to void any from him: and
when he feels the pain of the stone, laying it too again, it does take it
away incontinent, with expelling of much Sand and small stones. I have seen
it carried to persons that have been afflicted with great grief, and pains
of the said disease, who putting it to them, do forthwith expel the sand
and the little stones, ^^d remain clear thereof.

A property hidden.
This stone has a property hidden, by the which means it woorketh great
effects, to preserve men that they fall not into the pain of the said
disease, and after it is come to take it away, or diminish it. It does make
the sand to be expelled in great abundance, and likewise stones. It takes
away the heat from the reins of the back, it profits in griefs of the
stomach, laid unto it: and above all it preserves from the said grief.

My Lady the Duchess for that she had in short space three times, exceeding
pains of the stone, she made a bracelet of them, and used to wear it on her
arm, and sithence she put them to her arm, she never had more pains of the
Stone: and so it has happened to many other that found the like benefit, for
the which these stones are much esteemed: and now they be not so soon had, as
at the beginning, for that the gentlemen, and rich men have them only, and
with reason, because they do work such marvelous effects. An other stone
there is that does heal the salt fleume, the which I know by hearesay only,
but I have seen none of them.

Of the VVoodde for the evils of the Reins, and of the Urine.
ALso they bring from the new Spain, a certain woodde that is like unto the
woodde of a Pear tree, gross and without knottes, the which they have used
many years in these parts, for the pains of the Reins and of the Stone, and
for the infirmities of the Urine.

The first time that I saw it used, may be about xxxv. years past. There was
a Pilot that was sick of the Urine and of the Reins, and after that he had
used it, he was whole and very well. And sithence that time I have seen that
many have brought it from the new Spain, and they do use it for these
diseases following.

For them that cannot piss liberally, The diseases which it cures.
and for the pains of the Reins, and of the stone, and for them that do piss
wi^h pain, and for them that do piss little. And now the thing has
extended unto opilations, for that the water thereof does cure and heal them,
both of the Lunges and the Liver, and this has been found within these few
years, and they do find in it notable profit. The water is made in this
form.

They take the wood, and make it into small pieces very shinne: and small as it
is possible, How the water is made.
and then put the^ into fair water of the Fountain, and leave it so until the
water be sokened into it: and by putting the wood into the water, within half
an hour the water does begin to change it self into a blewe color very
clear, and the longer that it lies in the water, so much the blewer it
turns, although that the wood be of a white color. Of this water they do
drink continually, and therewith they use to water their wine, and it works
marvelous and manifest effects, without any alteration, so that it needs
but only good government and regiment. The water has no more savor then if
there were nothing cast into it, for that the wood does change nothing. The
complexion thereof is hot and dry in the first degree.

Of the Peper of the Jndias.
I Will not let to speak of the Peper that they bring from the Indias, Of the
India^ Peper.
which serves not only for Medicine, but it is otherwise most excellent, the
which is known in all Spain, for there is no Gardeyne, nor Orcharde, but that
it has plenty thereof in it, for the fairness of the fruit that it
brings forth.

The description of the Plant.
It is a great Plant, insomuch that I have seen in this City some that was
equal with many Trees. It does cast forth the leaves green, after the
fashion of Basil of the biggest sort. And it casts forth certain white
flowers, out of the which comes the fruit, the which is of diverse forms:
some Peper is long, other round, others of the making of Mellons, others of
Cherries, but all is at the beginning when it is not type very green, and
being ripe very read, and with a gracious and good color.

The use of it.
All the sorts are used in all manner of meats and pottages, for that it has a
better taste then the common Peper has. Beaten in pieces, and cast into broth
it is an excellent sauce, they do use it in all things that the aromatike
spices are used in, which are brought from Maluco, and Calicu^. It does differ
from that of the East Indias, for that costeth many ducates, and this other
does cost no more but to sow it, for that in one plant you have spice for one
whole year, with less hurt and more profit.

The virtues that it has.
It does comfort much, it does dissolve winds, it is good for the breast,
and for them that be cold of complexion: it does heal and comfort,
strengthening the principal members. It is hot and dry, well near in the
fourth degree.

They do bring from diverse parts of our Indias many purgative Medicines, Note.
that have been found and discovered by continuance, whose works and effects
are great: of the which I will give here a short relation, that it may be an
entrance for to entreat of the root of Mechoacan, which was our principal
intent now to write of.

Of the Cannafistola.
THere does come from the Islands of Sancto Domingo, Canafistola.
and from Sancte John de Puerto Rico great quantity of Canafistola, and it is
so much, that not only all Spain is provided of it, but all Europe, and well
near all the world: for that unto Leuant, from whence it was accustomably
brought, now there goes more Ships laden with it, then come with Iron from
Biskeye. That which comes from our Indias, is much better in comparison then
that which is brought from the East Indias to Uenis, and that which the
Galleons do carry from thence to Genoua, and from Genoua to Spain, for when
the Merchantes brought it hither, it could not be good, for that it was very
small, and also it was not type, and with so long time and continuance it
became so corrupted, that it did profit little.

This of ours that they bring from Sancto Domingo and Saint John is ripe,
great, full, weighty, honilyke, The description of it.
and fresh. In so much that many times it comes in sixty days after it is
gathered, and being fresh, it is of a gracious and good taste, and not of so
horrible smell, as that of Leuant is, and so it does his work far better,
and with more facility.

This Canafistola, and the work thereof is of great security, it purges
gently, without any alteration. The virtue of the Canafistola.
And does avoid principally Choler, and after Fleume, and that which is in
the ways and the Guts. It does temper them much that take it, also it
purifieth the blood, it does many good works in all kind of diseases, in
especially in the pains of the Reins, and of vryne, being taken two hours
before supper. And in reumes it does much profit, being taken two hours
after Supper, and easily it does cure the euilles of the breast, which have
be^ne of long continuance, and griefs of the side, being taken with Syropes
for the breast: and being applied outwardly with the Oil of sweet Almondes,
it takes away the grievous diseases of the Lunges, and griefs of the Reins.
It is good in hot Fevers, and using it continually before supper or dinner,
it stays the ingendring of the stone, it takes away the dries. it is moist
in the first degree, it declyneth to heat, although it be little, it is
dissoluatiue, it clarifieth the blood, and delayeth the sharpness thereof, and
of the red color. There have been in the Indias since it was discovered some
thereof so weighty, that one codde waieth five shillinges, being taken out by
the Seen, and four ounces in weight the whole cane.

Of the Purgative Nuttes.
AT the beginning when they discovered the Indias, they brought from Sancto
Domingo, Of the purgative Nuttes.
certain Nuttes being three cornered, with the which the Indians did purge
themselves, and were unto them a familiar purgation. And afterward the
Spaniardes, for necessity did purge themselves with them, with hazard enough
of some of their lives, for with the use thereof, many thought to lose their
lives, for that it is a strong purge. And although that it does make a great
excess of stools, yet does it also provoke vomitte very strongly, and with
much violence, with great faintness and heaviness. Afterward some did
rectify them by costing of them, and then they be not so violent, nor so
strong, neither work with so much cause of faintness. What these Nuttes do
purge.
They do purge Fleume very strongly, and after color. It is an excellent
Medicine for the Colike, it does dissolve winds, and put in a glister it
does euacuate reasonably.

The manner and color of them is as of our Nuttes, with a thin rind, The
d^scription o^ ^he N^^^es.
of the color of a clear Baye, they are three cornerd, the carnell within is
white, and sweet, insomuch that for their sweetness, many have been m^eked
therewith. The Physicians do call them commonly Ben, Ben.
of which there are two sorts, one they call great, and the other little.
The great Ben be these purgative Nuttes, the little Beu be as great as our
Peason, of the which in Italy they make that oil of sweet smell, which they
call Oil of Ben, with the which they do annoint their hear, and beards for
dilicatenesse. Their complexion is hot in the beginning of the third degree,
and dry in the second. Their weight is of half a dragme unto one, but they
must be tosted.

Of the purgative Pinions.
THey do bring from the new Spain certain Pinions or Carnels wherewith the
Indians did purge themselves: The description of them.
they be like to our Pinions, which do grow out of our trees, being great
after the fashion of the wheat of the Indias, the shale is not so hard as ours
is, they are somewhat more black, they be round, and within very white,
fattie, and sweet in taste. They do purge valiantly Fleame and Color, and any
manner of waterishnes, they are more easy Medicine, then the Nuts be, they do
purge by stool, How they purge.
and by vomit, and if they be tosted they do not purge so much, nor with so
much faintnes. They do purge of their own nature gross Humors: it is a
Purgation much used amongst the Indians, being ground and dissolved with
Wine, having first taken preparatiues that do attennuate the humor, How they
be taken.
that a man does pretend to euacuate, and using a convenient Diet. They take
of them five or six more or l^sse, conformably to the obedience of the
stomach, of him that shall take them.

Ordinarily they do tossed them: for so they be more gentle and less furious. It
is needful that he which does take them, be kept as one being purged.

They be given in large infirmities, and where there be gross humors: they be
hot in the third degree, and dry in the second with some fatnes, which does
take away somewhat of the drynes.

Of the purgative Beans.
FRom Cartagena, and number de Dios, they bring certain Beans like to the
fashion of ours, Beans like to ours.
saving that they be somewhat less, and of the color and making of ours, they
have in the midst of the Bean that does divide the two halues, one little
thin skin, like to the skin of an oynion.

How they be taken.
They do take them from their shale, and from the inner thin skin, and
toste them and make them into powder, and take them (...) Wine: and being made
into powder and mingled with Sugar, one sponeful of the powder is taken, and
upon that a little draught of wine. They do purge without molestation Choler
and Fleame, and gross mixed humors. And amongst the Indians they are of great
estimation, for the easiness that they have in the taking of them. Many
Spaniardes do purge with them with much security, and it is a Medicine more
easy and gentle than that aforesaid.

History.
I have seen many that have come from those parts, purge them therewith, and
it succeeds with them very well, and purges without grief.

Note.
But they must be aduysed that there be taken from them that little skin that
is in the midst of the two halfes of the Beans. For if they take that, the
strength of it is so much greater and vehement of Uomites and stools, that
they put in great hasarde him that shall take them And also they must have care
to cost them, for that it does prepare them, and delayeth much of the
sharpenes, and fearsenes, which is general in this Medicine, and in all the
rest, for that to tossed them is the true preparation of them. After the taking
of any of the foresaid Medicines the patient must not sleep at al: it is
needful that he keep great watch being purged, and in all things which in a
man purged may be convenient.

The Beans be given prepared, in Fevers being large and importunate, and in
diseases of mixed humors, Their work^ and effects.
being gross and in the pains of the joints, and they are an universal
Purgation: they be hot in the second degree, and dry in the first, there be
given of them from four too six, tos^ed more or less, as the obedience and
sufferance of the belly is of him that shall take them.

Of the milk Pinipinichi.
IN all the coast of the firm land they take out a certain kind of milk,
from little trees. Of the Pin^pinichi.
like to Apple trees, which the Indians call Pinipinich^, of the which cutting
one bough, there comes forth whereas it is cut, a certain kind of milk
somewhat thick and clammy, and taking three or four drops thereof, it does
purge valiantly by the stool principally Cholerike Humors, and Citrine water,
and it does work with much vehemency and force.

It must be taken in Wine, or dried into powder in little quantity, for that
the work thereof is of most strength. How it is taken.
It has one property, that in eating or drinking of broth or wine or other
thing forthwith it woorketh no longer, and he that does take it, has need to
keep good watch, and good order, It is hot and dry in the third degree.

All these Medicines which we have spoken of, be violent and of great force,
and they have not been much used sithence the Mechoacan has come, for that
in it there is found a work more sure, Note.
and unto this not only we, but all the Indians have run, as unto a purge
most excellent, of the which we will treat now.

Of the Mechoacan.
THe Mechoacan is a root, that it may be about xxx. years that it was
discovered, Mechoacan.
in the province of the new Spain, in the Indias, of the Occean Seas, it is
brought from a Country that is beyond the great city of Mexico, more then 40.
leagues, and is called Mechoacan the which Sir Fernando Curtes did conquer, in
the year of our Lord, 1524. This is a country of much riches, of Gold and
chiefly of silver, The riches and increase.
and it is understood that in all that Country is, much silver. For more then
200. leagues, here those Mines be so celebrated, and of so great riches, that
they be called the Cacatecas, and every day they discover in the land very
rich mines of silver, and some of Gold. It is a country of good and wholesome
air, and does bring forth healthful herbs for to heal many diseases,
insomuch that at the time the Indians had the government thereof, the inhabiters
there round about that Province, came thither too heal their diseases and
infirmities. For the said causes, it is a country very fruitful, and of great
abundance of bread, wild foul, and fruits. It has many fountains, and some
of sweet waters, which have much abundance of fish, the Indians of that
country are of a tauller grouth, The s^^^ation of Mechoacan.
and of better faces than the Borderers are, and much more healthful.

The Principal place of that Province the Indians do call in their language
Chincicila, and the Spaniardes do call it as they call that Realm Mechoacan, and
it is a great town of Indians, situated near to a lake, which is of sweet
water, abounding with very much Fish. The same Lake is in fashion of the making
of an horseshoe, and in the midst thereof stands the Town, the which at this
d^y has great trade of buying and selling, for the great Mines of Plate that
are in all that country.

As soon as that Province was gotten from the Indians, History.
there went thither certain Friars of Saint Frances order, and as in a
Country so far distaunt from their natural soil, some of them fell sick,
amongst whom the Warden, who was the chief Friar of the house was one, with
whom Caconcin Casique an Indian Lord, a man of great power in that Country,
had very great friendship, who was Lord of all that Country. The father Warden
had a long sickness and was brought in great danger of life: the Casique as he
saw his disease proceed forward, said that he would bring him an Indian
of his, which was a Physician, with whom he did cure himself, and it might be,
that he would give him remedy of his disease. The which being heard of the
Friar, and seeing the little help that he had there, and the want of a
Physician, with other things of benefit, he thanked him, and desired him,
that he would bring him unto him: who being come, and seeing his disease,
sai^e to the Casique, that if he took a powder, that he would give him of a
root, that it would heal him. The which being known to the Friar, with the
desire that he had of health, he accepted his offer, and took the powder that
the Indian Physician gave him, the next day, in a little wine: with the which
he did purge so much, and without pains, that the same day he was much
lightened, and much more from that time forward, in such sort that he was healed
of his infirmity. The rest of the Friars which were sick, and some Spaniardes
that were sick also, did follow the father Wardens cure, and took of the
selfsame powder once or twice, and as often as they had need of it, for to
heal them. The use of the which went so well with them, that all they being
healed, the Friars did send relation of this, to the father prouincial to
Mexico where he was, who did communicate it with those of the country, giving
to the^ of the root and comforting them that they should take it, because of
the good relation, that he had from those Friars of Mechoacan. The which being
used of many, and seeing the meruellous works that it did, the fame of it was
extended all abroad, so that in short time, all the Country was full of the
good works and effects thereof, vanishing the use of Ruibarbe of Barberie,
and taking the name thereof calling it Ruibarb^ of the Indias, as all men do
now commonly call it. And also it is called Mechoacan, Ruibarbe of the Indias.
for that it is brought from thence, and gathered in the Province called
M^choacan. And not only in Mexico, and in that Country it does take it as the
most excellent purgation, and best of all other, but also in Peru, and in all
other parts of the Indias, they use no other thing, neither purge they with
any other purge, and they take it with so much trust and easiness, that when
they take it, they think to have certainly their health, and so they carry it
from the new Spain, as Merchaundise of very great price.

History.
I^ is about thirty and four years past, when I saw it here the first time,
when one Pasquall Catano a Genoues, came from the new Spain, who fell sick
at his coming, and as I did cure him, at the time that I would purge him, he
said to me that he brought a Ruibarbe from the new Spain, that was a very
excellent Medicine, with the which all they of Mexico did purge themselves,
saying, that it was called Ruibarbe of Mechoacan, and he had been purged many
times therewith, and it had succeeded very well with him, and if he should
take any purge, he would take that, of the which he had experience. But I
caused him utterly to forsake the use of such like n^w Medicines, of the which
there was nothing written nor known. And did persuade with him to purge with
the Medicines that we had here, of the which there was so great experience
and knowledge, in written Authors. And he did grant to my words, and purged
himself with a purga^ion that I gave him, eue^ as it was conu^nient for his
disease. By the which although that there did follow unto him notable
lightness, and profit: yet he was not clear of the disease in such sort,
but that it was necessary to purge him an other time. And when we came to the
second purgation, he would take none other but his own Ruibarbe of
Mechoacan, with the which he did purge so well, that he remained whole, and
without any disease. And although that this ^ffect did like me well,
nevertheless I did not remain satisfied, until many other that came at the
same time, and fell sick, did purge with the said Mechoacan, and it went very
well with them, because they were accustomed to purge therewith in the new
Spain: and seeing the good works and so many thereof. I began to consider of
it, and to purge many therewith, giving credit to the good effects that it
wrought.

And so with these that I did make experience of here, The use in all parts of
the Mechoaca^s.
as also with the relation, and great credit of them, that came out of the
new Spain (insomuch that the use thereof has spread abroad, that it is a
common thing in all the world, and they do purge therewith not only in the
new Spain, and the Provinces of the Peru, but also in our Spain, all Italy,
Almaine, and Flaunders) I have sent relation thereof, well near to all Europe,
as well in Latin, as in our native tongue.

The use thereof is so much, The gr^ate quantity of Mechoacan that is used.
that they bring it for chief Merchaundise, in great quantity, and it is
sold for great sums of money: Insomuch that a seller of Drugges told me,
besides that which he had sold for the City, he had sold forth of the city
the last year, more than ten kintalles of it, which is a thousand pound
weight, so that now they ask for Ruibarb of the Indias, for that it is so
familiar, that there is no husband man that does not use it, as a most sure
medicine, and of great effects, because for that kind of purgation, there is
no need of a Physician, as being that, unto which all men give most credit,
as a thing determined and approved for good.

I have talked with many of them that have come from the new Spain, and in
especially with them that have been in Mechoacan, concerning the fashion of
the plant that this root is of, and what form and figure it has, the which
they do bring from the Country, within 40. leages of beyond Mechoacan, from
a country which is called Colima, and they have so little care therein, seeing
that their principal intent is unto their interest and gain, that they know
no more thereof, but that the Indians in Mechoacan do sell it them, the roots
being dry and clean, as hither they do bring them, and the Spaniardes do
buy them, as a kind of Merchandise, and so send them to Spain.

And surely in this we are worthy of great reprehension* that seeing that
there are in the new Spain, so mani^ Herbs, and Plants, and other things
Medicinable, of so much importance, there is not any that writes of them, nor
is it understood, what virtues and forms they have, for to accord them with
ours: so that if men had a desire to search out, and experiment so many kind
of medicines, as the Indians do sell in their Market places and Fayres, it
would be a thing of great profit, and utility to see and to know their
propertie^, and to experiment the variable and great effects, which the
Indians do publishe, and manifest with great proof amongst themselves, which
they have of them: we of our part without any consideration do refuse it,
and such as do know their effects, will not give us relation, nor knowledge
what they are, nor write the efficacy and manner of them.

And going too search after the Place of the Root Mechoacan, History of the
Plant of Mechoacan.
a Passenger that was come from that Province, did advertise me that a Fraunces
Friar, that was come from that Country, had brought in the ship where he
came, the proper Herb of Mechoacan green, in a great barrel, and with much
care, which he brought from beyond Mechoacan, and that he had it in the
Frierie of S. Frances of the City. And hearing thereof I did receive great
contentment, and so I went forthwith to the Frierie, and at the door of
Infirmerie, or house for the sick people of this Frierie, there was a thing
like too half a Pipe, in the which there was an herb very green, which they
said was the Mechoacan, that the Friar had brought from the new Spain, not
with little labor. The description of the Mechoacan.
It is an heath that grows creeping up by certain little Canes, it has a
sad green color, it carries certain leaves, that the greatness of them
may be of the greatness of a good Porenge dish, which are in compass round,
with a little point, the leaf has his little Sienewes, it is small, well
near, without moisture, the stalk is of the color of a clear Tawnie. They
say that it casts forth certain Clusters with little Grapes, of the
greatness of a Coriander seed which are the fruit, and do wax ripe by the
Month of September: it casts out many Bows, which does stretche a long
upon the Earth, and if you put any thing near to it, it goes creeping upon
it. The Root of the Mechoacan is unsavory, and without biting, The manner of
the root.
or any sharpness of taste. That which we do see at this present of our
Mechoacan, is a root which they bring from the new Spain, from the Province
of Mechoacan, made in great and little pieces, of them cut in pieces, of
them broken with their hands. It is a white Root, somewhat strong, and
mighty, it appears that the pieces be of a great root, without any heart.

The conditions, or elections that it must have, for to be good and perfect is:
that it be fresh, which may be known if that it be not worm eaten, The
electio^s of the Mechoacan.
nor black, and that it be somewhat white: but the very white is not so good,
and if it be somewhat russet, so that it be the uttermost part of the root,
for that the inner part is somewhat white. In the tasting or chewing of it, it
is without savor, or any manner of biting taste.

It imports to make his work the better if so be that it be fresh, That it
be fresh.
for that the fresher it is, the better it is, and the greater the pieces are,
the better they are conserved. And it is true, that that which is brought in
powder, is not so good, for that it does putrify, and lose much of the
virtue, and operation. As also we do see, if we make powder, and keep it, it
does not make so good work, as when the root is ground, and then forthwith
taken. The root being old does turn black, and it will be worm eaten with
holes, and become very light. It will keep well rouled in Sere cloth. It is
gathered in the month of October, and it never loses his leaf.

The Complexion thereof is hot in the first degree, and dry in the second,
The complexion thereof.
for that it has subtle parts, with some bynding, whereby it seems that
his work being done, it leaves the interior Members strengthened, without
debilitation and weakness, which the other Purgative Medicines do leave them
in: but rather those that do purge themselves therewith, do remain after
they be purged, more strong and hard, then before they were purged. It has no
need of rectification, for that we do not see in this root any notable
hurt, only the Wine is unto it a corroboration for the work, for being taken
with Wine, it makes a better work, then with any other Licour, for that it
does not cause vomit, and it woorketh the better.

It is given at all times and in all Ages, Easy to take and easy to work^.
it does his work without molestation, and without the accidents that the
other Medicines soluatiue are wont to procure. It is a Medicine easy to be
taken, for that it has no evil cast. Only it has the savor of that with the
which it is taken, for that it is of it self without savor, and so it is
easy for Children, for that they may take it without feeling what it is, it is
so likewise for persons that cannot take Medicines, for it has neither smell
nor taste. I have purged therewith many Children, and many very old persons,
and have given it to men of more then 80. years of age, It is given to
children and old people.
and it makes in them very sure and good work with no manner of alteration
nor change of body, and without being debilited or weakened.

This Root does avoid cholerike humors, gross mixed, and also flegmatike
Humors, of what kind soever they be, and humors putrified and rotten, and of
both colo^rs: The woork^^ and effects be meruellous of this root.
it does euacuate the Citrine water, of them that have the Dropsy, with much
easines. The principal respect thereof is to the Liver, making it clean, and
comforting it, and the Members near adjoining to it, as the stomach and the
inner parts. It does cure all Opilations of the same parts, and all diseases
caused of them: As the Dropsy, the Iaundies, and jointly with his good work
it rectifieth the evil complexion of the Liver, it d^ssolueth windiness, and
with easin^sse it expels it, and does open all the hardness of the Liver,
and of the Lunges, and of the stomach. It takes away old griefs of the
head, and mundifieth the brain and the Sinews, and emp^ieth out the humors
that be in the head, or p^r^es thereof. In the disease called the Lampa^ones,
which is the Ringes Evil, it makes a good work: in old gri^fe^ of the head
called the Megrim, and the Falling sickness, and in all Distillations, or old
runninges, in pains of ^he Joints, both particular and universal, as in the
^ou^ Arthetica, in pains of the stomach, emptying the cause, and consuming
windines. Also in pains of the Uryne and Bladder, In griefs of Women.
in pains of the stone and Colicke, of what kind soever it be, it makes a
meruellous work. It cures the pains of women, and especially the Mother, by
emptying and taking away the cause, as namely those causes which come of cold
humors and windiness, and in the griefs of the breast, as of an old cough,
and shortness of breath, for using this root oftentimes it takes it away, and
heals it. Also in griefs of the Reins caused of gross Humors, for it does
empty and expel them.

In griefs of the Pox.
In griefs of the Pox it makes a great work. And it seems that for these
griefs our Lord did ordain it, emptying the humors of them, which for the
most part are cold, and especially when they be waxen old of long time, it
purges them, and does expel them without any pains, by multiplying the
taking thereof as many times as is necessary, for that in these infirmities
that be old, and of long continuance, Note.
one euacuation is not sufficient, but it is necessary to have many
euacuations, which may be done without danger with this Root: and it is not
to be marvelled at, if that with one eu^cuation therewith does not follow the
health that is wished for, but that many times it is needful to make often
repetition, to the intent to root up and expel the evil, and naughty humors,
that are the cause of the said disease.

In agewes.
This root does maruellously empty forth the cause of the l^rge Fevers, and
importunate, and all Fevers compounded, and chiefly in old Fevers, as
Tertians, Quotidians, flegmatike, and in such diseases as commonly come of
opilacions, using thereof at the time that is needful, for that in the like
large and importunate diseases, the Physician must not be content with one
eu^cuation, Note.
but with many, digesting by little and little, and avoiding out by little and
little, seeing that the avoiding out is done with such assurance by this
Medicine so blessed.

He that has need of it must have a good heart, Note.
and with trust that it will profit him much, which hetherunto we have
experimented, in so many, that with just title all credit may be given to the
good works thereof. We see with how much easines and without any accide^ts, it
works the effects that we have spoken of. and it is looked for, that every
day will be discovered greater matters, that may be added unto these.

The Rule and order that must be kept in the administration, and giving of the
Pouders, The order that ought to be kept in taki^g of it.
made of the root of Mechoacan, was learned of the Indian Physician that we
have spoken of, and since it has been used in diverse and sundry fashions.

The first thing that is required of him that shall take this Powder is, that he
do prepare himself with good diet, It is convenient that there be a preparatiue
for him that shall take it.
and good order, keeping himself from all things that may offend health, and
to use these meats which are most convenient for him, and to dispose the humor
that principally he pretends to avoid out, and with some Syrope, that may
have the same respect that the humor is disposed unto the way to be prepared
where he may go out. And for this it is good that he take the counsel of a
Phisitio^: and he must use Glisters, if the Belly be not obedient at the least
the day before he shall take it, and if by chance he shall need letting blood
he shall do it with the judgment and opinion of a Physician. The body so
prepared and ready to be purged, he shall take this root chosen as we have
said, and it must be ground, How these pouders shall be taken.
making Powder of it, of an indifferent sinenesse, and way of it the quantity
that must be taken, as we shall speak of, and put it into white Wine, which
is Sack, as much in quantity as is needful for to drink, and it must be
taken in the morning. Wine is the best licour that it can be taken withal,
and so it is used generally in the Indias, for the Wine as we have said,
does corroborate and give strength to these Pouders, and because there be some
that can drink no wine, in such case they may give it in sodden water, wherein
Synamon has been boiled, or Anis or Fenell seed, and if the pure wine do
offend them, it may be delayed with any manner of Water, but the quantity of
the Wine that shall be taken, is so little, that it cannot offend, nor molest
any person. It may be delaied with Endife, or Langdebeefe water, and because
this medicine is not given in sharp Agues, but in large and temperate
diseases, Otherwise to give it.
it does hear the Wine better then any other licour.

Also they give these Pouders with Conserua of Uiolets, and with Syrope of
Uiolets, and it is a good practice: for with his cold and moisture, it does
correct the little heat, and drought that the Patient has, and let them drink
upon it Wine watered, or some water as aforesaid.

There is made of this Powder Pills formed with electuary of Roses, There are
made pills of it.
and surely they make a very good work and purge well.

Also they do put it in paste of Wafer bread, or in Marchpaines, and as it
has no evil savor, so they do not feel it. In Wafer bread.
It serves much for children and for them that cannot take the like things.

The Pills that must be made of this powder must be very little* Note.
somewhat greater then Coriander seed, that they may dissolve the rather, and
not heat, and so they work more quickly and better.

They may be given in the morning and at night, these pouders be received with
most prosperous success, When they shall be given.
being made up with Syrope of Roses of nine infusions, mingling the quantity
that thereof shall be taken in two ounces of Syrope, and surely this mixture
does make a meruellous work, Wh^t hum^rs the M^choaca^ does avoid.
for that it does strengthen, and enforce much the work of the pouders.

It auoydeth Cholerike, gross and fleugmatike humors and permixt, and the
fearcenes of the blood, and so it is a great Medicine, and of marvelous
work: It auoydeth also most strongly the Citrine water of them that have the
Dropsy, frequenting it many times, giving between one purge and another, that
which may corroborate and make strong the Liver: in Broth it is taken many
times, and makes good work.

This Medicine or purge must be taken in the morning early, and after it is
taken, When it should be taken.
they may sleep half an hour upon it, before it do purge, for that the
sleep does slaye the Uomit, and the natural heat shall make a better work in
the Medicine.

He that shall take these Pouders, if he do fear them, or any other Medicine
purgative, and if he fear Uomit, Note.
may use this one remedy, of the which I have large experience, and is, when
he has taken this purge or any other, let him take the Yolke of an Egg
roasted hot, broken between his Fingers, and put into a course Linen Cloth, and
so round let him put it into the Throat Pit, and let him hold it there,
until that he do begin to purge, for that surely, it will slaye the
Uomiting and also the Fumes, that do rise of the purge, and this is no small
content. After that he has somewhat slept, if he can, at the time that it
begins to work, let him not sleep nor eat, nor drink any thing, but be
in place where the air do not offend him, nor with much company, for that
all the intent shall be for to purge, staying all things that may let the
avoiding out. And he shall be advertised, that one of the greatest excellencies
that this purge has, is, that it is in the hands of the sick person to
avoid out what quantity of humor he will, the which is a thing that they of
old time did consider much of. And waying which was surest of purging or the
letting of blood, they do not aleage any other cause more principal, than
that the letting of blood is more sure. Forasmuch as in the letting of blood
we may take out what quantity of blood we lust, and not in the purge, which
once being taken, it is not in the hands of the Phisitio^, nor the sick
person to let it to do his work, which quality is not in this our purge of
the root of Mechoacan, seeing that with taking of a little Broth, or eating
any manner of thing, the working of it seaseth, and it works no more, and so
it cannot exceed nor hurt the patient.

Note.
Surely it is to be holden of much price, that there is found a kind of purge
with so much assurance, and that so mightily does his work, and is at the
will of him that does take it. After it has done what to the patient seems
good, and sufficient, then with a little Broth which he eats, it shall work
and purge no more.

After that he has purged.
After that the sick person or Physician perceyueth that it has made an end
of his working, and has purged that which is convenient, then they must give
him somewhat to eat, taking at the beginning of his Dinner a Disheful of
Broth, and after a little while let him eat of a Hen, and in the rest let him
govern himself as one that is purged, as well in his drink as in his meat, as
also in the keeping that he shall have of his person. For that day that he
does take it, let him take heed that he sleep not in the day time nor
drink till Supper, the which Supper shall be light and of some good meats.

What he must do the next day.
The next day let him take a washing Medicine, and some Conserua, and from that
time forward let him keep good order and good government, in all that is
convenient for him.

And if that with once taking of these pouders, the sick man do not heal,
nor avoid from him that which is needful for to be voyded, he may take it
again, as many times as the Physician shall see convenient, wherein he shall
have care after that the sick man is purged, to comfort and to alter the
principal members.

Note.
And in this I can hold no precise opinion, for that there be diverse and
variable diseases, and it is needful for them to have diverse remedies, and my
intent is no more then to write the use of the Root of Mechoacan, as a thing
of so great importance, and of a purge and remedy so excellent, as nature
has given unto us.

And if process of time have taken from us the true Myrre, A good digression.
and the true Balsamo, and other Medicines that they of old time had, of the
which in our time there is no memory, and with the time are lost: yet time it
self in place of them has discovered and given so many and so sundry things
as we have spoken of, as our Occidental Indias do send us. In especially the
Mechoacan, a purge most excellent and gentle, which does his work with such
assurance, being white in color, pleasant in savor, and in smell easy to
take, without any lothsomnes in working, and without that horriblenes, that
other purges have, and without those accidents and fayntnes that come at the
time, that they be taken, and without that disquietnesse which it makes when
it woorketh.

This Root has over and above that, which is said, other properties, and
hidden works, that we do not reach unto, which with the time and use of them
shall be known and discovered every day.

The weight or quantity that is given of the Powder, made of the Root of
Mechoacan, The quantity that is given of it.
is conformable to the obedience of the belly, of him that shall take it. Some
there be that do purge with little quantity. I know a Gentleman of this
Realm, that with the weight of half a Ryall, which is iii. d. does purge very
well, and there are other that have need of the weight of xii. d. and others of
the weight of xviii. d. And in this every one ought to measure the quantity,
as he has his belly in obedience, more or less. Even so they ought to limit
the quantity conformably to the age of the Patient. For that the Child has
need of little, the Boy of more, and the strong man of much more, and the
Lean of less, and for this cause the Physician must measure the quantity as
he sees it convenient. Because to the Child he shall give the weight of iii.
d. and to the Boy the weight of vi. d. and to the Man the weight of xii. d.
which is commonly so taken, but to the Woman it is not convenient to give less
then the weight of twelve pence, and in this there may be had a consideration,
seeing that it is in the hand of the Physician to take away his work when he
does see that it excedeth, it is better to give a little too much, considering
that with taking of a few suppings of broth, if it do exceed, the excess
may be remedied.

This is the sum which I have understood unto this day of the Root, which
they bring from the Province of Mechoacan, and when I shall know more of it, I
will write as the time and the use thereof shall give occasion.

Of the quick Sulphur.
WHen I made an end of writing of these last lines, Barnadine of Burgus the
Poticarie, Quick Sulphur.
a man learned and expert in his art, did show me in his shop a piece of
quick Sulphur brought from our Indias, a thing most excellent as ever I saw,
and in our time the like has not been seen. It was bright like Glass, of
the color of fine gold, taking a little of it, and casting it into the Fire,
it does cast from it a very great smell of Brimstone like to green smoke, As
it is.
and the piece it self (smelling thereunto) has no smell.

They brought it from Quito, with is a place in the province of Peru, Brought
from Quito.
from a Mine that there was found in certain H^lles, nere unto the Mines of
gold. And it is not in vain that the Alcumistes do say, that the matter of
Gold, is the Quickesiluer, Note.
and the Sulphur, that is to say, the Quickesiluer the matter, and the Sulphur
the former and maker. And so this which I saw, was like to a piece of gold
most fine.

They bring from Nicaraga, other Sulphur, but it is russet, like to Ashes,
congeled without color or brightn^sse, Evil Sulphur.
which is found nigh unto the Uolcan of Nicaraga, the which being cast into the
fire does cast from it the smell of Brimstone, but it is a piece of earth, and
in nothing is like to that, of the Province of Quito, more then in the smell,
neither has it that color of Gold, nor that brightness that the other has,
which is of Quito.

The same being applied in things, that are convenient for medicine, works
meruellous effects: The thinge^ that i^ profits in.
chiefly being ground, and dissolved with wine, and applied in the night to
them, that have their face read inflamed that be like to Lepers, using it
certain nights, after they have been at the stool, it takes the redness
away, and heals it maruellously, of the which I have great experience. It
heale^h the Skabbes, being dissolved with oil of Roses. Taking the weight of
six pence in an Egg, it heals the Colike. and the Palsy. It is good for
the pain of the Stone, and being taken, it heals the Iaunders.

It is hot and dry excessiuely, which appears by the friendship, that it
has with the fire, The complexion thereof.
for being touched with it, it inflameth, and makes a flame. It is the
principal matter, of that Diuelishe invention of Gunpouder, which has been
the cause of so many evils, and hurtes.

Of the wood Aromatike.
ALso the said Barnardino de Burgus showed me a Wood, which to my seeming, I
thought too have been the holy wood, that I mean of Saint John d^ Puerto
Rico, the which was of this manner, and form.

Being in the house of a principal Merchant of this city, making a Medicine in
a Chimney, where they did burn of that wood, the smoke that came out of the
wood did smell much, The smell of the wood.
and gave a very sweet savor, of the which he marvelled much, and asked from
whence they had cast thither that good smell. They of the house told him, that
the good smell was of the wood that they did there burn, and it was that which
did cast that good smell. He took a stick of the Wood, and from it plucked a
slip of the same, which had no smell nor savor, more than other common wood
had, then he took away a little of the rind, and smelled unto it, and tasted
it, and he found a sweet smell most excellent in it, and a Savor no more nor
less then of Maces, or Nutmegges, and much more sharp, and more sweet, and
of a more pleasant smell and taste, then any Cinamom that is in the world, and
with more liveliness, and sharpness of taste then the Peper. I tasted it at
the taking away of the rind from the said wood, of the which he had a great
piece of timber, and surely there is not any thing of so sweet smell and taste,
of any thing which we have that with so much pleasantness of smell, and with
such liveliness seadeth forth a flauour as this did penitrate me, insomuche
that tasting a little of it, I carried all that day the sweet smell and savor
in my mouth, being meruellous, as though I had carried there a piece of
Nutmegge.

Histori^.
Of this wood they said, that a Master of a Ship of his, did cut a great
quantity, coming by the Hauana, and in a mountain, they cut much of it, for
the ships provision, and that which did remain they carried to the Owners
house, and there wast it, as I have said. Whereby I do consider how many trees
and plants there be in our Indias, that have great virtues for medicines, that
in the fuel of the Chimney they spend wood, of sweet odoriferous savor, the
rynde of the which being made into powder, there might be done very great
effects with it, for comforting the heart and the stomach, and principal
members, without seeking after the spicerie of Maluca, and the medicines of
Arabia, and them of Persia. Seeing that in the fields untilled, and in the
Mountains and Deserts, our Indias do yield them unto us, the fault is ours
that we do not follow after them, nor seek to do the diligence that is
convenient, for to profit our selves in these meruellous effects, the which I
trust that Time being the discouerer of all things, and good diligence and
experience withal will discover unto us to our great profit.

The end of the first part. God be praised.
The Second Part of this Book is of the things that are brought from our
Occidentall INDIAS, which serve for the use of Medicine, wherein is treated of
the Tabaco, and of the Sassafras, and of the Carlo Sancto, and of many other
herbs and plants, seeds and licoures, that newly are brought from those
parts, of great virtues and meruellous effects.

Written by Doctor Monardus, Physician of Seuill.

Catholic Royal Majesty.
THese days past I wrote a book of all things which come from your
Occidentall Indias, serving for the use of medicine, and surely it has been
taken in that estimation, that the things which in it are entreated of do
deserve. And seeing the profit that it has done, and how many have been
remedied and healed with those remedies, I did determine to proceed forwards,
and to write of the things, which after that the first part was written, have
come from those countries, of the which I have understood, that no less
utility and profit shall come, then of those which are past, for there shall be
discovered new things and secrets, which will bring admiration, never to this
day seen nor known before. And seeing that these medicinal things which we
do treat of, and the Realms and Countries from whence they come, belong unto
your majesty, and he also that writes of them, is your Majesty's subject: I
do desire your Majesty, to receive this travel into your protection, and
that the reward may be such, as for the like works dedicated to your Majesty
is accustomed to be given.

Your Majesty's Subject Doctor Monardes*

Of the Tabaco, and of his great virtues.
THIS Herb which commonly is called Tabaco, is an Herb of much antiquity,
and known amongst the Indians, and in especially among them of the new Spain,
and after that those Countries were gotten by our Spaniardes, being taught of
the Indians, they did profit themselves with those things, in the wounds which
they received in their Wars, healing themselves therewith to their great
benefit.

Within these few years there has been brought into Spain of it, more to
adornate Gardens with the fairness thereof, and too give a pleasant sight,
than that it was thought to have the meruellous medicinable virtues, which it
has, but now we do use it more for his virtues, than for his fairness.
For surely they are such which do bring admiration.

It is growing in many parts of the Indias, but ordinarily in moist and
shadowie places, How it is sown and how it grows.
and it is needful that the ground wh^re it is sown, be well tilled, and
that it be a fruitful ground, and at all times it is sown, in the hot
Countries. But in the cold Countries it must be sown in the Month of
March, for that it may defend it self from the frost.



The proper name of it amongst the Indians is Picielt, for the name of Tabaco
is given to it by our Spaniardes, The name of it.
by reason of an Island that is named Tabaco.

It is an herb that does grow and come too be very great: many times to
be greater then a Lemmon tree. The description of it*
It casts forth one steame from the root which grows upright, without
declining to any part, it sends forth many Bows, straight, that well near
they be equal with (...) and at the time as the herb is in the Mortar a
stamping, let there be put to it a few drops of Uineger, that his work may
be made the better, and after the place is rubbed where the pain is, then lay
upon it one leaf or two leaves of the Tabaco being hot, and so let it alone
til the next day, and then do the like again, or in place of the leaves use a
Linen cloth wette in the hot Joyce. Some there be, that after they have
rubbed it with the sta^ped leaves, do annoint it with ointments, made for the
like evils, and upon it they lay the leaves or the joyce of the Tabaco. And
surely with this cure they have dissolved great and hard opilations, and very
old swellings. In the grief of the stone, of the Kidneis and Reins, In the
grief of the stone.
this herb works great effects, by putting the leaves into Ashes, or
Embres, hot, that they may warm well, and then being laid upon the grief,
multiplying the use of it as often as it is needful. It is necessary in the
seethinges that are used to be made for Glisters to put into them with the
other things, To put them ^n Glisters.
the Leaves of this herb, for that they shall profit much: and likewise for
Fomentations and Plasters, that they shall make.

In griefs of winds.
In griefs of winds they work the like effect, taking away the pains that
come of the windiness, applying the leaves after the same sort as is above
said.

The evil of the Mother.
In the grief of women, which is called the evil of the Mother, laying too one
leaf of this herb Tabaco very hot, in the manner as it is said, it does
manifestly profit and it must be laid upon the Navel. And under it some
do use to put first of al, things of good smell upon the Nauel, and then upon
that they lay the leaf. In that which they find most profit, is to lay the
Tacamahaca, or the oil of liquid Amber, and Balsamo, and Caranna, or any of
these unto the Nauel, and to keep it too it continually, that it may cleave
unto it, and this works manifest profit in griefs of the Mother.

In one thing, the women that dwell in the Indias do celebrate this herb,
that is, For an evil breath.
in the evil breathing at ye mouth of children, when they are over filled with
meat, and also of old people, anointing their bellies with lamp oil, and
laying some of those leaves, in ashes hot to their bellies, and also to their
shoulders, for it does take away there naughty breathing, and makes them go
to the stool, applying it unto the fundement at what time it is needful, and
if the leaves be ashed it is the better.

Worms, of all kinds of them, it kills, For Worms.
and expels them maruellously, the seething of the herb made into a Syrope
delicately, being taken in very little quantity, and the joyce thereof put on
the nauel. It is needful after this be done to give a Glister, that may avoid
them, and expel them out of the guts.

In griefs of the Iointes coming of a cold cause it makes a marvelous
work, In evil of the Joints.
the Leaves of this Tabaco being laid hot upon the grief: the like does the
Joyce laid upon a little cloth hot, for that it does dissolve the humor,
and takes away the pains thereof. If it come of a hot cause it does hurt,
saving when the humor has been hot, and the subtle part is dissolved, and the
gross remains, then it does profit as if the cause were cold, and it is
to be understood, that the leaves being laid, where as is grief of the said
cause, in any part of the body, it profits much.

In swellings or in cold Impostumes, it does dissolve and undo them, washing
them with the hot Juice, In cold s^ellings.
and laying the beaten leaves, after they be stamped, or the leaves being whole
of the said Tabaco, upon it.

In the Toothache when the grief comes of a cold cause, or of cold Rumes,
For the t^^^ache.
putting to it a little ball made of the leaf of the Tabaco, washing first the
tooth with a small cloth wet in the Juice, it takes away the pain, and
stays it, that the putrefaction go not forward: in hot causes it does not
profit, and this remedy is so common that it heals every one.

For C^ilblaines.
This herb does maruellously heal Chilblaines, rubbing them with the stamped
leaves, and after putting the hands and Feet in hot water, with Salt, and
keeping them warm: this is done with great experience in many.

In Venom and venomous wounds.
In Uenom and venomous wounds our Tabaco has great commendation, which has
been known but a short time since, for when the wild people of the Indias,
which eat man's flesh do shoot their Arrows, they annointe them with an
herb or Composition made of many poisons, with the which they shoot at all
things that they would kill, and this Uenom is so strong, and pernicious, that
it kills without remedy, and they that be hurt dye with great pains and
accidents, and with madness, unless that their be found remedy for so great an
evil. A few years past they laid to their wounds Sublimatum, Sublimatum in
venomed wounds.
and so were remedied, and surely in those parts they have suffered much with
this vexation of poison.

A little whiles past, certain wild people going in their Boots to S. John De
puerto Rico, to shoot at India^s, or Spaniards, if that they might find the^,
came to a place and killed certain Indians, and Spaniards, and did hurt many,
and as by chance there was no Sublimatum at that place to heal them, they
remembered to lay upon the wounds the Joyce of the Tabaco, and the leaves
stamped. And God would, that laying it upon the hurtes, the griefs, madness, and
accidents wherewith they dyed, were mittigated, and in such sort they were
delivered of that evil, that the strength of the Uenom was taken away, and the
wounds were healed, of the which there was great admiration. Which thing being
known to the^ of the Island, they use it also in other hurtes and wounds,
which they take when they fight with the wild people, now they stand in no
fear of them, by reason they have found so great a remedy, in a case so
desperate.

This Herb has also virtue against the herb called of the
Crosseboweshooter, Against the herb of the Crossebowshooter.
which our hunters do use to kill the wild beasts withal, which heathe is
Uenom most strong, and does kill without remedy, which the Kings pleasure
was to prove, and commanded to make experience thereof, and they wounded a
little dog in the throat, and put forthwith into the wound the herb of
the Crosseboweshooter, and after a little while, they powered into the self
same wound that they had anointed with the Crossebowe shooters herb,
History.
a good quantity of the Juice of Tabaco, and laid the stamped leaves upon it,
and they tied up the dog, and he escaped, not without great admiration of al
men that saw him. Of the which, the excellent Physician of the Chamber of his
majesty, Doctor Barnarde.
Doctor Barnarde in the margent of this book, that saw it, by the
commandment of his Majesty, writes these words: I made this experience by
the commandment of the kings Majesty. I wounded the dog with a knife, and
after I put the Crossebowe shooters herb into the wound, and the herb was
chosen, and the dog was taken of the herb, and the Tabaco and his Juice
being put into the wound, the dog escaped and remained whole.

In the venomous Carbuncles, In venomous Carbuncles.
the Tabaco being applied in manner as is aforesaid does extinguish the malice
of the venom, and does that which all the works of Surgery can do, until it
be whole. In bitinges of venomous beasts.
The same effect it works in bytinges of venomous beasts, for it kills and
extinguisheth the malice of the venom and heals them.

In wounds newely hurt, and cuttes, strokes, pricks, In wounds newly hurt.
or any other manner of wound, our Tabaco works marvelous effects, for
that it does heal them and makes them sound. The wound must be washed with
wine, and procure to annoint the sides of it, The manner of healing.
taking away that which is superfluous, and then power into it the Juice of
this herb, and lay upon it the stamped leaves, and being well bound it shall
continue on until the next day that thou shall return to dress it. After the
same fashion the patientes shall keep good order in their meat, using the
diet necessary, and if it be needful of any euacuation by stool, the cause
being great, let it be done what shall be convenient. Note.
And with this order they shall be healed, without any need of any more Surgerie
the^ this herb only. Here in this Country, and in this City they know not
what other to do, having cut or hurt themselves, but to run to the Tabaco,
as to a most ready remedy. It does marvelous works, without any need of
other Surgery, but this only herb. In restrayning the flux of blood of the
wounds it procures most marvelous works, for that ye Juice and the Leaves
being stamped, are sufficient to restrain any flux of blood.

In old sores.
In old Sores it is marvelous the works and the effects that this herb
does, for it heals them wonderfully, making clean and mundifying them of
all humors that are superfluous, and of the rottennes, that they have, and
brings up the flesh, reducing them to perfect health, the which is so common
in this City, that every man does know it* and I having ministered it to many
people as well men as women, in great number, and being grieved of ten, and
of twenty years, have healed old rotten sores in legs, and other parts of
the body, with this remedy only to the great admiration of all men.

The order of the Cure.
The order of the Cure that is to be wrought with this herb, is this
following. For the old rotten sores although they be cankered, let the sick
man be purged with the counsel of a Physician, and let him blood if it be
needful, and then take this herb and pound it in a Mortar, and wring out
the Juice, and put it into the Sore, and then after the manner of a Plaster
lay the stamped leaves upon it, which are the Leaves that the Juice is taken
out of, and this do once every day eating good Meats, and not exceeding in
any disorder, for otherwise it will not profit. And doing this, it will make
clean the evil flesh that is rotten, and superfluous, until it come to the
whole flesh, and it is not to be marvelled at, if the wound be made very
great. For the evil must be eaten up, until it come to the good, and in the
same cure putting in less quantity of juice it will incarnate, and reduce it
to parfit health, in such sort that it accomplisheth all the works of Surgery,
that all the Medicines of the world are able to do, without having need of
any other manner of medicine.

This work does cure old Sores, It cures best the wounds that be rotten
and cankered.
with very great admiration: and not only in men, but in brute beasts also.
As at this day in all parts of the Indias, where there are any cattle having
wounds or gauls, and the country being hot and moist over much, does
soon rotte them, and very quickly they come to be cankered, and for this
cause, much great cattle do dye: To remedy this and the worms that do
increase in the sores, Sublimatum does heal the soars of beasts that be
cankered.
they had for remedy to put into the sores, Sublimatum, for that in this remedy
they did ^^^de more benefit than in any other, that they had used. And for
that the Sublimatum bears there so high a price, m^^y times it was more worth
then the cattle that it heal^^. For this cause and for having found in the
Tabaco so much virtue too heal new wounds and rotten, they did accord and
agree together to use the Tabaco, in the healing of beasts, as they had done
in the cure and remedy of men, pouring the Juice of the Tabaco into the
wounds, and washing them therewith, and laying upon them the stamped leaves of
the Tabaco, after that the Juice is taken from them. And it is of so great
efficacy and virtue, that it kills the worms, and makes clean the sore,
eating away the evil flesh, and ingendering new until it be whole, as in
the other things which we have spoken of. The like it does in the gauls of
the beasts of Cariege, the juice being powered in, and the beaten leaves wherout
the juice comes of the Tabaco, as it is said: although they be cankered, it
does make them clean, and incarnate them, and cures and helps them. And so
the Indians do carry it, when they journey, for this purpose and effect, and
it procures the like profit, that the juice does.

I saw a man that had certain old sores in his nose, whereby he did cast out
from him much matter, History.
which daily did rotte and canker inward, and I caused him to take at his nose
the juice of this Tabaco, and so he did: and at the second time, he cast out
from him, more then twenty little worms, and afterward a few more, until
that he remained clean of them, and using it so certain days, he was healed
of the sores, that he had in the inner part of his nose: and if he had tarried
any longer, I think that there had remained nothing of his nose, but al had
been eaten away, as it happens to many, which we see without them, And being
writing of this, History.
a daughter of a Gentleman of this City, had many years a certain kind of
drieskabbes, or well near skuruie in her head. I had her in cure and did unto
her many benefits, universal, and particular: and also Masters of Surgerie had
done their diligence, and al did not profit. And a Gentlewoman, which had the
charge of her, as s^e heard me speak one day much good of the Tabaco, that
(...) did good, and profitable, for so many infirmities, sh^e sent for it, and
did rub hard the disease that the wench had, and that day she was very
evil, and as though she had been fooli^h: and the gentlewoman did not let, in
seeing her after that sor^, to rub her harder, and then the wench did not
feel so much grief, but the dry skabbes beg^n to fall, and the white scurffe
of her head in such sort, that it made clean and healed her head, with doing
so certain days, so that she was healed of her scuruie disease very well,
without knowing what she did.

One of the meru^lles of this herb, and that which brings most admiration,
is, the manner how the Pri^stes of the Indias did use it, which was in this
manner: The man^^^ how the Prieste^ of the Ind^as do use th^^ Tabaco.
when there was amongst the I^dians any manner of busin^sse, of great
importance, in the which the chief Gentl^men called Casiques, or any of the
principal people of the country, had necessity to consult with their
Priests, in any business of importance: then they went and propounded their
matter to their chief Priest, forthwith in their presence, he took certain
leaves of the Tabaco, and cast them into the fire, and did receive the smoke of
them at his mouth, and at his nose with a Cane, and in taking of it, he fell
down upon the ground, as a Dead man, and remaining so, according to the
quantity of the smoke that he had taken, when the herb had done his work,
he did revive and awake, and gave them their answeares, according to the
visions, and illusions which he saw, whiles he was rapte in the same manner,
and he did interpret to them, as to him seemed best, or as the Devil had
counseled him, giving them continually doubtful answeares, in such sort,
that howsoever it fell out, they might say that it was the same, which was
declared, and the answer that he made.

In like sort the rest of the Indians for their pastime, do take the smoke of
the Tabaco, too make themselves drunk withal, and to see the visions, and
things that repr^sent ^^to them that wherein they do delight: and other times
they take it to know their business, and success, because conformable to
that, which they have seen being drunk therewith, even so they judge of their
business. And as the Devil is a deceauer, and has the knowledge of the virtue
of herbs, so he did show the virtue of this Herb, that by the means
thereof, they might see their imaginations, and visions, that he has
represented to them, and by that means deceive them.

Too have Herbs that have the like virtue, Hearbe^ which ha^^
is a common (...) I^^ias but is also a common thing in the Oriental Indias.
And also in the Portug^ll Indias, for this effect, they do sell the Opi^ in
their Shoppes, even as they sell Conser^^, with the which the Indians use to
ease themselves, of their labor that they take, and to be merry, and not to
feel pains of any great labor of the body, or mind that may come unto
them, and they call it there amongst themselves Aphi^^. This Aphion the Turks
do use for this effect. The ^o^l^iers and Captains that go to Wars, when
they labor much, after the time that they be lodged, that they may take their
rest, they receive Aphion, and sleep with it, and remain lightened of their
labor: The most principal people take Bague, and it has a better cast, and a
better smell, for there is put to it much Amber, and Musk an^ Cloves, and
other spices. And surely it is a thing of admiration, ^o see how these
Barbarous people do take such Medicines, and how many of them do take them,
and that they do not ki^^ them, but rather they take them for health and
reme^ie, for their necessities.

^istorie.
I saw an Indian of those parts, that in my presence did ask an Apothecarie
for a quart of Opi^, and I demanded of him wherefore he would have it, and he
told me that he took it to put away weariness, when he felt himself over
much grieved, and afflicted with labor, and he took the half of that which
he carried, for the Apothecary gave him more then a pi^te for twelve pence, and
therewith he slepte so soundly, that when he awoke from sleep, he found
himself very much eased of his weariness, in such sort, that he might
continue his labor. I meruelled at it, and it seemed to me a thing of
Mockery, seeing that five or six graynes, be the most that we can give to^
sick Person, how strong soever he be, which being very well prepared,
does cause many times Accidents of Death. And many years after standing in
the Shop of an other Apothecary of this City, there came an other Indian, of
the same Oriental Indias, and he asked of the Apothecarie, for some Opio
called Aphion, the which Apothecarie understood him not. And I remembering my
self of the other Indian, caused him to show unto the Indian Opio, and in
showing it to him, he said that it was that which he asked for, and he bought a
quarter of a Pint of it, and I asked of the Indian, wherefore he would have
it, and he told me the same that the other Indian did, that it was because he
might labor, and ease himself of his weariness for that he did bear
burdens, and should help to discharge a ship: wherefore he said he would
take the one half that he might therewith labor, and the other half after he
had labored, that therewith he might take ease, and rest. Then I gave credit
to the first Indian, of that he said unto me, and since I have believed that
which I have seen and read, in those parts to be a thing in common use, for
the like effects. And truly it is a thing worthy of great consideration,
that five grains of Opio do kill us, and threescore do give them health and
rest.

The Indians do use the Tabaco, for to suffer dries, and also to suffer
hunger, The Tabaco takes away drought.
and to pass days without having need to eat or drink, when they shall
travel by any desert, or dispeopled country, where they shall find neither
water, nor meat. They receive thereof little balls, which they make of the
Tabaco. For they take the leaves of it, and chew them and as they go chewing
of them, they go mingling with them certain powder, Little balls for hunger
and drought.
made of the shelles of Cockels burned, and they mingle it in the mouth
altogether, until they make it like dowe, of the which they frame certain
little Balls, little greater then Peason, and lay them to dry in the shadow,
and after they keep them, and use them in this form following. The manner how
to use them.


When they use to travel by the ways, where they find no water nor meat,
they take a little hall of these, and put it between the lower lip and the
teeth, and go chewing it all the time that they travel, and that which they
chewe, they swallowe down, and in this sore they journey, three or four
days, without having need of meat, or drink, for they feel no hunger
dries, nor weakness, nor their travel does trouble them. I think that to
journey after this sort, is ^he cause they go chewing continually the little
balls: for they bring Fleume into the mouth, and swallowe it into the stomach,
the which does retain the natural heat, which it does confirm, and so they
mainteyn themselves thereby, the like whereof we see to happen in many beasts,
for that a great part of the Winter, they be shut up in their Caves, and
hollow places of the earth, and pass their time there without any meat, for
that they have to c^nsume the natural heat, of the f^mes, which they had
gotten in the Summer. The Bear being a great and fierce beast, much time in
the Winter remains in his Cave, and lives without meat or drink, with
only chewing his paws, which perhaps he does for the said cause. This is the
substance which I have gathered of this herb, so celebrated and called
Tabaco, for that surely it is an herb of great estimation, for the excellent
virtues that it has, as we have said.

Hereafter follows a further addition of the Herb called Tabaco, otherwise
called by the Frenchmen Nicotiane. Which herb has done great cures in the
Realm of France and Portugal, as hereafter at large may appear in
thistreatise following. Nicotiane. Chap. 76.
NICOTIANE, Nicotiane the chiefest among other medicinable herbs.
although it be not long since it has been known in France, notwithstanding
deserves palm and price, and among al other medicinable herbs, it deserves
to stand in the first rank, by reason of his singular virtues, and as it were
almost to be had in admiration, as hereafter you shall understand. And for
that none such as of ancient time, or of late days, have written the nature
of plants, did never make mention thereof, I have therefore learned the whole
history touching the same, which I learned of a gentleman my very friend, the
first author, inuenter, and bringer of this herb into France: wherefore I
thought good to publish it in writing for their sakes, that have so often
heard speaking of this said herb, and yet neither knew the herb nor the
effects thereof.

This Herb is called Nicotiane, Nicotiane wherefore so named.
of the name of him that gave the first intelligence thereof unto this Realm,
as many other plants have taken their names of certain Greeks and Romans,
who having been in strange Countries, for service of their commonweals, The
Queen^ Mothers herb.
have brought into their countries many plants, which were before unknown.
Some have called this Herb the Queens Herb, because it was first sent
unto her, as hereafter shall be declared by the Gentleman, that was the first
inuenter of it, and since was by her given to diverse for to sow, whereby it
might be planted in this land. Others have named it the great Priors herb,
The graund Priors herb.
for that he caused it to multiply in France, more then any other, for the
great reverence that he bare to his herb, for the Divine effects therein
contained. Many have given it the n^me, Petum, which is indeed the proper name
of the Herb, Petum.
as they which have tra^elled that Country can tell. Notwithstanding, it is
better to name it N^cotiane, by the name of him that sent it into France
first, to the end that he may have the honor thereof, according to his
desert, for that he has enriched our Country, with so singular an Herb.
Thus much for the name, and now hearken further for the whole History.

Master John Nicot, Counsell^r to the King, being Ambassador for his Majesty
in Portugal, Master Nicot Ambassador for the king in Portugal.
in the year of our Lord. 1559.60.61. went one day to see the Prysons of the
King of Portugal: and a Gentleman being the keeper of the sa^e Prisons
presented him with this herb, as a strange Plant brought from Florida. The
same Master Nicot, having caused the said herb to be set in his Garden, where
it grew and multiplied maruellously, was upon a time advertised, by one of
his Page^, that a young man, of kin to that Page made a s^ye of that herb
bruised both the herb and the Juice together upon an ulcer, which he had upon
his cheek near unto his nose, coming of a Noli me tangere, which began to
take root already at the griffles of the Nose, wherewith he found himself
meruellously eased. Therefore the said Master Nicot caused the sick young
man to be brought before him, and causing the said herb to be continued to
the sore eight or ten days, this said Noli me tangere, Experience of the Noli
me tangere.
was utterly extinguished and healed: and he had sent it, while this cure was a
woorking to a certain Physician of the king of Portugal one of the greatest
fame to examine the further working and effect of the said Nicotiane, and
sending for the same young man at the end of ten days, the said Physician
seeing the visage of the said sick young man, certified, that the said Noli me
tangere was utterly extinguished, as in deed he never felt it since.

Within a while after, one of the Co^kes of the said Ambassador having almost
cut off his thombe, Experienc^ for wounds.
with a great chopping knyfe, the Stew^rd of the house of the said Gentleman
ran to the said Nicotiane, and dressed him therewith five or six times, and
so in the end thereof he was healed: from that time forward this herb began
to be famous throughout Lishebron, L^shebron.
where the court of the king of Portugal was at that presone, and the virtue
of this said herb was extolled, and the people began to name it the
Ambassadors herb. The Ambassadors herb.
Wherefore there came certain days after a Gentleman of the Country, Father
^o one of the P^ges of the Ambassador, who was troubled with an ulcer in his
Leg, having had the same two years, and demanded of the said Ambassador
for his herb, and using the same in such order as is before written, at the
end of ten or twelve days he was healed. Experienc^ of an old ulcer.
From that time forth the fame of that same herb increased in such sort, that
many came from al places to have some of it. Among al others there was a woman
that had her face covered with a Ringworme rooted, Experience for the
Ringwormes.
as though she had a Uisour on her face, to whom the said L. Ambassador
caused the herb to be given, and told how she should use it, and at the end
of eight or ten days, this woman was thoroughly healed, who came and
presented her self to the Ambassador, showing him of her healing.

After there came a Captain to present his Son sick of the kings evil to
the said L. Ambassador, Experience for the king^ evil.
for to send him into France, unto whom there was a say made of the said
herb, which in few days did begin to show great signs of healing, and
finally he was altogether healed thereby of the kings evil.

The Lady of Montigue dead of a Noli me tangere in her Br^st.
The L. Ambassador seeing so great effects proceeding of this herb, and
having heard say that the Lady Montigue that was, dyed at Saint Germans, of an
ulcer bread in her breast, that did ^^rne to a Noli me tangere, for the which
there could never remedy he fo^nde: and likewise that the Countess of Ruff,
had sought for all the famous Physicians of that Realm, for to heal her face,
unto whom they could give no remedy, How the Nicotiane was brought into France.
he thought it good to communicate the same into France, and did send it to
king Frauncis the second, and to the Q^eene Mothe^, and to many other Lords of
the Cou^^ (...) the m^ne^ of ministering the same, and how to apply it unto the
said diseases, ^uen as he had found it by experience, and chiefly to the Lord
of Iarnac governor of Rogel, with whom the said Lord Ambassador had great
amity for the service of the king. The which Lord of Iarnac told one day at
the Queen^s table, Distilled water of Nicotiane, singular good for short
breath^. The figure of Nicotiane.
yt he had caused the sai^e Nicotian^ to be distilled, and the water to be
dr^nke, mingle^ with water, of Euphrasio otherwise called eyebright, to one
that was short breathe^, who was therewith healed.

This herb has the stalk great, bearded and slymie, the leaf large and
long bearded slymie, it grows in branches half foot to half foot, and is
very full of leaves, and grows in height four or five foot. In hot countries
it is nine or ten months in the year laden, in one self time, with leaves
flowers, and Coddes full of ripe graynes, which is when they are waxed black,
and to be ripe, which is when they are yet green. It sproutes forth near the
root much, and reuyueth by a great quantity of buddes, notwithstanding the
grain is the least seed in the world, and the roots be like small threeds.

Ground fit for Nicotiane.
Nicotiane does require a fat ground finely dug, and in cold Countries
very well dounged, that is to say, a ground, in the which the doung must be so
will mingled and incorporated, that it be altogether turned into earth, and that
there appear no more doung.

It requires the south Sun, and to be planted by a wall, The Sun fit for
Nicotian^.
which may defend it against the North wind recovering the heat of the Sun
against it, being a warrant unto the said herb against the tossing up of the
wind, because of the weakness and highness thereof.

It grows the better being often watered, and reuiueth it self by reason of
the water in time of droughts. To water Nicotiane.
It hates the cold, therefore to preserve it from dying in the Winter time, it
must either be kept in Caves made of purpose within the said gardens, or else
covered with a double Matte, How to keep^ Nicotiane in Winter.
and a Penthouse of Reed made on the Wall over the herb, and when the South
Sun shyneth, the door of the place must be opened where the herb is on the
Southside.

For to sow it, The sowing of Nicotian^.
there must be made a hole in the ground with your finger, as deep as your
finger can teach, then cast into that hole 40. or 50. grains of the said
Seed together stopping again your hole, for it is so small a Seed, that if
there be put in the hole but three or four graynes thereof, the earth would
choke them, and if the weather be dry, the place must be watered lightly
during the time of fiftiene days after the sowing thereof: it may also be
sown like unto Lettis and other such herbs.

And when the herb is out of the ground, for so much as every Grain thereof
will bring forth his twigge, To remove Nicotiane.
and that the little threeds of the Root are the one within the other, you
must make with a great knife a great compass within the earth round about
the said place, and lift up the earth together with the Seed, and cast it
into a payle of water, so that the earth be separated, and that the little
twigges may swim above the water, then shall you take them without breaking,
the one after the other,

The Sassafras.


Of the tree which is brought from the Florida, called Sassafras.
FRom the Florida which is the firm Land of our Occidental Indias, lying in
xxv. degrees, The Histori^ of the Sassafras.
they bring a wood and root of a tree that grows in those parts, of great
virtues, and great excellencies, healing therewith grievous and variable
diseases.

It may be three years past, that I had knowledge of this Tree, and a French
man which had been in those parts, showed me a piece of it, and told me
meruels of the virtues thereof, and how many and variable diseases were healed
with the water, which was made of it. I gave at that time no credit to him, for
that in these things of Plants, and herbs, which are brought from other
places, they say much, and know little, unless it be by a man that has
experience of them, with care and diligence. The tree and the parts thereof
lyked me well, and I judged that, which now I do find to be true, and have
seen by experience. He told me that the Frenchmen, which had been in the
Florida at that time, when they came into those parts, had been sick the most
of them, of grievous and variable diseases, and that the Indians did show them
this tree, and the manner how they should use it, and so they did, and were
healed of many euilles, which surel^ brings admiration, that one only remedy
should work so variable, and so meruellous effects.

After that the Frenchmen were destroyed, History.
our Spaniardes began to wax sick, as the Frenchemen had done, and some
which remained of them, did show it to our Spaniardes, and how they had cured
themselves with the water of this meruellous Tree, and the manner which they
observed in the using of it, showed to them by the Indians, who used to cure
themselves therewith, when they were sick of any grief.

Our Spaniards began to cure themselves with the water of this Tree, and it
wrought in them great effects, that are almost incredible: for with the
naughty meats and drinking of the raw waters, and sleeping in the dewes, the
most part of them fell into continual Agues, of the which many of them came
into opilations, and from the opilations they began to swell, and when the evil
came first, immediately it began to take away the lust that they had to their
meat, and then happened to them other accidents, and diseases, as such like
Fevers are accustomed to bring: and having there no remedy to be healed, they
did what the Frenchemen had counseled them, doing that which they had done,
which was in this form.

They dug up the root of this tree, and took a piece thereof, such as it
seemed to them best, they cut it small into very thin and little pieces,
and cast them into water, at discretion, as much as they saw was needful,
little more or less, and they sodde it the time that seemed sufficient for to
remain of a good color, and so they drank it in the morning fasting, and in
the day time, and at dinner, and supper, without keeping any more weight, or
measure, then I have said, nor more keeping, nor order then this, and by this
they were healed of so many griefs, and evil diseases, that to hear of them
what they suffered, and how they were healed, it brings admiration, and they
which were whole, drank it in place of wine, for it does preserve them in
health: They which we^e whole drank it.
as it appeared very well by them that have come from thence this year, for
they came all whole and strong, and with good colors* which does not happen
to them that come from those parts, and from other conquestes, for they come
sick and sw^lne, without color, and in short space the most of them di^. And
these Soldiers do trust so much in this Wood, that I being one day amongst
many of them, informing any self of the things of this Tree, the most part
of them took out of their Pockets, a good piece of this Wood, and said:
Master, do you see here the Wood, that every one of us does bring to heal
us withal, if we fall sick, as we hau^ been there? and they began to praise
it so much, and to confirm the marvelous works of it, with so many examples
of them that were there, that surely I gave great credit unto it, and they
caused me to believe all that thereof I ha^ heard, and gave me courage to
experiment it, as I have done, and as we shall see in the maruelles, which we
shall write of it. And now we come to show the description, and form of this
Tree.

The Tree from whence they cut this Wood, The description of this Tree.
which they newly brought from the Florida, called Sassafras, is a Tree that
grows to be very great: there be of a middle sort, and lesser sort. The
greater sort is of the bigness of a Pine Tree, of a mean height, and well
near to the making of it, for it is straight, and casts out no more but one
branche of Bows, after the manner of a Palm Tree, only in the highest part,
or sends out bows after the manner of a Pine Tree, made clean, making of the
Bows which it casts forth, a form of roundnes. It has a gross rind of a
Tawny color, and upon that an other thin rind, of the color of ashes, and
upon the inner part thereof, the Trees and bows b^e white, and near like to
Tawny. The tree and bows are ver^ light, the rind being tasted, has an
excellent sweet smell, and it is somewhat like to the smell of Fenell, with
much sweetness of taste, and of pleasant smell, insomuche that a little
quantity of this Wood being in a chamber, fills the air contained in it, and
the rind has some sharpn^sse of t^st* the inner part has little smell, the
higher part that co^t^yneth the bows has leaves, the which be green, after
the ^u^mer of a Fig tree, with three points, an^ when they are little, they
be like to the leaves of a Pear tree, in only showing their points. They be
of color a sad^e Green, and of a sweet smell, and much more when they be
dry. The Indians use to lay them beaten or stampe^ upon br^ises, or when any
man is beaten with dry blows, and being dried they are used in Medicinable
things. They l^se no^ their leanes, they are always green, if any do dry
and fall, there springs other, it is not known that it has any flower or
fruit.

The roots of this Tree be gross, or slender, conformably to the greatenesse
of the Tree, The roots.
they be light, but not so much as the body of the Tree, and the bows, but
for the greatness it is notable light.

Note.
The root of this Tree is very superficial, spreading in the upper face of the
soil or ground, (...) so they dygge them up easily: and this is a common
thing in the Tree^ of the Indias, tha^ most of them have their roots of small
depth, and if they carry any plant^s from Spain to plant elsewhere, if they
do not set them of small depth in the ground, they bear no fruit.

The best is the root.
The best of all the Tree is the root, and that woorketh the best effect, the
which has the rind cleaving very fast to the inner part, and it is of color
Tawnie, and much more of sweet smell then all the tree, and his Branches:
the rind tastes of a more sweet smell, then the tree, and the water being
sodden with the root, is of greater and better effects, then of any other
part of the tree, and it is of a more sweet smell, and therefore the
Spaniardes use it, for that it woorketh better and greater effects. It is a
tree that grows near unto the Sea, and in temperate places, that have not
much drouth, nor moisture. There be Mountains growing full of them, and they
cast forth a most sweet smell, so that at the beginning when they saw them
first, they thought that they had been trees of Cinnamon, and in part they
were not deceived, for that the rind of thi^ tree ^ath as sweet a smell, as
the Cinnamon has, and does imitate it in color and sharpness of taste, and
pleasantness of smell, and so the water that is made of it, The S^ssafras as
good a^ the Cinnamon.
is of most sweet smell and taste, as the Cinnamon is, and procures the same
works and effects as Cinnamon does.

The tree grows in some parts of the Florida, and not in others, for that it
is in the port of Saint Elen, and in the Port of Saint Matthew, and not in any
other parts: but when the Soldiers did wax sick, The c^mpl^ction and
temperature of the tree.
in places where this tree grew not, either they carried them to be healed to
the said places, or they sent them the trees, or their Roots chiefly, and
therewith did heal them. The best of the tre^ is the root, and after them the
bows, and next the tree, and the best of all is the rindes. The complexion
and temperature of the tree and of his bows, is hot and dry in the second
degree, the rind is somewhat more hot then the rest, for that it enters into
the third degree, of heat, and dries, and this is manifestly seen in the
water* and so they tha^ shall need of it, must procure to have the roots or
bows, which have the rind, for that which is without it, does no^ work so
good effects.

The name of this Tree, as the Indians term it, i^ called Pauan^e, and the
French Men call it Sassafras. The name.
I know not wherefore our Spaniardes call it after the same manner, being
taught by the French Men, although that some do corrupt it, and call it
Sassafragia, by the name that we have from thence, and they of these parts do
call it Sassafras.

The use of the Root, The use ^y seething.
or of the Wood of this Tree the which w^e have treated of here, is by the way
of seething, and in this form the Indians did show it to the French men, and
they unto us: and as the Indians have neither weight nor measure, they have not
kept in those parts any order in the making of the water of this wood, for
that they do no more there than put a piece of the wood, or of the root at
their discretion made in pieces, into the water as they do think best. And
they sees it after their manner, without consuming more quantity, then when
they see that the seething is sufficient: Variety of seething.
so that all they which have come from those parts, are very variable in their
manner of seething, which is no small confusion to them that shall use it, and
likewise to the Physician that shall minister it. That which I do herein. I
will write. I look upon the complexion, and temperature of the sick person,
How the author does order it.
that shall take and use this water, as also the manner and quality of the
disease, and conformably I make the water, and give it to the sick person,
giving to the Cholerike less seething, and less quantity of Wood, and to the
Flegmatike more seething, and more quantity of Wood, and to the Sanguine
meanably: and so after this sort too their infirmities, according too the
qualities of them, for that if it be not done according to this order, they
cannot choose but make many errors in the use of this water, and also it is
convenient that for the mo^^e part they keep the use of the diet and
government which is necessary for the disease which they pretend to cure. Let
none think, that to take this water without order and good consideration, as
many does, there shall follow health: but unto them rather taking it without
measure and without order, ^t shall do unto them much hurt: whereby it seems
to me that when this water shall be ministered, as well in the diseases that it
cures, as in any other whatsoever they be, it is necessary that they go to
some learned Physician, that may dispose the manner and making of the Water,
and the order which they shall observe in taking of it, for that in the Winter
it should be taken otherwise than in the Summer. And otherwise it must be
given to the lean person, than to the strong, and in an other manner it must
be taken of the Cholerike, than of the fleugmatike, and one order is required
in the cold region, and an other order in the hot. Whereby it appears, that it
is convenient to keep order, measure, and form in the taking of it, for that
there goes no less with it then health and life, considering that we see it
have no price in the world, and not to let it alone to the judgment of him
that knows it not.

It happened to a gentle woman, History.
unto whom for certain i^dispositions of the Mother, proceeding of great
cold that she had taken, I cou^selled her that she should take this water of
the wood of Sassafras. And I gave her the order that she should use, in making
and taking of it, which was as much as was convenient for her disease, and
seeming for her. But she took much of the wood, more then I willed her, and
seething the water more then I commanded her, she thought that she should
heal the sooner. And as she took it certain days with this strength, she
was burdened in such sort with a very great Ague, that not only it stood her
upon to leave the water, but it was needful to let her blood five times, and
put her life in adventure, and so procured infamy to the remedy. After she was
whole, and had prevailed, she returned and took the water with the order that
I had first told her, and she healed very well of her disease. It is time now
that we come to the virtues of this wood so excellent, whereof let us speak
particularly of every one of them, as we have known, and experimented them.

In general our Spaniardes in those parts of the Florida, where they have
been and now are, The virtues thereof.
do use this aforesaid water sodden at their discretion, for all manner of
disseases, without making exception of any. An^ being sick of any manner of
evil which comes unto them, sharp, or long, hot, or cold, grievous or
otherwise, they ^ure them all by one manner of fashion, and they heal all with
o^e manner of water, without making any difference, and the best is that al be
healed therewith, and in this they repose so much trust, that they fear not
the evils which are present, nor have any care of them that be to come, and so
they use it for an universal remedy, in all manner of diseases.

In one of the things that they have found most profit in this water, It
heals opilations.
was in Opilations, in the interior parts, of the which they came to be
swollen, and to be full of the Dropsy the most part of them. For of the long
and large heates which they had taken, they came well near generally to have
these diseases. And with this water both the swelling and the opilation went
away, and therewith they came to be made whole of the Quotidian Agues, which
the most part of them had. For in going thither the most part of them fell
sick, of these long and importunate Fevers, in the which I have experience by
this Water, being taken as it ought too be, for it woorketh marvelous
effects, and have healed many therewith. For the principal effect that it
has, It comfort the Liver and the stomach, and does disopilate.
is to comfort the Liver, and to dissolve Opilations, and to comfort the
stomach, which are the two principal things, that are most convenient for the
Physician to do, that the sick may be healed of the like diseases. For in
these evils it is not to be feared that the humors be corrupted. And if the
principal members be hurt, one of the things that these medicines which are
brought from our Indias do principally, when the water of any of them is taken,
is to comfort the Liver, and to amend it, that it may engender good humors,
for if this be not done, the cure is in vain. And so our Sassafra^ has a
marvelous property, to comfort the Liver, and to dissolve the Opilations, in
such sort that it does engender alowable blood.

I healed ^ young man which had an opilation of cert^yne Tertians. H^storie.
And thereof he was all swollen, in such sort that he was well near full of
Dropsy And with purging him many times with Pills of Ruibarbe, and by taking
of Dialaca amongst the said Purgations, and drinking the water of this
Sassafras, continually without drinking of any other thing, he came to be
healed very well, and was clear of his swellings, and opilations. And he did
not let to drink it until he remained perfectly whole.

The manner of curing with this water made of the Sassafras, for the Tertian
Agewes and long Fevers, I will show you, and what has passed in this year,
that I wrote this. There have been many people diseased with the tertiane
Agewes, so importunately, that no manner of medicine was sufficient to take
them away, and to root them out, insomuch that we let many alone, with only
good order, and good government, without helping them any more. They were
opilated, and had evil color of the face, and some of them were swollen.

And at that time it was, when the Captain general Peter Mellendis came from
the Florida, Peter Mellendis.
and brought him in common, this wood of the Sassafras, and when every man did
so much praise it, many of them that had Tertians, took water of the
Sassafras, keeping the order that the Soldiers gave them, and surely I saw in
that great maruelles, for that they healed many with the use thereof. Not
only of the tertians that so much did molest them, but also of the Opilations
and evil color that they had. And seeing this, I caused other to take it,
that without counsel durst not do it. And it did very well with them, but it
must be well seen unto how it should be given, and to whom, that the cause
may carry with it both order and measure.

That which ordinarily was done, was to give one cup full of the Water well
sodden, How this water must be g^uen.
in the morning with Sugar or without it, and after to drink the water
continually, that which was more simple, then the first, and as the Physician
shall judge to be most convenient for him that is sick, keeping the conditions
in the taking of this water that we shall speak of.

And surely it is a thing that gives great contentment to heal only with the
drinking of a water, Digression.
it being of a sweet smell, and good of savor which is taken, and drunk
without any manner of grief, and so to do that work which sharp medicines
and sirupes of evil savor and taste cannot do. And such as did drink wine,
did water their wine with it, and they found themselves well with it.

In one thing it was seen greatly to profit, which is in the use of this
water, To give appetite to eat.
in them that have lost the lust of their meat, insomuch that it is restored
to them, and the lothsomnesse taken from them, by the use of it, so that many
did amend and come to their health quickly. And the use of this water does
cause lust to meat. The Soldiers do commend it with such admiration, that
some came to leave it, and not to drink it, for because that it caused them to
have so great hunger, that they could not withstand it. And because there was
no such abundance of meats wherewith they might satisfy their hunger, which
the water was cause of, they would not drink it, as not having sufficient for
their maintenance, for they did all use it for a drink in steed of wine, and
it was a great remedy for them, that by it they became whole, as appears by
them which came from those parts whereas they do use it.

In the Hauana there is a Physician, whom they take for a Man of good
understanding in these causes, How a Physician of the Hauana does use it.
who did cure many of them which came in the Fleet from the new Spain sick,
with only the use of this water, without giving or making for them any other
Medicine. And it did very well with them, for that many were healed therewith,
and he gave them to drink as much as they would, all the day, and at Dinner
and Supper, and in the morning he gave a Cup full warmed, to them that could
not go to stool with a little Sugar not very white, and it wrought very well
with them, for their going to stool. And to other he gave Medicines of this
water only and Honey, and it made a good work. I cured here some that were in
cure in the Hauana. And being ordered in this manner, they which came not well
healed thence, were here fully healed.

In griefs of the head, and in pains thereof being very old, which proceed
of any cold cause, In the h^adache.
the taking of this water hot in the morning well sodden, and at dinner and
supper, and in the day time simple with good government as well in the meat
that is eaten, as in the rest of all other things, and doing this for many
days, it cures and heals them maruellously. It is convenient for him that
shall do this, that he purge himself first, and in the time that he must take
it, that he receive certain Pills of Hiera simplex, and he has no need to
keep himself close neither in his chamber, nor in his bed. He that shall
take this, it is enough that he go well clothed, and that he keep himself from
the cold and air, and that he use to eat good meats.

In griefs of the breast caused of cold humors, this water does profit much,
and opens the ways of the breast. In evils of the breast.
It consumes moisture and fleames, it stays the flux, and the running which
comes from the head to the breast. It must be taken in the morning hot, and
drink continually simple, for besides the ordinary drinking in the morning, it
must be drunk simply for a long time. For these simple waters as they do
their work by little and little, so it is needful that they be continued for a
long season. It is good that there be put some suggar too it, that it may make
the better work.

In griefs of the Stomach when the cause is cold or windy, after that the
universal euacuations be made, In grie^es of the Stomach.
taking this water in the morning strong, and as it is s^id simple, at other
times, it takes them away and heals them, chiefly if there be any old
grief, for that I have given it for this effect, to men that many years did
suffer most grievous pains in the stomach, and with taking the water in the
morning hot for certain days, and continuing with the simple water for a long
time, and taking once every week pills of Hiera simplex, many people were
healed thereof very well. And thus we have declared how that the use of this
water restores the appetite lost, and gives lust to meat.

In the weakness of the stomach, and in the lack of natural heat, For the
weakness of the Stomach of them which do not digest their meat, and for them
which do vomit their meat.

In the grief of the Stone.


where that which is eaten is not consumed, it works great effects, and
helps digestion. It consumes winds, which are the cause of indigestion, it
takes away a stinking breath, and from them that do vomit their meat, it
takes away that evil custom, so that they eat little, and use continually to
drink this water without wine. And above al other things, it makes a good
breath, and a good smell at the mouth.

In the disease of the stone of the Ridneis and reins, the use of this water
hot when they have this grief, does greatly profit, and much more using it
continually simple by it self, or with wine, for that it does preserve that
the pain come not so continually nor so grievously. And also it makes him
that does use it, to cast out much Sand, where the stones be engendered. It
causes to cast out grauel and stones.
And also it causes the stones that are in the reins to be cast out, and
staieth the ingendering of them, for that it consumes the fleames, of the
which they be principally ingendered, and the winds that be many times the
causes of the pains.

For whom the use of this water is not convenient.

Of the wood for the stone.


To them which have the burning of the Urine, and to such as have great burning
at the time that they make their water, do feel great heat, unto such is not
convenient the use of this water, for because it is hot.

Al such should use of that wood, which I have written of in the first part of
this History, which is excellent, for such as suffer the like burninges and
pains. For the stones and sands, for all such evils coming of heat, the work
is meruellous that it does, saving that if there be any stone in the Bladder,
from which place proceeds the like burning, for in such a case none of these
waters do take effect: but only the Surgions Raser when the Stone is great,
is that which does profit, as I have seen in many. And while it is said it
is a stone, it is no stone, death has come unto them that had it, whom if
they had been opened in time, might have lived many years, as we have seen in
diverse of sixty years and more who have bin opened, and lived until they came
to eighty years and more.

And I advertise you, that this wood, which I call of the Uryne, and the stone,
does make the water blewe, The wood of the Urine will make the water blewe.
for if it do not make the water blewe, it is not the right wood. And now they
bring a wood, which makes the water yellowe, and this is not it which does
profit, but that which makes the water blewe, and this has the covetousness
of them caused, that bring it, because they have seen that it is well sold in
this city, for the manifest profits that it does, in these griefs of the
Urine, by tempering the Reins, and the Liver, and procuring many other
benefits, and they bring of all the wood that they find, and sell it for wood
of the stone. The same has happened in the Mechoacan, which when it came to be
worth twenty Ducates the pound, they laded so much from thence of it, some
not being ripe, other not being right, that when it is come hither, it woorketh
not the effect, that the good and well seasoned was wont to do. Wherefore it is
needful to see to that which is taken, that it be the same, and that it be
well seasoned. ^alse Mechoacan.


That which is very white, is not such as the yellowe is, in mine opinion, for
that which is yellowe, we see that it m^keth the better work: it may be
that the very white is not of it, or has not the perfection that the good
has. And coming to our water of Sassafras, It prouo^eth Vners.
it provoke Urine, it makes them to Uryne well, which have the impediment of
it, chiefly if it come by humors of col^e causes. I did know a Priest, which
came in this fl^ete from the Florida, who being in those parts, did make water
very evil, and cast from him stones, some times with very much grief, and some
of them did put him in hazard of his life, and when he was in the Florida, as
he drank of the water of Sassafras ordinarily, as many other did in the place
of wine: he avoided many great and small stones, without any pains, and after
that hither unto he has found himself whole, and very well of this evil,
by drinking the simple w^ter of this wood ordinarily, and watering his wy^e
therewith. Many do drink of this water for the same purpose, and they cast
out much Sand, and do find themselves cured therewi^h.

In the^ which be lame.
In them that be lame or creeples, and in them that are not able to go, nor to
move themselves, as for the most part that infirmity comes of cold humors:
by taking this water hot in the morning, and procuring sweat all that he can,
eating things of diet, and drinking the simple water continually, and using it
many days: we have seen many healed. And it is to be noted, that in taking
of this water, there is nothing to be observed, as in other waters: but when
they shall take it hot, if any sweat come, to keep it, and after this they
may rise and go well clothed: it is not needful of any thing else, but of
this and good order, and to eat good meats, and if they sweat not, it makes
no great matter, but if they sweat not, they shall be healed: I know a
Captain, one of them which came from the Florida: and he certified me that
he was so weak in all his body, that his Soldiers carried him upon their
shoulders, for that in any other manner he could not stir, and he was in a
place where the tree of Sassafras was not, and he sent for it and took the
water, and therewith sweat for certain days, and afterward he took it
simply, and he was restored to his perfect health, and I did see him whole,
and well.

In the toothache, this wood being broken and chewed with the tooth that is
grieved, In the toothach^.
and leaving that which is chewed in the hole of the tooth, which is grieved,
if it have any hollownesse, and although that it have none, yet it takes away
the pains meruellously, with experience done upon many.

In the evil of the Pox, In the evil of the Pox.
it works the same effects that the rest of the waters, of the holy wood,
the China, and the Sarcaparillia does: taking it as these waters be taken
with sweates, putting up more or less, the decoction of the water, and the
quantity of the wood, as the complexion is, and the disease of him that shall
take it. For that in cold humors Flegmatike, it makes a better work, then
in them that be Cholerike: and so in the Pox that be of a long time, it
makes a better and greater work, than in them that be of small continuance:
and more where there be knobbes, and moisture of matter, and old griefs of
the head, with the order as is aforesaid. The simple water.
And in these evils the simple water is continually taken for a great time, and
it works great effects, chiefly in them that be lean, which be altogether
weakened and debilited, with the use of many Medicines.

Many which have the Gout, have used, and do use to drink of the Water of
this tree, In the^ which have the gout and the evil o^ the Joints.
some of them taking it hot, as we have said, and others simple continually
by it self, and watering their wine therewith. That which I have seen, is that
which in the old kind of Goutes, does neither good nor evil, and if it do
any good, it is to comfort the stomach, and to dissolve win^inesse, and to
give them some lust to their meat, and the rest of the benefit that it
brings, is to them that have bin sick but short time, if the cause proceed
of cold, unto whom it procures notable profit, but if the humor and cause
be hot, it does them no good, but hurte^h them, infl^ming and causi^g them to
have greater pains.

In one thing I have seen it in many people to bring notable profit, with the
continual use of this water, and it is in them which have foul diseased
hands, For them that have foul hands.
which cannot exercise them, as they were wont to do. I healed a Gentleman
which could not write, that when he went to write, his hand fell down by
little and little, and the pen also, after he had begone to write not past
five or six letters. And he took a Cup full of that, which was last sodden
in the morning, and after he drank it, he continued two hours in his bed,
and after he rose and went about his business. And he did eat at his dinner
good meats, and at his Supper used diet, and drank the simple water of the
self same Sassafras, and he was healed very well: having spent a great sum of
money on Physicians and Medicines, which did not profit him any thing, until
he came to be remedied in the order as is aforesaid.

The water h^t makes a man go to the stool.
Many did certify me that, which now I find by experience, and learned of
them that were sick in the Hauana, and could not go to the stool, that the
Physician which is there, did cause them to take in the morning fasting a good
Cup full hot of the water of the Sassafras, and it did soften the belly,
and they went to the stool very well, which we have seen here to be true by
experience. And there was a Soldiour which certif^ed me, and proved it, with
others of his company, For the going to the stool by indigestio^.
that having stools by indisgestion and rawnesse of stomach, for want of
heat, it took them away, with taking of one good cupfull of this water every
morning fasting, and so with drinking it continually, but that which he drank
every morning, he drank it cold, and yet nevertheless he was healed very
well of the flixe, which he had many years. I^ the evil of W^^^n.

The eu^ll o^ the Mo^h^r and (...).




I^ griefs of women the water of Sassafras does greatly profit, and in
especially in that which is called the evil of the Mother: and where there is
windiness, it consumes and diss^^^eth it, and also any manner of cold of the
bel^y, and it dissolueth the swelling of it, curing any manner of disease which
proceeds of the Mother. And this is so experimented, and so put in use, that
many have been healed with this water, that never thought to have recovered
health. And in the withhelding the Monthly course that comes, not to women,
this water makes a meruellous work, by provoking and making it come in them
that wholly do lack it, In stopping the courses of Women.
taking one Cup full of this water in the morning: and drinking it ordinarily
at dinner, and at supper, and in the day time being more simple, then that in
the morning, using good regiment, and doing other things which may help the
water, that it may be provoked. And unto them also to whom it does not come
well, it brings manifest profit, taking the water in form as is aforesaid,
keeping them the time that they take it, from such things as may offend them:
and being used it does disopilate, and make a good color in the face, as it
is seen by the experience of them that do use it, having need of it. Let them
beware if they have much heat, or be of a hot complexion, Where as i^ much
heat this water i^ not convenient.
in such case let them moderate the quantity of the wood, and the seething of
the water, as is convenient, and this is easy to be done, by seeing how it
goes with them at the beginning, with the use of it, and according thereunto
they may rise or fall, as it seems to be necessary.

Some women do use of this water, for to make them with child, To ma^e women
with child.
and in some it has wrought the effect as it is well known. That which I can
say, is that a gentlewoman, being many years married, without having
children, took this water, for that her husband used it for certain euilles
of Opilations, and of an agewe that held him, with certain sittes of a double
tercian which he had, and he continued with the taking of it in the Morning
hot, and at Dinner simple, and at Supper, and in the day time, keeping a good
government, whereby it came to pass, that she was with child, and brought
forth a son.

And I understand, that one of the principal virtues that this water has,
Note.
is to drive away the Mother for this effect, for the most part of women that
have no children, is for the great cold that is ingendered within the Mother,
which does hinder the cause of generation, and as the water ryseth it
consumes it, comforting the place and dissoluing the winds, that are the let
of it: I am sure that it will manifestly profit, as we have seen in them
which do not bring forth children, for having too much heat and dries, to
whom permit not the use of this water, for because it will not profit them,
and if they do take it and feel hurt thereof, let them not put the fault in
the water, but in their complexions, seeing that it is not convenient for them.

This water does make fat.
The use of this water does make fat, and this is certainly known, for we
have seen many lean and sick, that have taken it, and have healed of their
evils, and have recovered much more flesh, and better color, as those people
that come from the Florida, do praise it very much: and they they al say, that
the use of this water does make fat, and it happens so to many, and not
only it heals them of their diseases, but also makes the^ remain with a
good color. And so it seems by the^ that come from that country, for that
they come al fat, and of a good color, who I believe as they were very sick,
so that they were very lean and yellow, when as they were healed of their
infirmities which they had, they gathered flesh, and became of a good color,
ingendering in the Liver good blood, by the which the members were ^etter
maintained, than when they were sick. And surely it i^ a great thing that
this water should work this effect, considering that it is hot and ^rye, if
it were not for the causes that are above said. And I have seen many that
entered i^, to ta^e the water of the wood, lean, and with an evil color, to
come forth strong and fat, and of a good color, eating no other thing then
Res^nges, Almondes, and Biscuit.

In pestilent and contagious diseases, which we have seen* In P^stil^n^ and
corru^^ ay^es.
in the time of the Pestilence past, there were many that desired to drink it,
to preserve them from that evil. And we did see that none of them which used
it, were wounded of the disease, that then reigned. Many did use to carry a
piece of ye Root of the Wood with them to smell to it continually, as to a
Pomander. For with the smell so acceptable it did rectify the infected air: I
carried with me a piece a great time, and to my seeming I found great profit
in it. For with it and with the chewing of the rind of the Cidron nor of the
Lemmon in the morning, and in the day time, to preserve health it ha^h a great
strength and property. And it seems to me, that I was delivered by the help
of God from the fire, in the which we that were Physicians went in, blessed be
our Lord GOD that delivered us from so great evil, and gave us this most
excellent tree called Sassafras, which has so great virtues, and works such
marvelous effects as we have spoken of, and more which Time will show us,
which is the discouerer of all things. It shall do well to show the
quantity of the wood, and also the quantity of water, wherein it shall be
sodden, and to prescribe a rule in weight and measure, in effects, and
temperatures, for them that are hot, and others that are cold.

I will tell you the order that ought to be kept in ta^ing the water of this
excellent wood, How (...) water ought to be ma^^ in general.
which must be made conformably to the disease of him that shall take it, and
accordin^ to the quantity and comp^exion of the sick body. For unto the
Cholerike Person the water ought to be given less sodden, and with less
quan^itie of wood, and to the flegmatike more sodden and with more quantity,
of wood. So the diseases should be considered of. Unto them that are very cold
the water ought to be given more sodden and with more quantity of Wood. And
unto them that be not so col^e, but do participate of some heat: the water
ought to be given less sodden, and with less quantity of wood. The like shall
be done in the hot or cold times, and in the age of the person, or the most
causes making to this respect and proportion. And for the more light, I will
here set down the manner how this water ought to be used, the which shall serve
to show how that they may rise or fall therein, co^formably to the opinion which
shall seem good to every one. For in these infirmities that be very cold, they
must set up the water in quillates, both in seething and also in quantity of
the wood. And in the diseases that are not so cold, or that do participate of
any heat, they must set the water lower, in Quillats, seething it less, and
putting in less wood, the manner and order of the preparing it is this.

You shall choose the freshest wood that may be had, and that which has a
rynde. The manner to make it in particular.
For that wood which has not the rind, is not good, nor takes effect, you
must procure that it be of the root, for that is the best of the tree for
these effects and cures, and for the diseases which we have spoken of. And if
in case there be no root, then the bows are the best that grow in the higher
part of the Trees, and in case the bowe^ lack, then is the tree good, and if
so be that the one and the other have the rind of the root, let there be
taken less in quantity thereof, and more of the bows, and much more of the
tree, which must be double to the quantity of the root. Now let us speak of
the bows as of a thing in the midst, between the root and the tree, being
that which continually they do bring, of the which you shall take half an
Ounce, and cut it as small as may be. And it must be put into three Pottelles
of water in a new Earthen pot, The order ho^ to make the strong water.
and there lie a steeping two hours: and after it must be sodden at a fire of
Coals, until the two parts be consumed, and the one rem^yne. And after it
is cold, let it be strayned and kept in a glassed vessel, The ^im^le wat^r.
and upon those small cuttinges of wood that have been already sodden, let
there be poured other three Pottels of water, and let it sees until half a
Pottell be consumed, and no more, after that it is cold, let it be strayned
and kept in a glassed vessel. Let the first water be taken in the morning
fasting, half a Pint hot, and then keep your self warm, and procure sweat,
then change your self into hot clothing, and wipe your self from the sweat.
And eat of a Hen roasted, and dry fruit, and Conserua, and drink of the
second water at Dinner and Supper, and in the day time. And then rise and go
well clothed, and fly from all things which may offend you. And at night make
a light Supper, and eat dry fruit and Conserua, but eat no flesh at night,
and drink of the second water. And this you may do for as many days as you
find your self grieved: and if you find your self well with the use of this
water taken in this manner, proceed forward until you be whole, and if not,
then continue in taking of the strong water every third day, and drink of the
simple water continually. After this order it may be given in all diseases,
that we have treated of, and it will profit. But many will not submit
themselves to this labor, which truly is the best of all others, and that
which is most convenient. They may make ^he simple water in this form.

Let there be taken half an ounce of the wood, little more or less, with the
conditions aforesaid, The s^mp^e water.
and let it be made into small pieces, and sees it in three Pottels of water,
until half be sodden away, rather more then less. And of this water you may
drink continually, at Dinner and at Supper, and in the day time, and surely
taken in this order it does and has done mauellous works, and most grea^e
Cures, in long diseases, and importunate, taking it and ^eeping a good
gouernem^nt in your Meat and other things prohibited. And howsoever it be,
being drunk so simple, it procures great profit. They that cannot forbear
the drinking of wine, may water their wine therewi^h, for it will rather make
it of a better taste and sweetness, for this water has a most sweet smell,
and taste, and above all, it works marvelous effects, as we have seen and
do see in diverse and sundry diseases, in the which ordinary remedies of
Physic do not profit, with the great examples which we have hereof.

Note.
And it is to be considered, that principally it does profit in long and
cold diseases, and where there is wyndines, and other evils, that run this
course, which shall be known forthwith by him that shall have need of it, and
use it. And one thing is to be understood, that using it in the order as is
aforesaid, although that he which takes it have no need thereof, it can do
him no hurt, but rather if it be well considered, it will manifestly profit
him in the time that he shall take it, yea, although he leave the taking of it
when he sees that he finds not the profit which he desires, nor that it
has done him any hurt or harm during the time that he has taken it.

CARLO SANCTO Of the Carlo Sancto, a root brought from the new Spain.
THey bring from the new Spain within this three years a mauellous root and
of great virtues, The root of Carlo Sancto.
which is called Carlo Sancto, the which a father of S. Francis order
discou^red and published in the province of Mechoacan, being taught by an
Indian of that country that was very wise in such things, and a man of
great ^xperience, in the virtues of them. In the fir^te part we have
decla^ed that there be many Medicinadle H^ar^es, which have great secrets,
and virtues. Where it gro^eth*
This ^ur Carlo Sancto grows in that Province, in places which are v^rie
t^mperate, which ^e not dry nor ver^ moist. The form and figure thereon is
like to our wild Hop^ of Spain, The ^^rme (...).
for it c^rrieth a Lease as they do, and it r^nn^th up by any other t^ing that
is near unto it, and if it have nothing to lea^e unto, then it c^eepeth all
along upon the ground: the colo^r is a sad gr^ene, it car^ieth neither
flow^e nor fru^t, the smell that it has is little, The col^^r. The sm^^^.
and acceptable to some. Out of the Root s^ri^geth a gross tree, and it
casts forth other Roots of the greatness of a finger: it is white in
color, The ro^te.
and has a Rind which falls from the inner part, the heart of it is
meruellously wrought: for it is compounded of certain small boordes very
thin, The heart is marue^^^us.
and they may be divided by one and one, the root has a pleasant smell, and
being chewed, it has a notable bitterness, wi^h some sharpness of taste: The
virtue is in the rin^e of the r^ote.
this root has his virtue in the Rind.

In the ships that he now come, there come the satin: p^e of it, and now there
is more knowledge of the virtues t^erof then before there was. Many of them
that came in this flee^e from the new Spain, do speak much good of this
root. But he that speaks most of it, is a Gentleman that came from
Mechoacan, and brought a good quantity of it with him. That as he reports,
and also what we have experimented of it, we will speak of, and also of the
complexion and tempera^ure thereof, which is hot, and dry, in the first part
of the second degree.

(...).
The principal effect that this Root does profit in, is in ^^^mes and
runninges of the head, for it causes them to flo^e out of the mouth, and
^ringeth them from the head, ^y (...) a little of the Rind of the Root, a good
time, but it (...) be taken in the mor^ing fasting, and it boydeth out much
(...), ^ h^mors from ye head, that would go to the stoma^e, (...) other parts,
but before this be done, it is convenient, that (...) be purged. (...).


(...) that chew it, which can eas^ly vomit, do vomit with chewing of it,
and it causes them to cast out much Choler and fleume, and much more it makes
them vomit, if they take the decoction of it, for it makes the humor to come
up, which is in the stomach with much easiness. The roo^e comfort the
stomach, and also the gummes by chewing of it, and it fortifieth the teeth, It
comfort the teeth, (...), and keep them from worm eating.

In diseases of women it provoke Purgation. It dissolueth winds and
comfort the stomach,


and does preserve them from woormes, and that they rotte not, nor corrupt. It
makes a good smell in the mouth, and because it is bitter, it is convenient
after that you have chewed it, that you wash your mouth with wine, that the
bitterness may be taken away.

In the infirmities of women chiefly, where opilations are, and lack of
purgation, the powder of the rynde of the Root does dissolve them, and takes
them away, and makes their purgation to come down well with the use thereof.
It must be taken with wine, or with water, sodden with Coriander, and Cinnamon,
which they must drink, whiles they do take it: it dissolueth winds, and
comfort the stomach, whiles they use it, they must annoint their Belly with
the oil of Liquide Amber, and Dialtea of equal parts, and first they must
be purged, and take heed that they keep all good order, and good government.

In the evils of the heart, In the evil of the heart.
chiefly being joined with the Mother, the said pouders and the water sodden
with the rynde of the Root, do work very great effects. They must take
the powder in the order as is aforesaid: and the weight of twelve pence of the
root, cut small and sodden in one Pottell and a half of water, until half
be sodden away: and then they must cast into it the weight of two shillinges
of the ryndes of Cidrous being ^rie, and the weight of twelve pence of Cinamom
made in powder, and give it certain seethinges with them, and then strain it:
and they must take every morning a small vess^l of six Ounces of this seething
with Sugar, because it is somewhat what bitter, or without it as you please:
and it is to be noted, that before you begin to use it, you must make the
universal euacuations, which shall be convenient.

This Gentleman says which brought this Root, that it profits much, in
the disease of the Pox, In the evil of ^^e Pox.
taking it in Powder, or the seething of it: which I have not experimented, for
that we have so many remedies for this evil, that we have made no experience
thereof: he says that it is to be taken without keeping, more, then when they
be taking the water, or powder, and that then they keep good order and good
government in their meats, and in all other things.

In the falling sickness, a strong disease, and well near incurable, they say
that it has a great property, and works great effects: In the falling
sickness.
taking the powder of the rind of the root, with wine or with water, as is
most convenient for him that shall take it. I counseled one here, who was
more then forty years of age, and had had it of long time, to take it, and
hitherto he has not felt more then to vomit with the powder, when he takes
it, and he casts up much Choler, and his faintness is not so great as it was
wont to be. It seems to me, that it cannot take it away. For it should work
that effect in them, that do not pass twenty and five years, who unto that
time have remedy. I will prove it upon such: it would be no little good, that
it might work the effect that is spoken of it.

In griefs of the Head, they use this root in those parts, In griefs of the
head.
as a great and sure remedy. I will tell what has passed. The first time that
I saw this root, was in the power of one which was sick, who came from
Mexico, and he brought it for a great thing, saying: that he healed there with
and took away the pains of the head, which he had certain days, and he
asked me if that he should use it. I tasted of the root, and it seemed to me
as I have said, and I counseled him that he should use it, as they had willed
him to do in Mexico, and so he did chewe it in the morning, and it took away
the pains of the head, which a long time had molested him.

After this, a passenger told me, which came in the Ship, where the
Gentleman was that brought a quantity of this root, and he chewed it well, and
did disfleume therewith, and immediately it took away the pain, and he showed
me a little that remained thereof, which was the same that I saw, and since
that, some have used it, and it has done very well with them.

In the toothache, they that have brought it into Spain do much esteem of it.
In the toothache.
And being in the lodging where this man was which brought the root, the host
of the house certified me, that having the toothache very grievous, it took it
away from him with chewing the rind of the root, on the same side where the
tooth was which grieved him, disfleming therewith as much as he could. And I
being one day in the Custom house curing a Genoues which was there, an other
of the same Nation complained unto me of the toothache, and we caused to be
brought some of the said Root, and in the presence of as many as were there,
he chewed the rind of this root, having very great pains, and he avoided
much Fleume, and in disfleming it began to take away the pains, and before he
went from thence he was thoroughly cured. Certain days past I had a grief in
one tooth, so that it pained me all one Night, and part of one day, and I
gathered in a garden which I have in my house, c^rtaine leaves of Tabaco, and
also the aforesaid root, and I chewed both together, and disfleumed, and the
pains went from me, and returned no more to me, being more then six months
after I was payned therewith. This is the effect, that I have obtained of this
Carlo Sancto, which being so little time known, is sufficient. The time will
discover the rest, and as we shall understand more of it, so so we will give
notice thereof.

Of Beads, which be called the Beads of Saint Elen.


The Beads of the roots of saint Elen.
FRom the Florida they bring certain round Roots which are called the Beads
of Saint Elen. And they take this name by reason that they grow in a place of
that Country that is so called: they are great large Roots, divided into
several pieces, The form of them.
and cuttinges, every piece by it self, they remain round as Beads, which
being bored in the midst, they make of them Beads for to pray upon, which the
Soldiers do hang about their necks, for a thing of great estimation. They dry
them, and they are as hand as a bone, on the outward part they are black,
and within white, and the Rind is joined in such sort, that the heart and it
is made alone, they are wrought after they be dry, and this Root being
tasted, has a sweet smell, with a good taste. And it seems by the taste that
it is a kind of Spyce, for it i^ like to Galanga, they are of the thickenesse
of a man's thombe, somewhat less, the Plant has a great stalk: the Bows do
spread by the ground, The ^lant.
and cast out the leaves broad and great, and very green. It grows
commonly in moist places, the complexion thereof is hot in the end of the
second degree, and more dry the^ in the ^ir^t, the ver^ues thereof are these.

The Indians use the herb beaten between t^^o st^nes ^hen they pretend to
wash themselves, (...)
^ubbing ^^l their body with it: for they say that i^ knit^eth their fl^^h
t^g^t^er, and comfort them with his good smell. And this they do for the
most part every day, for the great profit that they f^nde in it.

In griefs of the Stomach, the Indians do use it, In griefe^ of the ^^^ma^ke.
by taking the Powder of it, and our Spania^ds also take it, for the same
purpose, receiving it in wine, being ground small, of the which I have seen
notable experience in some.

In the grief of the Stone of the Ridneis or Reins, the Powder of this Root
woorketh a known effect. In the ^rief^ of the ^tone in the (...) or ^eines.
For that some have taken this root made into Powder in wine, having the
grief, and it has taken it away. And I marvel not at all that his manifest
quantity is sufficient, to work the like effects.

In griefs of the Uryne of them that cannot piss well, In griefs of the V^i^^.
by taking the Powder, it does profit, and expel it. A thing used of many that
have come from those parts, for that they have proved it in the like euilles,
and here has bin seen the same experience. And one that had a stone which h^e
could not avoid from him, used certain days the powder of this root, and
did easily avoid the same. A ^^uldier brought Beads at his Neck, made of
these roots, and m^t with me^ one day, and asked me if I knew those Beads,
and of what they were made, and he said it was told him that they were ^oote^
of Gentiana. But I declared unto him, that the ^^^des ^ere made of certain
roots, that (...) of ^aint Elen, and that they were not made of Gentiana* and
then he told me great virtues of them, ^ the (...) v^r^ rare that the use of
the^ had wroug^t ^hi^h I did believe: for it seem^th well, in the root that
they have great Medicinal virtues, according to their fashion, and sweet
smell, and by that which I had experimented of them.

Of the Guacatane.


THey have brought in these Ships ^n herb from the new Spain that the
Indians call Guacatane, The description of the Guacatane.
and it is like to our wild time, saving that it has no smell, it is a little
herb, whitish, I know not whether it carry Flower or fruit, the herb I
have without the root: the name that it has amongst the Indians, is as
aforesaid, and the same name the Spaniardes also have given it. The Indians do
use it for their infirmities whereof we will speak, and for the same the
Spaniards do use it likewise there in the Indias, and they also which have
brought it hither, with notable profit.

In the disease of the Piles.
In grief of the Pyles they use it in this manner: they grind or stamp the
herb very small, and wash the Piles with wine, in the which there is sodden
this herb, and if there be heat in them, they sees it in water, and with
that hot seething they wash them, and then they dry them softly, and cast the
Powder of this herb upon them, and surely the effect that it works is
marvelous. Thus after I saw the good efects thereof, I much esteemed the herb.

Whenever you have any grief of cold or of windines in any part of the
body wheresoever it be, In griefs of cold and windines.
apply Turpentine unto all parts, wheresoever the grief is, and cast the
powder of this herb being small ground upon it, and lay a Linen cloth upon
that, that it may cleave fast as a Plaster, in such sort, that it be not
taken away, until the grief be gone. And of this there is manifest
experience, by them of the Indias, and also by us of Spain. The powder of this
herb cast upon little sores, and especially in the secret places does
mundifie, and heal them.

Of a certain kind of Barley.


THey bring likewise from the new Spain, a kind of Barley, which they call
small Barley: they give it this name, for the likeness which it has unto our
Barley: for it casts out an ear like unto it, and in the veins, the seed
is shut, but it is different from it in qualities and virtues: for that this
small Barley, is the strongest poison, It is most strong and mighty poison.
which at this day in herb, or plant has been seen, insomuch that it
woorketh the same effect, which Sublimatum does. And wheresoever it is needful
to burn, or eat away dead or rotten flesh, putting the powder of this seed
thertoo, it will do the like work that any burning Iron shall do. It
extinguisheth and kills any canker, how strong soever it be, it kills and
expels Worms, It kills the Canker. It kills worms.
wheresoever they be, it eats flesh which is naught and rotten, taking it
from the sores, and making them clean from such evil flesh.

The Indians for that they had no Sublimatum, nor other remedies which we
have, It eats rotten flesh.
when they should use the like, they had and have this seed most strong, and
surely so it is, and they do use it, as a remedy most strong, and of great
efficacy. This powder must be laid too, by little and little, more or less,
How it must be ministered.
conformably to the greatness of the evil, applying things defensive, which is
used to be laid too, when as the like remedies are used.

In old sores and filthy, where it is needful, In old filthy sores where it
is needful that they be cleansed.
that naughty rotten flesh be eaten away, with taking of this Seed, and
grinding it, and dissoluing it well with water of Planten, or of Roses, weating
in the clear water that shall remain upon it, some small clothes, or in
place of the small clothes, lint of fine Linen cloth, weate in the water, it
cleanses the sore, eating the evil flesh in such sort: for how evil, old,
and filthy soever that the sore be, it leaves it clean, and being laid to
the flesh, it does soder and heal them, and after this is done, you must use
the Medicines which have virtue to engender flesh. And the effect of this seed
is no more then to mundifie, and make clean, and to take away the superfluity
of the wound.

The self same effect that this seed works in us, it works in beasts
also, In Beasts it woorketh the same effect, and better.
which for the most part have very evil sores, that be cankered, and full of
Worms, the seed being laid unto them, if the cause be so great, that it
does require it: or the water of it, as it is said, makes the like work, as
we have spoken of, and better, using always the defensiues as is convenient,
where such Medicines be applied, for that it is a Medicine most strong, and it
has need of them all.

I will show you what happened to me with it. An Indian brought me this seed
with many other herbs, History.
and going about to discover them and being come to this seed, I took a
grain and put it into my mouth, to prove it. He that brought it, as one which
knew it well, kept back my hand, and would not suffer me to prove it: and for
all that I parted with my teeth one grain, which is no greater then one grain
of hemp seed, but some deal lesser, and bears some likeness of it: at the
time that it came to the point of the tongue, the seed being parted, made me a
blister upon it, which dured with me certain days: I commended it to the
Devil, and then I believed what they had certified me of it. I began to make
experience of it, and it wrought more effectually then was spoken of it. It is
hot in the fourth degree, and more if there be any more degrees.

An herb which heals the evil o^ the breast. An herb which makes a woman
to cast from her a dead child. Two maru^llous herbs.
Also I have an Herb which being sodde, and the water of it taken hot, heals
the evils of the breast: I know not the name of it, but in the remembrance of
them which came, it was written.

And an other which enforces to cast out the dead child of the belly: of thi^
the Indians have great experience for this effect, and once in these countries,
it has profited.

They brought me two dry herbs, which I would have been glad to have seen
green: the one of these being in the field in all his force, if a man or woman
do put their hands upon him, forthwith he falls down dead upon the ground.
And the other lying abroad upon the ground, in touching it to gather it, it
shuts it self together as a Cabadge of the Country of Murcia, Things
meruellous, and of much consideration.

I have black Eleboro, brought from the Province of Mechoacan, like to that of
Spain, Black Eleboro.
and woorking the like effect.

Certain days past, a young man which took counsel of me, that came from
the Prouice of Quito, History.
and being with me, there came unto me a neighbor of mine, saying, that his
daughter was very sick of the Flixe, and I had her in cure, and her disease
increased with blood, requesting me that I should go to visit her. The
Indian which was with me, asked me if they were stools of blood, I said yea:
and he said unto me that he would give her a thing, that being made into
powder and taken, would take them away forthwith, and that in the Province of
Quito, it had been experimented many times. The Father of the sick maiden,
went with him to his house, and he gave him certain pieces of a fruit, which
seemed to be of a great tree: of the one part they were very smooth, and of
color yeallowe, and of the other they were very sharp and very read,
insomuch that they seemed of a purple color. They were ground small, and he
gave the powder to the sick woman, with the water of the head of Roses, once
that Evening, and an other time in the Morning, and immediately the Flixe did
cease, and from tha^ time waxed better, whereby she came to be whole.

And as for the man I never saw him, after he gave it to her*

To the right Worshipful, Master Doctor Monardus, Physician in Seuill.
RIght worshipful and famous Doctor, it will seem a new thing to your
worship, that I being not learned, not of your profession, do write to you in
things of your faculty, being a Soldier that have followed the wars in these
Countries al my life: I have done this, because I am affectioned to your
worship, by reason of a book which you have co^piled of the medicines which are
in these parts, and of the virtues and benefits, that by the^ have been
received, which are so great that I cannot declare the^, as they deserve. And
by means of your book we have order how we should use the remedies which we
have here, for before we did use the^ without rule or measure, so that neither
they did work effect, nor with them the people were well remedied, which now is
to the contrary, and by means of your books, there has been people remedied,
that never thought to have had remedy nor health. It is more then 28. years
unto this day, that I have gone wa^dring by all these Indias, where are many
things of those, which your worship does write of in your book, and other
things also which have not been brought thither, for because the Physicians that
come to these parts, are nothing curious. They apply not their eye to the
universal wealth, but to their own particular, for they come only to enrich
themselves, and for the most part they be ignorant people which pass to those
Indias, they do not esteem of the good which they might do. And though that
I have no learning, I am affectioned to men of learning, and so I am to your
worship, for that I understood of your books, and for the same that you have
in these parts, which is great, although I know you not, yet I was willing to
take these pains, which is a contentment to m^* You write in your book, giving
knowledge of the Bezaar stone, and set down the signs of the beasts which have
the^: which being considered, we have happened upon a kind of beasts that live
in the mountains of this country, which are much like to sheep or kiddes which
your woorship speaks of, which are in the Indias of Portugal, which breed
and have these stones, of the which there are many in this country, in the
mountains, and cold countries. They are for the most of a dark red color,
they are fed with healthful herbs, whereof is great plenty in the mountains,
where these beasts do feed they be very swift, insomuch that they cannot be
hunted, but with the hand Gun: they have no horns, and in that only they do
differ from them of the East India, for in all the rest they are the same.

The 15. day of June in this year of 1568. How they have found the Bezaar
stones.
I and certain ge^tlemen my friends went to the mountains, to hu^t, and we
were a hunting five days, and we killed some of those beasts, which I have
spoken of. And as we went for this purpose, thinking that they were of the
kind, of the^ of the East India: we carried your book with us, and we opened
one of them, the greatest that we hunted, and oldest we cold find, and we
found no stones in his belly, nor in any other part of him, nor any other
thing, whereby we bel^eued that they were not the same kind of beasts with those
of the East India. And we asked of certain Indians that went to serve us,
where these beasts had their stones, and as they are our enemies, and would not
that we should know their secrets, they answered us that they knew nothing of
these stones, until one boy which was amongst them being an Indian of the age
of 12. years, seeing, that we were so desirous to know the same, showed us the
secret of the (...) have been used since that hunting, that I have spoken of,
which were the first that have bin discovered in the world for the use to heal
diseases: and we do trust that with them will be done marvelous works,
according as they have begun to do the^. and all this is owing to your worship,
seeing that by your book we had knowledge to seek them, and to discover them,
and to take them out of these beasts, which had them so hidden within them,
that surely there is much owing to your worship, for discovering unto us so
great a treasure, as this is, which is the greatest that has bin found in
these parts, whereby our nation is much bound to you, and likewise all the world,
because al men shall profit by the^, and the rest of the secrets which you have
set down in your book, which brings unto us great profit. And in recompense
of the benefit which I have received, I send here to your woorship a dosen of
stones, by the return of John Anthony Corso, the rich Merchant, which if they
come thither, your worship may make experience of them, in many infirmities,
for you shall find great effects in them. By the same return also your worship
may advise me of them, and any thing that shall please you to command me, I will
do it, as one that is most affectioned to you, because you are curious and
learned, and for doing so much good to the world, in those things which you
have written and published. Heerewithall I send you a small Chest, in the which
come certain Frisoles, which you may command to be sown in the beginning of
March, that the cold do not hurt them, which send forth a plant like unto
beans, but somewhat less, which have certain veins where the seed is. Half
a dozen of them eaten with salt, and being of the taste of green beans, they
purge valiantly, and euacuate the water of him which has the dropsy, without
pains. The self same effect it works if that they be dry, making the^ into
powder, and taking the^ with wine and it is needful that meat be made in a
redines: for if they work to much, by taking more then they should be, with
eating any thing incontinent, the work will cease.

Also I send you an herb, An herb for the Reumes.
which grows in these plain countries, clounge to the ground like unto
grass, which is of great virtues for many infirmities, chiefly for them which
are grieved with Reumes and Fleumes in the throat, taking them away easily
with great benefit, and in this, and griefs of the head and Reumes chewing
it, they do dissleume very much: they call this herb after my name, because I
use it for the like evils, for that an Indian did teach it me, which knew much
of the virtue of herbs.

Also I send your worship a fruit of a tree which is of great profit, A fruit
of a tree of great vertu^s.
and these trees be not found in any country but in this they are of the
greatness of an Oak, of those in Spain: it has many virtues, for the rind,
being made in powder, and cast into any sore which is needful to be made
clean, it makes it clean, and afterward causes the flesh to grow, and
heals it. And rubbing the teeth with this powder, it makes the^ clean very
well, and being laid upon the gummes, if the flesh be taken away, it does
incarnate them, and if the teeth be loose, it makes the^ fast. Seething the
leaves of this tree well in water, and washing with the water thereof any
manner of swelling, which has any sore, or that is thereof cankered, it takes
away the swelling, and impostume. And making some small linen clothes weate in
this seething, and laying them warm upon the medicine, which is laid upon the
sore, or upon the powder that is made of the rind: it makes the sores to
heal more quickly, causing that there come no humor to them. Out of the said
tree comes a Rosine, which is of sweet smell, and serves to perfume in many
diseases of the head, and to make plasters for many e^ils, and here I send it
to your worship. Of the fruit the Indians make a certain drink, which is for
them very health^ul. Your worship may command them to b^e sown, for I would
be glad that they should grow, for it will be a thing of much delight, for the
profit that it brings in Physic, and for the novelty of the tree, for at
al times it has a very good smell. I brought into this country a black woman,
which I bought in Xerez de la Frontera, and there did appear upon her when we
came hither certain old sores in her legs, which were of long continuance, and
coming to the Island of the Margareta, and being very sorowefull for the
sores which my black woman had, an Indian told me that he would heal her,
and seeing that she had no other remedy, I delivered her to the custody of the
Indian, that he might heal her for me, and immediately he took a fruit, which
is common in that country, and al people ingeneral do eat it, which is of the
greatness of an Orange, and it has a stone like unto a Peach. This stone the
India^ did burn, and made it into powder, for the stone is hard, and can not
be ground, without burning of it: and he cast the powder of it into the sores,
which she had full of much rotten flesh, and very filthy, which with the powder
were made clean and very well, and it took out all the rotten flesh to the
bone, and after it was clean, with lint and a little powder laid too it, they
began to be filled with new flesh, until they were full of flesh, and she was
healed very well. And it is to be considered, that the little kernel of the
stone has so much venom, and malice in it, that if any person or beast do
eat it, he dies forthwith without remedy, as though he had eaten any manner
of venom corsiue, as Sublimatum, or any other Poison.

In the Town of Posco where I dwelt certain years, there was an Indian, A
cure with the sweat of blood.
which did cure the Indians and the Spaniards of any manner of grief or disease
that they had, with anointing their Iointes and the parts which did grieve
them, with the juice of a certain herb, and forthwith he wrapped the^ in many
clothes, and they did s^eate at the joints pure blood. And also in the sick
part where he did lay the juice, and as they went sweating he made clean the
blood with a Linen cloth, until he perceived that they had sweat sufficiently,
and with this he healed many diseases that were incurable. And I am able to
say, that many did think that they had waxed young again, and were more strong
and young than they were before. He fell sick, and for all that we could do
with gifts and fair words, and fierce words, and threatenings, he would never
tell us what herb it was, nor show it to any man in this country. There is
found a kind of tree, that is of soft Timb^r, the Indians will make no fire of
it, although you kill them. For that they say, if any of them come near to the
fire that is made of this tree, or receive the smooke of it, he remains
impotent, for women. And they have this so certain in persuasion, and it is so
verified, that you shall not make them to come near the fire, that is made of
that tree, for any thing in the world, for they are so carnal that they will
none of this.

They heal in these countries any swellings which are in thee feet or legs,
caused of cold humors, Centella, an herb good for the swelling of the feet
or leg^.
with an herb called Centella, which being stamped and laid to the swelling,
there arise certain Blisters, by the which there comes forth great quantity
of water and humors, until it leave the Foot, or the leg dry. I have seen
great experience by these euacuations, amonge^st the Indians, for they use them
much, and I have seen some Spaniards use it, and were healed of the like
diseases.

In the year 1568. in the Province of Chile, they did cut of from certain
Indians being prisoners, the calves of their legs, to eat them, and they
roasted them for that purpose, and that which is of more admiration, they
applied unto the place where they were cut, leaves of certain herbs, and
there came not out a drop of blood, and many did see it. And this was done in
the City of S. James, in the presence of the Lord Don Garcia de Mendosa, which
was a thing that made al men marvel at it.

There are to be found here very few herbs and trees like unto those of
Spain, for that the earth does not bear them: but in the new Spain there
are more of them than in any other part of the Indias. For when it was
conquered, they found many trees and herbs and Plants like unto those of
Castile, and birds and beasts likewise. We have here snakes which bring
admiration to such as see the^, for they be as great as men, which are for the
most part tame, and do no hurt. Here are Spyders as great as Oranges, and very
venomous. It raineth Todes as great as those of Spain, which the Indians do
eat roasted, for they are a people which eat al kind of venomous beasts.
There be so many buytres, which breed in many Islands, that are in the sea,
near to the land, that they eat up the Cattle, and such numbers of them that
it is wonderful, and as the keepers of them be black so they care little for
them. One thing does make me marvel, that the kine which are bread in the
mountains, being brought to the plain ground, do al dye. I saw a friend of
mine that brought 300. Kine to be weayed, and they staid a time before they
were wayed, and by little and little, in one month there remained not one, but
al died. And that which is more to be marvelled at, is, that they died al
trembling, and consumed. Some there be that do attribute it to the mountains
which is a country most cold, and it raineth every day, and in the plain
country where there is no rain, but it is hot, and as they move from one
extremity to an other they dye, that truly is a thing worthy of
consideration, to see how that in the space of eight Leages, little more or
less, which are of plain ground from the coast to the mountain, by a long
vale of more then one thousand Leages, it never raineth in them, and in the
mountains it rayneth every day.

Your worship shall understand, that the eight day of October in this year,
there came hither a Cousin of mine, called Alonso Garcia, a good Soldier,
Against the he^rbe which the Indian^ do use.
who tell^th us that he has found an herb which is good against the venomous
herb, which the wild people do v^e. Which herb does kill without remedy,
and these valiant people of the Indias do use it in their wars. And likewise
those that dw^l from the Charcas toward Chile, and live like unto wild
people, mainteining themselves only by hunting, and flesh of mankind, who
have killed with their arrows which are poisoned with these venomous herbs,
an infinite number of Spaniardes* which they say be not good to eat, for that
their flesh is hard, so that when they kill them, they keep them to wax tender,
three days or four days. But with this herb that is now found, the hurt
shall be much remedied, that they do make. Howbeit our people do not much
fear them, but only the herb which they shoot withal, for that it makes
them to dye by madness, without any remedy. And now with the recou^tering
herb which they have found, they are al gladned. They say it is an herb
that carries very broad leaves, which are like to the leaves of Planten of
Spain: which being beaten and laid to the wound that is poisoned, kill the
venom, and immediately take away the accidents, which the venom of the herb
procures. They take it for a great matter in that country, that they have
found such a remedy. And you shall understand that the cou^ter herb was found
in the same country, where the herb of poison was: and I think it be also in
other parts, but there where the hurt is done, our Lords will was to discover
the r^medy.

I note unto your worship these things, to the ^nde by them ye may consider,
how many more herbs* and plante^ of great virtues like to those, this our
Indias have, which we have not yet attained unto, for as the Indians are a
naughty kind of people, and our enemi^s* so (...) and being tasted and used
between the teeth they are pure Earth. The stone has neither savor nor taste,
rather it does cool then heat, and they be ordinarily as great as beans, or
bigger. For the most part there are both great and little of them, and it
seems well by them that they have medicinal virtues: many persons bring them,
which are now come in this Fleet, who come to me as though I were the first
discouerer of them. They declare marvelous effects of the^, that i^ seems
wonderful. I brake one and gave it made into powder, to a boy, of whom it was
said that venom had been given to him. I cannot tell whether any other
benefits done unto him, or that healed him, but he was well recovered. I will
use it in other infirmities, and what I find of their operation, and the rest
of the medicines, which shall be newly discovered, I will show in the third
volume, which I will write of this Medicinal history, wherein shall be
expressed things marvelous, and great secrets of Physic, that may give
contentation to al men, and much more to the sick, that shall be healed with
them. Of one thing you must be advertised, that which is here written, part
of it we have learned of them that have come from those parts, and brought
knowledge of them hither: and part is attributed to their complexion, and
qualities, what they may do: and part we have experimented: and in all have
this consideration, that al these things which are brought from our Indias, be
for the most part hot, and see that you use them in this quality, in all
causes wherein they shall be needful. And it is needful that there be some
advertisement given hereof, since the use of the things does so import it.

Of the Dragon.


the other the blood of Drago, in bread.

The one, and the other, have virtue to retain any manner of the flux of the
belly, The virtue of the blood of Drago.
laid upon the belly, or given in glisters, or taken by the mouth. Made into
powder, it staieth the running of the head, and to the lower parts applied, in
any manner of flux of blood, it does retain and slanch it. It sodereth and
gleweth wounds together, which be fresh and new made. It lets that the
teeth fall not out, and it makes the flesh to grow on the bare gummes. It is a
meruellous color for Painters. And besides this, it has many other virtues. I
do mean to sow some of the seed, to see if it will grow in these parts. It is
temper^te.
It is thought that the blood of Drago is temperate, with little heat.

There was a gum given unto me which they bring from the firm land of the
Peru, Gum to purge them which have the Gout.
wherewith they purge them, which have the Gout in those parts, they put of
it as much as a Nut into distil^ed water, and let it stand all the night in
steep, and in the morning they strain and wring it, and take that water,
which must be the quantity of two Ounces: and the patient must remain without
meat, till the midst of the day, and therewith they purge the humor, which
causes the Gout. I saw a Gentleman who came in this last Fleet, use it,
which he brought for remedy of this evil, who was full of the Gout, and
with using this euacuation, he finds himself well, and the Gout does not
come to him, as it was wont to do, for that it came to him very cruelly, and
often: and he gave me as much as a small Nutte, and would give me no more,
and I gave it in the order aforesaid, to one which had the Gout, and he had
three stools with it. I know not how it will prove, it were needful to have
more quantity, for to proceed forewarde, in more experience thereof: but it
will be brought hither by others, as they have done many other things. It
has a go^d taste in the taking, for that it has neither smell nor savor, it
makes his work without pains. It is hot in my opinion, in the first degree.
I know not what manner of thing the Tree is, wherout they take it, for he
which brought it, knows not so much himself.

Of the Armadilio.


THis beasts portraiture I took out of an other naturally made, which was in
the Counting house of Gonsalo de Molina, a Gentleman of this City, in the
which there is great quantity of Books of diverse Authors, and the fashion
and form of many kinds of Beasts, and Birds, and other curious things,
brought from the Oriental Indias, as also from the Occidentall, and from other
parts of the world. And great variety of coins and stones of antiquity, and
differences of arms, which with great curiosity, and with a noble mind, he
has caused to be brought thither.

weight then two pound: hollow in some parts, and very white: For the grief
of the stone in the Kidneies.
they are al somewhat heavy. Of these stones they have in the Indias great
^xperience: giving them made into powder, unto those that suffer the grief of
the stone in the Kydneies, and to them that cannot piss, and to them that
cannot cast out the stone of the Reins, and of the Bladder, being of such
greatness that it may not pass out. This is a thing amongst the Indians very
common, and well known: and likewise amongst the Spaniardes, which dwell in
those parts and they which come hither auerre it plainly, and affirm it to be
so. I have tasted it, and it seems a thing unsavory, but I have not proved
it, nor applied hitherto, in time it shall be done, and we will give some reason
thereof.

They bring also from the new Kingdom and from the province of Cartagena,
Turpentine of Cartagena.

Better then ours.


a certain Turpe^tine, very clear, and of sweet smell, much better then that
they call de Vetae, which they bring from Venice: it has all the virtues that
the good Turpentine has, and it works the selfsame effects, and better,
and with greater efficacy and readiness.

Here has been used of it in wounds, and it is a thing marvelous to see the
good work which it does, especially in wounds of joints and Sinews,
Marvelous for wounds.
and of Legs, wherein I have seen great works done with it. And it does
mundifie being mingled with other things, all kind of old soars, and it is
an excellent thing, washed, and prepared, for the faces of Ladies which have
need of it.

Moreover they bring from the selfsame parts Caranna, of Cartagena, Caranna of
Cartagena.
purified so clear that it is like to Cristal, and surely it is better, and it
is applied unto much better effect then that which hitherunto has come, and
makes better works, and is of a more sweet smell, and more excellent in
operation.

Of the Flower of Mechoacan.


MAny persons of them which came now in this last Fleate from the firm land,
Mechoacan of the firm Land^.
brought very good Mechoacan, better then that of the new Spain, gathered in
the Coast of Nicaraga, and in Quito: yea, since the Mechoacan was discovered,
in the new Spain, they have found the selfsame herb and root in those
parts which I do speak of. And they use it to purge, and it does marvelous
works, and they use it in those countries and in all the firm land, as they did
use that which was brought from the new Spain, with marvelous success.

From the Cape of Saint Elen, Furious Mechoacan.
which is in the same coast, they bring another kind of Mechoacan, but it is
very strong, and being taken it causes great accidents of vomites and
faintness, with many stools, and for this cause they call it Escamonea, and no
man uses it, because it brings (...) by incision, which comes forth like
to a white tear or drop, most clear, with a marvelous sweet smell, declaring
well the marvelous effects, and Medicinal virtues that it has, of the which
we have treated in the first part. And that Balsamo which is made by
seething, as we do there show, we see the marvelous effects that it
works, with so great and marvelous virtues, that it brings admiration to
the whole world, with many other maruels which hetherunto we have seen, that
be there spoken of. And greater will these works be, that shall be done with
the Balsamo which they now bring, made by incision: seeing that one drop of
this is more worth then two Gallons of the other, as it is manifestly seen
by using of it.

The Balsamo of the Indias which is made by incision, is better then that which
was in Aegipt.
And surely that which was in Egypt, and failed so many members of years past,
I believe that it had not more virtues then this. And I am sure that this is of
greater virtue and effects then ever that was of. I have the fruit of this
tree, which is little, according to the greatness of the tree, and it is a
grain as great as a white Pease, the taste of it is a little bitter, it is
shut into the end of a little ^od of the length of a finger, being narrow,
white, and thin, of the thickness of vi. d. It carries no more but one
grain in the end, which is the fruit that the Indians do use, to perfume
them withal, in griefs of the head, and in Reumes. Surely the Balsamo is a
marvelous thing, and it shows well in it self what it is, In griefs of the
head.
according to the works thereof.

They bring moreover from the firm land a Turpe^tine, or Licor, Turpentine or
O^le of Deabeto.
which is called Deabeto, and it is gathered from certain trees of mixture,
they be not Pine trees, nor Cipres, for they be higher then our Pine trees,
they are as straight as Cipresses trees. In the highest part of the tree, it
brings forth certain bladders of two sorts, the which are great and small,
and being broken, there comes forth of them a marvelous licour, which
falls drop after drop, and the Indians gather them with great deliberation,
and they receive the same drops which be in the bladder into a shel, and
always have shelles lying under the bladders, whereou^ they distill, and it is
a thing done with such leisure, that many Indians do gather very little all the
whole day.

The Licor serves for all things that the Balsamo does, The virtue thereof.
it heals very well wounds, it takes away cold griefs, and windy. Some
do take it for the griefs of the stomach, caused of cold humors, or for
windines, with a little white wine. And it is to be understood, that the
Balsamo which is made by seething, or that which is made by incision, Note.
and this or any other manner of Licour of these of the Indias, which is to be
taken by the mouth, ought to be taken but in little quantity, which must not
be more then four or five drops, and it must not be taken in the Palm of
the hand as it is said, but putting a little wine or Rose water into a spoone,
and pouring upon that the drops of Balsamo, and putting the spoone well into
your mouth, and letting the Licor fall in, so that it touch not the tongue. For
taken with it, or touching it, the savor and taste is not removed away in a
long time: and it procures an evil taste, in such sort, that for this only
cause many do abhor it, and will not take it, and from others it has taken
away the lust of their meat, by receiving it and touching it with the tongue.

Of long Peper.


Long Peper.
ALso they bring from Cartagena, and from the coast of the firm land, from
Nata near to Veraga, a certain kind of Peper, which they call long Peper,
which has a sharper taste, then the Peper which is brought from the Oriental
Indias, and biteth more then it, and is of more sweet taste, and of better
smell, then that of Asia, or the Peper of the East India: it is a gentle spyce,
to dress meats withal, and for this purpose all the people in that country
do use it.

History.
A Gentleman gave me a platter full of it, for he brought a great quantity of
it for the service of his Ritchin, because they use it in place of black
Peper, and they take it to be of a better taste, and more healthful. I have
tasted it, and it byteth more then the black Peper does, and it has a more
sweet taste then it has. I have caused it to be put into dressed meats, in
place of the Oriental Peper, and it gives a more gentle taste unto the meats
that are dressed therewith.

It is a fruit that casts out a high plant, of the greatness of a gross
Packethreed, The description of it.
and the lower part near to the root, is as great as a little stick, that is
very small: and upon it are joined the little grains, very near together, as
though they were wrested one within the other, which causes the greatness
whereof we spoke: and being taken away from the little stick, the stick
remains bare and whole: and it is green being fresh, but the Sun ripeneth
it, and does turn it black, and so they bring it into these parts. It
grows in the coast of the firm land in Nata and in Cartagena, and in the
new kingdom: in all these parts they use it, as I have said. It has the
Medicinal virtues, which the Oriental Peper has that we use. The complexion
thereof is hot in the third degree.

And going to visit a child, the son of this Gentleman, History.
which gave me this Peper, being diseased of the fire in the face, I commanded
him to be let blood, and that to his face they should apply some little cloth
with Rose water, and the herb Mora: he said to me that he liked the
letting of blood well, because the boy was of Sanguine complexion, but as for
that which should be laid to his face, he had wherewith to heal it in short
time: and he commanded to be brought forth, a thing like unto a cake, as
great as a mean platter, the outside was black, and within yeallowe, and
being brought well near two thousand Leages, it was moist, and he dissolved
a little of it with Rose Water, and laid it to the boys face. I was desirous
to know what it was, and he said, that when the work was seen what it would
do, he would tell me whereof it was compounded. The next day I returned to the
sick, and his face was so amended, that I marvelled at it, and immediately he
was washed with Rose water, a little warm, and he remained as though he had
not had any evil therein at all.

The cake was made of certain Worms, which the Indians take out of the
ground, Of what it was made.
and they make them fat, giving them to eat leaves of a certain kind of
corn, that they have there called Maiz, and after they are fat, they put
them into a frying pan of earth, and sees them therein, and as they take of
the skumme, they strain it, and sees it still, until it be thicker then an
ointment, after the fashion and manner as he had it there.

They bring also from the Charcas certain Roots, that be like to the Roots
of flower de Luce, Roots against venom and venomous things.
saving that they are smaller and they smell much like the leaves of Fig
tree: they call these Roots in the Indias, a remedy against the venomous
herb, for being made into powder, and taken with white wine, it is a thing
of great strength, and of the greatest virtue, that is there against venom, of
what manner or quality soever it be, so that it be not corsiue as Sublimatum,
M^lke good against poison.
or the like: and as for that kind of poison, with only drinking of much Milk
they be remedied.

This Root being taken, causes the venom to be cast out, which is eaten or
drunken, or any manner venomous humor, coming of any evil degree, or cause
whatsoever, which is as well done by vomit, as by sweat. If th^re be any small
Worms, or long Worms in the body, it kills, and expels them: and if you
have any suspicion, that there have been given you any venomous morsel,
whether it be venom or witchecraft, it expels it: in which there is so
much trust in those parts, that they take it for a meruellous remedy, for the
things aforesaid. The root being tasted, it has a sweet relishe, with some
sharpnes. It seems to be hot in the second degree.

From the coast of Nicaraga, and of Nata, they which come in these last ships,
from the firm land, bring a certain kind of purge with them, that surely by
the taste is easy to be taken, and it works well, and without any pain, and
principally it purges Choler. It is the fruit of a tree very great, after the
manner of Thornish Chestnuts, which have within them Chestnuts, saving that they
prick not, but be plain* within those prickles there be some like to
Chestnuts, made clean without shale, well near square, which divide
thems^lues asunder, by means of a little skin, every one into two parts, and
so they are covered with it, and when they be taken and occupied, that little
skin is plucked away, and they are made clean from it, for that being taken
with it, it procures most dangerous accidents, and vomites, and much
faintness and infinite stools: and without it the Chestnut is a purgation
very gentle, and they purge easily, and without pains: if they be tosted, then
they will purge less: if they be green they eat them: or being beaten in a
Mortar, they take them with wine, or with the broth of a hen: if ^hey be
dry, they make powder of them, any manner of fashion. They do their work
well, and with much assurance, keeping the order that ought to be kept, by them
which be purged, and the humors being prepared, as is convenient. They are hot
in the first degree.

Of the Sarcaparillia of Guaiaquill.
IN the first part we declared, how that they brought Sarcaparillia from
Peru: Of the Sarcapari^lia of Guaiaquill.
which we use in some persons, and it works great effects. And because
there was but little of it and soon done, we returned to that of the H^nduras
which is that we have spen^ hi^herto. And ning as much as they can drink at
once, or at diverse times, and after they cast themselves into a sweat, and
they sweat so much, that it runs by the Bed in great quantity. After
that, they take clean clothes, and eat of a Hen, but they drink of no
other thing but of that juice which they took out of the rynde of the
Sarcaparillia, as well at Dinner, as at Supper, and they must eat very little
at Supper, and likewise at Dinner. And they must procure to keep themselves
from the Air and from the cold all that they can, although in that Uillage of
Guaiaquill, wherein be about fifty houses, or few more, the most of them are
Cotages, and of little safegarde, and the Walls be made of Canes, and there be
no Chambers on high, but only below: they dwell all in places of little
defense. Being in this order and small comfort for lack of Conserua and dry
fruit, which were necessary, yet in eight or nine days they are made whole of
all the diseases, that are healed with the Sarcaparillia, and of many others
which should be very large to speak of. It is sufficient that there go no
Man from thence which returns not whole, although he had never so grievous a
disease, so that they be not sharp Agewes: For in that case the cure has no
place, or in any other sharp disease. All other diseases it heals with
marvelous success, as it is seen by the great number of people which come
thither, and go away whole of the diseases, which they bring thither. But it
is needful that he which does enter into this cure, be strong and not weak,
for if he be weak, he cannot suffer so great sweat, without great peril of
his person.

Another way to take it.
For these euilles they have another manner of Water, that is, taking four
ounces of Sarcaparillia, rather more then less, for that there they use
neither wayghte nor measure, but do put all at discretion, and they take away
the rynde from the Sarcaparillia, and break it, without putting it in Water,
if it be green, and if if it be dry, then they break it and put it in
water, until it be made soft: this rynd being without the heart, they sees
in 4. Pottels of water, little more or less, and they sees it until half
the water be diminished, rather more then less: and of that Water they drink
as much as they can in many times, or at one time, and forthwith they betake
themselves to sweat, and although they sweat not so much, as they sweat with
the first water, yet they will heal, they move their clothes, they eat of a
Pullet, they keep themselves from the cold and air, and at Dinner and Supper,
they use the self same water, for that in one day they consume one seething:
this people take it in this manner fifteen or twenty days, and in this sort
also they are healed of all their evils and diseases, to the great admiration
of the people. And for the use of this Sarcaparillia they do not except any
disease, unless it be fevers or sharp diseases: these people purge not at the
beginning, as we do here, nor in the midst, nor in the end of the cure,
for there is no other Physician nor medicine, but certain women which be
there, that give the water: they are women Physicians, and therefore they take
away, and put to as it seems good unto them.

That which I do note in this business, is that they sees the Sarcaparillia
without the heart: and that they use not but of the rynde, which seems to be
very well done, and very conformable to good Physic, for the parts of the
roots which be hard, should be taken away, as things superfluous, and without
virtue and profit, which rather do let and disturb, that it cannot work that
effect which is desired in it, and the virtue is in the rynde: and this is that
which we do commonly use when we will profit our selves by it. And so from
henceforward, The manner how to ma^e the water of the rynde of Sarcaparillia
when I shall ordain this water for any that have need of it, I will use the
rynde only.

And thus I ordain it at this present. Which is to take four ounces of
Sarcaparillia, and too take away the heart,

BEing in company with John Gotierres Telo, a gentleman very excellent, and
Treasurer of ye Contratatio^ house, a passenger which came from the Florida,
gave him a piece of Ambar Grese, very excellent, saying that he brought it from
the Florida. I took it, and brake it, and it was perfect grese, of a very good
color, and in the uttermost part it was black, and I asked him that brought
it, where he had it: he said, that he gathered it in the coast of Florida, and
that they have it commonly of the Indians, that gather it in that Coast, and
they take much pleasure in it with great delight, and contentment annoynting
their faces with it, and other parts, for the good smell which it has. And
surely it makes me marvel to see, that in our Occidentall Indias, there is
so excellent Ambar, and that the time has discovered it unto us, and that
there has come from those parts not only so great riches, of Silver and
Gold, Pearls, and other precious stones, but that also now they bring us
such excellent Ambar Grise, a thing so esteemed in the world, and so much
used for the health of the body, and so necessary to cure and to heal withal,
so many and diverse infirmities, as we will speak of being a thing which for
the delicacy of mankind, is an ornament, and co^tentment with very much serves
for use. I do understand also that other Passengers brought of the like Ambar,
and some in much quantity, of which I was very glad, and the first piece that
I saw was very suspicious unto me, and after that I had seen more, Ambar is not
the seed of the Whale, but a Gu^me.
then I believed that there was of it, in those parts, which is found cast up
unto the coast.

Some there be which think that it is the seed of a Whale, as it has been
an ancient opinion, which is false, as Simeon Archiatros a Greek author does
show, saying that the Ambar in diverse places does spring, Simeon a Greek
author.
they be his fountaynes from whence it does spring, as those of Pitch Licor:
the worst is that which these fishes do taste, and swallowe down, etc. The
same it seems Serapio does understand, and besides this Simeon a Greek, and
Actio, I find no other Greeks that make mention thereof, but it is treated of
by the Arabies with as great ignorance and confusion as may be seen.
Whosoever by them will verify what Ambar is, it is to be determined upon,
that it is a kind of Pitch, that comes forth of springs and Fountains, that
are made in the deapth of the Sea, and coming forth to the air, the Licor
being gross does congele, and wax hard, and is made the Ambar which we see,
as many things else which are in the lower part of the Sea, are soft and
tender, but being brought out into the air are made hard. As we see in the
Coral, which in the lower parts of the Sea is soft and tender, Coral.
and by bringing it into the air is turned into a stone: and the Ambar whereof
the Beads are made, in the low parts of the Sea is white, and being come
forth into the air, turns hard and stony, and is Pitch, Ambar congeled.
which comes forth of a fountain, which is in the German Sea, whereby the
barbarous opinions are confounded, that say the Ambar is the seed of the
Whale. And the cause whereof this ignorance came, was this, for that Ambar was
found in the Whales, and other fishes, Amb^r found in the Whales Mawe.
and therefore men said that it grew of it own nature in their mawes, and as
this Pitch rises up to the highest parts of the Sea by reason of the lightness
thereof, the Whales do devour it, thinking that it is a thing to be eaten, and
so men find it in their Mawes. For if it were seed, it would be found in other
parts of their bodies, where it is natural to al beasts. In my time was taken a
Whale, in the coast of the Canaria that had more the^ one hundred pound weight
of Ambar within him, and after that they killed many, and found none.

They that come from the Florida say, that there be Whales by those coasts,
Whales of the Coast of the Ambar.
and that they have killed some of them, and found neither Ambar nor other
thing in their Mawes, more then fishes: and also in the young Whales which are
very great, although they have killed them, that they found nothing in them,
for that the Indians do fish for the^. and take them with the greatest
cunning that may be imagined, which is after this manner. One Indian takes a
long cord, and strong, made with certain ginnes, and shippeth himself in a
little Boat, and makes toward the Whale where he sees him coming with his
young Whales, and goes to one of them and leapeth upon him, and casts his
snare upon his snow^. The strong young Whale when he feels this, he goes
down to the deapth of the Sea and the Indian hampered fast with him, for they
are great swimmers, and can abide long in the water: and the young Whale as he
has need to breath, returns up to the height of the Sea. And in the time
that he comes up ward, the Indian carrying with him a sharp wedge, and
putting it through his nose where he breaths, he strikes the wedge into him
with his fist, in such sort, that the young Whale cannot cast it from him, and
when he comes up on heigh, the Indian gives him cord, and takes his
boat, and goes after the young Whale, and as he cannot breath, he ch^keth him
easily, and he comes to the land. It is surely a delicate and marvelous
hunting, wherein they have so much cunning, that a great Lizard or Crocodil of
xxiiii. foot, the most horrible and cruel beast that is in the Sea, one Indian
does kill. Some say, that the Ambar is made of certain fruit growing by the
Sea side, where Whales be, and in the Month of April and May, when it is in
season, and of sweet smell, the Whales do eat it, and of that the Ambar is
made, as if the fruit so eaten, would be converted into an other thing then
into blood and flesh. There be many other opinions, concerning this matter
what Ambar should be made of, which are confuted all: and it is to be
understood, that it is a kind of Pitche which springs from Fountains that
there are in the deapth of the Sea, in particular parts of it, as we see
there be of Petrolio, of Napta of Sulphur, and of many other things, as in our
Occidental Indias, of diverse other Licors: Which is best Ambar.
the best Ambar is that which is most like to a red color, the white is not so
good, and the worst of al is the black.

Ambar has great virtues, and serves in the world for many things, and so it
is a substance of great price: The virtues of the Ambar.
for that which is good is worth at this day, twyce more the^ the most fine
Gold. For the contentment of man, and for the delicateness of the world, it
serves for many things: The medicinal virtues thereof.
with it they make Beads, and fine perfumes, and odorous smelles, and water of
Angels of most sweet smell, in diverse forms and fashions: with it they dress
gloves of diverse sorts, and make Oils and licors of most sweet and
delectable smelles: it serves for meats and drinks, in diverse and sundry
forms, which to report, would be a large process.

In medicinal things the virtue thereof is great, and it profits very much
in our Medicines, for it enters into the most principal matters of Physic,
which are compounded in the Poticaries Shoppes, as well Electuaries, as
Confectio^s, pouders, and pills, Preparatiues, Ointme^ts, plasters, and many
other things, that receive great virtues thereby: and of the name of it, there
is made a confection called Dia-Ambar. The virtues which it has in particular
are great, and of great effects, for that with it are healed diverse and sundry
diseases. And this the Arabiens did teach us: for of the Greeks only Simeon,
and Actio wrote a few words of it, and also Actuario made the like mention
of it: These three authors being Greeks, lived after the time that the
Arabiens did write, and they made some record of the Medicines, and things
which they wrote of, whereof the ancient writers made no mention and one of them
is Ambar, which the old Physicians knew not before the Arabiens, for they
made no mention of it.

The virtue thereof is to heal, dissolve, and comfort any manner of way, The
complexion thereof.
wherein it is applied: For that the complexion thereof is hot and dry, with
some fatnes, and it has virtue to mollify, and make soft, with other virtues
that it has besides.

And being applied to the Brains, in the manner of an ointment, It comforts
the brain and Sin^wes.
and melting it with the Pestel of a Mortar being hot, and mingled with the
oil of the flowers of Orenges, in this sort it takes away the grief of the
head, it comfort the Sinews, it dissolueth any manner of cold which is in
them, with a great prerogative and help, as well in it own form as in making a
plaster of Al^pta M^scata, which is made of certain compoundes, that it be
applied continually to that part.

What the smell of the Ambar does.
Smelling unto it in the piece, or making a Pomander of it, mingled with Musk,
and Lign'aloe, it comfort the brains, and opens the understanding: in the
one sort, or the other, being applied unto it, it makes a good memory, and
helps the understanding that it may be better and more perfect. And it is
convenient that we use it more then women, for the hurt which the good smell
does unto them, which be grieved with the Mother, for they ought not to use
it, if there be not a descending of the Mother to the lower parts: for in such
case it were convenient to smell much to it, for it causes the Mother to rise
up to his place, with the good smell, taking some evil savor by the inferior
parts. And likewise by smelling unto it, it comfort the heart, and makes
the Spirits valiant and strong: and for this purpose it profits, being
carried about one, and smelling to it, in the time of the Pestilence, and in
corrupt airs, to resist the corruption, and malice of them, with the virtue
and sweet smell thereof.

It is a marvelous thing to understand how much the Ambar does profit and
succor them, which be old, The Ambar is a great remedy for the^ that be old.
in what manner or sort soever they use it: and although with it excellent smell
it comfort the spirits, and the brains of the head, yet it makes thin
also Flegmatike humors, which do continually abound. And some say, that the
use of it holds back age, and conserueth that it go not forward, and it is
good that such do use it in their meats, and in sweet smelles for their
apparel and Chambers, and applied to the brain and heart, and that they hold
it to smell in their hands continually: and that it be put into the wine,
wherewith they shall wash their hands and face: for it is a marvelous thing
how much it comfort, and gives strength, wherein I have seen marvelous
effects, and they which are old and crooked, and do use it, shall perceive
what great good it will do them.

In pains of women, it is a marvelous remedy, In pains of women.
mingled with the Lode stone, and Galuano, made in little plasters laid upon
the nauil, to keep the Mother in his place, and for the rest of the pains of
it. Chiefly by smelling to it continually, it profits women that the moother
may come down. And if it rise up, putting into it a Tente of Cotton woll,
dissolved with oil of Liquid Ambar, it makes it come down. And being put
into the mouth of the mother in women which do not bring forth children, for
the coldness that is in them, it is most excellent. I use to take this
confection: which is compounded with Ambar two parts, and the scraping of
Iuory, one part ground small, half a part of Lignaloe made into powder, and
a little Musk: of the which make Pills, and they must take three, that may
way three pence, from three to three days: applying moreover the little
plaster, which is spoken of, to the nauill, and the tent into the mouth of the
mother: surely it does profit much, the universal euacuations, being made,
and it must be used many days.

For the evils of the stomach.
The Ambar profits much in the diseases of the stomach, and for the coldness
of it, if there be a plaster made thereof, and of Alipta Muscata, and of
Storacke, after the manner of a breast plate, and laid to the stomach: and
likewise of the self same thing Pills being made and mingled with wine, of
sweet smell, and taken in the morning fasting. For it dissolueth winds, it
takes away any manner of cold which is in the stomach, it helps disgestion,
it gives appetite, and lust to meat, and this is convenient for him that is
cold of complexion, or for that which causes the hurt of the stomach, that
comes of cold: and therefore it should be convenient for them that be old,
and cold of stomach.

It comfort the heart, and heals the diseases thereof, principally if they
come of windiness, For the evil of the heart.
or of cold humors, being taken by it self, or mingled with Lignaloe and Musk,
in manner of pouders, or pills. For that the Musk, as Anerois says,
comfort more then al other sweet smelles that are in the world, for that
the sweet favor, and comforting smell thereof preuayleth more, then al other
smelles. In what manner of way soever the Ambar is applied, by it self, or with
other things, in infirmities of the heart, it profits, much applied thereunto
outwardly, and in any manner of sort taken, it does comfort and strengthen,
and dissolve any humor that is in the body.

I do cause Ambar to be ground, which being well mingled with yeallowe wax
molted, and made into a thynne cake, and laid to the heart, does profit much
in the euilles of the heart, Of them that be Melancholic.
chiefly if they come first of windiness, Melancholy, or of any other cause
whatsoever, so that it be not hot.

The Ambar is very profitable for them that be Melancholic, for it makes them
very merry, taking away the causes of the evil, and dissoluing the windiness
thereof which there are very many grieved with all: and unto such it is good to
be ministered, and to use it after the manner of Medicine, mingled as we have
said, in the morninges: and also to use it laid upon the heart, and upon the
brains, and in meats, for surely I have seen great effects wrought in them
that have frequented it.

Where there is corruption of air, It rectifieth the air.
the Ambar does rectify it by it self, or mingled with things of sweet smell,
the place being perfumed with it, where men should remain, principally in
the time of winter, and unto such as do suffer cold Rewmes, in cold times:
chiefly perfuming their kercheifes, wherein they sleep, with it, or with some
mixture thereof, perfuming the Chamber likewise, for it is a marvelous thing
to see the good work it does make.

And likewise it does good to them, which have the palsy, For the^ that have
the Palsy.

For them that have the falling sickness.


or weakness of Sinews, perfuming themselves with it, or with the mixture
thereof.

Those that have the Falling sickness, by giving to them at their noses, when
they be in their trance or paroxismos, the smoke thereof, it makes to awake:
and wearing it about them, and smelling to it continually, the trance does not
come so quickly, nor so strong. And unto those which suffer the disease of the
Palseye, by anointing their head with it, and all the upper part of the skull,
it brings manifest profit: for that the Ambar is a thing that comfort the
Sinews and brain, more then any thing that we know.

One property the Ambar has, that brings admiration, The Ambar does make
drunk.
and Simeon Secto a Greek author does report, that if any smell to it
before he drink wine, it makes him stand as if he were dronken* and if it
be put into the wine, it makes him drunk indeed, in such sort that a
little wine mingled with Amb^r, causes drunkenness, which I have seen by
experience, in the house of a great Lord of this Realm, where for
delicateness, and daintiness, they had a S^lte seller of Ambar, as also Salt
to cast into meats: and to a Iester there was Ambar cast into his wine, and
he was made very dr^nke with it. Many other things ^here were to treat of
Ambar, but because I would not pass the limits of my purpose, I leave (...)
write of them, and the r^ther, for that in the third part we will declare
that which we mean farther to say of them.

The end of the second part.
THE THIRD PART OF THE Medicinal History, which treats of the things that
are brought from our Occidentall Indias, serving for the use of Medicine.
Wherein there is mention made of many things Medicinal, that have great
secrets and virtues:

Now newely set forth by the said Doctor Monardes, after that he had made
the first and second parts.

Of the Cinnamon of our Jndias.
IN the year of our Lord 1540. Francis Pissarro provided to make toward his
brother Gonsalo Pissarro governor of the province of Quito, and the Spaniards
went thither with a good will, and they went also unto the country that was
called the country of the Cinamo^, with is an other province beyond Quito, and
the Cinnamon was much spoken of amongst the Spaniardes, for it was understood of
the Indians that it was a thing of great riches,

Gonsalo Pissarro departed with 200. Spaniards, and it happened to him evil in
his journey, The history of the conquest of the country, where the Cinnamon
grows.
for it was a sharp country, and without vittaile, and with great travel they
came to that province called of the Indians Somaca, where the Cinnamon grows,
which is right under the Equinoctial line.

The trees which bear it, are of reasonable greatenesse, they carry a Leaf
like to Laurel, they be all the y^re green, and they never loose the leaf,
which is a thing common to all the trees of the Indias. The description of the
trees, and of the fruit.
They bear their fruit unto the likeness of a little Hatte, that has his
Cup and sides as great as a piece of eight Rialles of Silver, which is four
Shillinges, and some greater, it is of the color of a dark tawnie, as well
without as within, it is smooth in the inner part, and sharp in the utter, in
the highest part of the Cup it has a stalk, whereby it hangs in the tree,
it is as thick in the side, as a piece of eight Rialles of Silver, and the
uppermost part is fuller of body, and being tasted, it has the same
pleasantness of taste that the same Cinnamon has, which they bring from the
India of Portugal, and in like sort there r^mayne^h in the mouth the same
sweet smell, and taste, that the same Cinnamon of the East India has, and there
remains in the mouth the same sweet smell and taste, with some dryness: the
selfsame it does being ground, respiring out from it the same smell, which
the most fine Cinnamon has. And in the meats wherein it is put* it gives the
same taste and savor that the Cinnamon of the East India has. The trees have a
gross rynd, but without taste, savor or smell of the Cinnamon. I cannnot tell
if the little inner rynd have any, only the rynde I have seen with the fruit,
as it is described: they say that the leaves being beaten, give out some smell
of Cinnamon, only the virtue, sweet smell and taste, is in the fruit, which is
contrary to ^he Cinnamon, that is brought from the Oriental Indias, for only
the Rynde of the tree is that which has the sweet savor and pleasant smell,
as we do all see. And true it is, that some is better and of more sweet smell
and taste, than othersome is. For although that they are all one sort of trees,
which bring forth the Cinnamon, yet some have the rind thin, and that is the
best Cinnamon, and others have it gross, and this is not so good: and thereof
it has come, that there be some which do distinguish the Cinnamon into diverse
kinds. For one sort they call Cassia, and an other Cinnamon, and an other
Cassia lig^^a, and it is all one kind of tree, that brings them forth: but
that the diversity of the place brings forth one more fine than another, and
so Cassia and Cinnamon are al one, Cassia and Cinamo^ all one.
for that they differ not, but only in the names, for all is Cinnamon, thin,
and fine, and whereas you find written Cassia, may be put Cinnamon; and where
you do find Cinnamon, Cassia.

This our fruit that is called Cinnamon, profits in Medicine for many
things: Virtues which it has in medicine.
being taken and made into powder, it comfort the stomach, and it
dissolueth winds, it takes away the evil smell of the mouth, and it is an
important remedy for the grief of the stomach, it is cordial, it makes a
good color in the face, and Cassia in dressed meats is used even as Cinnamon is,
because it woorketh the like effect, that it does: by taking the Powder of
this fruit with wine, or water made for the nonce, it provoke the purgatio^
of women. It is hot in the third degree, and dry in the first, but with
notable comforting, by reason of the dry parts that it has.

Of the Ginger.
DOn Francis de Mendosa, Don Francis de Mendosa,
Son unto the vice Roy Don Anthony de Mendosa, did sow in the new Spain
Cloaues, Peper, Ginger, and other spices, of those which are brought from the
Oriental Indias, and that which by him was begun, was lost, by reason of his
death, only the Ginger did remain, for it grew very well in those parts, and
so they bring it green from the new Spain, and other parts of our Indias,
and some they bring dry, after the manner of that of the East India.

The Ginger is a Plant which carries his Leaf like to L^rio, somewhat more
narrow, with the same greenesse: The description of Ginger.
the Root is as it seems, some greater than other, and when it is green, it
burns not in the mouth, wherefore being made small into pieces, it is put
into Sallettes, for because it gives them both taste and smell. They sow it, of
the seed that it brings forth or of the same little Root, and of the one
sort and of the other it waxes great: and after the Root is grown great,
they take it forth, and dry it in the shadow, where no moisture does come,
for that is it which does corrupt him, and for this cause they bring it in
dry earth and made in Conserua, although that here it may be very well made
of that which is dry, burying the Root at the foot of a place where many
(...) led Imperial, being abroad below and narrow above, and by the mouth of
them there grows out certain Buddes, which are his Leaves, which cause him
to show very fair, and these Buddes are sown, and of them grow the
Plants, which carry the Pinnas, and one Plant carries not more than one
Pinna, in the highest part thereof: it grows green, and as it ripeneth, it
turns yeallowe. They take from it the Rynde, which is very thin, for to
eat, that which it has within it is white, and soft, and melts in the
mouth, with a very good taste, and sweet savor: saving that it has many small
karnels round about it, which it is needful that you cast from you when you
eat them, which are of a Purple color. The smell thereof is like to a kind
of Quince, and where there is a Pinna ripe, he smells like to a Quince over
all the House where he is.

The virtues thereof.
They take them to be good for the stomach, and likewise for the heart, and to
restore the appetite lost: it is a general fruit in all parts of the Indias,
and much esteemed. They are to be eaten at the beginning of meat, and they use
to eat them in the hot after Noones: for they say that they do refresh: they
are cold in my judgment: they brought two sorts of them, the one dry, and the
other in Conserua. The dry did serve for no other purpose, but to see the
figure and the form of them: in Conserua, they have a good taste, although
somewhat sharp: they ought to be made in Conserua when they are green.

Of the Guaiauas.
The description of the tree which does carry the Guaia^as.
THey brought me from the firm Land the seed of the Fruit which is so much
esteemed by the Indians, as also by the Spaniardes, which they call Guaiauas.
The trees which carry this fruit are of a reasonable greatness, they cast
out their bows dispersed. They carry a leaf like to the manner of Laurel,
the flower of it is white, according to the fashion of the flower of Orenges,
saving that it is somewhat greater, it is of a sweet smell. This tree yeldeth
much fruit, wheresoever it be sown, and does multiply and spread so much
abroad, that they take it to be evil for the ground where it grows, for
that in many pastures the people do loose the feeding of their cattle by
reason of them. And they weue themselves one together with an other like
Briars: the fruit which they carry is like to our Apples, of the greatness of
a Pippin, it is green when it begins first to appear, and as it ripeneth,
it turns yeallowe. In the inner part it is white, and in color russet, and
being cut, has four places divided, where it has the seed, which is like to
the seed of Medlers, being very hard, and of color tawnie, all the stones
within have no karnel, they are without any savor. And to eat these Apples,
they pare them from the Rind, the fruit is wholesome, and of good digestion:
when they be green they are given to them that have the Laske, for they
restrain and bind much, and when they be very ripe, they make the belly very
laxaatiue when they be of a good seasonable age. They are good roasted for them
that be whole, and for the sick, for being so roasted they are more healthful:
and better, and of pleasanter taste. And the best of them grow in trees which
are tilled. The Indians use the leaves in seething, with the which washing
their feet that are swollen, they cause them to abate, and the inner parts of
the body being stopped or opilated, being washed with this seating, do
disopilate. It seems to be a cold fruit, and therefore they give them
roasted to them which have hot Agewes. It is a very common fruit in all the
Indias.

Of the Cachos.
ALso they did send me the Seed of a plant or herb, The description of
the Cachos.
which the Indians do much esteem, which they call Cachos. The Cachos is an
herb very reddish in color, it carries a round leaf and thin, it casts
out a fruit like to a Berengena of Spain, where the seed does grow: it is
very small, and of a Russet color, it has a taste without any sharpness,
only in the mountains of Peru this herb is found,

The Indians do much esteem it, for the medicinal virtues that it has, The
virtues thereof.
it makes one to piss well where the lack of Uryne is, it does expel the
Sand and Stones, which grow in the reins. And moreover they say, that the
use of it does break the stone from the bladder, if the Stones be soft, that
they may be dissolved, with taking very little quantity of it, and of this
they have so many examples, that they cause me to marvel at it, because I
think that the stone in the bladder cannot be expelled, but only to cut it
out is the remedy, for that no Physic can dissolve him. They say that taking
the seed ground with some water, made for the purpose, causes it to be cast
out in Clay, and being come forth it returns to be congeled, and turns it
self into a stone.

Only to a young man I saw this happen who had a stone in the bladder, History.
and I being certified of it by the Master Surgions that had felt him, and of
the accidents which he had, caused him to be carried at the beginning of the
Summer, unto the Fountain of the stone, and in two months after that he
was there, he came whole from thence, and brought in a paper all the clay
which he had voyded from him at times, being of stone dissolved into pieces.
We will sow the seeds, although very little, only to see the effect wrought
by them, which as they say is in a cause so great, and if it do grow, we will
use of it.

Of the flowers of blood.
I Sowed a seed which they brought me from the Peru, The description of the
herb, and the flower.
more to see the fairness thereof, then for any Medicinal virtues that it
has. The herb comes to be of the height of two spannes, little more or
less, bows it casts out straight with certain round leaves, very green
and thin, in the hiest of the bows there grows a flower being yeallow,
very high in color, and only it bears five leaves, and in the midst of
every leaf there is figured a drop of blood, so red and so firmly kindled
in color, that it can not be more. This flower has at the foot of it a
stalk very long, which comes out a good space from the flower. It is a
flower very beautiful, which does adornate gardens, and it grows very well
of the seed, or of the plant, and being tasted, it has the same savor and
taste that the Mastuesso has: it is notable hot.

A rind of a tree for the Rewme.
AMongst the things with they sent me from the Peru, there is a thick rind,
which seems to be of a great tree, and being tasted, has a sharpnes of taste
with some dryness: the trees grow at the side of a river, where this rind is
taken of, which is twenty and six Leagues from Lima, and they are not found
in other parts of the Indias, but only there. The tree is after the fashion
of an ^ime, as well in the greatness, as in the leaf. The Indians when they
feel themselves laden with Reumes, The use thereof.
or have the Cough, or any pains of the head, they make powder very small of
the rind of the tree, and take it in at their noses, and it causes them to
purge much at them, and with this they clear themselves of the evil: which we
have experimented, by taking the powder in at the nose, and it makes them to
purge notably. It seems to be more then hot in the second degree.

Of the Pacal.
IN the same River there grows an other tree, The use thereof.
which the Indians call Pacal, which tree is lesser then that we have spoken
of before: the Indians do use it made in Ashes mingled with Soye, it takes
away any manner of sore or skabbe in the head, how grievous soever it be, as
well those which grow in the head, as in the body: as also it takes away the
marks of the said skabbes or sores being never so old. Hither they sent me
a little of the wood, wherewith the Ashes are made, that we might make
experience of it.

Of the Paico.
THey sent me an herb which in the Peru they call Payco: they be certain
leaves after the manner of the leaves of Planten, of that making and
greatness, and as they come dry they are very thin: and being tasted, they
have a notable bityng, so that thereby they seem to be very hot. And being
made into powder and taken in wine, they take away the grief of the stone in
the kidneis, which comes of windiness or cold causes: The vertue^ thereof.
and being sodden and made into a plaster, and laid upon the grief, they
take it away also.

An herb for the evil of the Reins.
LIkewise they sent me another herb, which profits much in the evil of
the reins, when it comes of a hot cause. The vertue^ thereof.
The Juice mingled with the ointment of Roses amongst it, and one of the leaves
or more, if it be needful, laid upon it, is good for an infla^mation, the
juice thereof being put, and it profits much, for it does resist the
inflammation, and mittigate the pain. The leaves which they sent me, be like
to small Lettice, with the same greatness, and being tasted they are of an
evil savor: it seems to be some herb notable cold.

Of a fruit which grows under the ground.
THey sent me from the Peru, a fruit very good, that grows under the earth,
and very fair to behold, and of a very good taste in eating. This fruit has
no root, nor does produce any plant, The description of it.
nor plant does produce it, but that it grows under the ground as the Turmas
do grow under the earth, which are called the Turmas of the earth. It is of
the greatness of half a finger round, and round about it is wrought with a
very fair work, it is of a bay color: It has within it a little kernel,
which when it is dry, makes a sound within, like to an Almonde: the rind of
it is tawny, and somewhat white, parted into two parts like unto an Almonde.
It is a fruit of goood savor and taste, and eating of it, it seems that you
eat Nuttes.

Where it grows.
This fruit grows under the earth, in the coast of the River of Maronnon, and
it is not in any other part of all the Indias. It is to be eaten green and dry,
and the best way is to toste it. It is eaten always after meats, as fruit
eaten last of all, because it dries much the stomach and leaves it
satisfied, but if you eat much of it, then it brings heaviness to the head.
It is a fruit in great reputation, as well amongst the Indians, as the
Spaniardes, and with great reason, for I have eaten of them, which they have
brought me, and they have a good taste. It seems to be a temperate fruit.

Of the fruit called Leucoma.
THey brought me likewise a fruit of a tree which the Indians call Leucoma,
It is like to Chestnuttes.
which is like unto a Chestnutte of these of ours, as well in color as in the
greatness, as also in the whytenesse that the Chestnutte has. It seems that
within it is another thing. I did not break it to see what it was, because
they brought me but two of them, the one I have sown, and the other I have
for to sow at an other time. This fruit does bear a tree of much
greatness, for it is of timber strong and hard, it casts forth the leaves
like to Madronno, which is a red berie, growing in the Mountains of Spain.
This fruit serves to be eaten, for that they say it is of a good taste, and
good for the laske, because it is very dry: they say it is a temperate fruit.

Of the Beads stones to wash withal.
THey sent me a little Cheste made of Cork full of round beads stones and
black, of great beauty, so that they seem to be made of the wood Ebano: and
they be a fruit which a small treee bears, How it is fruit.
being more crooked then straight, after the manner of briars: and it carries
a round fruit as great as a Nut, covered with a certain fleshinesse clong
thereunto, which being taken away, there remains a round Bead stone, and so
round that it cannot be rounder, of black color, most hard, that it can not
be broken.

This fruit serves in place of Soap, in such sort, that two or three of
these with hot water are of more effect to wash withal, and to make clean
clothes, Soap.
then one pound of Soap: and so it rayseth the foam, and woorketh all the
effects that Soap does, and so they proceed washing by little and little, until
only the Beadstone do remain, which is that which this fruit is founded on,
and al are pierced through: and there are made of them Beads to pray upon,
which seems to be made of Ebano. They dure a long time, for as they are
Beads so hard, that they break not: this fruit is so bitter, that neither
beast nor byrd comes too it, for the bitterness thereof. I have sown some
of the Beads, and they have grown, and they cast out from them fair leaves
very great. I trust that they will bring forth fruit, for now the plants are
very little, but in time I hope they will yield it.

Of the Crabbes of that Country.
A Gentleman which came from the firm land certified me, that having had
certain continual Agues in that country, History.
he came to be in a consumption, and was counseled to go to certain Islands,
which are between Puerto Rico and the Margareta, for that there is in them
great quantity of Crabbes, and they are the best of the world, because they
are maintained by Pigeons Eggs, which go thither to lay, and of the young
Pigeons that are there, and that he should eat no other thing but these
crabbes sodden, and he was healed very well: and although he had eaten much
flesh of Popingeies for that purpose, they did not him so much good, as the
Crabbes did: and in them that are consumed, they have a great property, as
Auenzoar says, and not only they profit such by manifest quality or degree,
but also by their particular property which they have, for the same purpose.

Of the Cardones.
Because I should see the strangeness of this Herb which is the Cardones
of the greatness of a torche of eight square, and wreathed like unto it, they
brought them unto me. It has a Medicinal virtue, The medicinal virtues thereof.
that being newly beaten in a Mortar and put into Sores, it heals and
sodereth them forthwith. And well near I my self had need of it, for this
purpose, for that one of the thorns that it has, did prick me. They are
strong as Needles which did hurt me. It seems to be a strange herb.

Of an herb for such as are broken.
THey sent me a little of an herb, and by reason it was so dry it came small
broken in pieces, so that the figure of it could not be seen, which they wrote
was marvelous for them that are broken, whether they be children or men that
have that kind of grief, and in those parts they have it for a sure thing,
and it is used by one Indian, by applying this herb green, upon that which
is broken, being men or children. And it makes thereupon a certain binding
very strange, without need of any manner of Brich, made for the purpose, for
they may go so fast and so swift being bound therewith, as though they had a
pair of Briches, as one told me that had been healed of the like disease, with
the herb, and with the manner of bynding. I have understood that if the manner
of binding be as good as this man speaks of, it is sufficient to heal
without the herb, or any thing else, by reason that I saw a man of C^rdona
which healed all persons that were broken with only the bynding that be made
of them, without using unto them any manner of brich. And this is certain, that
there be some here that were healed and cured by him.

Of the Veruaine.
ALso the same Gentleman wrote unto me from the Peru, that in the Rivers of the
Mountains of that Country near unto them, there grows a great quantity
of Veruaine, like unto that of Spain, with the which the Indians do profit
themselves in their cures, The virtues thereof.
for many infirmities, and in especially against all kind of poison, and for
such as say that there has been given them a morsel, or the like thing.

I spoke here with a Lady which came from the Peru, and she certified me that
having been many years sick, History.
and being in cure with many Physicians, she went to an Indian, that was known
to be a man that knew much of herbs, Worms.
unto whom the Indians did put themselves in cure, and he gave her to drink
the juice clarified of Veruaine, which she her self made, and within a few
days after that she had taken it, she cast out from her a worm, she said it
was a vearie Snake, of more then two spannes long, and very great, and his
tail was parted, and after she had cast him out from her, she was well and
whole. And she counseled a Gentleman which was in the Peru, that was
continually sick to take it, and he took it in the morning with Sugar, for so
she had taken it, because of the bitterness that it has, and he cast out a
great number of long and small woormes. and one like to a white long girdell,
and since that time he has very well his health. And this she counseled
other Persons which were sick, to do, that had suspicion, too have woormes,
and with the use of the said juice they cast from them many, and they were
healed. And it was so certainly, and she showed me a Servant of hers, and it
was said that according to the greeuousnes of a disease, which he had, there
was given unto him certain things of witchcraft, and with the juice of the
Veruaine that he took, he cast by vomit many things out of his stomach, of
diverse colors, and it was said that it was that wherewith he was bewitched,
which being cast forth, he remained whole, and of that which touches
witchcraft I will speak what I have seen. Witchcraft


I saw a servant of John de Quinatna Duenas, being Aburgales, A notable
history.
who did cast out at his mouth in my presence a great bundell of ^eare, of a
brown color, very small, and he had in a Paper more then twice as much,
which he had cast up two hours before, and he remained as though he had cast
up nothing at all, more then the alteration that he had, to see, that he had
cast up such stuff.

John Langins an Almayne Physician, John Langius history.
and very well learned, says that he saw a woman that complained much of
pain in her stomach, did cast out many pieces of glass, and pieces of Earthen
Platters, and of fish bones wherewith she remained whole.

An other case like unto this Beneuenius speaks of in his book de morbis
mirandis, but that which I do most marvel at, Beneuenius history.
was, that a laboring man suffering great pains in his belly, so that no
medicine could profit him, did cut his own throat with a knife, and after
that he was dead, they opened him and found in his belly great quantity of
hear, the like whereof he that I have spoken of did vomit, with many other
pieces of iron. These things I do attribute to ye works of the Devil, for that
they cannot be reduced unto natural causes. The Ueruaine is like that of
Spain, and all the year it is green.

Of the Mastuerco.
I have an herb brought from the Peru, which they call Mastuerco, The virtues.
it is a little herb, and does carry certain small leaves that are round,
which being beaten in a mortar, and the juice of them put into any manner of
wound, does refresh, comfort and heal, curing it forthwith, and the use of it
is not more nor less then the use of the Tabaco, in wounds which he freshly
made washing them with the juice, and laying the beaten leaves to them, and
being tasted it seems that it is notable hot.

Of the small wild Lettice.
LIkewise they brought me from the same parts an other herb, which they
call wild Lettice: the leaves be like to Lettice, the color is a sad
green, it has virtue too take away the Toothache, It takes away the
toothache.
receiving the seething which is made of the leaves, and holding it in the
part where the grief is, and putting a little of the juice in the tooth,
which is grieved, for so it takes away the pains, and y^ leaves which are
sta^ped, after the juice is taken out, must be laid upon it, and being tasted
it is most bitter. It seems to be hot in more then the first degree.

Of the licour which is called Ambia.
IN a great Cane they sent me a Licour which springs out of a fountain that
is near to the Sea side, it is of the color of honey, and as thin, the smell
is like the Tacamabaca, they say and also they write, that it has great
medicinal virtues, The medicinal virtues thereof.
chiefly in the healing of old diseases, and those which come of cold causes.
It takes away the pains in any part of the body, proceeding of cold or of
windiness. It takes away the cold in what part soever it be, it does comfort
and dissolve any manner of swelling, and it works all the effects that the
Tacamabaca and the Caranna do, and so they use it in those parts, in steed of
them: you may not touch nor handle it with your hands, unless you have them
wet, and wheresoever it be put, it sticks fast, that it cannot be taken away,
unless it be wasted with long time. They sent me this little for a show,
because they do esteem it greatly, and therefore they sent it as a thing very
precious. It seems to me hot in the third degree, with notable clammines.

Of the tree that shows whether one shall live or die
IN the year of our Lord, 1562. When the Earl of Nieba was in the Peru, he had
there a gentlewoma^ wc was married that served him, and her husband waxed sick
of a grievous disease, and an Indian of great reputation seeing her to be in
much sorrow, said to her, if she would know whether her husband should live
or die of that disease, he would send her a Bow of an herb, that she
should take in her left hand, and hold it fast, for a good while: and if he
should line, then she should show much gladness, with holding the Bow in
her hand: and if he should die, then she should show much sadness. And the
Indian sent her the Bow, and she did as he had willed her to do: and the bow
being put into her hand, she took so much sadness and sorrow, that she threw
it away from her, thinking that she should have died thereof, and so he died
within a few days. I was desirous to know if that it were so, and a Gentleman
of the Peru that had been there many years, did certify me and said that it
was of truth, that the Indians did this with their sick people. It has put me
in admiration, and in much consideration.

Of the Granadillia.
FRom the firm Land they brought me certain Fruits which are herbs which
they call in the hills of the Peru where they grow, Gra^a^illias, The
description of ^he Granadillias*
and this name the Spaniards did give them, for the likeness and fashion that
they have to our Grana^as, which we call (...) they sent me, is of a red
color, somewhat dark, and it has a good smell.

Of the Bezaar stones of the Peru.
ALthough in the second part I treated of the Bezaar stones, that have been
found in the mountains of the Peru, for that they have been sent me by the
first discouerer of them, the best of as many as from those parts have come,
yet I would say in this third part some thing of them, which he sent me for
knowledge, saying: that because I wrote of them they had kno^ledge of them: and
the book which I wrote of them, was the guide to find and discover them, as
we have said, as he shows by his letter, which we have set in the second
part,

Those which he sent me too prove be very excellent in their coullour,
making, and greatenesse, whereof I have broken some, and find them as
excellent as those of the East India: and so they prove in powder, or in one
little grain as the other do, and in coullour well near they are the same.
Truth it is, that those which have this quality and goodness, and have all
the qualities that the Bezaar stones ought to have which are fine, should be
those that are taken out of the beasts, that are fed in the Mountains, for
those which are taken out of them that are bredde in the plain grounds, are
not so good, nor have any Medicinal virtues, because the Beasts a^e not
mayntayned by those healthful Herbs, whereby these stones are ingendered,
for as they be Beasts and chewe tha^ which they eat of the juice, that
proceeds from the herbs, the stones are ingendered. Which thing that
Gentleman gave well to understand, who was the first discouerer of them, who
did see where they lay, and were bred within the beast, and with his own
hands made the Anatomy of him, Where these stones do grow.
and wrote unto me that the Bezaar stones are growing in those beasts, after
the manner of a guard made of flesh, of the length of two spannes, little more
or less, and of three fingers breadth, which is joined near unto the Mawe of
the inner part, and in the guard the stones are set in order one after an
other, like unto button holes, in a coat, in this form.

How there are set in order.


And they open that guard of flesh being closed, and take out the stones, that
surely it is a marvelous thing to see, what Nature has created there, for our
health and remedy of our evils And as I have understood, that these which are
brought from the East India, be found after the same manner, so I speak the
truth, for they bring very many which are false, that amongst one hundred
there are not to be found ten that are true, and their writers of the East
India do confess, that there be made many indeed which are false.

The people of the East India take them cut also of a certain kind of Goats,
They of the Oriental Indias.
that be for the most part red as ours be: they are the best stones which
are taken out of y^ cattle, which go in the Mountains of Persia: and likewise
they take them out of other Goats, that go in the plain Countries of Malaca,
and these are not had in such estimation, nor have the goodness nor the
virtues that they of Persia have, because those Goats of Malaca do serve for
cattle to be eaten, and they be not maintained by healthful herbs of the
mountains, as they that (...) yet it takes away the accidents of it, the
faintness and sadness, In quarterne Agewes.
and the grief of the heart, which in these Fevers are common. Surely they
feel with the use of it notable profit, in all long and importunate diseases I
do give it, and they find profit in it, In long evils.
chiefly those which stand in fear, of any malice of disease, or windiness,
whatsoever it be. For I have seen, that in this it has a great property,
and of this it comes, that it is good to cast into pourges, some grains of
it, that if the Pourge do carry venomous qualities, it may rectify them, and
amend them, and if not, it gives force, and strength to the heart, and they
work the better. In the oriental Indias they have a custom to purge
themselves twyce every year, and especially the noble people of estimation, and
after they have purged themselves, they take every morning fasting four
grains of the Bezaar stone, A custom of the Oriental Indians.
with Rose water, or with water made for the purpose, and they say that this
does conserve their youth, and strengthen the members, and preserve them from
diseases: and it is a good use, for it cannot choose, but do them much good.
For Worms they give this Stone with most happy success, and surely I have
given it to many people, and especially to Children, and Boys, that are
tormented with this evil, and I have seen such works as are not to be
believed, if they were not seen. I give it by it self, and also mingled with
this powder, in this form.

I do take herb Lumbrigera the wayght of twelve pence, Pouders to be
meruelled at for the worms, and al kinds of them.
the seed of Santonico the wayght of six pence, the Horn of a Heart burned,
and the seed of Verdolagas, and Carlina, of every one the weight of three
pence, and the Bezaar Stone of the Peru, the weight of three pence: of these
things let there be small Powder made, and let them be well mingled. These
Pouders are marvelous and of great effect, to expel Worms, and very much
experimented in many people, and they have wrought in this case great
effects, and they must be given in the morning fasting, as to the Physician
shall seem good, according to the age of him that shall take them, using some
Medicine of Milk, and Sugar two hours after they be taken. And unto
children being sick of it, we give this stone mingled with milk; and without
it, if they do suck, and it does a marvelous work: and to them that be in
years, by it self, or mingled with other things appropriated for the
disease. In conclusion, we give this stone in all long diseases, and
importunate, where the ordinary medicines have not profited, in which it does
manifest profit, and if it do no profit, yet it can do no hurt.

Of the Fig trees of the Peru.
Fig trees being carried from Spain to the Peru, have increased so well in
that Country, that there is great plenty of them, where they carry many and
very good Figs, of all sorts. And you shall understand, that in that
country there are certain kinds of Uermyn, which are called Spyders, and
wheresoever they be, they do spinne, and make Nets as they of Spain do.
Spyders.
These kind of Uermyn be great, and come to be as great as Orenges, and
they are so full of poison that which one stinging they kill, unless there be
used great remedy. And if it be long time without remedy, and that the
Poison go up to the heart, there is nothing that can be done that will
benefit, but he must die without remedy: and for this there is found a
remedy in the Fig trees, which is a marvelous thing, that as soon as the
Indians or the Spaniardes do feel themselves bitten by this evil Spyder,
they go to the Fig trees, and put unto it the Milk which comes forth of
the Leaves of them, two or three times to the place, that is bitten, and this
works so great effect, that it remedieth it which is so poisoned, with the
venom that the Uermine did cast into the sore, and the accidents be remitted
which they suffer, to wit, great griefs and soundings, remaining only to heal
the place bitten, and as it is little, so it heals forthwith, although they
procure to keep it open a long time. And Gods will is, that at all times this
remedy should not lack, for the Fig trees never loose their leaves,
throughout all the year they are always green.

Of the Coca.
I Was desirous to see that herb so celebrated of the India^s, so many years
past, which they call the Coca, wc they sow and till with much care, and
diligence, because they use it for their pleasures, which we will speak of.
The description of the Coca.
The Coca is an herb of the height of a yerd, little more or less, it
carries leaves like to Arraihan, somewhat greater, and in that Leaf there is
marked an other leaf of the like form, with a line very thin: they are
soft, and of color a light green, they carry the seed in clusters, and it
comes to be red when it is ripe, as the seed of Arraihan, when it is type.
And it is of the same greatness, when the herb is seasoned, that it is to be
gathered, it is known in the seed, that it is ripe when it is of some rednes
like to a blackish color, and the herb being gathered, is put into Canes
and other things, that they may dry, that they may be kept and carried to other
parts. For that they carry them from the high Mountains, to other places, as
marcha^dise to be sold, they barter and change them for Mantelles, and Cattle,
and Salt, and other things which run like money amongst us they plant the
seed in Almaciga, and from that they take them up and set them in other
places, into Earth that is well labored or tilled, and made convenient to set
them in by their lines and order, as we do set here a Garden of Beans, or of
Peason.

The use of it amongst the Indians is a thing general, for many things, for
when they travel by the way, The use of i^.
for need and for their content when they are in their houses, they use it in
this form. They take Cokles or Oysters, in their shelles, and burn them and
grind them, and after they are burned they remain like Lyme, very small
ground: then they take the Leaves of the Coca, and chewe them in their Mouths,
and as they chawe it, they mingle with it some of that powder made of the
shelles in such sort, that they make it like to a Paste, taking less of the
Powder then of the herb, and of this Paste they make certain small b^wles
round, and lay them to dry, and when they will use them, they take a little
Ball in their mouth, and chawe it, rolling it from one place to an other,
procuring to conserve it all that they can, and that being done, they take
another, and so they go, using it all the time that they have need, which is
when they travel by the way, and especially if it be by ways where is no
meat, nor plenty of water. For the use of these little Balls takes the
hunger and thirst from them: and they say that they receive substance thereby,
as though they did eat meat. At other times they use them for their pleasure,
although they labor not by the way, and they use the same Coca alone, chewing
it and tossing it in their mouths, from one side to another, until there be no
virtue remaining in it, and then they take another.

When they will make themselves drunk, Note.
and be out of judgment, they mingle with the Coca the leaves of the Tabaco,
and chewe them all together, and go as they were out of their wits, or as if
they were drunk, which is a thing that does give them great contentment, to
be in that sort. Surely it is a thing of great consideration, to see how
desirous the Indians are to be depryued of their wits, and to be without
understanding, seeing that they use thus the Coca with the Tabaco, and al to
this end, that they would be without understanding, and have their wits taken
from them, as we said in the second part, when we treated of the Tabaco.

Of the diverse colors of the ground.
A Marvelous thing it is, and well to be considered, the diverse colors of the
grounds which are in the fields, in the countries of the Peru: for that
looking a far of you shall see many parts of grounds of diverse colors,
which seem to be clothes of diverse colors laid to dry in the Sun: for you
shall see one part of the ground Green, and an other Blewe, and forthwith
an other yeallow, and white, and black, and red, and so of other colors, all
which are Mineries of diverse Earths. Of the black I can say that they sent me
a little that there with I might make Ink, which being cast into water or
wine there is made there of very good Ink, wherewith one may write very well,
but it is somewhat blewe, which makes it of a better show.

The red ground has been a thing of great riches, for that which has been
taken out of it, for it is a Minery most excellent, Quick silver.
of which is made quick Silver, and there out is taken such quantity of it,
that there are carried to the new Spain, Ships laden with it, which is a
riches so great, that it is not known unto the Indians. It serves them for
no other use then to mingle it with certain gummes, to paint themselves
withal, which they use to do when they go to their wars to show
themselves gallant, and fierce. Every day they discover in those countries
great Mineries of metals, and such like things, for they have found out a
mountain of Oker, and a mine of Allom, and an other of Brimstone and many
other things which they do daily discover.

Of the Casany.
I Have caused them to bring me from Sancto Domingo a leaf of that plant
whereof they make the Casani, and they brought it me. The Casani is the bread,
which the Indians so many multitudes of years have maintained themselves
withal, Casani ^s bred in the Indias.
and do yet maintain themselves, and likewise many Spaniardes. It is made of
an herb that the Indians do call Yuca, which is of five or six spannes of
height, The descripti^n o^ the herb and the f^u^t^.
it carries certain Leaves open, spread abroad like to the fingers of an
hand, and every one carries seven or eight points, they are always green,
they are set in a ground well tilled, of pieces cut of from the same plant, the
fruit is after the manner of gross Turnepes, they are of color Tawnie without,
only in the body, for within they are white, and they part them to use them:
and of this fruit they make Bread in this form.

They make it clean from the Rynde, and grate it in certain Graters, which
are made of Nedles, How they ma^e ^read of the fruit.
and being so grated they put it into a sliue of palm, and upon it they hang
things of weight, which are great stones, which make the juice run out of it,
and being well pressed it remains as Almondes beaten: they cast this into a
plain frying pan of Earth, that they have put to the fire, and there they
knede it, and make it like to a little cake of Eggs, turning it from one side
to an other, and after it is well kneded, it remains like a Cake, of the
thickness of a piece of silver of four shillinges, or little more, which they
lay in the Sun, that it may dry, and these Cakes they use for Bread, which
are of much substance. These Cakes continue long time without corrupting, and
they bring them in the ships which come from those parts, into Spain
without being corrupted, and serve for Biscuit too all the people. It eats as
a thing sharp, and so it serves, and they lay it to soake in water, or in
broth, or in Pottage, for after this manner they serve themselves better with
it, then to eat it dry. It is needful to have a vessel with water, for to
soake it in.

It is a mauellous thing of the juice which comes out of this fruit, Note
the maruelles of the juice.
which is spoken of, that if any Man or beast do drink it, or any part of it,
incontinently he dies, as with the most strong venom that is in the world:
but if this juice do sees, and be consumed the one half, and so set out too
cool, it serves for very good Uineger, and it is used as if it were made of
Wine: and if you sees it until it be thoroughly purged and thick, it serves
for Honey, and becomes sweet: you may see how much the seething avails in
these things, seeing that of mortal venom, it makes meat, and healthful
drink. And I will say an other thing which brings admiration: that all this
kind of Corn, which grows in the firm Land which is like to that of
Sancto Domingo, which they call Cacani, is healthful, and the Fruit thereof
is eaten and the Water that comes of it is drunk, without having any
venomous quality, and that of Sancto Domingo, howsoever it be eaten and the
juice thereof unless it be sodden, it kills. And that the disposition of the
place is so great a cause, that that which is healthful and allowable
sustenance in the firm land, the same is mortal venom in all the Islandes: as
Columela writes of the Peache, that it was venom most mischeeuous, Colum^la.
which in Persia did kill men and being brought into Italy it lost that malice
and property that it had to kill, and gives unto us health, and a sweet
juice.

Howsoever it be, having in the Indias so much Mayes, and so common in all
parts thereof, I would not eat Casani, seeing that the Mayes are of as good
substance as our Wheat, and in no part has either venom, Ma^is
or poison, but rather is healthful, and makes a good stomach. There is bread
made of it, as of the Casani, Bread of Ma^i^.
for they grind it, and with water they knede it, and in a Frying pan of
Earth they bake certain Cakes, which they make of it, and it must be eaten
fresh, as soon as it is made: for being dry, it is sharp and trouble some to
swallowe down, and does offend the teeth.

The Batatas, which is a common fruit in those Countries, I take for a
vittayle of much Substance, Batatas.
and that they are in the midst between flesh and Fruit. Truth it is,
that they be wyndie, but that is taken from them by rosting, chiefly if they
be put into fine Wine: there is made of them Conferna very excellent, as
Marmolade, and small Morselles, and they make Potages and Brothes, and Cakes of
them very excellent: they are subject that there be made of them any manner of
Conserua, and any manner of meat: there be so many in Spain, that they bring
from Velez Melaga every year to Seuill, ten or twelve Caruelles laden with
them. They be sown of the same Plants that are set, the smallest of them,
or pieces of the greatest in the Earth that is well tilled, and they grow very
well, and in eight Months the roots wax very gross, so that you may eat
of them: They be temperate, and being roasted, or otherwise dressed, they soften
the Belly, and being raw, they are not good to be eaten, because they are
wyndie, and hard of disgestion.

Of the Canes which are good for the shortness of breath.
THey bring from the new Spain great Canes, of a Cane that are covered within
and without with a certain gu^mme, and to me it seems that it is mingled with
the juice of Tabaco, and it is heavy. It seems that the Cane is anointed,
and as a thing that the clingeth fast, it is clunged well to the said Cane, and
it is of a black color, and being hard it clingeth not, they kindle the Cane
at that part where the gum is, and the other part of it they put in the
mouth, and they receive that smoke, and with it they cast out from them all
fleume and rottenness, that is in the breast: and this they do when they find
themselves grieved with the shortness of wind, so that they be all ready to
choke. I have seen it done by a Gentleman, who is much payned with it many
times, and receives by it great profit: and did it first with the Tabac^,
taking the smoke of it, and it brought to him the like benefit. And for this
cause, I say, that it seems, to carry with it the juice of the Tabaco,
mingled with the one and with the other. It is done with all assurance, for that
we do see it experimented with manifest assurance in many.

Some being sick of the shortness of breath, that come from the Indias, For
faintness or shortness of breath.
with it I have seen expel, and cast out this rottennes, by taking a little
Tabaco green, and chewing the juice of it, with although it be loathsome, it does
them much good to expel the rottenness and fleumes, which are retained within
the breasts, so that they be lightened with it notably. It is a marvelous
thing, the great virtues, and sundry and diverse effects that they do
discover of the Tabaco: for besides that which I have written of it in the
second part, of the marvelous virtues thereof, I determined to make further
trial of it, as I have understood, and seen since that time.

Of the Carlo Sancto.
IN the second part we entreated of the virtues of a Root, that then they
had brought from the new Spain, which they call Carlo Sancto, and now in these
ships they have brought it, with great veneration and estimation: and the root
is called Indica, and they bring written many virtues of it more then they are
woonte too report of the Rosemarie. Now that which has been experimente^,
and seen since that I wrote of it, I will speak, The virtues thereof.
of this Root, which being made into Powder, given to women that newly brought
Children, who for evil keeping have taken great cold and be numbe, it
profits much to provoke them to sweat, and makes them remain clear: it
profits much given with Wine, or water of the flowers of Orenges, unto them
that have a hard labor. There was a Friar which had pains of the Stomach,
History.
and no taste of his Meat, but had an evil breath, and much windynesse, and
all did proceed of cold that he had taken, and little natural heat. He
sodde of these Roots in water at his discretion, as the water of the
Sarcaparillia is sodden, and so he drank it continually, at dinner and supper
for a long time, and it did so well with him, that he amended his stomach, and
increased the heat of it, whereby he did digest, and consume his meat very
well, and took from him his evil breath, and consumed the winds, and in
taken (...) from two to three Ounces of it, it purges well and easily, and
even as it is good to take, so it is good to work, for that I have purged many
people with it, and it makes a very good work, and purges without pains.
One thing they do evil in those parts, which is, that they never bring them
hither made with good Sugar, if they come so, they would be the better, and of
better taste. They be purges for delicate people, they euacuate the same humor
that the Canafistola does. Of the Canes of the small Canafistola there is made
an other Conserua very good, which is an excellent purge, Of the Canes in
Conser^^.
and delicate: for they take the small Canes, which are growing of a small
time, and sees them in Sugar, and with the seething and Sugar, is taken from
them the sharpness and the dryness which they have, and they are made tender
and soft, and of a very good savor. These being taken, make a very good
work, and purge without grief or molestation, and without all accidents and
faintness that purges are used to procure, for that they are full of good
taste, at the taking of them, and light of woorking. They are given from two
Ounces to three, I have given them many times with very good success, and have
taken them being sick, and they have wrought very well with me. Of these
Conseruas they bring hither every year from Sancto Domingo, and Puerto Rico
many Barrelles full. The Canafistola that is perfect and ripe, is the most
excellent Medicine for to purge withal, of as many as have been known to this
day, and that does his work best in that which it serves for, and with most
assurance, as it is well known not only to Physicians, but also to all the
world, and does his work without the hurtes and accidents which other
Purgative Medicines are used too do, and it is a general Medicine, and
amongst them that are called blessed, is the most blessed of all, whose virtues
and properties we do treat of particularly, in the first part, and that
which we have spoken here, has been to give relation of the leaves, and
flowers of it, which they have now brought me.

One thing I would they should be advertised of, Note.
that when we are commanded to give Canafistola, to lighten and soften the
belly, and that the common matters may be voyded down, is meant that they
should take it a small time before meat be eaten, at the most half an hour
before, for the meat being mingled jointly with it, works with it, and in
this order it makes a very good work, and purges very well, and without
pains: which is not done with that which is taken any long time before meat,
as two or three hours before, as now many do use it, for that the meat
being dilated, it makes an end of woorking. And as it is a thing without
strength and weak, it goes al into vapors, and so sheadeth it self abroad
throughout all the body: and if it tarry long, it is converted into meat, and
substance, which I have seen by experience many years wherein I have
practiced, that always as I gave it half an hour before meat at the most,
it makes a good work, and if it be given many hours before meat, it
purges, and euacuateth little. Concerning mingling of medicines, which do
purge, with the meat, Hipocrates treats of it in many parts, and Galene in
his Commentaries. And truth it is, that when we will that the Canafistola
should not euacuate, but that the vapors should be spread abroad by the
reins, and all the body, we give it many hours before meat, and then not
working, it performs the effect that we have spoken of.

Of the Balsamo of Tolu.
THey newly bring now from the Firm land, from a Province which is between
Cartagena, and Number de Dios, which the Indians call Tolu, a Balsa^o, or
licour, that is the best thing, and of greatest virtues, of as many things as
come from these parts. They gather it from certain trees, What trees they are
whereof it is gathered.
which are after the manner of little Pines, which cast out many bows to al
parts. It carries the leaf like to Algarrona, all the year it is green,
they are the best which grow in a soft ground well tilled.

How it is gathered.
This Bals^mo the Indians do gather by way of incision, gy^ing certain cuttes
in the rind of the tree, for it is thinn^ and soft, and they set underneath
it, near unto the tree, things like to dishes made of wax, which is in that
country black, which they take out of Hiues, that certain black Bees do
make in the chappinges of the ground, and I have seen brought much of this
Wax into Spain^, Black wax.
and it was spent in Torches, but it was forbidden that none of it should be
spent, for the smoke which it cast from it, had so evil a smell, that it could
not be suffered. They did use this wax in matters of Medicine, for thereof
were made Cerecl^thes, which wrought very good effects, in mittigating grief
of any cold cause, it dissolueth any manner of swellings, and woorketh many
other good effects. Of this wax the Indians do make vessels like to a
spoone, and set them close to the tree, that they may receive the licour that
comes out of it, by the places where the cutting^ are made, and from thence
they receive it into those vessels: and it is needful that it be done in
time of great heat, that the cuttinges may cast out the licour, and in this
time likewise, there soketh out of the joints of the said tree some licour,
and it is lost because it is so little, and falls into the ground: in the
night time there comes forth none.

This licour, or Balsamo is very much esteemed amongst the Indians, and is of
great value, and with the notable works which therewith are done, and the
Spaniardes have learned, and by seeing the great works which it makes, they
have brought it hither, as a thing of great estimation, and such a thing as
they buy there for a great price: and they have reason so to do: for one of
the best things that have come from those parts, which have been brought for
Medicine, is this Balsamo, which seems to be better then that of the new
Spain, and in it self appears to have more virtues.

It is of an Alborne color, very near like to a thing that is gilt, it is not
very thin, nor very thick, The color and manner of it.
it clyngeth fast wheresoever it be laid, and it has the taste and savor
sweet, and although it be taken, it makes not any horriblenesse, as the
other Balsamo does: it has a most excellent smell, like to Limons, insomuch
that wheresoever it be, the good smell thereof gives great contentment, and
it can not be hidden, The works and effects of this Balsamo.

How they cure with it.


for a little of it smells much: and if you rub your hand therewith, there
remains a marvelous smell. The works thereof are excellent and very great,
for that it is licour which is taken out by incision, as they took out in old
time the Balsamo in Egypt: and for all those diseases for which that was good,
this of ours is as good.

It heals al fresh wounds, comforting the parts, and joining them without
making any matter, and without leaving any sign of them. The superfluity that
is in the wou^d must be taken away of what sort soever it be, and washed with
wine, and joined well in the lips and parts thereof, and then the Balsamo laid
to it, when the coldness is out of it, and forthwith a double linen cloth
upon it, wette in the same Balsamo, and so bound that the lips go not a
sunder, and keeping diet, and using letting of blood if it be needful, and not
unbinding it until the fourth day, and they shall find the wound comforted,
except that there be any accident, which causes it to be undone before. And
when the cause is such, that it requires to be dressed every day, by
reiterating the wette Linen cloth in the Balsamo, it will be healed: for the
virtue of this Balsamo is to cause that there be no matter engendered in the
wounds, and especially this Balsamo does profit in wounds, where there has
been cuttinges of bones, taking them out that have been divided one from
another, and not touching the rest, for that the virtue of the Balsamo will
cast them out, and having so done, will heal the wound. One of the things
wherein this Balsamo works great effects, is in wounds, and joints, and
in cuttinges of Sinews, and in all pricks: for in all these kinds of wounds
it makes a marvelous work, curing and preserving them from extreme cold,
and from running together of Sinews, that they remain not lame. The wounds
which do penetrate, are healed with this Balsamo, being mingled with white
wine, and spouting it into them, and after three hours taking it out again.
This must be done in wounds or pricks, once every da^, that it may go with a
moderate heat. Likewise this Balsamo serves to be applied, where have been
given dry blows, or brusinges, and for all works of Surgerie, where is no
notable inflammation, which being taken away with the Medicines, that are
convenient for it, the Balsamo may then be used.

In diseases that belong not to Surgery.
In euilles which belong not to Surgerie this Balsamo does profit much, as in
him that has the shortness of breath, by taking a few drops in white wine it
profits him much: it takes away the grief of the head coming of a cold
cause, and a little Plaster being laid upon the grief, and wette therewith to
the Temples of the head, takes away all runnings by those parts, and in
especially the euilles of the eyes, and Reumes that run into them, being
laid to the foreparte of the head, and it must be good and hot. It takes away
the pains of it, and comfort it, and remedieth the Palsy. Some that have
been in a Consumption have used it, taking some drops in the morning,
licking them out of the Palm of the hand, and they have felt notable profit.
And it makes clean the breast very well, it is good to take some drops with
Aqua vitae, hot, before any manner of cold in a Quarterne Ague, or of a long
importunate tertian Ague, annoynting with the same Balsamo, mingled with Oil
of Ruda, the Temples of the head, good and hot before the cold does come. If
with the Balsamo they anoint themselves from the mouth of the stomach to the
Nau^l, it comfort the stomach, it gives a lust to meat, it helps
digestion, it dissolueth Winds, it takes away the pains of the stomach, and
it works far better these effects, if the half of the Balsamo be mingled
with another half of Oil of Spike Nard^ compounded or simple, and so it is
better applied. There is great experience of it in the Indias, for Swellings
that are in the manner of Dropsies: and mingling it with ointment, disopilatiue
of equal parts, and anointing the belly therewith, chiefly the part near ye
Lunges, there are seen wrought therewith great effects: it dissolueth any
manner of swelling or hardness that is in any part of the body, and being laid
upon any pain that comes of a cold cause, although it be of long
continuance, it takes it away, bringing it to be so small until it fall of it
self, the same it does wheresoever is any wind. And if it be in the belly,
or in any part of the body, wetting a Linen cloth hot in Aqua vitae of the
best, and applying it to the place, where the grief of the Stone is, and
mingled with Oil made for the purpose, it makes a great work, it takes
away the pains of the Sinews, and when they be shronke together, in a very
hot weather, rubbing them with it, it dissolueth them. The evil called the
Lamparones that are open or shut, it heals. Many other effects this
marvelous licour works which I have not known, but these which I have
known I do manifest to all the world, that they may take profit by so
marvelous a Medicine, which has so many virtues as you have heard, and every
day the time will discover other greater.

The end of the third, and last part.
The Table of the things that these three books do contain.
In the first Book.
OF the Anime and Copal. fol. 1. Of the Tacamahaca fol. 2. Of the Caranna. fol.
4. Of the oil of the Fig tree. fol. 5. Of the Gum. fol. 6. Of the Liquid
Ambar and the oil thereof. fol. 6. Of the Balsamo. fol. 7. Of Guaiaca^ and
holy wood. 12. Of the China. fol. 13. Of the Sarcaparillia. fol. 15. Of the
blood stone, and the stone, for the disease of the stone. fol. 18. Of the wood
for the Urine. fol. 19. Of the Peper of the Indias fol. 20. Of the Canafistola.
fol. 21. Of the Purgative Nuttes. fol. 21. Of the Purgative Pinons. fol. 22. Of
the Purgative Beans. fol. 22. Of the Milk of Pinipinichi. fol. 23. Of the
Mechoacan. fol. 23 Of the Quick Sulphur fol. 30 Of Arromatike wood. 31
In the second Book.
OF the Tabaco. fo. 34 Of the Sassafras. Of the Carlo Sancto. fol. 57. Of saint
Elens Bedes. 59. Of the Guacatane. fol. 60. Of the small Barlie. fol. 62. The
Epistle from the Peru. fol. 64. Of the blood of Drago. 71. Of the Armadilio.
fol. 73. Of the flower of Mechoacan. fol. 75. Of the Fruit of Balsamo. fol.
76. Of the long Peper. fol. 77. Of the Sarcaparillia of Guaiaquil. fol. 79. Of
Ambar grise. fol. 82.
In the third Book.
OF the Cinnamon of our Indias. fol. 88, Of the Ginger. 89. Of the Ruibarbe of
the Indias. fol. 89 Of the Pinnas. fol. 90 Of the Guaiauas. fol. 90 Of the
Cachos. fol. 91 Of the flowers of blood. 92 Of the Rind of a tree for Reumes.
fol. 92 Of the Pacal. ibid. Of the Paico. ibid. Of an herb for the evil of
the Raines. ibid. Of the fruit which grows under the ground. 93 Of a fruit
called Leucoma. fol. 93 Of the washing Bead stones. fol. 94 Of the Crabbes of
that country. fol. 94 Of the Cardones fol. 94 Of an herb good for them that
are broken. fol. 95 Of the Ueruaine fol. ibid. Of the Masluerso. fol. 96 Of the
wild Lettise. fol. 96 Of the licour called Ambia fol. 96 Of a Tree which
shows whether one shall live or die. fol. 97 Of the Granadillia. fol. 97 Of
the herb of the Sun fol. 98 Of a Gum that is taken out from under the
ground. fol. 98 Of the Bezaar stones of the Peru. fol. 98 Of the Fig trees of
the Peru. fol. 100 Of the Coca. fol. 100 Of the Colors of diverse grounds.
fol. 102 Of the Casaui. fol. 103 Of the Canes for shortness of breath. fol.
104 Of the Carlo Sancto. 105 Of the Stone for the Mother. fol. 105 Of
Canafistola in Conserua. fol. 160 Of the Balsamo of Colu. fol. 170
A Book which treats of two medicines most excellent against all Venom,
which are the Bezaar stone, and the Herb Escuerconera. Wherein are declared
their marvelous effects and great virtues, with the manner how to cure the
said venoms, and the order which is to be used for to be preserved from them.

Where shall be seen great secrets in medicine and many experiences.

Newly compyled by Doctor Monardes of Seuill, 1574.

Translated out of Spanish into English, by John Frampton. 1580.

(...) eases of the body from the top of the head to the soale of the foot
may be cured by the same, so as no drugge in the world is thought to be
comparable to the same. The third book shows the mischiefs that grow by
drinking of drinks whot, and what Benefit does follow by drinking our
drinks cold, etc. And Sir, finding many thankfully to take my said former
simple travel too you heretofore dedicated: and your Woorship above all desert
of my part too recompense the same, and being earnestly and often exhorted, by
the learned Phisitio^ Master Doctor Hector Nones to translate these said 3.
Books also, the remanent of Monardes works, and to make my Countrymen of
England Partakers of the benefit of the same, I took it in hand, as inflamed
with the great commendations that this Learned Man made of the said three
Books, and especially of the Book treating of the benefit of iron and steel
in physic. And having now thus finished the whole work, I dedicate the same
to your woorship, as to the man to whom I am most bound, and that does of many
best deserve the same, requesting you too take it in good part and to bear
with the base doing of the same. And calling to remembrance of what moment in
sometimes A man of value may be to a common Weal, and how common in the world
the practice of poison is, and what malice reigns now among men, and how
needful it is that some kind of persons should fear and provide for the worst,
and weying that by our Persian merchants and by other means the Bezaar stone
this great Jewel is brought into the realm, and may be compassed in this our
time for a little money: And withal, weying that Iron and steel be things
tending so much to the cure of al diseases, and be the natural home
commodities of England and such as are common, and that are both easily and
cheaply to be had by every poor subject, I have the rather for the ready
benefit that might ensue, taken the dispatch of the translation in hand with
purpose no longer to keep the same out of print: and so I most humbly take my
leave, from London the xv. of June. MDLXXX.

Your worships most bownden John Prampton.

(...) bewail him hereof: in that so little a Herb can offend him, and so
small a fruit or stone may destroy him.

Against al these venomes as well in general as in particular, the Physicians
as well Greeks as Arabiens and Latinistes wrote effectual remedies as well
general as particular. Amongst the which they put one in practice, that in
times past was had in great estimation, and taken for a present remedy, for
the great virtues and meruellous effects, which it wrought against all venoms
and accidents thereof, which they called the Bezaar stone. But as time is the
discouerer of all things: so is it the destroyer and consumer of every thing:
for in having been hid so long from us, we knew no more what the Bezaar stone
was, then as if it had never been: and the name thereof was so strange and
unknown unto us, even as the Towns in Scitia. Time it self willing to
restore again unto us this precious stone hidden from us so many years; not
only discovered the same unto us, but jointly therewith has descried unto us
an herb, which has the like virtues and effects against all manner of
venom, which herb is called Escuerconera, having been discovered but a few
years past to our exceeding great profit and commodity.

The herb Escuerconera.
And because these two things, to wit, the Bezaar stone, and the Herb
Escuerconera, be so like in operation, and have so many and the self same
virtues against venom, that I determined to write of them both together, and to
show the proper virtues of these two things so excellent in medicine: it is
needful first to know, and therefore treat of the venomes as a beginning of
the work; and to declare what Uenom is, and the cause of such as have taken
Uenom, and then the remedies thereof, and how they may be preserved from
them: and therefore we will treat first of Uenom, for that it will serve not a
little for the intent of that which we mind to write of the Bezaar stone, and
the Herb Escuerconera.

Uenom is a thing, which being taken at the mouth, or applied outwardly, does
overcome our bodies, by making them sick, or by corrupting of them, or by
killing them: and this is found in one of these four things; in plants, in
minerals, in beasts, or in mixtures, the which works their effects, either
by manifest quality, or by hidden property, or both. These venoms partly do
kill us; partly we use them for our profit, and bodily health; and partly the
people of ancient tune did use them for a remedy against their great labors.
That which does offend us as well in general, as in particular, Dioscorides
in his sixth book of his history of Plants does treat of very exactly,
Dioscorides.
putting in general these remedies, and in particular, that which is
convenient for every one of them: and the same did other Greeks, Latinistes,
and Arabians, which are to be seen, who will more particularly know of them.

These did write of many Medicines, with the which every one may preserve
themselves from poison: for the malice of mankind is very great, and many
have procured for their interest, and revenge, not only with venom to offend
and kill the common sort of people; but also Emperoures, Kings, great Princes
and Lords; the which in how much more high estate they are appointed and
placed, so much the more danger they are in.

And many notable men of the old Writers fearing this, did compounde many and
diverse Medicines, that by means of them they might not be hurt by venom or
venomous things that might be given them. As for example, the Emperor Marco
Antonio did use such things, The Emperor Marco Antonio.
who fearing to be poisoned, took every morning a little Triacle and
Methridate. Sometimes his confection Methridatica, other times certain Leaves
of Rue, with Nuttes and Figs: and so they did use the like medicines because
they (...) and inward and outward burning, that it seems to them they are
fired.

It is also necessary (to know what venom they took) for too see the vomit,
To know what venom it was.
and what they do cast up withal, to judge by the color what Uenome it was:
and being known by this way, or by Relation, or otherwise being apparaunt,
it must be remedied by his contrary, for to estinguish and kill the malice
thereof, as all the ancient Physicians have sufficiently written of, as well
in general against all, as in particular against every one of them, for that
every one has his contrary effects for to remedy the malice thereof.

The tokens that he most evil in them that have taken Uenome, Evil signs.
be often soundinges, and to cast up the white of their eyes, they do wax
very red, and put out their tongue very great, and black, and the pulse fa^^,
cold sweet universally throughout all their body, chiefly in the extreme
parts, and in their breasts, and they are desirous to vomit, but cannot, and
they have their understanding troubled: and this is in all kind of venom being
taken, or by bytings of venomous beasts, in so much that they talk ydlely as
though they had the frenzy which is a mortal sign.

It is needful, for the better knowledge what Uenom it was, To know what
venom (...) was.
that it be seen if there did remain any thing of that which they had eaten
or dronken, and to see what was that which was mingled therewith, judging it by
the color, the smell and the taste, or giving it to a Dog, a Hen, or a Catt,
and mark how it woorketh with them: For if any of them wax sad or heavy,
it is a token that there is venom; and if they dye, it is a token that the
venom was strong.

And being known to be venomed the first thing that is to be procured, The
cure.
is, that he which is sick do vomit, which is the thing that does most
profit, because there should be no time for the venom to enter, by the veins,
and arteires, for to come to the heart, for if it come thither, it is past all
man's help: and therefore it is convenient that this remedy of Uomite be done
with all speed, that it may be expelled, before it pass from the Stomach.
And for to cause Uomite, there must be procured things that in very short
time will provoke it, as to put the fingers in hot water, and the most
common thing is sweet Oil, drinking much quantity thereof in such sort,
that they fill their Bellies therewith, that it may the better be expelled:
the which having received, they shall with their Fingers, or feather provoke
them to vomit, which must be done until that you perceive that all that be
expelled, and cast out, which was eaten or drunken, which did hurt. And if the
Oil be not sufficient too do this; there may be mad^ things for to cause
Uomite, beginning by the most Weak, as the seething of Dill, the Seed of
Radishe of Camamell and other like things that do provoke Uomite, adding to
the seet^ing, if it be needful, a Dram of Agarico, the which although it
do provoke vomit strongly, it has also the Property to break the strength
of the venom. Some for a great secret do give a Pint of Water of the
Flowers of Orenges warm, which although it does provoke Uomite, it has also
a particular virtue too extinguishe, and kill the strength of the Uenome, it
must be given hot the quantity of a Pynte. And he^reof it comes that the
Water taken out of the Flowers of Orenges which is a kind of Cydron, has
great virtue against Uenome, as we have written in a little Book which is
printed with others of mine in Latin, that does treat of Orenges. It is
very good that with the thing which provoke Uomite, there be mingled
things that have virtue against venom, as Triacle, Methridato, and other like
things, the which hereafter we will treat of.

(...) mu^t be given the remedies, that are too be done for the Cures and
Diseases that the venom is cause of; not forgetting the principal cause which
is to kill and to destroy the malice, that is the cause thereof with the
medicines and Remedies that I will speak of hereafter.

If he that has taken venom do not perceive nor know what manner of venom
it was that he took, nor the Accidents thereof do show; It is to be thought
that it was of the venomes which do their work of their own property which
is the woorst of all kind of venomes: Venom of his o^ne property.
then it is convenient that there be had more care procuring vomit, and that
it be effectually done, as it is aforesaid. And if any be descended in^o the
Guts, let him have a gentle Glister that in all properties has a known
virtue against venom, which remedies are called Bezaarticas, the which must
be used at all times with his meat, and drink, procuring the inward and
outward comforting of the principal members, and using meats of substance
that may give great strength, taken out by a small press and in any other
sort that is needful, in the which there must be put things that have
v^rtue against all kind of venom, of the which we will tr^ate of hereafter.

And this must be done, not only in them that be venomed with unknown
Uenome which woorketh the malice of it own property, but in such as have
taken known Uenome which woorketh by quality: for that the Uenome is a thing
that does most of all pull down and weaken nature, making lean very
quickly, and overthrowing the virtue and strength thereof. These medicines
which have this virtue and special property against these venomes, are many:
some be simples and other compoundes: and because there are many of the one
and of the other, I will speak of them that are most used, and where is seen
greater experience of the^ which are compounded. The principal is the triacle
that Andromacho wrote of, the which if it be well made, is the most principal
medicine of as many as ever have been compounded against al kind of venom.
Triacle.
And although it be of a true composition, yet there lacks some medicines
always to do that which is possible; we do see that in this case it does
marvelous effects, and not only being taken with some water made for the
purpose, but also being put into pricks or bytings of venomous beasts, and
likewise in Apostomes full of poison which are made in the time of the Plague.

The Methridate is of very great effect, in this case, and does serve
sometimes for triacle. Methridat^ and compou^ded medicines.
That of Cidrons and Emeraldes do make a meruellous work, in all venom. The
earth S^gillata has a prerogative above them, especially in fevers which have
an evil quality. The triacle Diathesaron, is for the purpose in cold venoms
and in bytinges of venomous beasts, and in especially in the biting of a beast
that is made. And so you have many other compounded medicines that have virtue
and property against venom: but these which I have spoken of, are the most
principal, and found most true by experience.

The simple medicines be many, the most principal is the earth Lemnia so
celebrated of the old writers, in especially of Galen, who only to see it,
Medicine^-simples. Lemnia.
and to see how the priests did make it, sayl^d to the Island of Lemnos that at
this day is called Estalimene, which is the most principal simple medicine that
the Greeks knew.

The true Diptamo is another which ^roweth in the Island of Creta, which at this
day is called Candia, Diptamo.
whereunto the people of the Isle do run, when they feel themselves (...)
in vain. Likewise it is to be given to them that are bitten with venomous
beasts, or pricked of them, because it may extinguish and kill the malice of
the venom: And although that these pouders are of so much virtue as
aforesaid, the Bezaar stone is of greater virtue and excellency, for that in
it alone is found all the virtues and properties that are in all medicines
which we have already spoken of, by his own property hidden and by grace from
heaven infused into it against venomes: which you shall find to be the best
and most present remedy of all others, as we will show in that which follows.

Of the Bezaar stone.
THis Bezaar stone has many n^mes: for the Arabiens do call it Hagar, The names
of the stone.
the Persians Bezaar, the Indians Bezar, the Hebrews Belzaar, ye Greeks
Alexipharm^cum, the Latinistes Against venom, the Spaniardes the stone against
venom and sounding. Conrado Gesnero in his book that he made of beasts,
Conra^o.
speaking of the Goat of the mountain, says that this name Belzaar is an
Hebrew name, for that ( ben) in Hebrewe is as much to say as Lord, and ( za^)
venom, as if ye would say, Lord of the venomes and by good reason it is so
named, seeing that this stone is Lady of the venomes, and does extinguish and
destroy the^ as being Lady, and mistress over them. And of this it comes
that al things that are against poison, or venomous things are called
Bezaarticas, for their excellency.

This stone is ingendered in the inner part of a beast, that is commonly called
a Goat of the mountain. Where they are engendered.
The ingendering of stones in beasts is a common thing; and also in man
chiefly, there is no part^ in his body, wherein they be not engendered: and
likewise in birds, and fishes, and rattes of the field.

Pliny in his 28. book the 9. chapter, says that the wild hearts go to
the hollow places where snakes and serpents are; Pliny.
and with their breath do bring them forth and eat them. And this is
gathered hereby, that they do it either to heal them of some disease; or to
wax young again, that they may live many years. The Arabiens do amplify this
cause and say, that the wild hearts by eating of these serpents, come to
engender the Bezaar stone; and they declare it in this manner.

In these East parts are bred certain beasts, which are called hearts,
History.
which for the great heat of the Somm^r go into the ^aues and hollow places,
where the adders and snakes and other vermin being of poison are, which in that
country be many, and very venomous, because the country is so hot; and with
their breath they drive them out, and tread upon them, and kill them, and eat
them; and after they are filled with them, they go as speedily as they can
where water is, and they plundge themselves therein, in such sort that they
leave no part of their bodies out, but their snowt, for to fetch their breath:
and this they do, that with the coldness of the water they may delay the great
heat of the venom, which they have eaten: and there they remain without
drinking a drop of water, until they have alayed and cooled, that fervent
heat, wherein they were by feeding upon the venomous vermin. And being in
the water there does engender in the places w^ere the drops of water comes
forth of their eyes, a stone, which being come forth of the water, falls
from them, and it is gathered up for the use of medicine. This is tha^ in
effect which the Arabiens do write of the manner how the Bezaar stone is
ingendered. I have procured and with great diligence sought to find out by such
as have come from the India of Portingal, and such as have past beyond the
China to know the truth of this matter: and it is thus.

In the greatest India, (where Ptolomeo does write to be found so much goods
and so great riches before the River Ganges in certain mountains which do
ioyn^ with the Country of China, How the Bezaar stone is ^ngendered.
) there do breed certain beasts like to Hearts as well in greatness as in
swiftness, and are very much like unto hearts, saving in some respect they do
participate with goats, as well in their horns which they have like a goat,
being turned backewarde, as in the making of the body: whereby they give them
the name of goats of the mountain: wherein in my opinion they are deceived,
for they rather ought to be called heart goats, in that they have the parts
and likenesses of both, which is of a heart and of a goat. These heart Goats
in those parts do use themselves like to the hearts, that Pliny speaks of,
in these places as is aforesaid, that go to the dens of wild venomous
beasts, and with their breathing cause them to come forth and eat them: and
afterward do go whereas water is, and do plundge themselves therein, until
they perceive that the fury of the venom which they have eaten be past, and
until then they dare not drink a drop. And being come forth from th^nce,
they go into the fields, and there they eat many healthful herbs, of
great virtue, which are against venom, which they by their natural instinct
do know: that there do arise as well of the venom which they have eaten, as of
the herbs which they have fed on, being engendered by means of the natural
heat, and by that virtue which is declared, being infused at the time of the
generation in the inner parts of the bowelles, and in other parts of their
bodies, certain stones, of the greatest and of the smallest sort, which is a
thing of great admiration, and of the greatest virtue that to this day is
known against venom. It is understood of that venom which is so pernicious
and ^urtful that they did eat; and of those herbs being so healthful that
they fed upon, by a meruellous work, the Bezaar stone is ingendered.

And as they say which come from those parts, and have seen this beast from
whom they take out these stones, The figure of the beast.
he is of the greatness of a heart and well near of this making, he has
only two broad horns, with the points sharp, turned and falling much
backewarde, his hair is thick and gross of a mingled color, for the most
part, and reddishe, and of other colors: you have many of them in those
mountains. The Indians do hurt them and kill them with weapons and with
snares and ginnes: and they be so fearce, that sometimes they kill some of
them: they are very swift on foot, and leppe much, they live in hollow places
of the ground, they go in companies, there be males and females, their
voices are roarings: they take out the stones from the inner part of their
bowelles, and of other hollow parts of the body, and they use much diligence
in the taking out of them, by reason the Portingales that do trade thither,
give much for these stones, that they do so take out, and they carry them to
the China, to sell; and from thence to Maluco, and from Maluco to Calicut, for
there is the greatest utterance of them, and they do esteem so much of them,
that one is worth there, being fine, fifty crowns, as they are here.

And as I was writing this treatise I went to see a beast, that should seem
to be the same, History.
by reason he has all those marks which those of that parts have, which I
saw in the house of the Archedeacon of Mebla, being a worthy Gentleman,
which was sent him from very far Countries, by the way of Africa, and is in
this form and fashion: He is a Beast of the greatness of a wild heart, he
has the same hair, color, and horn, His figure.
that a heart has, he has the face, the head, and the tail like a heart; he
is swift in running, like to a heart, his snowt is like to the hearts, and
likewise his countenance, his body is like to a Goat, for he is like to a
great he Goat; and has two horns turned backwarde, somewhat falling, with
the points wrested, that he seems to be like a he goat, and all the rest
like to a heart. There is one thing in this beast which is greatly to be
marvelled, for if he fall from a Tower down to the ground, he lyteth upon
his horns, and receives no hurt thereby, but rather does rebounde as a ball
of wind in the air: he eats grass, bread, and all that you give him, he
is of great strength, and is always tied with a Cheyne, because he breketh
and byteth asunder the cords. I do look still when he will dye, or that they
will kill him, to see if he have the Bezaar stone.

The form of the stones.
The making and fashion of the stones be of diverse manners for that some be
long as the stones of Dates, others be like to Chestnuttes, others like to
round pellottes, of earth, such as are shot in Crossebowes, others like to the
eggs of Pigeons, I have one like to the kidney of a kidd, there are none that
be sharp pointed.

And as these stones be diverse in their makings so they do vary in their
colors, His color.
some have the color of a dark baye, others be of an ash color, commonly
they be of a green color, and with black spots, such spots as the
Cattes of Algallia have, of a sad gray color, all which are finely compounded
of certain thin skales, or rindes, one upon an other, like to the skales of
on Onion, very artificially set, and those rindes are so excellent and so
glistering, that it seems as though every one of them were burnished by art,
and so taking away that which is uppermost of all, that which remains is much
more glistering, and shyning, then that which was taken away: and hereby they
are known to be fine, and true, and only for this I took away from that
which I have, the uttermost shale, that was upon him, and that which remained
was as glistering and more then the ^^rst, these shales are greater or smaller
according to the greatness of the stone, it is a light stone and easy to be
scraped or cut, like to Alabaster, because it is soft: if it be long in the
water, it dissolueth. It is light.
It has no heart nor foundation in the inner part, whereupon he is formed,
but rather is somewhat hollow, and the hollownesse is full of powder of the
same substance that the stone is of, which is the best. And this is the best
way to know whether the stone be fine and true when it has that powder, for
they which are false, have it not, and by these two things they which are
fine and true, may well be known from those which are false and counterfayt.
Which are fine.
In them that are most true be these thin skales and rindes, glistering and
shyning one upon another; and the inner part has that powder which I have
spoken of: and those which are not true have neither the one nor the other. For
I saw one that was broken, to see if it were fine and it had shales, and in
the inner part it had a grain or seed whereby the Indian deceived many.

Guido de Lanazaris, a man naturally borne in this City, Guido de Lanazaris.
which traveled all the round world over, and was in those parts of the
China, said unto me, that there were Indians that counterfeyted them with a
composition that they use and know, but the two things which is aforesaid
they could never bring to pass: to wit, the glistering skales, and the
powder, that is in the inner part. And he said to me, In great estimation.
that they were there much more esteemed then amongst us, because they be
healed with them of many diseases.

Andrew Belunensis ^o^h allege of Tipthas Arabien, Andrewe Belunensi^.
in a book that he wrote of stones, and says that the Bezaar stone is a
mineral, and that it is taken out after the same manner as the other particular
stones are, of his min^ries as the Diamondes, Rubies, Es^^raldes, and Agatas:
and it seems that Serapio does so understand it, when he spoke of this
stone. He said that the Mineral of this stone is in the land of Syria, and
of the India, and East Countries, in the which they were deceived: for that it
is clearly seen that they are taken out of the said Beasts, which the
Indians do take out with great diligence as we have said: and there is
seen in them the work and manifest effect which we will speak of.

Serapio does show, that in his time there were likewise of these
counterfayte stones which he says have not the virtue against Uenome as the
true Bezaar has. Serapio.
Of this stone I find no Greek Author which has written of it, The old
Writers wrote of this stone.
nor Latinist: only amongst the Arabiens this matter is treated of, and in
some late Writers which we will speak of hereafter, and for this cause only
the Ancient Writers, being Arabiens that wrote of it, and the late Writers
Latinistes and those of our time, amongst the Arabiens, he that did most
largely write of it, was Serapio a learned man, in his medicinal History in
the 306. Chapter where he writes many things of this Bezaar stone worthy
too be known, Serapio of his virtue.
the which of his own authority he shows how great excellency this stone
has against all kind of Uenome, of what m^nner and quality soever it be, and
against the bytinges of Uenomous beasts, extinguishing and taking away the
ground, and evil quality, that the venomes do infuse into the bodies,
delivering them from death that shall use it. It is given in Powder, and they
say that it does the same effect by chewing of it, Note.
or holding of it in the Mouth: for after it is taken, it does provoke sweat
and does expel the venom, and makes the work sure, saying that being
carried about any person, and that it touch the flesh, and bringing it over the
left part, it does preserve him that shall so carry it about him that no
venom or venomous thing shall offend him: for being applied to the body, it
resists venom that it may not offend him: and them that be infected
therewith it heals. And this it does not only to them that have taken
venom, but unto such that have had it put into their Syrope, apparel, or
letter, or other part that may offend them. The same Serapio says, that
this Stone does profit much against bytinges of beasts that are venomous,
and in their Pricks taking the Powder thereof at the mouth, and provoking
sweat, it expels it from the inner parts: it profits much, too cast the
powder of this stone in Pricks, or in wounds made by these venomous beasts,
for it destroys and takes away the malice of the venom, and although that
the soars being so made by these beasts do begin to corrupt, it cures
and heals them, and the powder of this stone being put upon the venomous
beasts does take away their strength, and if it be put in place where they do
wound any, although they make a sore, yet the malice of the venom does not take
hold^.

And this is seen by experience in the venomous beasts called Adders and
Snakes, for the powder being put in place where they do byte, all their
venomous strength is taken away and nothing does remain but the sign
thereof. Three graynes of this powder we with some licour, being cast upon
snakes and adders they dye forthwith. Thus much Serapio says.

Rasis Simia of Gallen a man amongst the Arabiens most learned in the book
which he wrote called Continent, Rasis. Simia of G^len.
says thus: the Bezaar stone is that which seems some what yellowe and
soft, without any manner of taste, the which he says that he has
experimented two times, and has found in it virtue of great efficacy against
Napelo the strongest of all venomes. He says also that he has seen in this
stone the most marvelous effects against all venom that ever he saw in any
Medicine, that was against v^nome either simple or compounde, or any
composition made against venom, as Triacles, or other compositions, for that
the Bezaar stone is of more efficacy and virtue then any of them. The same
does agree with the books he made to the King Almasor, saying, The evil
Uenoms that do offend the heart and work their effect, O how little profit
does any cure prove in them, if the Bezaar be not taken, for that does resist
it: and he says, Moreover I my self saw that it did resist the venom called
Napelo which is the Uenome that does penetrate more then all venoms: thus much
of Rasis.

An other Moore very learned and a great Astronomer that wrote of stones
figured under Signs and Planets and the virtues they have, was called Hamech
Benreripho: he in his book that he wrote of the virtue of Plants and of
stones and of beasts, that serve for the use of Medicine, says the Bezaar
stone is against all venom, and it has besides this particular property
taken in powder against the bytinges of Scorpions, and being carried about one,
and graven upon, he is safe against all the bytinges of venomous beasts. An
other Moore called Abdala Narache, a learned man in medicine, says, that the
Bezaar stone is against all Uenome, he saw it as a precious thing in the hands
of the King of Cordoua called Miramamolim unto whom was given strong venom:
The king of Cordiua.
and having given unto him the Bez^ar stone, by means whereof he was delivered
wholly of the venom; forthwith the King gave his royal Palace to him that
gave him the stone, which delivered him from this imminent death: and surely it
was a great gift of a king, the chief Palace of Cordoua, at this day day
being a thing so notable and of such great value: and the stone was much
esteemed, for that so great a price was given for it. Auensoar.
Auensoar a Physician of the Moors, but a natural Spaniarde of Penaflore a
place lying between Cordoua and Seuill, gave unto one, who was very much
lamented, by reason he had taken very evil Uenom, of the Bezaar stone the
weight of 3. grains with the water of Goords, for that it was hot venom, and
because it did seem to be so. For as soon as he had taken it, there did
appear upon him the Iaundice very yeallow, and he was very well delivered and
saved from it.

Aueroiz a Physician and a Philosopher very excellent, being a Spaniarde, and
borne in Cordoua, Aueroi^*
says that the Bezaar stone is in great estimation and very profitable
against all venomous bytinges, and especially against the bitinges of Scorpions.

Haliabas does make mention of the Bezaar stone in three places where he
treats of Uenomes, Haliabas.
but he passes it over lightly, only showing that it is soft, and says that
it must be scoured in water and that the water of it must be given to them that
are poisoned.

Rabbi Moises of Egypt, but borne in Spain, a most cunning Physician, who
followed Gallen in all his works, Rabbi Mo^ses.
in the book he made of venomes in the first thing that he treated of in the
third Chapter speaking of simple Medicines and the use of them which are
convenient for the bytinges of Uenomous beasts, says the simple Medicines
that we have amongst us of most profit and greatest experience which are of
many approved are the seed of the Cidron etc. And the other is the Emeralde a
marvelous medicine agayn^t all venom etc. Gallen made mention of the third
which is the Bezaar stone that is taken out of a beast, the which stone is like
to an akorn, the color thereof is green and does engender by little and little
making it self gross: and for that they find in it o^e skale upon another,
some do say that they are engendered in the corners of the eyes of certain
sheep that are in the East parts: othere do say that they are engendered in
the purse of the gall of the said sheep which (...) poisoned, I caused him to
take thereof diverse Morninges the weight of three graynes of the same Bezaar
stone with the water of Oxetongue, and he was therewith very well healed.

Many Physicians of late time and in our days have made mention of this Bezaar
stone and do very much extol the same in their books with great
Prerogatives, Physicians of late time.
against all kind of venom and against many other diseases, which we mind to
treat of, to see what we find written by every one of them. Amongst whom
Andrewe Mathiolus of Siena, a man very well learned, in the Commentaries which
he wrote most learnedly upon Dioscorides in the sixth book, Mathiolus.
declaring the Medicines that are against venom, by special property, does
write of the Bezaar stone very geeat virtues, and does approve it to be a
medicine and remedy most principal that at this day is known in the World
against venom, and he does refer that, as is said, unto the Authors which
we have alleged.

Andrewe de Laguna borne in Segouia, who amongst the learned was named Galen
the Spaniarde for the Commentaries which he made upon the sixth book of
Dioscorides in the Spanish tongue, Andrew de Laguna.
where he treats of venomes, he shows how present a remedy the Bezaar
stone is against all kind of venom and against the bytinges of venomous
beasts, and against pestilent Agewes of evil quality, and also that it is a
great remedy against the falling sickness, that it does expel the stone
of the Raynes, and being given with Wine, it breaks the stone in the
Bladder. There he notes how this Stone is engendered in certain Goats of
the Mountains of Persia, and how the stones that are the best be bright, and
skaley and soft, of the color of a Fruit of Spain called Beringena, which
is a remedy much commended amongst Princes and great lords for the effects
aforesaid.

Valescus de Taranto, a Physician and borne in Milan, Valescus.
the scholar of Tornamira, in the 7. book of his experiments, praises very
much this Bezaar stone, to be of great force against venom and other diseases
for his effects, and for the great fame that was of his works, in this time
against al venom. Saint Ardonius of Pesauris Physician, in a book which he
made of venomes, exceedingly prayseth the Bezaar stone and prefers it before
all other medicines, as well simples as compoundes, which have virtue against
venom or by^inges of venomous beasts: and says, that he saw it and proved
it by great experience.

Amato Lucitano, a learned man of our time, Amato Lucitano.
being now resident in Ragosa, in his commentaries which he wrote upon
Dioscorides in the second book of Ceruigenitale, did treat of this Bezaar
stone very learnedly, as a man of Portingal, who did much inform himself of
those of his nation that came from the East India, and he says that the
Bezaar stone is of the making of an acorne, full of spots, declining to the
color of a sad blewe, compounded with many shales, the which they call Bezaar,
as a present remedy against al manner of venom, and they take them out of
certain beasts which are like to wild hearts, that are in the East India,
and are called goats of the mountains: they are found in their bowelles and
inner parts, of the which being given 3. graynes with the waters of the
flowers of Orenges, it is the present remedy against all Uenom, killing and
extinguishing, the venomes, and force thereof, it kills the worms given with
water of Verdolagas, and where the fever is, and where there is no fever with
white wine: he says that he has experience, and has cured therewith the
plu^esie being very sore rooted, it is convenient that it be given to them,
that have taken venom, in vomittes, and it will expel the venom, and being given
to them that have vomitted of beasts speaking of the goat, does much commend
this Bezaar stone to be against al veno^. Other authors there be that make
mention of this stone, but they pass it lightly over, only praising it to be
good against venom, in general and in particular, the which at this present I
lightly pass over, for it is sufficiently spoken of by those before rehearsed,
whereby it may have authority with all those that thereof will profit themselves.

That as I have seen by experience.
That which I have seen by experience I will now speak of for the more
confirmation of the said cause, and of the meruellous virtues which it has,
whereby it may be understood what is written by these authors aforesaid, with
manifest examples. It is about 14. years past that my Lady the Duches of B^jar
was advertised by the Lord don John Mauriques that in the Court was used for
such as did sound, a stone that was called the Bezaar, for that my Lady the
Duches had a son very sick of the said disease, well near since the time of
his birth, and she being desirous of his health did procure to know what
remedy might be had, and seeing the ordinary remedies of Physic which they
had ministered unto him being many and diverse by the wysest Physicians of
Spain, and yet not prevailed any thing; and hearing of the great virtue of
this Bezaar stone, they had communication with me thereof: yet was it to me
somewhat strange, for that I had no other knowledge thereof then by books,
and I thought that it had not been in these parts: then I requested that the
stone might be sent for being desirous to ease this Lord, for his virtues
deserved the same, and his great knowledge in all kind of learning, and in all
things that a noble man might have knowledge in, as also to see the stone which
was a thing of me much desired. The stone was sent for to Lishebron by means
of a Genoues, and there was brought two of them very fair wrought in gold,
and each of them as great as a Date stone and somewhat greater, of color
green and blackishe, like to a Beringena which is a fruit of Spain, and the
stone being brought, not a little to our contentment, every one gave their
judgment, and it was agreed yt at such time as he should sownde, it should
presently be given him: and the sownding being come in the evening he took
forth with the appointed order, which was brought from the court, that he
should take forthwith the weight of three grains of the powder of the stone,
and it should be cast in water of Oxetongue so much as might be sufficient for
him, and so it was done. Opening his mouth he swallowed it down, the which he
did with much difficulty; within the space of half a quarter of an hour,
after he had taken it, he recovered as easily, as though he had not had it.
And seeing the virtue that was in the stone, we did esteem it much, and the
more for that we saw that every time it took him, he came to himself so
easily, and when he took not the stone, the sounding did continue long, and he
returned from it with great pains, and in long time it seized not: but when
the stone was given him he came quickly to himself and with great easiness,
as though he had not had any sownding at all. My Lady the Duches carried the
stone in her purse, and had the quantity that he should take always in a
readiness, because when the sownding came to him, it might be given him with
more speed, because he should not be long in pain: so that from the time
that he received it, his soundings came not to him so continually as they did
before. This being perceived, I said one day to my Lady, that it was the
doctrine of Physicians, that the medicines which do not heal diseases, cannot
preserve that we fall not into them, but that it seemed good to me that we
should give unto him every morning the powder of the Bezaar stone, that with
the continual use thereof, the vapor might be consumed which did rise up to
the brains, so that what seems to be venomous and hurtful, the stone would
extinguish and kill, and would consume the vapor that rises up from all the
body, and from

A Child did eat a certain venomous thing, whereby he was in danger of
death, and seeing that the common remedies did not profit, I caused to be given
to the child the Bezaar stone, and immediately it was well. And for children
that have worms, it is likewise very good, for that it causes them to be
expelled by dissolution, meruellously taking away the accidents, that are wont
to happen to children. And this it works wheresoever you fear any grief or
venomous humor. In the things that it has done most good, has been in the
pestilence, for that there was in Germany a great Plague, and unto all such as
had the Bezaar stone given them, immediately was seen the great effect that it
did in them that took it. And in an Hospital were four persons infected with
this evil, and it was given to two of them and not to the other, and they
that took it escaped, and the other two dyed. And then it was given to many
that were infected with this evil, and some of them had two sores, and some
had three, and yet they escaped and of this were witnesses many people of
great credit that saw it and other meaner persons, as it is very well known
to all the Court.

For them that are sad and melanch^lie.
This stone does profit much to them that be sad and melancholic, the Emperor
took it many times for this effect, and it is taken of many persons that are
melancholic: for it takes it away, and makes him glad and merry that uses it
and to be of a good disposition. Many I have seen that have been much
diseased with faintness, soundinges and melancholy, and taking the weight of
three graynes of this stone with the water of Oxtongue they have bin healed
presently. In fevers of an evil quality and most pestilent, it is meruellous
the good work that it does: for that it takes away the malice thereof,
extinguishing and killing the evil quality of the venom, which is the first
and principal thing that the Physician should do, for if that this be not
taken away first, the cure is in vain. Many do use this stone holding a piece
thereof in their mouth in the suspected time of a Pestilence, and whereas venom
is feared, or any thing that is venomous, and also it does profit much taking
it in water to them that are sick of pestilent Fevers.

A Gentleman had all his servants sick of Agewes, History.
that are commonly called Modorras, and he put into a pot of water a Bezaar
stone that he had, of the which he caused the sick people to drink, and they
all escaped and were delivered from death. And many people for this cause, have
this stone laid in water continually, that they may drink thereof being
sick, for it profits much to take away the Agewe, and gives strength to the
heart, and not only this stone does profit in venomous things and venomes,
but in other diseases, as it has been proved: and being given to them that have
the gidines in the head, it does much profit, and also against opilations. And
it happened that a Nun that had sowndinges and great opilations, by taking
the Bezaar stone was healed, and likewise of the opilations: and being long
time without her customed terms, they came very well too her and abundantly.
This stone profits much to them that have taken Arsenike or other corsiue
venom, for that it does kill and consume the force of the venom, and takes
away the accidents thereof. Milk has in this a great prerogative, and does
work effectually, by taking much quantity, and continually using the same,
for although that it be a meruellous remedy, it must be used in corsiue
venomes, for that it makes the venomes to be expelled by vomit, and does
extinguish the malice. It is the true Antidote against corsiue venom, and
after the use thereof, the stone may be given or the powder, or any of the
said medicines, that have virtue against venom. Also this stone does profit
much against fevers that bring certain red spots in the body like to
Flea-bytinges, that commonly do appear in their shoulders, and in their
archter parts of the body: these do come in sore Agewes, that do expel the
humors out of the body, and so it is convenient that it be so used that it
may come out well, and this must be done by putting bentosit^es, and other
like helps, that may expel the humor, whereby nature is helped, forbidding
oyntmentes and other things that may disturb the coming out of these things.
An other thing which is convenient, is to give to the sick, when these small
spots do begin to appear, those things which do extinguish and kill the
venom: of the which we have treated very largely having respect not to let
blood, after that they have appeared, if it come not of too much replection
and fullness of blood. One thing I have found for these read Spots and for
Fevers of much profit and notable experience in many, which is our
Bolearmenike prepared in a dishe of earth with Rose water given in all
medicines that are too be taken, and in the meats that are too be eaten, and
surely in it I have found great effect, chiefly in one year, wherein reigned
many Pestilent Agues, called Moder^as, and many were delivered from them, with
the use of it, for that this our Bolearmenike does differ little from that of
the East parts, and this shall be where the Bezaar stone is not to be had,
for that it does exceed all as I saw in a principal Gentleman of this city
which had a sore Fever, with soundinges, Uomites and other Accidents of an
Ague upon whom did appear spots, which before I have spoken of on his
shoulders, and in giving him the Bezaar stone with a little of the U^^cornes
horn, forthwith the Accidents did cease and began to be better, for that it
did extinguishe and kill the force of the Agewe, which caused all the hurt.
And after this sort I could speak of many here in Spain, that for the
space of this fourteen years I have used it, and many have been delivered
therewith from many diseases with the use thereof, that surely it seems a
thing of wonderful effects, that a stone taken out of the belly of a beast
like to a wild Heart or Goat in so little quantity given, should work so
great effects as we have written of. And for that it is already time to
treat of the Herb Escuerconera, because we have been long and treating of
the Bezaar stone, I will speak what is known of it.

Of the herb Escuerconera.
THe Herb Escuerconera the which we have promised to treat of, is an herb
known, and found within these thirty years. For time has discovered it too
us as it has done many other things, as we see which they bring from the
West Indias, and they are so many things, as we see every day, as were never
seen by those that were before us, nor yet by us, as we have written o^ in a
Treatise that we made of these things which do treat of all the things that
they bring from our Indias that does serve for the use of medicine.

So it is that in the Country of Cataluina in the County of Vrgell in a town
called M^mblan^, Histori^*
was the place where y^ herb Escuerconera was first discovered and found out,
and as all that country i^ molested and toubled of certain venomous beasts
which are called Escuercos, and likewise of many other and although that they
are very Uenomous and full of poison, there are also many in number, as well in
the tilled fields as amongst trees, and grass, and especially in the Corn
fields, in such sort that they are to them in steed of a Plague, and an
incurable mischief, by reason that the people cannot labor in their Uines,
nor reap their Corn, nor do their business in the fields, by means that
they are so cruelly hurt by them, whose venom and poison is such, that
wheresoever they byte, it swells forthwith, with great pains, and the
swelling rises up to the heart immediately, and if they be not remedied and
suckered forthwith, they die presently: their Triacle and other benefits
which they had, did serve them to little purpose.

How this herb was discovered.
And seeing that in this time this Plague was so without remedy, it fortuned
that they brought to that place from Africa a young man Captive, which did
heal them that were bitten with these so venomous beasts, with giving them to
eat of a root, and the juice of an herb that he knew which did them so
much good, that it healed the bytinges and poison very easily. For the which
there came so many people to the Moore, that they did not only make him free,
but also rich, and the young man in all this time with all the promises and
gifts that they could give and make unto him, would never tell them what
root and herb it was, wherewith he healed so great a Plague.

Two Persons of the Town being very desirous to know the same, by reason it
stood them so much upon too know what Herb it was, went after him and
dogged him so politikely, that at length they saw where he gathered the
herb and took out of the ground, the roots thereof. The Moore being gone,
they went too the place where he gathered it, and they found the lack of
the grass that the Moore had gathered, of the which they took out a good
quantity, because there was much there in that place, and they went therewith
too the Town, and so to the house of the Moore, where they found him taking
out the herb of a Bag that he brought it in: and the one herb and the
other being seen, they saw that it was all one: whereby the Moore could not
deny but the thing which had been by himself long time hidden, was now
discovered, and the herb that he had gathered and given, and that which the
other brought were all one. And from that time forward all the people began to
know it, and such as had need of it went to geather it, and used it for the
bytinges of these venomous beasts, as I have said. They call this herb
Escuerconera because it does heal and remedy the bytinges of this beast, Why
it is called Escuer^onera.
called Estorcu in the Catalan tongue, and the same root is like too the said
beast, and the beast like too the root in figure. This beast or vermin
commonly is a Spanne and a half long, he is small in the tail, and is
greater and greater toward the head: his head is great and square with a
great mouth, his tongue black and sharp, his teeth small like to a she
Adder, with the which he does byte, and with his tongue he does prick like
to a Scorpion, his color is full of black spots, with diverse colors he
goes evil fauouredly, and is continually among Plants, and Uines, and byteth
other beasts, as he does men, he goes continually by the ground, and
therefore all men look warily too their feet, where they are. He is a fierce
beast and ugly too behold, and full of mischief, his biting is woorser and
more dangerous than the biting of a she Adder of that Country. Only this
Herb is contrary too him which is called of his name Escuerconera: for if they
cast the juice upon him, it makes him foul, The virtue of the herb.
and if they put it into his mouth and that he swallowe it down, he dies. If
any man (...) seed, and the seed being gone, then the Leaves of the Plants
do fall. The Root is like too the root of a Sanahoria fleshie, and weighty,
and leaves with a point, and waxes greater toward the leaves, it has a
thin rynde joined too the root, and is of a russet color, somewhat
blackishe, and somewhat sharp, and being cut or broken, it does cast from it
a certain clammie waterishnesse, like to milk: it is all white within,
sweet, and fattie, it grows for the most part in hitlie places, where some
moisture is: the complexion thereof is whot and moist in the first degree.

The Uertues that it has be such as we have spoken of, the principal
virtue is against the Escorcu a beast so venomous, and does so much hurt, that
in this surely it seems to be a thing of great virtue. It is good when the
juice is taken out of the leaves and clarified, and that the root also be
taken, which is a thing of greater virtue.

And it is to be considered that although you take the juice and the root of
this Herb against the Poison that proceeds of this beast which is so
pernicious, it is convenient that great diligence be used, as we have
aforesaid, for the remedy of them that are venomed: whereby it would do
very well that in the mean time that the juice be a providing or the Root of
the said Herb, that four or five fingers breadth above the sore it be
bound fast, that the force of the Uenome do not pass too the rest of the
parts of the body, and this is too be done in the Leg or arm. And if the
biting be in any such place where it cannot be bound, then there must be
laid too it, plasters of dry and strong things that may dissolve the fury
of the venom: and this must be done with speed, before the hurt do enter the
inner parts, for if it once do come to the heart, the cure will go hard:
and this must be universally in all prickinges or bytings of venomous beasts.
And if the wound be small it is needful to open it, with a small cut or some
other way: and if it be new, let the cuttinges be small, and if it be of a
long time, then let the incision be deep, for that with the much blood that
geeth out thereof, there go out a great part of the venom also. And after
the cutting let there be applied such things as may draw out strongly the
venom, still adding thereunto that as shall be needful. Some there be that do
suck out the venom of the pricks or wounds with their mouth, but it is
dangerous to them that so do, for some have dyed thereof: it is better to
r^medie it with ventosities, or to put too it the hinder part of a Cock, or a
Chicken, or a Pigeon being alive, upon the prick, or w^unde, the feathers
being plucked from the hind^r part ther^of, and use it so often as shall be
needful, until y^u perceive that they have taken out the venom that is in the
wound, and every one of them must be applied thereto so long time until that
you may perceive that he does wax faint, or until he be ready to dye.
Also it is a good remedy to put them that be a live opened at the back, and
let them be there as long time as they have any heat: and beginning to wax
cold, then take them away and put others to, and the venom being taken out by
these means, let there be put upon the wou^d a medicine that has virtue to
keep the wound open. Some do use in the cuttinges or incisions an actual
thing to burn, called a cauterie, which does very much good, extinguishing the
venom, and comforting the hurt. The same ^ffect do^th the cawterie potentiall
in killing the ven^me, but it is not so good as the actual, but thereby it
does cause that the wound do not close, which is very necessary for the cure.

The juice of the herb Escuerconera does profit very much, being put on
venomous ^ytings or prickings, by it self or mingled with other medicines,
that have virtue to take away the strength of the venom, as treacle, methridato
and other medicines like to these: and if the Bezaar stone might be had casting
the powder thereof upon the wound, it will work a marvelous effect. While they
are in this case they must be kept with good order, and good government, in all
things that are contrary to them, and using euacuations, such as is convenient
with wholesome medicines, and there must be mingled with them medicines that
are against venom, and when time serves use letting of blood, and in the rest,
to go to the cure of the disease, and unto every one of them, as it is
convenient universally, and particularly, having always care to give to them
that are sick, in the morning fasting, the conserua of the root of the
Escuerconera, and his water, or the Bezaar stone, or ye powder as it is said,
or Bolearmenike prepared, he must have care to annoint the heart with things
which are temperate, that may comfort with pouders and cordial waters,
amongst the which let there be put the herb Escuerconera. And besides the
virtues that the herb Escuerconera has against the bytinges of these beasts
in particular, and for the remedy of all in universal, it has also other
particular virtues, the use whereof has been showed unto us, it is very good
against sowndinges, of the heart, and for them that have the falling sickness,
and for women whose matrix are suffocated or stopped, by taking the conserua
made of the root, and drinking the juice of the herb clarified, or the water
of it distilled. It does profit much when the soundinges are come, but much
more before they do come: when they feel that they begin to sownde, let them
take the root thereof with the water, and it does hinder the coming thereof:
and if it do come it is much less, and it does not work so vehemently as
when it is taken after. Unto them that have the gidinesse in the head it does
good, and being continually taken, it makes the heart merry: it does take
away the sadness which is the cause thereof: the juice taken out of the leaves
and clarified, and set in Sun for certain days, taking the cleerest
thereof, and put into the eyes does clarify the sight, and takes away the
dimnesse thereof, if it be mingled with a little good honey, it is good for them
that fear themselves to be poisoned. The conserua of the root being taken,
and the water in the morning, that day by Gods grace they shall be safe. The
use and experience of this herb has bin taught without any auctor: for to
this day we know not with what name the authors do term it.

John Odoricus Mechiorius an Almayne Phisitio^, does write in an Epistle to
Andrew Mathiolo, saying that Peter Carniser a Catalan Physician, sent to him
the herb Escuerconera dry, into Germany: this Physician did ask of Mathiolo
what herb it was: Mathiolo did not know what herb it was, neither did any
other, until now that it has bin spoken or written of. Some that are curious
will say that it is the Co^drillia, a spice of Succory which Dioscorides does
make mention of in the second book in the 122. chapter: and although that it
has some likeness thereof, it differs much in the root: for the Condrillia
has it very wooddie and unprofitable and very small, and in the flowers: but
they differ not in their virtues, for both of them are good for the bytings of
adders. And whatsoever that our Escuerconera is, we see that his effects are
great, as well against the bytinges of the Escuercos which is so evil a beast
and venomous, as for other diseases which we have spoken of: which seeing that
in so few years there has been so much thereof discovered, I do trust yt much
more will be hereafter by wise men, that there may be added to this which I have
discovered and written of it.

And seeing that we have treated briefly and the best that we can of these two
medicines so precious, to wit, the Bezaar stone and the herb Escuerconera,
which are two things so precious and of so great effects against venom, now
have we to treat of the last part which we promised to do; and how we ought
to keep and preserve our selves, and not to fall into so great a danger, as of
them is declared, for that it is better to keep our selves from danger, the^
to fall therein. Herein the ancient writers have bin very circumspect. Amongst
the rest it has been an ancient custom in Princes Courts and other great
estates, to have their tasters as well of their meat as of their drink for the
eschewing of poison, and so by the means thereof they assure themselves to be
out of peril for that matter, the which surely is allowable and a good custom,
and necessary for the safeguard and health of any Prince or Lord, for if there
be any hurt in the meat or in the drink, it shall light first upon the^ that
do eat or drink thereof, and not upon the Prince or other high estate, in
whose life and health great matters do depend.

Truth it is that in these days it is done more for a ceremony and estate,
then for health and safety of life, and this order is used amongst great
estates, more for custom then for any thing else, for this purpose the common
people have it in estimation, so that at this present it is used contrary to
that end and purpose it was meant, for they use now taking of a little bred and
bringing it with the meat and so taste it: that done, they cast it away, and
likewise they drink a drop of wine or water: and if it should be used as it
ought to be, they should eat and drink thereof thoroughly, for otherwise the
poison, if there be any, cannot be discerned before it come in to the Princes
mouth. Also the lord ought to command that there be prepared for him diverse
meats, for that if he mislyke of one, he may taste of another: for being of
diverse sorts he may taste of each a little, and eating little at once of any
that were infected, it would do less hurt then if he should eat of one
dish being infected filling himself therwithal, for being either of them
infected and eating much thereof, it shall do the more hurt. And note this well,
that many times a man is not given always to eat of one meat, nor to see it
always tasted before he eat it, and afterward there appears in it notable
hurt, therefore it is good to take your meat with a forke or a spoone, and
that they be made as Jerome Montuo a learned man in Phisike had appointed for
king Henry of France, which was made to know if that he had eaten any venom,
there must be made a little forke and a spoone of one mixture of gold and
silver, that the old writers called Eletrum and it must be 4. parts gold
and one of silver, they must be smooth, clean and well burnished, with the
forke or holder let him eat his meat, and with the spoone his broth: for
putting them in the meat or in the broth, if that there be any venom therein,
forthwith the gold will have an evil color, appearing tawnie, blewe, or
black, and loosing the beauty that before it had, the which will cause them to
look better to the meat, and this is done for trial thereof, and to make
further experience by some beast that may eat thereof, and so to see the
effect thereof, for that is the greatest experience: the like may be done with
the drink to make a cup thereof, or a broad vessel well burnished. For if
the wine or water that is put into it, have any venom, the vessel will take some
color thereof as aforesaid: and if it have no poison therein, it will remain
in his own color. And surely it is a gallant and a delicate secret, when you
begin to eat any manner of meat, the first morsel that you take let it be
well chewed, and mark well if it do byte, or have any evil taste, or if it burn
your mouth, or your tongue, or that your stomach abhor it, for in perceiving
or feeling any thing of these signs, cast it forth, and wash your mouth with
wine or water, and leave that meat, and fall to other: it would do very well
to give it to some beast to see the effe^t thereof, it is good to have in the
house some beast to whom it might given, for to make experience thereof. And
the effect so appearing they have to judge thereof. And this is to be
understood when the venomes come of corsiue things, you shall feel a notable
sharpenes, and they byte and burn forthwith: the best is for them that have
suspicion, to eat meat that is roasted or sod, and that they eat neither
brothes nor pottages, for in them there may be greater hurt: and if any be
made, let them not be made with things of smell, as Amber, musk, and sweet
spyces, and let them not have overmuch sharpenes, for in broth or pottage, the
poison will sooner lurk then in roasted or sodden, and use no meats, which have
much sweetness, therein all poison will lurk the more. He that has any
suspicion when he goes to his meat, let him not be to greedy to eat
forthwith very hastily, but let him refrain himself, and let him eat with
leisure, by little and little. The like he must do, in his drinking, being very
thirsty, he feels not what he drinks: and so many people being very dry,
have drunk in lie, lie, and also water of arsenike, not feeling the same until
they have hurt their body, and therefore it is convenient to drink leysurely
by little, and little, tasting his drink as he drinks: surely if men would be
ruled by this order, they should easily find if there were any evil thing in
that they eat, and drink. You have to consider the color of your meat, for
thereby will somewhat appear. For it will look otherwise, then it ought to
do^; see that your vessels wherein you eat or drink be clean, new, and
glistering: and if your ability be such, let them be of silver, being clean
burnished, for if you have venom in the drink, it is easily espied, and the
silver does turn black or tawney.

Not many days past a Gentleman of great riches, by drinking in a plain cup
of silver, History.
perceived the cup stained of a sad tawney color, and did marvel thereat, he
only tasted the wine, and it made his tongue rough, and his mouth also: he
looked well on the wine that was put into the cup, and it had not that quicknes
in drinking that it ought to have had, and he looked on the water, and in the
bottom of the ewre there were many grains of arsenyke, with as yet were not
dissolved. I was called and I gathered out of the ewre more then xx. small
grains of arsenike. and within certain days after the Gentleman fell sick,
whereby I did con^ect^re that it was not the first time that they pretended to
poison him: and since that, he has bin sick a long time. And thus much I
affirm that if the cup had not bin altered of his color ^ bin infected, it
had not bin perceived. Therefore it is necessary that the vessels and tinages
where wine and water are kept, be stopped, for fear least any venomous thing
fall therein, as spyders, Sallamanquesas and other like venomous be^sts, and
therefore it is naught to drink with vessels or cups that have narrow
mouths: for it is best to see what one drinks in a clear vessel and broad,
for it is good for them that do regard their health. It is good to have a piece
of a right Unicornes horn in a small cheyne of gold, that it may be swilled
continually in the water that shall be drunk. It would do well, for not only
it takes away the suspicion of the venom, but does put to the drink a
meruellous cordial virtue. Also you must not stand by the fire that is made
with venomous wood, for the smoke does poison, as if you should take poison,
and to set in the chamber coals when they do begin to kindle, many have dyed
therewith: let your apparel be kept by such as you have trust in, for in them
may be put things that may do notable hurt, and for all that, as is said, it
does much profit to have trusty servants, and that they be such whom you
may trust, and that they be of a good parentage, and stick not to reward them
well. And above al other let the Physician that has the charge of your health,
be learned and experimented, discrete and of a good judgment, and that he be
rich and of a good kindred, and being such a one, he will not do any thing
that he ought not to do, seeing that in his hands is the life and health of
the Master and Lord.

FINIS.
THE DIALOGVE OF IRON, WHICH TREATS OF THE greatness thereof, and how it is
the most excellent metal of all others, and the thing most necessary for the
service of man; and of the great Medicinal virtues which it has.

An Echo for the Doctor Monardes Physician of Seuill.

In Seuill in the House of Alonso Escriuano.

To the most Excellent Lord, the Duke of Alcala, etc. my Lord, the Doctor
Monardes your Physician wishes health, etc.
FOrasmuch as the metal called iron, is of so great importance in the world,
and so necessary for the service of man, it moved me to make this Dialogue,
which does treat of the greatness and marvelous works thereof. Which if
they be well considered* they will bring admiration unto all that shall read
them, by reason it is so nec^ssary for all states, and manners of living. It
has also great and medi^inall virtues, and likewise with worthiness, and
greatness, it is an Instrument and mean, whereby the most worthy have gotten
great Titles, and fame; as we see many of those which in times past have
attained unto, among whom the Predec^ssors of your excellency with their noble
minds, and strong arms, the S^eare in the fist, and the sword in the hand,
by ouercomming battles, by getting towns and places, the name and fame of them
have been immortal to this day. And for to augment and increase this the more,
and to give to your excellency, and to your chi^d^^n and successors, g^eater
glory, you took to wise the excellent Duches the Lady Iu^na Curtes that at
this day doe^h beautifi^ the whole world, with ^er worthiness, e^timation,
quality, and gr^at^esse, daughter to that valiant and re^owmed Prince, Don
^ernando Curtes, who with his greatn^sse and infinite Labors (...) is a
shorter way, and few people will be there. It seems to me, that the great
hall of the treasury house is s^utt: ^t may be that whiles I go up to see the
sick person, they will open it. Burgus. Your worship may go in Gods name, I
will tarrye here for you, and seeing the great hall is not opened, I will sit
down upon the benche, and will see what does pass until you come.

Doctor. Master Burgus, I pray you pardon me, if I have tarryed long: for
the quality of the cause has caused me to tarry. Burgus. Rather I would
have been glad that you had tarryed longer, because I would have seen more.
Doctor. What have you seen whiles I was absent? Burgus. The great hall being
shutt, and the parde full of people, and I looking upon them earnestly, it
seems to me that they are people of estimation, but to my judgment full of
cares: for in them I have seen so variable and diverse likenesses of
countenance, that I marvel at it. Some of them talking to them selves: others
being alone with their heads hanging down, and with great imagination: Others
talking by two and two together: Others in clusters treating of the sales of
their merchaundize: Maryners and soldiers carrying for their paymentes:
Others carrying away their porcions of silver, which they had taken out,
running with it, as though they had stolen it: Others there were with the
Notaries about their suites: Others in the office of the treasourer amongst
the Registers. There was also a great noise of much people, delivering and
receiving parcels of silver, but they were in a great strife therevppon. The
Judges were in counsel, and many people tarrying for them in such sort, that I
was in great admiration: I being there only to behold, and all the rest to
do their business. And it was to me as one that did behold them without
grief, as a comedye, with many Pageants.

And that which did make me marvel more, was to see that none were merrye,
nor content: rather they seemed to have great care and troubles.

Doctor. Master Burgus, I am glad you have seen what does pass in that
house, with so much attention: for all that which you have seen, that Gold and
silver is cause thereof, which with so great good will you came to see, and
this is it which is the cause of their troubles, and cares, and not only it
brings such as you saw there amazed and astonished, but many others, for they
are at this day the instrument of all these things. Some they put down,
others they raise up, whereby they have rule, and dominion in the world. These
mortal men have put so much felicity in them, that they have and do procure
them, by the loss of their lives, and shedding of their blood, and after they
have them, they conserve them with much labor, and with greater care keep
them, and with much misery they spend them, and with great evil fortune they
lose them. These are they that take away quietness and rest. They take away
sleep, and many pass the day to keep them, and to increase their afflictions
and cares. In the night also they rest with fear, and care: there are in them
so many snares and hazardes, as we see every day.

Burgus. For all this I would see the Gold, the silver, and the Emeraldes.
Doctor. What? master Burgus, have you never seen Gold, silver, and
Emeraldes? Burgus. Yea, I have seen them, but in little quantity. Doctor.
What do you think is there in seeing of little, or much, but to see much
earth, or little earth, and most of all without the profit of man, of as many
as nature has created? And if you have so great desire to see precious metals:
I will carrye you to a place where you shall see one metal much more of price,
and of greater estimation, then the gold and silver y^ you were so desirous to
see, and better, and of more profit (...) beginning, and original.

Trimegisto said, that the earth was the mother of the metals, Trimegist.
and the heaven the Father. And Pliny says these words. Pliny.
The inner part of the earth is a thing most precious, for into it, and
through it do go, and pearce all the influences of heaven, ingendring therein
things of great price, as stones and metals: and this is done, as Calcidonio
Platonico does say, by reason of the great heat that is in the inner part
of it. Calisthenes.
Calcidon^^.
Calisthenes understood that the form of metals were all one. Anaxagoras and
Hermes.
Anaxagoras and Hermes said, that the metalls had one form in the inner
part, and an other in the outward part, one secret, and an other manifest,
after the manner as the lead has within it gold, and the gold lead, and so of
all the rest of the metals. See you my masters how many and how variable
opinions there are among wise men.

A common opinion.
There is another opinion, which is that which is common, and which for the most
certain we do follow, which Auicen wrote in his books of Metheurous, Auicen.
and in the books he made of Alcumisto, which were confirmed by Geber and
Raymond Lullio, and Arnolde de Villa noua, Geber.
and all the rest that have treated of these matters, even unto our time,
Raymond.
do say, that the true matter of all metals is engendered of brimstone, Arnold.
and quicksiluer, the brimstone as the father, and the quicksiluer as the
mother: and the heat of the brimstone, does incorporate, and congele with the
quicksiluer, in such sort that of these two things are made the metals which
are in the bowelles of earth: and of the variation of these two beginninges,
they come to differ the one from the other, and of the pureness of these two
beginnings, some do come to be more excellent then other: and for this the
gold is more profitable and more fair then all other metalles, for because it
is formed of his beginning, clean, and pure, which was the cause and original
of his perfection.

And there were Philosophers which said that al metals should have bin gold, if
it had not bin for the imperfection of the sulphur, and the quicksiluer. And al
other metals besides the gold, they call imperfect mineralles, because they
had not their pureness, and concoction, that the gold had, with that
marvelous friendship, which nature gave unto it. And of this it comes,
that the Alcumistes for to make gold, do pretend to make clean and purify
these two beginninges of the which all the metalles are made, and being put
into their perfection the gold is made by of them, which is the metal most
pure and clean, of all other. Thus they d^e work with their distillations
and limbecks: and how hard it is to do, let them report and speak that have
spent their goods, and also their patrimonies therevppon, and yet in the end
have performed nothing at all.

Such as do write against them, making impossible their works and effects,
do say, that in the bowels of the earth, the metals are not engendered, nor
made of brimstone, and quicksiluer, as they think and hold it for certain,
so they cannot make of them by art, for if it were so, that of brimstone and
quicksiluer they were engendered, there would be some ^ase of them, in the mines
of gold, and silver, and of the other metals: for it is seen that there is no
sign or vain of them in any of those mines, how deep so ever they be: but
rather they are mines of themselves, as we see, that neither in them are
found metalles, nor in the mines of the metals are found^ sulphur, nor
quickesiluer. And if it were so as they say that the metalles do breed, and
are newly engendered of these two beginnings, it must be of force, that one
metal were already made, and the other should go a making, for that all
could not be made alyke: but rather they take out all metalles ready made,
and perfectioned, and in the meltinges (...) the Iron does fall down into the
lowest part, and so is made a great cake, the which being divided into pieces,
they carry them to the forge, where are certain great hammers or sledges of
Iron which the water dryueth, and they beat them, and there they are forged,
and do make these planches that you see there leaning. Truth it is, that
there are mines where some Iron is more strong then other some, and likewise
harder and stronger to labor. The Iron of Almayne is softer and gentler to
work: That of Flaunders is hard and naught: Almayne.
and therefore it is that many things are soon broken that are made of it.
Fland^rs.
In Italy you have all sorts, Biskey.
that of Biskey is the best, by reason it is good to work, and it is more
mighty and strong then all other, and for the goodness it has, it is carried
to all parts.

Doctor. Do they bring Steel from Biskey as they do from Italy? Ortun^o. They
do bring a certain kind of Iron so hard and strong, Italy.
that being wrought, it serves for Steel, cheefely with a temperature that is
given to it, that does make it very strong, although that it be wrought with
great labor. There is great difference between this, and ^he Steel which
they bring from Italy, and cheefely from Milan, for this is very pleasant to
work and soft, and is far better, and the crafts men that do work it,
for this cause are desirous of it, and do use it more then any other. Doctor.
Some will say, that the Steel is a mine a^one of it self distant from the
I^on. Ortun^o. It is not so, for all are mines of Iron, but that some is more
strong then other some, and the stronger and harder it is, for the strength and
ha^dnesse thereof we call it Steel, and there are countries which have no
other Iron but this which is hard and strong, as all the country of
Mondragon, where all the m^nes that are in it, M^n^^ago^.
are of this Iron, strong, and hard, whereby it is called Steel, all that is
taken out of them, the disposition of the place does cause it, but that which
they bring from Italy is of another sort. In that country are diverse mines of
iron, some of soft iron and easy to work, and other of hard and strong iron,
and not easy to work. And for to make the steel which they send us, they
use it in this sort: they take of the soft iron, the quantity they seem
good, and they make it in ^ ^^aine small thin planches, then they take marble
ground small, and also the rust of the iron ground small, and mingling it al
together, they put it into a furnace to mel^, prepared for this purpose, The
mann^^ how they make Steel in Italy.
with much quantity of kindled coal, they cast al together into it, and
gives it a strong fire, and after they cast to it some of that hard Iron that
is so hard, that it cannot be wrought, and with a strong fire it is al melt,
and they make it one piece, of the which they make these bars of steel, that
they bring to these parts, in so great quantity the which they call st^ele,
by reason it is hard to work, and strong, and in Latin it is called Chalibs,
by reason of certain small towns yt were so called, whereas was iron most
strong: and hard. The steel serves for many things, because it is of greater
might, Stee^e.
and stronger then the iron, and of more actiuitie, and they make strong and
fortify the tools of iron with it, to endure the longer, and may do their
work more quickly, with more strength and readiness, for that it is an iron more
pure and clean, and for this cause it is more dry, and white, and better to be
wrought: and this is to conclude that which I have understood of the original
of iron, and of steel. D. Master Ortun^o, has said very well, and not in
short speech, but wisely, and discretly. Reason would that many people should
buy of these 2. metalles. for I have understood that they serve for many
things. Ortu^no, they which do buy iron of me, are many; but they which do
work it, are many more, for I do not know any office or science in all this
city whereto iron and steel are not needful, and necessary. D. M. B. and I
would be glad yt you would tell us in what occupations, principally iron is used
and spent. Ortun^o. They are so many, that in many days they will not be
declared, much less in the little time that we have here. D. Let us be
informed as long as time will permit. Ortun^o. I will speak of some things
which I do remember. One of the things in the which iron is most spent, In
what things Iron and Steel are spent.
as also a great part of the steel, is in armor, as well defensive, as
offensive, so that there is no (...) at this day in the world where they are
not used, and exercised, and in many Countries they are made. Chiefly there is
spent much iron in making of handgunnes, the use whereof is so much in the
wars, and warlyke exercises, that the people of greatest fame and actiuitie,
are they which shoot in them: as a thing very principal, and most necessary:
but surely it was an invention of the Devil, for to carry many to hell. And
to speak of all kind of weapons which are made of iron and steel, it will
ask a longer time, then we have. The iron does profit for the tilling of the
earth, and laboring of the fields, and for the benefits of all the works
in the Country, to sow, and do other works, a thing so necessary and
profitable for all people, seeing that the works of the fields does
sustain all manner of estates, in the world. The iron serves to make
buildinges, so many sorts, and diverse, that therewith they build Cities,
Towns, Uillages, Forts, Churches, and public places, the which without iron
and steel could not be made, as also in the sciences of any manner of
handycrafts man, in the which there are so many necessary instruments, for to
use, and exercise, that thereby you may see how necessary the iron and steel
is, seeing that without the^ they cannot be made, nor any thing can be
wrought. And to express every office, and science by it self, that by means
of these two metalles are made and exercised, it will never be made an end
of. One thing I will speak with truth, that there is nothing in the world,
be it by it self alone or with the help of another thing, that has not need
of iron and steel.

By means of these two metals, kings and princes do get kingdoms, and
cities, and by means of them they do make subject their enemies, and do
defend their goods and persons. And as Liuio says, that with Iron the
country is defended, and not with gold, and with it kings are made strong and
mighty, and are esteemed and had in great reverence. By Iron justice is kept
and maintained, and by the means of it, evil doers are chastened, and the
good conserned. This metal has so much authority in the world, that it
conserueth peace and quietness in common wealths, in cities, in feeldes, and
in the deserts, in such sort that by i^ in all places they have all their
assurance, and defense: and so much may be said of that which it can do, and
the great aucthority that it has, and the mean that it is for all things, that
my tongue is not able to speak them, nor my memory to express them. One thing
I will say, that the ancient Romans had by it such estimation, that only
the noble people only might wear a ring, and the same to be of Iron.

Of two needles which are made of steel I will speak, as of the greatest
things that may be thought: The sowing needle.
the one is the Needle with the which they do sow: how necessary it is in the
world, in cities, in towns, in common wealths, in particular houses, in the
feeld, in the Sea, and in all places, yea and to any one particular man alone?
And let so many Arts speak thereof, that by means of the Needle are used,
and don, and without it, they should not be used nor don: and being so many, it
will be a thing incomprehensible to speak of them. Let every man consider
thereof, seeing that from the king unto the sheepeheard, and from the bishop to
the sexton, they cannot pass without the use of it. And if we look what
service it does to women in their uses and ^xercises, in their sowings and
works wrought upon linen cloth and silk, things so politic, and delicate,
that with the Needle they do work: Imitating also, in things which they work,
like unto the work of nature, making b^asts, birds, plants, leaves, and
flowers, which do seem with the branches, that they give of silk in colors,
as if it were the self same that is growing in the feelde. I saw the picture
of the kings majesty made with a needle so naturally, as if an excellent
painter had painted it. Of all this the needle is the instrument: a thing so
small that it is hid among the fingers. The Indians were in great admiration
thereof at the beginning, when they were first discovered, when they saw
Spaniards sow with a Needle, for it seemed to them a thing of wonder, and they
gave for a Needle much gold, and they were ask^d wherefore they would have
them, seeing that they were naked: they answered, for the works that the
Spanyardes did with them, they would have them in their power for a thing of
admiration. And with them they took out the thorns that can into their feet,
better then with any other thing.

The other Needle is that which serves for Navigations to sail withal in the
Sea, The needle for navigations.
and is one of the greatest things that has been discovered in the whole
world, within this little time: and by means thereof, there have been found
new worlds, great kingdoms, and provinces, never seen nor known unto us.
And if the Needle had not been found, they had never bin discovered. When they
wanted it, the navigations was very little, and short: they failed only casting
about by the banks of the Sea coasts: and now by the means of it, they do
ingulfe them selves, and do sail in such sort, that the ship called the
Uictorie sailed all the round world over, as the Sun goes every day, that
it is said, she sailed at one time twelve thousand leagues. And that which
is more to be marvelled at, that the ship being in a gulffe of 800. or 1000.
leagues, by means of the Needle they came to the port which they pretended to
go unto, without any other knowledge, more the^ by the means of the Needle, or
as we call it the compass, the which is of steel: and they do r^bbe over one
part of it with the lode stone, and forthwith by particular virtue which God
has given unto it by that part which they did rub over with the lode stone,
it looks toward the Pole, which is near to the North, and perpetually it
does this being in the Sea, or on the land, either by the day, or by the
night, with the Sun or without it, always it looks toward the North.
With the which Needle, and with the card of Navigations, wherein is placed a
distinc^ion for the knowledge of the wyndes, and the description of the ports,
they sail so many milleons of leagues, as at this day we see: and it is done
so easily, that it is very wonderful. Who f^rst found thi^ needle.
The inue^tion of this marvelous Needle was found by a Mariner, who was borne
in the city of Melsi^n Italy. Also the Iron and Steel do serve to make
clockes, which is a thing of great art, and very necessary to live with rule and
order: for by them shall be known the works that are to be made, and the time
that shall be spent in them, they serve for all states of people, whereby they
may live wisely and discr^tely: and where is no clock they live like beasts.
they are made at t^is day with so much art and curiousness, that they make
great admiration, they purify and make clean these two metals, that they make
them as bright as any other: they gyld them, they silver them, and there is
given to them other coulor^, and are made very fair, as we see that there are
made cheynes ^f Steel very delicate and fine: and there are given to them
dyu^^se s^apes and colors, and are more es^^emed then those which are made of
Gold or Sil^er. Th^se metals a^e dis^illed ^y t^^ w^^e of Alcumiste: and th^re
is ma^e of them Quinta ^ss^ncia, Dis^^^^ed.
as of Gold and Sil^er. ^he Alcumis^es too say, that the metal mo^^e ap^e
f^r their c^uses and ef^^ctes, is the Iron.

The Iron does suffer a ^ri^uous disease, which do^th consume and make an end
of it, which is called rust, That rust come not.
and because it may not come to it, there are many remedies, that the things
which are made of Iron, and of Steel may be continually clean: principally,
that they be put into no moist place, and that they be occupied and used,
gilding them or siluering them: in so doing they be kept clean from the
aforesaid rust, or annoynting them with common oil, or with the marrowe of a
Dear, or with the fatt of birds, or with white lead and vinegar, when they
are taken with the rust, for to take it away, they must be filed of, Remedies
when the rust has taken it.
and put into vinegar, and after into the fire, for with this it is taken away,
unless when they be so much eaten, that they are not to be remedyed with these
benefits. I do not speak of the finesse and delicateness that there is in
sodering of it, and closing of it together, and of the using of it in the
forge, because I am weary I let it pass, with many other things that I should
say thereof, and do conclude, that these two things, Iron and Steel are the
most necessary things for the service of man, of as many as are in the world.
Doctor. I am very glad with that which master Ortun^o has spoken: for all is
to confirm the excellencies, and greatness which I have understood of these
two mettales, whereby I do take them to be more necessary then the gold and
silver, if we do consider well of it. The gold does not serve us principally
for any other thing, but for money, which is to buy any thing therewith, and
for the trade of things, the which any other metal might serve, or any other
thing. For in the old time as there was no money, they did barter and change
one thing for another: and by reason in this bartering and changing there could
not be used any equality and justification between parties; the wise and
discreet men of common wealths did agree together to make a thing, which
might serve the lack that might be of the one party to the other, that with
it the things might be made equal, and there might be a justification of both
parts. And for this reason and effect, there was invented and made the first
money, which was neither of gold nor silver, but of iron, and of metal, as we
see in the money of old time. And after that, the Romans made it of gold and
silver, for the fayrnesse thereof, but it is sufficient that the first which
was made, was of iron and of metal, seeing that the Indians have it to this
day, of fruits of trees, and especially of the Cacao, which is the fruit of a
tree, like to an Almond, this has served, and does serve them for money, to
buy, Money mad^ of fruit of Tree^.
and to sell, and to use all playnesse, in their buzinesse. And in all Ginea
the black people called Negros do use for money, for the same effect,
certain little snayles, which they find in the Sea, as also other nations do
use of things like to this. B. I have held my peace, harkening to your
woorshippes, with great attention, and surely you have treated in things of
great importance, and of great learning: and seeing you go treating so
effectually the matter of iron, and so delicately, and with so great learning,
I would that Master Doctor might satisfy us one thing, that I have seen
decyded of learned men, upon the complexion of iron: for some do say it is
cold, and upon this I have had so many alterations, that they have amassed me,
and seeing that Master Doctor can certify us concerning this matter, we
shall take great pleasure, if that he will declare it unto us. D. I thought
to have made an end with this saying, and that I had accomplished my promise
with Master Burgus: but now he will drive me to a question, the most hard
and difficulte that is in all Physic, and surely it were need of more time,
then that we have to determine it.

B. Your woorship may not escape by that means, for to morrow you may make an
end of that, which you cannot do this day. Ortun^o. I shall receive great
pleasure in it, although it be not my profession: for being a thing touching
iron, I shall rejoice therein. D. For to content you, I will (...) own judgment.

And that we may more apparently see the same, I will speak of such that
hold the one opinion, and also of those that are of the other, That the Iron
is cold.

Galen.


and the parties being heard, we will judge that which shall seem best unto
us. Let us speak first of those that affirm Iron to be cold, and let Galen be
the first, who does say that all those metals of their nature are dry, and
so they have great virtue, and strength, to dry up, and that that has most
virtue and strength to do this a^ong all of them, is the Iron, as also with
this virtue to dry up: it has also virtue to make cold. He does compare it
to the stone, saying that the substance of the stone is constant, and steadfast,
for the cold, and dries that it has: Even so is the Iron, in such sort that
it has the nature of the stone, the which is cold and dry. And this which
he says in the nynth of his Methodo, Idem.
he does confirm in that of the natural faculties. The hard bodies do
show to have more earthly parts, and as the Iron is most hard, it has more
then all other things, whereby it comes to be cold and dry.

Aueroys.
Aueroyes does confirm the same in the fifth of his C^liget and says:
things which are made hard of heat, with the dominion of earthly parts ought
to be cold, and dry, Alberto Maegno.
as the Iron is. Alberto Magno in the book of the Metheuros says: the Iron
when it is kindled makes it self very read, for because in his principal
quality it has earthly parts, the same he does confirm in the book^ which
he made of metals.

Conciliador in the difference 155. says: in the Iron is not found that
virtue which is expressly active, Conciliador.

Idem.


but in the end it is cold and dry. The same words are said in the
difference 128. Gentill in the same question which he made de Actuatione
medicinarum, says, that the Iron is cold and dry.

Herculano in the chapter de Vomitu confirms the same. Iacobus de partibus
upon the second of the first, Herculano. Iacobus de partibus. Auic^n.
says that the iron is cold and dry. We do see that the waters which have
quenched hot iron or steel, are cold and dry. Auicen in the second of the
first, says that they do restrain the color, and take away dries, and the
heat, chiefly in time of very hot weather. And following after this, Menardo
says, that the water which has cooled hot steel is cold, Menardo,
seeing that it takes away the dries, and does mittigate the heat, in time of
hot weather: and the dries being taken away, causes that the putrefaction of
the fevers do cease, and where they are with stools, it makes an excellent
work. Albucasis in the book which he made of cering instruments says,
Albucasis,
that those instruments wherewith the head should be cered, ought to be of
gold, because it is most temperate: and that in no manner of wise they be of
iron, because the iron is cold of nature.

Brasauola in his book of the French disease says, that the iron is cold
and dry, Brasauola.
which as he says does show well in his color and manner of substance, and
in the darkness and weight it has, for these things do always appear, and
come into earthly substance, as that which is light in to hot, and ayery
substance, which is known to be cold and dry for his effects, seeing that
it takes away, and does repress the cholerike stools, it withholdeth the
flux, and hot runnings. That which this does, always is cold and dry.

Sanauarola puts the degrees of the coldness, which the iron has, and
says; Sanauarola.
that it is cold in the second degree, and dry in the third. B. Master
Doctor I pray you to pass forward: for unto me, that which is spoken, is
sufficient, for I have no doubt thereof, but that the iron is cold and dry, and
always I have understood it to be so, and now with the confirmation of such
authors, I hold it for more certain and firm. D. Master Burgus has very
quickly

(...) and determination of this controversy.

A concord of the di^ference.
We have said with the opinion of Auicen, and the rest of the authors, that al
metals are made of sulfur and quicksiluer, the sulfur as the father, and the
quicksiluer as the mother, the one as the maker, and the other as the matter,
and being so, the matter whereof the iron is made, is of these two things, and
of these two beginninges, of the most hot sulfur, and of the most cold
quicksiluer. The which nature has placed in the inner parts of the earth, and
made them metals, and where there was these two beginninges, most pure, it was
made gold, and likewise of that which was gross and vnpure, according to the
degree and quality of every one, there was engendered and made the metal,
conformably to the pureness, or grosnesse that it had: and where these metals
are more vnpure, more gross, and more dark, the iron did engender. The which
being of beginnings not pure nor clean, but gross and filthy, became to be a
metal, more hard then al other metals, so that by means of it strength,
there might be some who might make it easy and subject to be wrought, as
also it might be a necessary instrument that thereof men might profit
themselves. And whereas the iron is made and engendered of these two
beginnings, which are, sulfur and quicksiluer, the one hot, and the other
cold: so it has the complexion, and temperature, and does participate of
both qualities: therefore it is so dry, and for this cause hard and strong. By
means of the sulfur it heateth, it consumes, it dries, it opens, it
comfort, it provoke appetite, and makes the meruellous works that we
will speak of hereafter, and al is done by means of the heat which it has.
And by means of the quicksiluer, being gross and vnpure, and being formed
with earthly virtue, wherewith it is mingled, it cools, it retayneth, it
thickeneth, it congeleth, it withdraws, and detayneth any manner of flux, or
runninges by binding, it takes away stools, it cools and tempereth the
heat, and it does many other effects, which are all done by means of the
coldness that it has, in such sort yt as by the aforesaid is seen, the
effects are contrary which the iron does: the cause whereof is by reason it is
compounded of things that have contrary qualities, which are rooted in it, and
do work conformably to the subject where they do work. For where it is need
to open, it opens; and where it is need to shut, it shuts. Truth it is,
that besides these qualities, the iron has an other most principal, which is,
that it is most dry, more then all other metals, by means whereof it does
many of these effects and works, which we have spoken of, and also it has
virtue to heat, to cool, and to dry up. And of this it comes, that some do
say it is hot, because they see that it makes works of heat, and others say
that it is cold, because they see that it does works to make cold, the
reason whereof is, that it is compounded of two contrary beginninges, the one
hot, and the other cold, and thereby it seems that they may very well defend
themselves, who said that iron is cold, and works cold effects: And
likewise they that said, it was hot, and does hot effects. Whereby it does
appear that which the one and the other have spoken and treated thereof, to be
true. B. Master Doctor has very well ended the controversy, and contrariety
that is in this matter discretly and wisely, whereby we are satisfied: but
there remains a doubt, if the quicksiluer be cold, as he says that some
do say that it is, and to prove it, they say that it shows by his strength,
color, and taste, and the effects which it does, to make cold, seeing that
such as do use of it, it makes impotent, they suffer weakness, and
trembling of sinews, and are utterly void of the use of their members, and
many dye all together of a disease called Apoplexy, and all this does come of
cold causes. They which say that the quicksiluer is hot, do prove it with his
effects, for anointing the iointes, and other parts, of the body therewith, it
makes great works, and effects of heat, it inflameth their mouth, and throat,
their gummes, and rooffe of their mouth, with great heat, and burning: it
provoke sweat most vehement: we see that thereof is made that most strong
thing like to fire, that is called Sublimatum, which is most strong fire,
Sublimatum.
and burns wheresoever it be put, and all that it takes, it consumes, and
fiereth. Of it is made that corsiue poison, called powder Precipitatos, in such
sort that the cause is doubtful, seeing it has and does the works so
contrary to make cold, and to make hot. D. The same doubt we have of it, as of
the iron, and what is that which Master Burgus will now have? B. Now that you
brought us out of the first doubt, we pray you that you will bring us out of
the second. D. It seems unto me that Master Burgus does take the matter so
earnestly that I must needs do it, because I mean to content him, in all
things, and it shall be done very quickly: the evening comes upon us. The
quicksiluer is a metal co^pounded of diverse parts, the watery parts that it
has, are mingled with earthy things, which is tha^ that gives it substance
and strength. It has also mingled with it fulfery parts, which seems to be
very bright: for in chafing the quicksiluer between the hands, there remains
in them the perfect smell of brimstone, and so the quicksiluer i^ c^mpounded of
diverse things. The watery and earthy parts gives it virtue to make cold: by
means whereof is done the virtue which we have spoken of, and by means of the
sulfure which has ayery parts, it heateth, penetrateth, opens and makes
thin, and by them it provoke sweat, it causes to expel by the mouth, and by
stools the humor that does abound, by hearing and doing other effects of
heat. And therefore it is not to be marvelled that the quicksiluer does
contrary effects, seeing it has diverse operations, which is the selfsame that
we have spoken of the iron, and so the doubt remains discovered which was
propounded by M. Burgus. D. I remain sufficiently satisfied of that which is
said, but not so satisfied that there does not remain for me to ask of M.
Doctor another thing, which is of more weight then all that is said: which is,
to know the virtues that the iron and steel have in the use of medicine: for
their works, and effects, as I have hard it reported, are many.

D. It will be a trouble for me to reckon, and tell of so many ancient authors as
also of late written authors, which do treat of the virtues of iron, and of
the steel, by reason they are many, and do treat of great things. And seeing
that it shall be declared, let us loose no time, whereby we may the rather make an
end. By that which is said, you have understood how the iron, and steel,
are one kind of metal, saving that the steel is more clean iron, and more
fine, and for this cause it is hard and strong. They of old time knew not the
steel, but only treated of the iron, and to it they attributed the medicinal
virtues that we will speak of, and under our talk of iron, we will comprise
the steel, seeing that it differs not from it, in more then in being purer,
and cleaner from superfluities: and for this cause the steel does make cold,
and dries more then the iron. For where it is needful to heat and to open,
the iron has more force, because it is not clean of the sulpherie parts, for
there is lost much thereof, when the steel is made in the form as it is above
said.

It is needful before we proceed forward, Of the preparation of Iron and
Steel.
whereby we may the better treat of the virtue of iron, that we understand
how it ought to be prepared. For if it be not prepared, neither can it be
administered, nor yet will it work it effe^t^, because ^t is a hard metal and
strong. And seeing that we have M. Burgus here, who in his art is one of the
excellentest men of al Spain, he may declare unto us how it may be used, and
prepared, because we may go forward in this matter. B. I have received great
pleasure with ^h^t as I have heard treated of iron, and of steel, and thought
that we should have made an end, and not treated any longer of them: but
seeing that it seems good to Mai^^er Doctor, that I should speak of the
preparing of these met^lles, I will do it, because I would say some thing as
well for my part. But if Master Doctor would take pains, he might speak
thereof, as well as most men that are in the world, seeing he knows it, and
that there is nothing in medicine hidden unto him, but seeing that we have of
him a good Censor, if any thing do lack, he may speak and supply it. The
metalles if they be not corrected and prepared every one, To correct Metalles.
as it is convenient for them, cannot serve in medicine, nor work the effects
and virtues, which they have in them, because they are gross of substance, and
strong. The Alcumistes have known and do know much in correcting and
preparing of them, seeing that we see they use the gold and the silver, in
broths, that they may be dronke, and do reduce them into pouders, as also they
do the like with the lead and copper, and of other minerals and me^als, which
they do correct and prepare, for to make them into pouders, that they may
serve in medicyne.

They do correct and prepare particularly the iron for this effect, but with
great difference, from all other metalles, as Bulcasis shows very learnedly,
being a Phisiti^n, Bulcasis.
and a Moore, who in particular does show the manner which ought to be had,
for to prepare the iron, and he says in this manner, the fyling of the iron
which is most pure, must be taken without other mixture, for if it be mingled
with Copper, or Lead, or Glass, and if it be given so mingled to any person
for to drink, it will kill them, you may take the quantity you list, of that
which is fyled, being most pure, and let it be w^shed, and after it is well
washed, let it be put into a clean vessel. And let there be put to it
vinegar, and put it under some thing, so that it be well covered, let it so
remain thirty days, or at the (...) se^en, and after that time take it
forth, and you shall find that which is filed of the coullour of Uerdegrece,
the which must be dry^d: and after it is dry, it must be ground, and being
well ground you may use thereof.

Some there be that do wash it with fresh water, or with vinegar, and do
strain it through a linen cloth, and then put it under a vessel until it
wax rotten, and after they ^ash it, and keep it. That which this Moore does
say, se^meth to be of Aueroyes, in the fifth of his gathering, Aueroies.
where he sets down the preparation thereof in this form: After the Iron
is ground very small, let it be put many times in to vinegar, or into Gotes
milk, when it is cruddye. This he would should be the preparation. And
Christopher de honestis, Christ^pher de honesti^.
following this in the commentaries which he made upon Mesue says, Let the
fyling of the Steel be put into vinegre many days, for in any other wise the
use of it will not profit, although that some do put it into milk of Gotes,
and some into oil of sweet Almondes, and in this sort they take it. Clemen^
Clementin^.
The same preparation Clement Clementino does give. It seems a hard thing to
believe, that the Iron or Steel is penetrate, and does wax soft with any of
these things: only the strong vinegre is that which does penetrate and soften
it, whereby it may be well ground, for to use of it. And for the more
certeintie I will show how I do prepare it. The prep^ration.
I do take of Steel the purest and whitest I can get, as also Iron, and do
cause it to be fyled as small as may be, and when it is so fyled I cause it to
be washed in water many times, until the water do come forth clear, and then
I put it into a clean glassed vessel, and do cast to it as much strong white
vinegre as may be sufficient to wet thorough the said fyling, and the v^ssell
being stopped and put i^to a close place, I do let it stand xx. days,
stirryng it well twice every week, and putting to it some vinegar if it b^e
needful: and after the twenty days, when it is well s^kened, I take it out
of that, and put it into some other brode^ vessel, or upon a table, that it
may dry in the shadow, and after it is dry, I do grynde it in a mortar of
metal, sifting it twice through a thick sieve of silk, and so being made
into Powder, I put it into a fine earthen painted pot, and then with a Pestle I
beat it small again, in such sort that being taken between the fingers, it
seems not too have any manner of substance, neither is it felt between the^.
And if it be not done in this sort they are never well groun^e, for it is a
thing that they take most care of, so that thereby it may work the effect the
better. And being made into powder in this sort, it ought to be kept in a
glassed vessel. Some do wet it with Gum Dragagaunt and make it in rowles:
and it likes me very well, because they be the better conserved, and the
gum Dragagant takes away some part of their drithe. And seeing that I have
made an end of the preparing of the steel and Iron, that it does the effect
when it is need^ful as though it were the steel it self, let Master Doctor
show unto us the works and virtues that it does. D. I do rejoice very much
to hear the good order of the preparation, that Master Burgus has given and
set down to be used with these metals. And seeing that I am bound to declare
the virtues and medicinal works which they have, I will speak of it the best
that I know, as well that which I have known and read, as that which
experience has taught me, and the use of so many years, The vertue^ of Iron
and Steel.
These two metalles do serve in medicine two manner of ways; the one is, that
of them may be made instruments to work with, in causes of Surgery, without
the which the Surgions cannot work their works and effects, nor the Barbours
without them cannot do their occupations. To declare what instruments those
are which serve for the one and for the other occupations, it will be to
tedious. The iron and steel do serve in medicine with great effects and
marvelous works, by curing and healing diverse diseases, and so Pliny in his
book of the natural history, treting of this matter of iron, after he wrote
great things of it, as well in that which does profit in the service of man,
as other curious things, he treats of ^he vert^es and works which it
does in medicine, showing first the qualities of it, saying: The iron has
virtue too dry up, too retain, and too hold fast, it is good for such as
do lack their hear, that it may grow, being prepared and mingled with some
licour prepared and made for the same purpose, it takes away the roughness of
the cheeks, mingled with Uineger: and being made in an ointment with oil of
of Myrtiles, and wax, it takes away the blisters of all the vodie: the powder
of it mingled with Uineger, does heal the disease called Saint Anthonies
fire, as also all manner of skabbes, it heals the little sores between the
nail and the finger, the pouders thereof being applied thereunto with a linen
cloth. It heals also the flux of women of what sort soever it be, being
put thereunto with wool or with ^otton wool, and also if they be applied
thereunto after the mann^r of a Tent in the lower parts, the powder being
mingled with mirrhe and put to the sores or wounds new hurt, does soder them
and heals them: and being mingled with Uineger and put upon the pil^s, it
dissolueth them. It is a great remedy for such as are gowtie, being applied
with things made for the purpose upon the grief: It sten^heth the blood of
such as are wounded, which is for the most part made of Iron. It is given to be
drunk to such as are diseased of the lungs, for it consumes the disease, and
heals him that is sick, it stays any manner of flux and the Piles, and
does remedy the soars of them. It heals sort cheeks, casting the pouders
upon them it is a great remedy and worthy of estimation. He that does cause it
to be made and does put it upon a Plaster called Higre, the which does
profit to take away and make clean the soars, and to take away the Fistula
and too eat away the Branches and too cause that the sores be filled with
flesh: all this is of Pliny in the Chapter of iron. Galen in the Book of
Triacle to Piso, Gale^,
declares much the necessity of iron, for the life of mankind and for the
service of man, and does account it for a most excellent remedy, for to dry up
the moystures and tears of the eyes. In that of continual dissolution, he
says, that pieces of burning Iro^ cast into milk, by taking away yt
waterishnes which the milk has, is good for over much stoles, and especially
for the bloody flix. An^ in the tenth of the simple medicines, he commands
that milk be given, where in pieces of Iron have been quenched, and says
that such kind of milk does good unto them which have the bloodye flix. And
in the like case it is better to use of Iron, then of stones or pebble stones,
by reason the Iron does leave more drithe in the milk. A^xander Traliano.
Alexander Traliano, adding to this, treatet^ how milk should be used in
stools. He commands to sees milk with a quarter part of water, until the
one half be consumed, and in this sort it may be given to them which have the
ague with stools, and it is better in the place of small pebble stones,
wherewith they do command it to be sodde^, that there be cast into it small
pieces of burning Iron. Paulo.
Paulo, well near says that which Galen has said, and that the powder of
Iron mingled with vinegre profits much to such as have matter coming forth
of their ears, although that it has been of a long continuance. And also it
is a great remedy for such as have taken ^enom, that is called Aconito. And
forthwith he treats of the virtues of the water that have cooled hot Iron,
and says, that it does good to such as do suffer the pain of the belly, and
such as have any cholerike disease, and such as have hot stomakes, and such as
have the stopping of the lunges.

Dioscorides.
Dioscorides in the chapter where he treats of the rust of iron, says,
that the water or the wine, that has quenched a piece of burning iron, is good
for them that have the flux of the stomach, and the bloody flux, it desolueth
the hardenesse of the lungs, and serves in cholerike stools, and in the
looseness of the stomach. Actio.
Accio, treating of certain rowles which are very excellent for the opilations
of the inner parts, says, that it is a most convenient remedy for the
Lunges, and inner parts of the Body, that the water that has quenched whotte
iron be taken for a long time: but such as have a whotte disease, must use of
the water, and such as are cold if they be weak, of wine that has quenched
iron. Oribacio says, that the water which has quenched whot style, is an
excellent remedy for such as are sick of the lunges. Scribonio, Oribacio.
an ancient Physician says, that the water which has quenched whot steel,
is a great remedy for such as are swollen, Scribonio,
and for such as have sores and griefs of the bladder, chiefly if they use it
continually. Rasis in his Continent treating of iron says, the same as Galen
does. And Paul adding this, Rasis.
the iron does take away the flux being ouermuche of the menstruous, and
conceauing with child, it heals the little soars that are between the
finger and the nail, it takes away the Pearl in the eye and the hardness of
the eye lid, it heals the piles outwardly, it remedieth rotten gummes, it
takes away the Gout from the feet, and from the hands, it makes hear
grow where it lacks, although there have none grown a long time. The water
that has quenched iron, is good for the flux of the belly, although that it
has been of a long continuance, and for stools of blood which does avoid
from the body, and the meat which is eaten and not consumed, and for stools
of blood: it also dissolueth the hardness of the lunges, it remedieth the
runninges, and weakness of the stomach. And Macerico an ancient Physician
says, if the powder of iron be taken with sodden Wine called Cute, it
comfort the weakness of the stomach: he takes for his Author Mese a
Physician. And Rasis concludes the same, saying, I say and certify by great
experience, that the iron, does profit in the disease of the Piles, and for
the flux of Urine, and for ouermuche flux of the menstrues: this says Rasis.

Scrapio recites all that Rasis says, word for word: and because I would
not say it twice together, Scrapio.
I let it alone. Auicen follows Rasis in all that he has said, adding this
tha^ follows to it: Auicen.
The water wherein iron is quenched, makes strong the inner members by his own
property and manifest quality: it comfort the stomach, for the water which
does quench whot iron, strengthens the virtue, and consumes the
superfluities of the stomach, and the superfluous moisture thereof, for those
are the things that take away appetite by the looseness of the mouth of the
stomach, and they are those which extinguish and kill the natural heat: and the
iron by reason of the coldness and drithe, helps the knitting which is made
in the mouth of the stomach, where the appetite is engendered, it comfort the
Liver and the rest of the interior members, it strengthens natural heat,
the sinews and powers of the body, and in such sort it does give them
strength, and they take such virtue thereby, that they cast from them the
opilations: by reason of which causes the Lunges are consumed. It comfort
the virtue of generation, and this it does by consuming the moisture which is
that which lets and troubles natural heat which is necessary therefore,
and if it be not done by his quality yet it is done by his accidents. Auicen.
All this is spoken by Auicen, in the second of his first, as also he says in
the second Canon where he prayseth the iron greatly for Ring worms, and for
swellings, and for the Gout, and mingled with Uineger and put into the ears
that of long time have cast out matter, it heals them, and for the sharpnes
of the eye liddes, and to take away a web or the whiteness of the eyes: and
he says moreover that the Wine which does quench ^he Iron does profit
for the Apostumations in the Lunges, and for the looseness of the stomach, and
for the weakness thereof, it takes away the superfluous Flute of the Mother;
it dries the piles it takes away old stools and the blooddie Flixe, it
does good to such as their fundament comes forth, and to such as their water
does avoid from them, not feeling it, it takes away the overmuch Flux of the
menstrues of women, and comfort lustiness in man or woman: all this is
taken out of Auicen. Aliabas in the fifth of his Theorica says, Aliabas.
the water that cools the iron, does detayne the belly; it hardens and
comfort the Members, if you bathe your self with it, it does good too the
Pains and Apostumations of the Lunges. Albucasis says, that the use of iron
prepared, Albucari^.
takes away the naughty color of the yellow face, that is of the color of
Saffron, and the use thereof does make fat, and it should be used as the
sick man does heal, who being well and whole, does wax fat.

Well near all that which I have said, Alzananio and Isack, do say: which I
do leave to relate, Alzarania* Isaac^*
because it is showed already. B. Have there been any late writers that have
said any thing touching this matter? I think there be none that considers
how that the Ancient Writers have written much therevppon. D. Yes, many and
very learned. B. it would do well that you would so much pleasure us, as to
show who they are, and what they say, seeing you have begun, and that they
remain not unknown. D. I will show you, for some of them with care, and
particularly, have written of iron, and the use thereof, and of the great
virtues which it has, and the like they say of the steel. A Physician which
was a Cardinal called Vitalis de Furno, treating of iron in a particular
Chapter, says: the filinges of iron have virtue to dry up and to make thin,
What the late Writers say.

Vitalis de Furno.


and therefore it opens and heals opilations of the lungs: it heals the
bloody Flux, and any manner of Flux of the Belly taken in meat or drink.
The Iron that is quenched many times in Wine, is good for the stoppinges of
the Lunges, and Inner parts, and the milk is good wherein the Steel has
been quenched.

The iron obeys nothing but the Diamont, for it cannot do more then iron:
for it does consume it altogether. There is no metal, which does receive
so much hurt with the rust as the Iron does, and much more if it be cankered
with the blood of mankind, and also after you have made it clean again if
you anoint it with the marrow of the dear called the heart, or with Oil
olive, or with Uineger mingled with Alom. This the Cardinal says.

Monten^ana in his Counsel a hundredth sixty one does put for a great secret
to kill or quench fifty times a piece of steel in strong Uineger and in that
Uineger being made whot, Monten^^na.
to wet a course Linen cloth, and put it upon the lungs and inner parts that
are stopped, many days together, Michael Sauanarola in the book he made of
Bathes, Sa^anarola.
does say, the iron makes cold and dries up, whereby it is bynding, and
therefore it does deteyne, and the water that kills or quenches the iron,
has the said virtues, and all the reft that the iron has, for the water
receives into it his quatities, and virtues as Galen says, that the water
receives the qualities and virtues of the things that we put into them, Galen.
or sodde in them, and they do the same works that the said things
themselves will do; the water which kills or quenches the iron or steel
does deteyne, it causes that the flux or runninges do cease, and being put
to the ruptures, it does sodder them together, and shuts them, it consumes
the old matter of the eyes. The powder made of iron does loose the swollen
eye liddes, it takes away the Rhyme from the eye, and does make fast the
gummes that are loss. When there is a tent made and wet in this powder
prepared and put into the mouth of the Mother, it witholdeth any manner of
flux of it: and the look it does by putting it into the flux of blo^d: that
comes from the Piles.

This Powder is good against the Uenome called Ac^z^to. The Wine that quenches
iron or the steel, does profit for the hardness of the lungs, and the weak
stomach and laxatiue, and any manner of flux, chiefly if it be cholerike, it
does profit much. Such as have the dropsy, and the flux of the vryne, and
such as have the menstrues, overmuch, and such as their water goes from them
without perceiving thereof, and such as their fundament goes out: hetherunto
Sauanarola has said. Nicholas Florentine, prayseth infinitely steel, Nicolas
Florentine.

Bartholmew an English man.


for opilations of the inner parts of the body, and likewise the water of the
steel. Bartholomew Anglicus, greatly prayseth the use of iron, and of steel,
and says, that they are a more excellent medicine, then gold or silver, for
the service of a man: for that by them these two metalles, that are so greatly
esteemed of all men, are kept in safety, because they do defend and sucker
them from such as continually do persecute them. They defend justice, they
conserve the commonwealthes, by them the evil doers are chastened, and the
good are conserved and defended: in all offices of handycraftes they are
necessary: they labor and work and fields with them, whereby we are
maintained, it has medicinal virtues more then any other metal, for the filing
which does proceed of it, has virtue to dry up, and to make thin. It undoes
opilations of the lungs, it takes away any manner of flux of stools, although
they be of blood: and it profits for many other things. All this the English
learned man says. William of Saliceto, in the cure of opilations of the
lunges, Saliceto.
does command to take the powder of steel, for to loose opilations, and he
takes it for a great secret. Platerio in the chapter of iron says, the iron
and the scales of it, Platerio.
and his rust and the steel every one of them has the like virtue and
property, taking two parts of a dr^m of the fyling of iron prepared, as it
is convenient, with hot wine, it heals the opilations of the liver and the
lungs, although they be very old. Matthew Siluatico says the same, Matthew
Siluatico
that the rust and the scales of the iron have the same virtue that the steel
has, either of them (...) were the lade stone it self, and all this it does
by reason of the great likeness and friendship which it has with the iron,
together in one with the hidden property which it has therefore. For this
virtue, that it has to draw unto it iron, either it is for the lykenes it
has, or for the property, and in this stone ought to be the one and the
other. The diamond is his enemy, insomuch as it is said that in his presence,
Galen.
it draws not the iron unto it. Galen speaks of greater power that the
load stone has then the iron, seeing that it draws the iron to him, being of
his own kind, and therefore the ancient writers do give it the same virtue,
that they give to the iron, in curing the opilations of the lungs, and other
inner parts. Galen.
Galen says, that the use thereof heals the dropsy, and does euacuate the
gross humors. Serapio says, Serapio.
that being taken with water and honey, it loses the belly, chiefly gross
humors: many do praise it for the dropsy, with water and honey. I understand
that the lo^^ stone ought to be prepared in such sort that i^ may bet used, as
we have said of the preparing of the iron. B. Does your woorship minister any
time the rust of iron prepared'^ for I have prepared it by commandment of a
Physician, The rust of the Iron and his virtues.
being a stranger, and give the powder thereof unto such as had opilations: and
he said to me, that they did better work then the pouders of steel D. We
have spoken of Plateario and of Matthew Siluatico, Plateario.
how they say that the rust of the iron, Matthew Siluatico.
and the iron it self, and the filing of it, and the steel, have al one manner
of virtue, and therefore the rust of the iron prepared will profit as much for
the said purpose, as the rust does, and I have understood for to consume and
dry up the moisture of the stomach and the slimy humors thereof, it will make
great effects, for the rust of the iron and of the steel is the most hot
parts, and the dryest parts of them. Galen.
And so Galen does command it to be prepared with vinegar, and that there be
made of it, powder most small, the which dries extreemely, as he says in
the nienth of simples, and in the fifth of his Methodo. Mesue, Mesue.
in that of the ulcers of the ears, he does put a confection for them
wherein in is contained the preparing of the rust, and before that he puts
the same rust prepared in vinegar, and made in small pouders, he makes of
them a liniment for the ears that are troubled with ulcers. Rasis,
Rasis in the nienth chapter of those things that do comfort the stomach,
after he has showed of many compound medicines, says, if they do not
profit, let there be given the skales of iron, with wine, and he says the
same in the books of the Deuisions, in the chapter of the diseases of the
moist stomach: he commands to give a composition called Trifera Minor, and
after that, the rust of iron. And in the same chapter before for the weakness
of the stomach, and the debilitation of the natural heat, he commands that
there be given Trifera, and after that the rust of iron: and at the end of the
said chapter, for such as do eat earth, clay, and coals, he commands them
to be purged with Acibar, and after that they eat Trifera made with the rust
of Iron.

B. You have spoken very well, Master Doctor, but I pray you show us how we
should minister the pouders of these things. D. seeing that there with we
shall make an end, I will show it in short time, considering that the time does
no longer give place.

The cause and original of the disease being known, the sick person ought to
be let blood, and purged, How these pouders are ministered.
if it seem good to the Physician to be so, and if the sick person has
strength therefore: for there are some so lean, that it is not convenient to
use of any euacuations in them. This being done, they shall take of the pouders
that shall seem most convenient for them, of the three things which are spoken
of the iron, the steel, or the rust of them, the quantity that shall seem good
to the Physician, according to the age virtue, and strength. I do give to them
of a mean age a dram, The quantit^
and from thence I rise or fall, as the age and strength or the continuance of
the disease requires, and that it may not be less then two graynes of
weight, nor more then a dram and half, I give it many kind of ways, either
mingled with suggar of Roses, or with conserua of violettes, or with a syrope
of Coriander, or of the root, or made in pills, with a syrope made for the
purpose, casting them into the mouth, or any manner of these ways, that they
be taken: there must be drunk after them a little sack, that it be not
cold, nor very strong. And if the person that takes it, drink no wine, then
he may drink water sodden with Cinnamon, although the wine be the better, When
they should be taken.
it must be taken, fasting in the morning, and immediately after it be taken,
they must go and exercise their bodies, two hours after, if they have
strength therefore, and if there be not strength to do it, one is sufficient,
or the time yt they may possibly. The going must be in such sort that the
party be not ouerwearied: and if he be, let him sit down, now and then, and
by reason such as do take them have stoppings or opilations, of any manner of
exercise, although it be little, they are forthwith weary, and all the pain
is for the first days, for afterward they shall go very well, and shall not be
so much wearied.

This exercise is better to be used out of the house, and by the streets, and
in the fields, it does importe very much by the going whereby these pouders
do make their work, That which the going does import.
and do good, that if they be not well gone with all, they do not the effect
that is desired, and the exercise being made, let him take rest in his house,
or in the place where he comes unto, not vnclothing himself, but even so
apparelled, let him lie down upon his warm bed, and rest himself one hour,
and let him eat four hours at the least, after he has taken these pouders,
or when he perceyueth his stomach to be clear, of them, he shall eat of a
Hen, or of another Bird without any sauce, with some dry fruit, or some
conseruas, and not to eat any green thing. The order that he shall have.
Let the drink be according to the disposition that he has, wine watered, if
it be convenient for him to drink it, or water sodden with Cinamom: let him
refrain to that day from al things that may offend him, let him not drink
between meals, let him make a light supper, with that as may dry up moisture.
I will not counsel that they take these pouders every day, but every third
day, and chiefly these first days, and especially such which are lean and
delicate, for in taking of them every day, they will be much wearied, and one
day that they rest between, they will be restored, and take strength for the
next day. The day that it is not taken, if there do appear any fever, it
would do well that there were taken a good vessel or great cup full of whey,
made of goats milk hot, whot with suggar, and if it be not to be had, then
take a small table of rosade of a sweet smell: this day their liver shall be
anointed with some ointment made for the purpose, and their lungs with some
thing that may vnstoppe them, and the stomach with some thing that may comfort.
This shall be done in the morning when he is on his bed, and after the
oyntmentes are ended a little time, one hour or two after that they are
anointed, receive a common medicine with things that have virtue to euacuate,
and this medicine shall not lack, every day when the pouders are not taken, for
it does much import, except: if there be not many stools: in such sort it
will be better that it be a washing medicine. The day which they take not the
pouders, they may eat sodde meat with some sauce and green things, and in
the one day and the other drink little.

These pouders are given many or few days according to the necessity of the
party that is sick, The days that they shall take them.
and as it does him good for to some 15. days are sufficient, and to others
20. and to others 30. some there be which do vomit them up the first two or
three days, and they cast up much choler with them, whereby they are notably
lightened, and does (...) i^ this sort they give contentme^t and gladness, I
know no other medicinal benefit it can do to them. There are many Physicians
which do co^mande to carry to the money house, (which is the house where the
money is made) a pot of water corporal, Note.
and spiritual, and after he has done this, he does moderate it in this
manner, saying, But such which have not these eats, and drinks without them
when they are idle, and in pleasure and do not exercise themselves: these
people as they have not heat to constrayne them to drink cold, let them not
do it, neither is it convenient for them to drink, it, let them content
themselves with cold water, as nature has brought it forth, without putting
it too cool in any other thing, seeing that they have not need of that which
is most cold. And forthwith he says: Although they live idly, and do no
exercise, and also without cares if the time were warm, or very whot, they may
drink the water cold, I do mean that in Countries where it is not cold,
they may put it too be made cold, so that it be not v^ry cold. The
selfsame is confirmed by Galen himself in his third book of meats and in
the book of the disease of the raynes, where he says, That the use of cold
water cooled with Snow, unto such as are very whot, and such as are fatt^,
and such as do exercise themselves and labor much, that such may drink
very cold, chiefly if they be used thereunto, for such as are accustomed to
drink it* do suffer and carry yt better and more without hurt then such as
do not use it, for such ought to drink it with more respect and consideration.

And albeit the water has so great benefit in it, as we have said, for the
conservation of health, it has greater too heal Fevers and other diseases:
and therevppon Hipocrates and Galen treated very particularly, inespecially
Galen in the nienth of his Method^, does reprehende there Erasistrat^, Galen.
and such as do follow him, which did forbid the use of cold water, unto
such as were sick of the Fevers. And in his first book of his Methodo, by the
like reason does reprehende Tesalo. and in the seventh book he does show
that he himself has healed many sick persons that had the grief of the
stomach, with most cold water, and also made cold with Snow. And in the eight,
nienth, tenth, and eleventh of the same Methodo, he heals the Fevers and
other diseases with water that is most cold. And it is an excellent remedy
taken with the conditions that is convenient. In the xl. he says, that the
sharp Fevers are cured with letting blood and cold water, and especially the
Feue^s of blood or that have much mixture thereof. By that which is said, is
seen how convenient it is, that water be made cold with snow, where there is
not to be found any so cold as is convenient for our conservation and
contentment, and for to heal us of many infirmities. All the which we have
treated of in brief, whereby it may be a beginning of our pretense that shall
follow, which is to show the manner how to make told with snow, and because
that which shall be made cold is the water, and under is also to be understood
the wine, and all the rest that shall be made cold, we will speak of that which
shall be treated, under the water.

The water is cold two manner of ways, Of cold matter.
one naturally as it comes forth of the springes, and this is as cold as it
is convenient, and has no need to cool it, if it has as much coldness as
will satisfy our necessity, without having need too se^ke any thing that may
make it colder.

There is an other water which is not so cold as is convenient for us, as well
for our conservation and health, as for our satisfaction: and by reason it is
not so cold as it ought to be, it is the cause of the hurts it does, that
before we have spoken of. Some waters are not so cold as they ought to be by
nature, by reason they are in whot countries: Now our intent is to treat of
them how they ought to be made cold, because with their heat they hurt us,
and being made cold as much as need requires, they do satisfy us so that we
may drink them and use them without any hurt that they can do us: and so we
will show of all the means that we may have to make cold, which are used at this
day in all the world, and of them we will choose the best, and most sure,
setting down the inconvenience that is in every one.

There are four manner of ways to make cold, which at this day are used in
all the world: Four ways to make cold.
that is to say, with the air, in the well, with salt Peter, and with snow:
every one of these is used at this day.

The first with the air in the cold of the night.
The first is, to make cold with the air, although it be a common thing, and
used in all places, yet it has been and is most used of the Egyptians, by
reason they have neither wels, nor snow, and that of the salt Peter they never
knew. Galen makes a large relation of the manner how to make cold with the
air, and says thus: they of Alexandria and Egypt for to make their water
cold, ^alen.
that they may drink it in time of whot wether, do warm it first, or do
sees it, and then they put it into earthen vessels, and set it in the cold
air, or deaw in the night in windows, or in the gutters of houses, and there
they set it all the night, and before the Sun rises, they take it away, and
wash the said earthen vessels in the outside with cold water, and then
they roll them with the leaves of a Uine tree, and of lettice, and other fresh
herbs and they put them in the ground in the most cold part of the house,
that there the cold may conserve it. This manner of making cold is used at this
day in all the world, although not with so much curiosity, by reason they
sees not the water and they content themselves with putting it in the cold
air, and in the de^we, as commonly it is done.

Likewise they do make cold the water with hanging it in the air, To make
cold with hanging in the air.
having certain skins full of water in the air and moving them
continually: the which is used in all the Country called Estremadura. Others
do make cold by putting the vessels with water in the draw, and before the
Sun come forth, they drappe them in cloth or in skinne^, and this the
Sheepheardes and other people of the field do.

This manner to make cold with the air has many inconveniences, The hurt to
to cool in the air.
because the air is a subtle element subject to any manner of alteration and
corruption: and therefore it may be infected with some evil quality, easily:
and being infected, it may infect the water that so is made cold, infusing
therinto his malice. The which Auicen shows very well in the second of the
first saying, The air is an evil thing, by reason it is mingled with evil
things, as Uapors, and smelles, Auicen.
and evil smoakes, chiefly that which is put in between two walls, and
especially that which passes by places where are rotten Plants, and naughty
Trees, and where dead bodies are, for it alters at every one of these
things, and of them receives an evil quality. And for this cause the
ancient Physicians did forbid that in time of the plague the water should not
be put into the air to be made cold, because the corrupt airs should not
infect it. There is likewise an other inconvenience, that you cannot every
night set the water too be made cold in the Air, for some nights and the
most part of them, in the Summer time are so whot, that not only the air
does not make cold, but the water that is set in the air, is whotter then it
was before, and if it be made any whit cold, it dureth no longer then the
Morning, when it is not needful, and likewise in the time between Winter and
Summer, or in the Winter when the air would make cold, then the rain, the
tempests and clouds and other alterations will not suffer the air to do it.
All these things experience does show at this day.

There is an other manner of way how to make cold with the air, which is the
most wholesome, and more without hurt than any of all the other: wherein there
is no occasion of any evil quality. And there are many people of estimation
which do use this way to make cold that, which they should drink, the which
they put into vessels of earth, or metal, and do always make wind and air
to the vessels with a wet lynnen cloth. And it must be so, that it be in the
air continually without ceasing, as long as you are at meat. And in this
sort it will be made cold to purpose, and the hot air that is joined to the
vessel is taken away, and in place of it comes fresh and cold air, even
as it does when there is gathered wind to the face, and taking away the hot
air that is joined to it, and with fresh air it makes it cold and
refreshes.

The other way to make cold, is in a well, wherein they do put the vessels
with water or wine, The second manner how to make cold which is in wels and
the hurt that comes thereof.
and there they remain the most part of the day. This kind of making cold
has also many inconveniences, as well of the part of the water, wherewith it
is made cold, as of the part of the place where it is put, cheefely in the
wells of the cities and towns, that for the most part are foul and full of
filthiness. The water of these wells is an earthly water, gross and hard,
because it is continually standing in one place, and shut within the bowels of
the earth. And as it is a standing water, it must of force he putrified, for
that the beams of the Sun do not pearce it, nor yet the air does visit
it, and therefore continually it is full of evil vapors, whereof they do
easily rott, and they are foul waters full of durte and claye, and of other
mischiefs of an evil quality.

And seeing the water or wine is so put a long time into this foul standing
water, what can come of it, but that it participateth of the evil quality
that it has? And so Galen says, Galen.
that the vessel which must be put into the well, ought to be full: for if it
lack of his fullness, then the water of the well does penetrate it, or the
vapor of it goes into that which is empty: and therefore it is convenient
that the vessel be filled full, and that it be well stopped, for that which is
said. In the well the vessel ought to be well stopped.
And he says the contrary, when we shall make cold in the air: for then
the vessel shall not be put full, but some part thereof remain empty: for
the cold air in the night season entering into that which is empty, does
make the water more cold. and in the air unstopped and not full.

To cool in metal, i^ evil.




Ordinarily they are vessels of Copper, or of the lease of Milan, which are put
in wells for to make cold. The Copper, if it be not well tinned within,
does suffer too enter into that which is to be made cold an, evil quality:
for with the moisture of the well, there is grown in it immediately, a
certain greenesse that is seen upon it, after it has stood a few days,
which is a thing very evil and hurtful.

The leaf of Milan is made of Iron, the which with the moisture of the well is
taken forthwith with rust, which is a black thing that is seen upon it after
a few days, which is an evil thing, which does infuse an evil quality
into that which is drunk. And therefore I am of the opinion that that which
should be made cold in the water of a well, should be in a glassed vessel or
of silver, The best manner how to make cold with the water of a well.
although the best way is to take out water of a well, and put it into a
vessel, in the which should be put that which should be made cold, moving
the water many times: for by taking the water out of the well, it loses much
of his evil vapors, by reason it is visited of the air, which as is said,
does show the incouenience that there is by making cold in a well.

And besides that, we see that the water has ever a taste of earth, or of
some evil taste, that is perceived notably, after it is drunk, besides the
evil smell which we see tha^ it takes.

The third manner and fashion to make cold, is with saltpeter, The third way
or manner how to ^ake cold with saltpeter.
the which is an invention of marchantes, and in especially of such as go in
the Gallie, by reason that there the air does not make cold, and especially
in the time of calmes, and there is neither wells nor snow. Necessity did
teach the^ this remedy, although it is not good, for the great inconveniences
which it has. It does cool, as some say, the cold running unto the inner
parts of that which it does make cold, for the excessive heat which the
saltpeter has, the which is done with the strong force of the saltpeter with
the water, which the saltpeter being entered into the inner parts makes to
be cold, coming from the heat of the saltpeter working upon the strong
force thereof. Other say, that the water does make it self gross with the
saltpeter, and being made more thick and gross, it has more cold virtue,
the which being helped with the heat of the saltpeter, the cold makes a
greater pear^ing, through the water, for all things that are cold, the more
thick parts that they have, Galen.
the more they cool. And so Galen says in the books of the simple medicines,
that nothing ca^ be very cold, which has subtle thin parts, by the which how
more thick the things are the more force they are of. Other there be which say
that the saltpeter has an actual virtue, very cold, and woorking with the
water, is made more cold: as is seen by the bryne, that after the salt is very
much stirred in the water, it is most cold. The selfsame is seen in the water
of Allom, The hurt it does.
and of saltpeter. This manner of making cold does cause many diseases, it does
heat the liver, it causes continual heat, and a hot burning, it inflameth
the lungs, it takes away the lust of meat and other euilles, which would be
tedious to treat of.

There are other ways to make cold, which are in rivers, and most cold
fountains, Other ways to make cold.
whereof Galen speaks, of the which it is not needful to treat of, for
whereas are most cold waters, it is not needful to put them to be made cold,
but to use of them as they are.

We have showed how the water that should be made rain with the coldness
of the middle region of the air, Snow and rain water does differ in little.
did freese, and was made snow, and therefore is little difference from the
rain water, and that which comes forth of the snow, for both of them are
engendered of one manner of matter, saving that the water which proceeds of
the snow, is somewhat more gross, for the compultion it has, of the coldness
of the air, in such sort that it is not so evil, as they say it is. And we see
the Scithians do drink it continually, as Hypocrates says. We see that of
the snow which does melt, are made great and mighty rivers, of the which the
people that inhabit near to them, drink continually without doing to them any
manner of hurt, or benumming of them. And of these are many in Spain, Almanie,
and many more in the west Indias, where most of the rivers are of snow, which
does melte from the hills and mountains, and al people in general drink of
them, for there is no other water in all the Country.

The Romans for delight and curiosity, drank the water that came forth of
the snow, the which they strayned through stones to make it more thin.
Atheneo, Atheneo.
does rehears^ certain verses of Sopita, an ancient Poet, in the which he
says, that in his time they drank snow, and the water wc came forth of the
snow. Pericrates, Historiographer being a Greek most famous, says yt in his
time, Pericrates.
they drank snow, not only in the Cities but in the camps. Euticles a man
very learned, Euticles.
in one of his epistels does reprehende those that were in his time, that they
did not content themselves to drink that which was made cold with snow, but
that they drank the snow it self. Sciates, makes mention of the snow, used
at times convenient, Sciates.
with much care and delight. Xenophon in the things of memory which he wrote,
Xenophon.
makes mention of many people that did not only drink snow, but the water
thereof continually.

The Romans did use it much, and so Pliny in the 31. book of his history
says, Pliny.
that Nero was the first that sodde w^ters, to cool it in Snow. The which
Galen in the seventh of his Methodo does recite of him, saying, Nero was the
first that sodde the waters, and afterward cooled them with Snow: for the
water being made cold in this sort, receives more quickly the cold, and
more effectually. And it is a water more healthful, for by the seething of it,
is avoided the earthly parts from the water, and it remains more subtle,
and more thin, and so it descends more speedily from the stomach.

Pliny in his natural history, in the nineteenth book, complayneth of the
care that those of his time had, Pliny.
in keeping the Snow of the Winter, for the hot weather in Summer, saying,
that they did overthrow the mountains by keeping the snow from warm weather,
making it to pervert the order of nature, that in the months which are most
whot, in the which there is nothing but heat and drithe, that the curiosity
of the people is so much that at that time, there is such abundance of snow,
as in the months in the which there does naturally fall upon the ground great
quantity thereof. This Pliny says, for in his time and after, it was a
common thing to keep the snow of the winter, for the summer. Heliogabalo
Emperor had made a great cave in a little mountain, Reliogabalo.
from a garden of his own, where he gathered in the winter very great
quantity of snow, bringing it from the mountains that were nearest to Rome,
whereof they used in time of heat, in their bankettes.

Chares Militineus, in the history that he writes of King Alexander says,
Chares Militineus.
that in the City of Petra, a most populous City in Asia, there was,
ordinarily thirty caves, that in the winter time were filled with Snow, for
the whot weather, for the service of Alexander, and such as were retayners to
him.

At this day it is done, not only in Asia, Snow is kept by many people.
but also in many parts of Africa, and in all Europe, chiefly in all the
Countries which are under the dominions of the great Turk, and especially in
Constantinople, where the snow is so much used, that all the year it is sold
in public market, and they use of it all the year. The self same is done at
this day in all the states of Almanie and of Flaunders, Hungary, and Bohemia,
and other places, where they keep the Snow, in houses, and baw^es in the
Winter, for to make their drink cold therewith in the summer.

They carry from Flaunders to Paris, the water that is frosen, which is more
then three score leages distance. Likewise in our country of Castile it is kept
in houses, and they gather it in the winter: and when winter is past, they
conserve it for the whote weather. And there are many Lords and great men,
which have in the mountains particular houses, where they command that it be
put in the winter, for this effect: and many of them do use it, and do make
cold therewith as well in the winter, as in the summer, as there are chiefly
in Castile in the time of winter, waters that are most cold.

They which drink that which is made cold with snow, say that it does not
offend them, The cold which does proceed of Snow, does not offend as
other cold does.
as that which is made cold with the weather, for it is seen that a cup of
cold water being drunk, that comes forth of a well, or of a cold
fountain, hurts such as do drink it, and drinking that which is made cold
with snow, they feel no such hurt.

I do much marvel at one thing, How car^les people are that they have not had
Snow in S^^uill*
that this City of Civil being one of the most famous of the World, wherein
always have lived many great personages of very high estate, and many people
of great estimation as well of the natural people of the Country, as
strangers, that there has been none which have brought thither snow in the time
of whot weather for to make cold that which they drink, seeing that the heat
of this country from the beginning of Summer, until it be well near toward
Winter, is so great, that it is not to be suffered, and all the waters are most
whot, that they cannot scarcely be drunk. And besides that the most part of
the people of this City are people of much business and cares. And seeing
that in a Country so whot where business and cares do abound where the
water is whot, An exhortation.
and nothing wherewithal to cool it; with just Title it may be admitted and
used that it may be cooled with snow, seeing that the coldness is so sure, as
we have said, and it does make the benefits which Galen and Auicen have showed
unto us.

Note.
Let every one look upon his disposition that being whole, although he be
not altogether in health, in time of whot wether he may drink cold more or
less as it is convenient for him. For the drinking cold does temper the
Liver, it mitigateth the heat, it gives appetite to meat, it comfort the
stomach, The good that drinking cold does.
it gives strength too all the four virtues, that may do their works the
better, the meat is eaten with appetite, and with gladness it takes away the
drithe in the day time, it causes that the stone does not engender in the
raynes, by keeping temperate the heat of them, it takes away lothsomnesse,
and likewise it does many other good effects, that the use and thereof
experience ode show us.

And because it is the best manner too make cold with Snow as we have said,
Auicen.
let us a^^we thereof with grave Authors: and let Auicen be the first, in the
third of the first, where he says, The water that is made cold with snow,
unto such as are of a temperate complexion, whereas coldenesse has been made
with Snow, yea although the snow be foul and not clean then it serves to
make cold the water without: and that as is good and clean, is to be put in,
to that which shall be drunk, as Auicen himself shows in the second part of
the first book, the 16. chapter, where he says, the snow and the frosen
water, when it is clean, and that the Snow has not fallen upon evil
plants, or that it be not mingled with earth, or other super^^u^ties, and the
frost not made of evil infected waters, but that the water which come forth
of the snow, be clear and clean, and the water that comes forth of the
frost, be also good and clean, if any part of the water of the snow or of
the frost be put into the water that must be drunk, or with them the water
be made cold without dout it is good: for the waters which come forth of them,
be not strange from other waters.

This does Auicen say, giving to understand that these waters which do
proceed of snow and of frost being clean, do not differ from the goodness of
other waters: only the difference is, that the water of the snow and of the
frost are grosser then other waters, by reason that the vapor is congeled in
the middle region of the air, as we have declared. Rasis amongst the
Arabiens the best learned, Ras^^*
in the third book of those which he wrote to the King Almasor says thus,
The water of snow cools the Liver that is whot, being taken after meat, it
strengthens the stomach, it gives appetite and lust to meat, but that which
is drunk may not be much. And immediately after he says, the water which has
not so much coldness, that it gives not contentment to him that drinks it,
fills the belly, and takes not away the drithe, it destroys the appetite,
it takes away the lust of the meat, it consumes the body, and concludes, in
saying, that it is not a thing convenient to be drunk.

I do understand it for the preservation of the health of man, of the which
Rasis, Ide^.
treating in that book himself in the 4. of Almasor, speaking of the
preservation from the (...) and there comes to him hurt and poison, which
destroys and corrupts him: believe you me, and suffer not such which are
sick, to spend their money to cast gold in medicines which they take, nor let
them quench gold that is whot in wine, nor in water, for of the one and of
the other, there remains no medicinal virtue, that will remedy their euilles.
Only the gold being made money, has great virtues and properties, for that is
it that makes the heart glad, and takes away sadness and melancholy, and
repaireth all the virtues and strength of man, it gives strength whereas is
none, it is an universal remedy of al things, unless it be of death: for
against that, nothing can prevail. And seeing that night is come, and time
gives not unto us any longer liberty, and although that it gave us; yet age
does his office, for I feel my self weary. God be with you Master Ortun^o,
and likewise to you Master Burgus, and I go to take rest.

The end of the Dialogue of Iron.
THE BOOK WHICH TREATS OF THE SNOW, AND OF the properties and virtues thereof:
And of the manner that should be used to make the drink cold therewith: and of
the other ways wherewith drink is to be made cold: Whereof is showed partly,
in the latter part of the second Dialogue of iron.

With other curiosities which will give contentment by other ancient things
worthy too be known, which in this treatise shall be declared.

Written by Doctor Monardes Physician of Seuill. 1574

To the excellent Lord the Earl of Barajas assistent of the city of Seuill
etc. the Doctor Monardes your Physician wishes health.
MOst excellent Lord, the fair and white snow does complain unto me,
saying: that she being so ancient, and of so many ages, celebrated of so many
Princes, Kings, wise and valiant m^n, and being had in so great estimation
and price, that with great care they seek after her, and with greater care
they do conserve her, for to give health and contentment to all persons: yet
for all this, many people with little consideration, and not knowing what they
say, do persecute her, putting indecent names to her: and that which does
most grieve her is, that some Physicians, either for ignorance, or for malice,
do speak evil of her, not perceiving what so many learned me^ have treated and
said of the great vtility and profit which she does to many, as experience does
show, and all people do understand, chiefly when they do drink their drink
most cold with the benefit which does remain to them thereof, they do praise
and extol her. Moreover she says, that she forces no person to use her: but
if any will use her, she can give such order and manner to make cold the drink,
as is convenient for all persons, giving the degrees of coldenesse which every
one would have, and which does best appertayn to them, and this with all
assurance with only leaving or placing the vessel wh^rein the drink is joined
nere to her, the which none of the old writers nor of the late did speak
against, or forbid. And especially let this manner of making cold not be done
with stinking water of a well, nor with the most burning Saltpeter, but with
pure water being clean and clear. These co^plaintes and many other the fair
lilly white Snow has uttered unto me, and in the end she lastly said to me,
that since that I had praised her so much, and taken in hand to favor her,
that I should (...) ly the fire has no mixture of other Elements, and
amongst these Elements the air is very principal, which is divided into
three parts, one is the supreme, and near to the R^gion of the efire, which
is whotte and dry for the fellowship that it has therewith, taking much of
his quality, which is clear and pure, from whence do not proceed any
wyndes, nor clouds: and this they call the celestial Region and the parts
more low which are near too the water and earth be great and troubled full of
Uapours, pierced and visited with the beams of the Sun, whereby it comes
too be whotte and the supreme and middle Region of the air does come too
be very cold, because it stands in the midst of the two extremities,
being so whotte. And in it, is increased the cold as in the middle part
fleing from the extreme parts of heat, as we have spoken of before. This
middle part has parts more or less cold, for the part that is joining
near unto us is not so cold, as that which is near to the superior parts of
the fire. And how much more the vapors do rise up on height, the more they do
congele, and hold fast. In the middle region of the air do engender the
clouds, the small raynes, the drops, the frost, the rain, the Snow, the
Hayle, and other impressions as the Thunder, lightnings and sharp showers, and
comets. The Clouds be the principal matter which do engender the Rain, the
Snow, and the Hayle, and the other impressions which we have spoken of, that
are made of many Uapours which do rise up from the lower parts unto the
middle Region of the air: and so being joined, they make one body, and they
wax thick with the cold of the said place: and for this the clowd is like
to a mother, and is the common matter of all the impressions that are made in
the air. And so it is of the snow as a thing engendered of it, in the middle
Region of the air. And the Snow is no other thing but a Uapour, cold, and
moist, which came into the middle Region of the air, being engendered, in the
body of the Cloud with a mean coldenesse which is not so strong as that
which does cause the Hayle, nor so soft as that which does cause the water,
and in the like Uapour before it be made water, it both, congeale and freese,
and does fall broken in pieces and are white, because there do rain in them
more cold then in the water.

The which Galen does show unto us in the book of the Philosophical hystory
of Anaximenes the Philosopher. Of the congealed air, Galen.
Anaximenes.
he says that the clouds are made; and of the same, being more thick, the
rain is engendered, and the same is congealed and frosen, and by the coldenesse
of the Air it is made Snow: and being more congealed it is made Hayle. And
the same Galen does say in his book de Vtilitate respirationis, the Clouds
congealed are made Snow: which is the matter that the rain is made of, the
Snow does fall in the high places, which of their own nature are cold
places, and thereby it is much conserved, and very seldom it falls in the
Ualleyes, and if it do fall there, it is very small, and forthwith it
dissolueth. It falls in the Sea but seldom times by reason of the heat which
it has, and for the winds that are continually in it, for heat and moisture
are co^traries and much more the wind accompanied with the sun. Galen in the
nienth of his simples, says, that there were Philosophers that said the snow
had hot parts for being taken in the hand, Galen.
it heateth and burns like to fire. And so the said Galen in the 4. of the
said Books, says as he went upon snow, his feet did burn: the cause of this
is not that the snow is whot, nor that it has whot parts, but with his cold it
does shut the pores of the hands or feet and causes that the heat which is
in the inner parts have not where to come forth: and so being shut in, do cause
so great a kindlying, that seems to burn: the which we see contrary if the
hands do burn and be put into whot water, as ye pores (...) drinking of the
coldest water they were healed, as Galen says in the 7. of his Method^, ^alen.
that he saw in one day, ye^ in one hour, with a draught of cold water many
diseases were healed, and some of these were weak of stomach, not only, with
cold water of a fountain, but with water cooled in snow, Cornelio Celso.
and in Ro^^e it is used. And so Cornelio Celso in his first book, unto such
as were weak of stomach, commanded them to drink, after they had eaten, the
coldest water they could get, and in cholerike stools, should be drunk water,
that was most cold, and in runnings of whot humors, it should be used, for to
stay the flux. Auicen in the said chapter says, Auicen.
that the cold water does comfort all the ^ertues in his works that is to say
the virtue disgestiue, attractiue, rete^tiue, and expulsive. And so he goes
declaring every one of them, giving us to understand how much the cold water
does corroborate and make strong al these virtues, whereby they do their
works the better. Auicen.
And the said Auicen in the second of his first treaty of water, says, the
cold water is the best of all waters, and it is convenient for them which are
whole, for it gives lust to meat, and makes the stomach strong. And a little
before he says, that which is not cold does corrupt disgestion, and
causes the meat to swim in the stomach, it takes not away the drithe, it
causes the dropsy, by reason it corrupts the first disgesti^n, and
consumes the body with his heat. Auicen himself confirms this in the
third of the first part, Auicen.
saying, the cold water is convenient for them that have a temperate
complexion, for being whot, it causes the stomach to be sick. Isaac Aliabas,
Isaak.
and Rasis, say the same, that Auicen says, the which he did let to write of,
Allabos.
because he would not be long in his sayings. Rasit.
One thing Auicen would have in the third of the first part, Aui^en
that he which should drink very cold, must first make a good foundation,
eating first a good portion of meat, before he drink. Also he says that the
cold drink may not be drunk much at one draught, but by little and little, by
reason it does bring two benefits, which is, that there is taken more taste in
that which is dr^nke, Who drink cold, let them dri^ke little and little.
and it do^th not kill the natural heat, as it is seen by the pot that
boyleth, if you cast into it much water at one time, it does cease boiling,
but if it be cast by little and little, it cease not his working. And therefore
Auicen himself says, when that you will drink cold, that you drink with a
vessel which has a straight mouth, that the drink run not in hastily, the
said vessel being a limet, or a yewre, with a point, surely it is a great
benefit, for them which are affectioned to drink with the like ^esselles: if
they ought first to take out the wind or not, I do remit me to the Doctor
Villalabos, who treats largely of this matter.

And by that it is seen how Auicen would that those which would drink very
cold, You must ^ot dri^ke cold at the beginning of meat.
they should not drink forthwith at the beginning of their meat. For some
there be, that as soon as they begin to eat, forthwith they will drink,
that as is very cold, the stomach being empty without meat, which cannot
choose but hurt: and so the hurt which does come to them by this, they do
attribute it, forthwith to the cold of the drink, and not to their evil
order: the which Auicen says, speaking of cold water, that to drink it
without order, is the cause of many diseases, and if it be drunk in order, as
well in time, as in quantity, it profits as he has said. Therefore let every
one look to that which is convenient for him, and let him make experience in
himself, and if that it be convenient for him to drink cold, that he may
bear, it without that it do offend him that do it, for thereof will follow
the benefits which we have spoken of, but if he be sick, and fall into any
disease, whereby he says, that the drinking of cold drink does offend
him, in such case let him not use it, for my intent is to show and persuade
them that do drink cold, that if it do them no hurt, nor offend them that
they drink it so, and such as do use it of custom and have experience that
it do not offend the^, unto such i^ they drink not, that which they drink
cold, the lust of their meat is taken away from the^, for they take no taste
in that which they eat, and they eat it with grief, and with an evil will, for
that which they drink does not satisfy them, and the whot drink does fill the
stomach full of windiness, and cannot make therewith a good disgestion.

But what is he that has a reasonable health, being in the time of great
heat, He does counsel to drink cold.
or in the whot summer, that coming to eat, being weary of exercise, or of
great labor having the tongue dry, the breath short, that does let to
drink cold, seeing that to do it, there do follow the benefits that I
have said, and does succor his necessity, and remain content and glad
without having offended his disposition, and health. Unto the which Galen does
animate and exhort v^, in the book which he made of good and evil meats,
saying. In the time of hot weather, when our bodies are whot and somtymes
inflamed, then we must use of things that may refreshe us: although that they
be evil meats, as Plummes, Apples, Cheries, Melons, Goords, and of other
cold fruytes, in these like times. Galen says, that we may use cold meats,
as the feet of a pigge or hog sodden in vinegre, and crudded milk: and the
same meats must be made cold, and likewise the drink must be made cold, as
the water, and the wine watered with cold water, or made cold in snow, the
one and the other must be made cold in the most cold water of a fountain, and
if it be not to be had, let it be made cold in snow, chiefly the drink.
Galen.
And after that Galen has made a large digression, as it is convenient so much
in the time of great heat to eat and to drink cold things, he does
describe who they are that should drink cold, and says in this sort, those
that should drink cold are such, as have much buzines, and have care of many
things, as those which are gouerners of cities, and common wealths, and the
ministers which do help them, and do participate of such cares and troubles,
and those that are much exercised in bodily buzines, in especially the
sowldierlyke exercises, or other great exercises, and they which do journey,
and inespecially long iorneyes, giving to understand all corporal exercises.
Here I do see many being sick, and having great occasions of sickness, after
that they drink cold, they are whole: and when they use it not, they become
sick again. And although experience do show it, yet Galen does teach it
us, in many places, being the Prince of Physic. Galen.
For in the third degree of the substance of meats, he says, that unto them
which are whot of stomach, it is convenient that their drink be made cold
with snow: the same he does confirm in the book of good and evil meats. And
in the 7. of his Methodo, it has been seen, as he says, that diseases have
been healed, Galen.
and the griefs of the stomach with cold water, made cold with snow, and in
the 6. of the Epidimias he does use much of water, first sodden and after
cooled with snow, Galen.
and in many parts he does put to cool in snow the medicines, which he
does use of: and the same do the Arabiens, for that, as it is said, it does
seem that the snow was had in reverence, by the ancient writers, and that
they did use of it in the preservation of their health, and in the healing of
their diseases, for that it was the best manner how to nake it cold, more
clean, and more without scruple. For the cold that proceeds of snow, is
healthful without receiving hurt, by that which is cooled with it, nor causes
any alteration because it is a very good congeled water, and does make cold.

Truth it is, that it is not convenient to use of the said snow continually,
if it be not in time of need, How it ought to be used.
by the way of medicine: for the use of the said snow drunk in water or in
wine, or putting the snow into them, does engender many kind of diseases,
which if presently they be not felt, they come to be felt in age: Of the which
Galen does make a large relation, in the book of diseases of the raynes, and
in the book of good and evil meats. And because that Auicen did expound them,
I will show what he writes, in the third part of the first book, in the 8.
chapter: He which does drink snow, and the water that does proceed out of the
same snow, if he do use it continually there will follow much hurt thereby:
it does offend the sinews, and it is naught for the breast, and for the inner
members, and especially for the breathing: and there is none that do use to
drink it, but it will do them hurt, unless he be of a sanguine complexion
which if he do not feel hurt presently, he shall feel it afterward.
Whereby it appears how evil the use of the said snow is, and the water
which does come out of it, if it be not by the way of medicine, only so it
may be used to cool therewith, for in such sort it does not offend, as is
said. For in this neither the ancient writers did put any doubt of hurt, nor
any scruple, and now we see that it hurts not, but brings health, and
benefit, as we have said.

And as Pliny also says, of the delight and dayntinesse of the cold, Pl^nie.
without offense of any malice of the Snow. And Martial does show the same,
Martial.
in the 4. book, where he says, the snow must not be drunk, but that licor
which is made very cold with it. And this was showed and taught unto us, by
the most ingenious drithe.

And unto such as are very cold, it comes not well to pas, for them to
drink that, which is made cold with snow, or that which is very cold, if he
be not accustomed theretoo: for by custom, they may use and drink it without
any offense to them, but it is good that they moderate themselves in drinking
that which is very cold, and that they con^ent themselves that it be made
cold, after a mean sort, although it be with snow. Also it is not
convenient for children, nor boys, that their drink be made cold, with snow,
for the weakness of the sinews, and interior parts, and for the tenderness
of their age, and chiefly they may drink no wine, but water, for that their
age does not suffer, that they may drink it: and drinking water very cold,
it does them very much hurt. The wine which is made cold with snow, does
not offend so much as the water which is made cold: one of the things which
takes away the fury and strength of the Wine, is the making of it cold.

And so there are three things which do abate the fury of the wine, that is,
Three things which aba^e the fury of the wine.
to water it a good time before you drink it. Also to cast a piece of bread
into it, that it may suck the vapors, and subtlety of the wine. The third
is, to put it to cool some reasonable time in water, that is most cold, or in
snow, for the more it is cooled, the more the strength and vapors are
repressed, and so it will less offend the head, and it will less penetrate
the joints, which is seen in the said wine, and being made cold there is
abated much of his strength, in so much that if it be very cold, it seems
as though that it were water. Some people there are which do say and publish
much evil of the cooling with snow, without knowing if it be good or evil:
and as it is a new thing, and especially in this Country, they fear that
there will come hurt to them by the use of it. And I being at the table of a
Lord, there was brought a platter full of Cheries with snow upon them, and
there was a Gentleman that durst not take any one of them, saying that they
would hurt him, History.
because that they were made cold with Snow. And as it was a thing used a
long time, to cast snow upon fruit, Snow upon f^uite.

Galen.


as Galen does say that it was cast upon the Mulbery, the cause of this is for
lack of the use thereof, by reason it has not been used nor seen in these
parts, and always they take it for suspicious.

And here are none that do use it, but the noble men, and not al, but such as
have been Courtiers and such as have proved the benefit and commodity that
does follow of it: for the rest say, that without know they have loved, and
without it, they will pas on their time. And they do not consider that to live
they may pass with Beef, and Garlyke, and Leekes, but these kind of meats
do engender evil humors: for it is one thing to eat the partridge, and the
veale at his time, and mutton and byrds at another time. And there is
differi^ce to eat the flesh with sauce, and the partridge with a Lemon, for
the one is to eat without taste rustically, and the other is to eat as men
do, choycely and delicately. And so it is in the drinking of cold, or whot,
for of the drink that is made cold with snow, there follows health, taste
and contentment: and of the drink that is whot, comes evil diseases,
distyl^ing, and coffeehouse. Let us consider vow the old writers took great
felicity to drink cold, The old writers did use much to cool with snow.
and chiefly that which was made cold with snow, and they were people both wise
and discrete, and with much care that preserved their health. For in this and
in their estimations, and in their manner of subtle living, they did put their
whole felicity* and seeing that they with so much care as we have before
declared, did drink that which they made cold with snow, in countries that
was of lesser heat then this, wherefore should we not enjoy this benefit, and
cont^ntment, seeing that thereof cannot follow unto us, but great benefit of
health, using thereof as I have said?

Note.
Let every one look to that it is convenient for his health, age, use, and
custom, and let him have respect to that which does agree with him: for the
use will show him what he shall do, seeing that of the hurt or benefit, he may
soon perceive if it ought to be used, or no, and he must be advised that at
the be^inning when he does use to drink cold, that which is made cold with
snow, the first days he shall feel in the day time drithe, but being past 7.
or.8. days, it is taken away, rather they go between dinner and supper
without drith, and without having any need to drink.

They do bring the snow to this country, from the mou^tains whereas is much
snow 6. leagues beyond Granado. The snow has many things to preserve it, From
whence they bring the snow.
because the way is long and it comes by a whot country, by reason whereof it
does much diminishe, and very little comes hither of that which they take
out there: and therefore it is so dear.

It is a marvelous thing that these mountains of Granado, are always full of
snow, Mountains of Snow.
and that in them it is durable and perpetual, and for great heates, and sun,
that shines upon them: yet the snow continues in one state, and we see that
it does not change. In the mountains Pirineos, which are filled with snow
every winter, but the su^mer being come, al is melted, in such sort that there
remains in them no snow. The kings of Granado, being in all their royal
authority did use in the months of great heat and time of summer, to drink
these waters which they drank made cold with snow, as our hystory writer
Alonso de Palensio does refer himself too tha^ which he wrote of the wars
of Granado.

Let the snow be kept in cold and dry places, for the moisture and heat are
his contrary, The conservation of the Snow.
and the wind which comes of the si^ne, much more, because it is whot and
moist. They do tread or press the snow, when they put it in sellers to
keep, that it may the longer endure and melt less. Charles Militineus does
say that the snow must be kept trode^ and covered with leaves and bows of an
Oak, Charles Militineus.
because in this sort it is most conserved. That which is brought to this
city, they bring it in straw, for it does conserve it more then any other
thing, and it does melt the less: which the glorious S. Augustine does show
us in the first book of the city of God, where he says, who gave unto the
straw a cold virtue so strong, Saint Augusti^e.
that it keeps the snow which is most cold and conserueth it? and who gave it
likewise so whot and fervent a virtue, that the green fruit not being ripe, as
apples and other like, The properties of straw.
it does ripe and season them that they may be eaten? in the which it is seen
what diverse virtues the straw has, seeing that it doe^h contrary effects
which does conserve the snow, ^ does make ripe the green fruit, and does
more then the water, which is made cold in the deawe, or in other thing: by
putting any vessel with it amongst straw, it does conserve his coldenesse
all the day.

There were used two principal ways in these times too make cold with snow:
the one is, to put the bottelles or the vessels of that as you will make cold,
buried in the snow, this is done where there is much snow, and this does make
very cold and quickly: the same is likewise done with the water frosen. There
is another way to make cold which is more easy and it is done with little
snow, which is to fill a vessel of that which is to be made cold, and put
upon it a little platter of silu^r or glass, or of ^hin Plate called the leaf
of Milan and that it may be made so deep, whereby it may penetrate through
that which shall be made cold, and upon that deep vessel let the snow be put,
and from time to time, the water which does melt from the snow must be taken
away, With a little platter.
for if it be not taken away, it heateth the snow, and it melts the more.
After this sort it does cool much, and makes it as exceeding cold as you
would drink it: and it is a way that every one may use more or less, as
cold as he will, or as he has need of it. The selfsame is done with a long
cave made of the leaf of Milan, putting it full of snow, into the thing that
you mind to make cold continuing in it still, and this is to make any thing
cold in an earthen pot or any other great vessel. In a cave.


This manner of way is long or it be cold, and it is needful that it be put
long time before you go too meat, and for all this it will not make it very
cold. Others there be that do put the snow in a little basket, laid upon a
little straw, for this does conserve the snow much, putting in one goblet
with that as you will drink, leaning hard too the snow: after this sort there
follows much benefit, for it is not needful to go taking away the water
from the snow, by reason that it goes away through the basket. And the other
is, that the snow does not melt so much, let every man do as he has the
quantity of Snow to do it withal, and likewise in the cooling of it, more
or less as his necessity and health does require, and can bear well the use
thereof: of the which we have made a large relation, although that my intent
and purpose was for no more than too defend that the best way too make the
drink cold, and more healthful is to make cold with snow, and as for the
other manner of ways and uses too make cold, they have many inconveniences
which I have spoken of, and only too make cold with Snow, is that which is
convenient, seeing that the snow does not touch the thing, only the little
platter that is made cold with it, is only that which does make cold. All
other ways which does make cold, does not come near to the cooling with
snow by a great way, for that is most cold which is cooled with it, and all
other ways do seem whotte, being made cold in the deawe, in wells, or
with saltpeter, in comparison of that which is made cold with snow. And so it
is a great thing, and too be much esteemed that in the time of whot weather,
when we^ are made a burning cole, of the extreme heat of the time, when the
drithe is so great, that it makes us to sound and our bodies are so burning
and sweating, that we have so easy a remedy with a little Snow, we may
drink so cold as is convenient for us, and as cold as we will, with all
assurance of health giving us so much delighte and contentment, that there is
no price to be esteemed too it, nor understanding that can expound it, of the
which every one that does drink cold with snow may be judge of my Apology
when they do make an end to drink by means of the most cold snow.

By that which is said, it is seen what a thing snow is, and how the use of
it was esteemed amongst the people of old time for to make cold therewith, and
as the best manner of these which are to make cold withal, and more agreeable
to our health and necessity, is that which is done therewith; and also as the
drinking cold does bring so many benefits and commodities, and the drinking hot
so many hurts and disco^modities, seeing that to use it is to make lean, and
debilitate the stomach, it does make the meat to swim in it, and it does
corrupt the disgestion, whereby it does consume and weaken the body, it
ingendreth winds, it is the cause that the Liver is debilitated, and weakened,
it causes continual drithe, it does not satisfy our necessity, it gives
pain and grief and other hurts, that he which does use it, shall quickly
feel them in himself. The which is contrary to them that do drink cold
being cold of his own nature, or made cold with snow, for that it does
comfort the stomak if it be weak, and stre^gtheneth it and does stay the
flixe, and runninges of whot humors to it, and therefore it takes a way
stools and vomits being cholerike, it does comfort all the 4. virtues, it
takes away the driche, it gives lust to eat, it makes the disgestion
better, and you drink less and that with more contentment and gladness,
satisfiing us more to a little cold drink, then much which is whot. It does let
the ingendring of the stone unto the^ which are whot of co^plection, it makes
te^perate the heat of the liner, it takes away the kindling of the fire of
them that are too hot, or inflamed of what cause soever it be, it tempereth the
excessive heat of the summer, it preserves from the plague in the time of it,
and being taken upon meat it strengthens natural heat, that it may make
better his disgestion and work, it takes away the sharp pains which comes
of any hot cause, it takes away the trembling of the heart, it makes glad
them that are melancholy, it takes from wine his fury and vapors, and the
fruits put in snow, and cause, that they do not corrupt, he that drinks
cold does enjoy the daintiness of the cold that it does make, which is a
thing that cannot be expressed and the understanding of man cannot comprehend
it. They which may liberally drink cold and being made cold with snow, are
such as be temperate of co^plection and full of flesh, and those which are of a
cholerike complexion, hot and inffamed, the which are whot of the liver, and
of the stomach, they which are sanguine and do exercise themselves and labor
as men of great buzinesse, they which have many cares, the governors of cities
and common we^lthes: and the ministers of them, which do participate of the
like cares and troubles, they which do exercise themselves in warlike
affairs, and other great business, they which go much and have labored much,
they which do suffer burning Agues, and evils of great heat and
inflammations, and above al, those which are accustomed to drink it herein, let
every man drink cold, or most cold as he has necessity, and as it is most
convenient for him: and to such as it is not convenient to drink cold, nor most
cold, are they that are very old, and such as do live idly, without
exercise, and without care, they which have rawnesse in their stomakes, they
which suffer griefs of cold humors, they which are sick in the breast, they
which have diseases of the sinews, they which cannot taste that they eat for
humors or cold causes, they which do suffer much ventosity, children, and
such as are of young age, and others to whom time and use have showed what is
convenient for them. And thus we en^ our Apology.

Finis.

