THE HONOR of Chivalry.

Set down in the most Famous History of the Magnanimious and Heroike Prince
Don Bellianis: Son unto the Emperor Don Bellaneo of Greece.

Wherein are described, the strange and dangerous Adventures that him befell.

With his love toward the Princess Florisbella: Daughter unto the Souldan of
Babylon.

Englished out of Italian, by L. A.

Sed tamen est tristissima ianua nostrae,
Et labor est vnus tempora prima pati.
VERITAS VIRESSIT VULNERE

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Creed. 1598.

To the right Worshipful his special Patron, Master John Rotherham, Esquire,
one of the six Clerks of her Majesty's most Honorable Court of Chauncery.
SVch, so great, and infinite are the favors (Right Woe. Sir) that from the
bounteous liberallitie of your fair conditions, I have without desert
received: that by no means, in no respect nor in the least degree, my greatest
duty can no way satisfy by any active deed: Save with a willing mind,
always acknowledging it self unable to cancel the great bonds for the same.
Which in my doubtful thoughts reuoluing, being by persuasions won, to
pubish the exercise of some vacant hours: and remembering that at your Woe.
house at Semars, I began the practice of the Italian tongue (as these few
sheets of paper there commenced, do bear testimony) I cannot but in sign
of my duty, present this slender endeavor to your Woe. kind acceptance, craving
pardon for this audacious boldness; which confidently hoping to obtain, I
do then beseech you, to patronage it, as the first token of my thankful heart
(being destitute of all other means to do it:) Whose rude and harsh
discourses, cannot in his infa^t growth yet better please, through the myshe
covert of gross barbarism, in an unpolished wit, only supporting her
weakness, against al accidents of ensuing harms, on the strongpiller of your
favorable looks, which granted, my wandering desires shall triumph in the
victory of their own wishes: and rest encouraged to labor in their second
sowing, with more perfection, to your lasting praises. Whose continuing love, I
only pray, may by no sinister occasions, drown me in the obliuious center of
forgetfulness, from your dear remembrance, which is the anchorage of my
hopes, that no longer in a mortal world do wish may breath, then from your
duty they decline, or the grateful memorating (being al I crave) of your
incomparable merits. Whose life with many, many years increase, in all earthly
happiness, with augment of dignities in this terrene orb, and in the future,
the crown of joys, infallible, the only sole Ruler of them both, may grant
you in all largess.

Your Worships humbly devoted. L. A.

To all gentle Readers.
EVen as a young child newly, (as I may say) crept from his cradle, indeuouring
to pronounce with perfection, his natural language for his future use, is first
instructed to spell, before he be put to reading, and to read, ere he expound:
So I, whose rough skill, and harsh vnfiled wit, wanting the practisse of
continuing time, being disfurnis^t of Natures helps, and Arts pollisht
disciplines, must seem to go, before I may presume to fly, trusting to my
own vnfledged wings, least with rash asspiring Icarus, I ouerwhelme my
helps in the recordlesse Cave of everlasting disgrace. I speak this (most
courteous and gentle Readers) for that I had some few months paste, only
for my private recreation, in idle hours, imitated in this History, the
invention of a foreign wit, whose conceit being commended by diverse Gentles,
of no mean desert, have by their importunate entreaties, forced me (altogether
unwilling) to make known the rude exercise of my vacant leisure, which at
length to satisfy their requests (not my desires) I did resolve to do, only
thereby to make you sport, in the tedious passage of these winter nights, if
other pastimes do not disturb it. For on this sole hope it only leanes, that
being the first sprigge of a young plant, set in a barren ground, ouergrowne
with weeds, so it will obtain your general gentle acceptance, with a favorable
pardon for this rash presume. Defending it with the shield of your favors,
which will be a sufficient tower, well armed against al scandalizing tongus,
that but make an ecchoing noise, with their ayrie words, to harm none save
themselves, by the rebounding back of their reproachful tauntes, even on their
barking selves. But walled with hope, that the gentleness of your virtues,
will nothing derogate from your names, by kindly accepting my good will, I end:
praying, that all present and ensuing happiness, and content, may every way
answer your own wishes: requesting, that where you dislyke, there you would
mildely amend, and not utterly condemn.

The Honor of Chivalry, set down in the most famous History of the
Invincible Prince Don Bellianis, son unto the Emperor Don Bellaneo of
Greece, wherein are described his adventures, and love toward the Princess
Florisbella, Daughter to the Soldane of Babylon.
CHAP. I.
How the Emperor Don Bellaneo married the Princess Clarinda, daughter unto
T^leiano King of Spain.

WHen the Grecian Monarchy flourished with most glory, triumphing over the
greatest part of Christendom, as is recorded in the large annual Registers of
Fristone (surnamed the Wise) preseruers of the never dying fame, and ever
memorable acts of the worthies of this time: There then soly swaied the awful
imperious Crown and Septer, an Emperor named Don Bellaneo, who through his
rare virtues, gentle affability, gallant conditions, royal and heroycke
deeds, his admirable regard, and most great care in the administration of
equal justice to his subjects, not taking the ones right to make the other
rich, was of them so highly admired, loved, and reverenced, that the
superfluity of words in revealing it, would unpouerish rather then enrich the
perpetuity of his never dying glory. This Emperor was altogether in his
youth inclined and inflamed with desire ofhaughtie attempts, the conquering
offorraine Nations, Kingdoms, and Signories, wherein he never rested,
continually betaking himself (clad in abilements of military arms, in field
against his foes, manifesting his incredible valor, and his well knit sinowes,
which nothing disagreed from the greatness of his mind. The famliar vsance of
his nobles and vassales was such, that they might be rather termed his
companions and fellows, then subjects. He always would hazard his person in
greatest and most difficult dangers offered him, accounting that honor to be
supremest, which was obtained with most toil and peril, and judging it better
that strangers should blaze abroad the greatness of his military fortune
and magnanimity in war, then the commending of his Soldiers deeds, inso
much that their cheifest acts in the perilous battles, was to guard their
Lord: for so great was his courageous heart, not fearing mighty and puisiant
Giants, nor the strength of admired Knights, but as pretending all honor to
himself, and esteeming it but little, would as it were headlong, run where
he found most dangers, that sometimes his whole camp might hardly defend
him from the fury of contrarious Squadrons, where his heroicke thought could
not harbor the least sign of pale trembling fear: in which kind of life he
more ioyed, then if he lived among all the delicious and delighting pleasures,
that any Monarchs could yield in greatest plenty. Whereby his all wondering
fame was so vulgarde, throughout the far remoted Nations of the spacious
Orb, which they accounted as a blazing comet, presaging the future ruin, that
his bare name caused in them such agues of timorous fear, as does the furious
thunder (renting the darkened welkin with mighty showers of earth drowning
waters) in the heartlesse multitude of rusticke country swaynes. By which he
became so odious to all his enemies* that they would often give their own
blood as a reward for his death, foreiudging his life would be their utter
desolation. But having consumed the greatest part of his youth in hostile
arms, by counsel, and importunity of his nobility and subjects, being
often thereto urged (though against his will) he returned with wreathes of
immortal triumph, to the famous and euer-glorious City of Constantinople,
from whence were dispatched in his behalf, to demand in marriage the
Princess Clarinda, Daughter to Toloian, King of Hesperia, to whom in Embassy
were sent personages sufficient to make known his high magnificence, among
whom went as chief the King of Hungaria (cousin to the Emperor, and the
Prince of Macedon, with many Dukes and Lords, with the haughtiest pomp and
royallest show of Embassage that ever went to any Potentate. This understood by
the Iberian king, he in person came to meet them, musing at the sudden
coming of such states to seek him from so far Countries: who being seen
of them, with great courtesy that abounded in them, alighted, doing him that
duty that might appertain to such a King: who perceiving it, with the like
solemnity entertained them, where ouerpassing their greetings, they remounted
a horseback, and by the way breefely discoursed of many things, until they
arrived at the famous City Hispalis, where they were received again with
many very sumptuous shows, prepared only for that purpose, to express the
riches and greatness of his state: and approaching the royal Palace of
Hispalia, they alighted, the King Toloian leading in one hand the King of
Hungary, and Macedon in the other hand, entered the great Hall, where the
Queen and the Princess Clarinda with diverse Peers, expected their arrival,
and most maiestically received them anewe, and the King of Hungary kneeled to
the Queen, desiring to kiss her hand, but she refraining it, took him up
in her arms, embracing and honoring him as worthily as the dignity of his
estate merited, doing the like unto the Macedonian Prince and other Nobles,
that also prostrated themselves before the Princess, who entertained them with
such gallant grace, that they greatly admired at her rare beauty, and singular
perfections, thinking themselves very happy, to have so absolute a Lady for
their Empress. No sooner ended their salutations, but the Tables being laid,
they sat down, and were used according to their magnificence: afterward they
had appointed them large and rich lodgings, by his majesty's command, retaining
in the palace (the more to honor them) the two kings. The next morning were
summoned the chief Lords to parleament, and their present audience to the
Kingly Ambassadors, who being thither sent for to their Senate houses,
delivered from their Lord and Emperor their Embassey: for which the Spanish
king rested highly contented, and replied he was fully determined to accord
with the Emperors request, therewith remaining highly satisfied, and so they
might prepare themselves, for in ten days she and they should be provided of
al necessaries: whereat they greatly rejoiced, so did the Queen and Princess
with that marriage, having before heard of the Emperors rare and absolute
conditions. At length all things ordered, they departed, leaving the Court in
great solitude through the princesses absence, who with her train continued
their daily iourneyes, till they came to Constantinople, where they were
welcomed, and the nuptials solemnized with most magnificent tryumphs,
torneyes, and all manner of pastimes, according to the greatness of such estates.

CHAP. II.
The birth of Don Bellianis of Greece, and of a strange adventure did befall
him a hunting, by which he parted from the Emperor his father.

NOw the History does record, that in process of time the Emperor Don
Bellaneo had of the Empress Clarinda three sons, the eldest called Don
Belianis of Greece, that inherited the Empire after his fathers death: the
second Don Clarineo of Spain: the third, Don Lucidamor of Thessalie, who not
only in valor and Millitarie discipline, equalled their Father, but excelled
all others of their time, in all gallaunt and worthy heroical exercises:
insomuch that all men had them in high admiration, specially the prince Don
Bellianis, that was educated according as his royal state merited, and the
heir of such an Empire required, until he came to the age of eight years,
in which no Donzell in all the Court (though he doubled his years) could
excel him (there being very many) chiefly the Prince of Macedons son, by
name Don Brianell: another of the King of Hungary, called Don Arsileo the
strong, through his excessive strength: for being knighted, he would often
between his arms smoother puissant knights, so that nex^* the Prince he was
accounted chiefest. In which time they were instructed and taught those things
as fitted such Princes, wherein they so well profited, but specially the prince
Don Bellianis, who much applied himself to Music, that in those days none
surpassed him: that the Emperor seeing him so much given unto it, was not
s^^rke in providing for him, the excellentest tutors that might be found: to
whom, and those he had, the Prince highly rewarded. In which worthy exercise,
he busied himself, till he perfected the age of twelve year, with such
forwardness, that every one admired him, assuredly imagining, that within the
compass of the whole earth, was not a more excellent and rarer spirit,

At this time he was taught the science of Arms, in which he showed himself
so expert, as it were a thing he should by inheritance possess, that he
seemed to need no teacher. In this exercise he spent two years. About which
time the Emperor being desirous to hunt in a spacious Forest, three miles
distant from the City, and being provided of all necessaries, he departed
to it with the Empress, his son Don Belianis, (leaving his two Brethren in
Court, that then desired not to go with them) but there accompanied him Don
Brianell, and the Prince Arsileo, with many Knights and Lords of high
esteem, with so great and royal train, as they were going to pitch a
battle. The Prince Don Belianis did lead by the reins the Empress his
mothers Palfrey, and the Emperor went conforted with the Princes Aisileo, and
Don Brianell, of wheme he rested greatly satisfied.

In this equipage, within a while they arrived at the place where straight
their sport began, that with the noise of hounds and horns, they drowned the
Echo of their own voices. A while after, from that side the Empress s^t,
there issued forth a Lion, and a Bear, with so swift a course, that though
they would have hid themselves, they could not find any place. The Lion
ran straight against the Prince, who although it somewhat scarde him, did not
therefore fear him, but with an undaunted heart, set himself before him, with
his sword in hand, which at his side he wore. But the Lion joined with him so
suddenly, that he wounded him sorelie in the foreheade, and griping him
between his arms, thrust one of his paws into his flesh, making a deep
wound: but the Prince not dismayed thereat, nor loosing his courageous mind,
gave such a thrust from his arms downewardes, right to his heart; that the
Lion through extreme pain left him. Then looking toward the Empress, saw
that the Bear with devilish fury, having overthrown the Prince his Coosen,
(against which his great strength naught prevailing) dragged over the Mountain
tops, which he seeing, (although grieuouslie wounded, and the Lion not
styrring) straight took his horse, and with all speed sollowed the way the
Bear had taken, not respecting the many Knights that want in his rescue, nor
the Empress outcries, forbidding his enterprise, fearing he should faint
through the murh blood he had lost by his wounds: but counterpoysing all
these things with the great love he bare his Coosen, stayed not, but in all
haste thrust himself into those great and thick Groaues, through which he
left groat quantity of his blood, that it was no little ease unto him, being
on foot. For the way was so thick, and naught, that it was impossible for him
to ride therein. For else the running of his Horse would have put him in
extreme danger. But continuing his way through that fearful Groaue,
following the noise of a lamentable and pitiful cry which he heard: and
being unable to pass further through weary faintness, set him down: and
seeing how much blood he had lost by his wounds, and the danger which he
knew his loving Coosen to be in, put him into a melancholy sorrow. But long
was he not so, by reason of a great noise that suddanly arose out of the
Thicket thereby, whereat he faintlie began to rise. And looking what might
be the cause thereof, saw the most horrible and fearful Bear, hasting to
the place where he was: but he setting himself before him to hinder his
further hurting his Coosen. The Bear espying him, furiously ran to assault
him, but by the Lions experience, he cast himself aside, and so let him pass
with his devilish fury, and turning about to strike him, perceived the Bear
to run in a Cave that was at the foot of a steepie Mountain there
adjoining: whereat very joyful of such a mischaunce, went to his co^sen, who
amazed at that he had seen, was likewise coming to him, and with great love
embracing him, and seeing his wounds bleed very fast, said: without doubt,
(good c(...)) you are sore wounded, wherefore I pray you rest here while I seek
out our company, and see your wounds dressed. I am no(...)s present (replied
Don Belianis) in such necessity, but may accompany you, yet would I gladly
know what strange adventure is in you hollow Cave. For as God shall help
me, we hither are not come, without some special secret. It behooues not you
now (said Arsileo) for your wounds will not suffer you to know the end of
this strange adventure. For in the lingering of your cure, you may endaunger
your self greatly. Never may it be said (replied Don Belianis) that I hence
part and not know it. Whereupon hand in hand they went till they came to the
Cave, whose obscure darkness was able to baunt the stoutest heart. But those
hautie Princes arrived there fearlesse of any thing, and had scarce entered the
same ten paces, but Don Arsileo unable to pass further, was, (mauger his
strength) thrust forth: and though he assayed to reenter, yet could he not,
but was with greater force still rebated back: which extremely grieved him,
seeing he could not enter to help his coosen. Meanewhile, he heard within a
rumor of great blows, as if many Knights were in fight together. For after
the Prince parted from his coosen, he went forwards through the Cave, beating
his head against the walls on every side, till he had passed that great
darkness, that he found himself in a Hall, where he saw a huge Pillar,
with certain Arabian letters, which he going to read, by the light that
proceeded from a Window thereby, was forbidden it by a most deformed Giant,
that seeing himself before (having in his hand bound with a mighty Chain,
the monstrous Bear causer of his coming thither) with a terrible ecchoing
sound of his hearse voice, thus spoke.

Thou art not permitted (poor captive donzell) to read the Letters of the
brazen Pillar, for I will hinder thee thereof, being here placed for the same
purpose, until the Prophecy be fulfilled which it contains. The Prince
rested greatly amazed to see so misshapen a Monster, that he supposed him some
infernal shadow, sooner then a mortal substance. But he with a never
daunted mind, made this reply. I may not enter battle with thee (thou
fearful beast) having not yet received the order of Knighthoode, which if I
had, although thou should never so much gainesay it, yet I would not go
hence, until such time as I had read them.

No reason shall serve thee (replied the Giant) to keep thee from death by my
hands, for here was I set for that purpose to welcome him with it, that
should presume to enter this my forbidden habitation. And so ending his
speech, he let loose the furious Bear, which with his devilish paws ran
against the Prince, and the Giant laying hand to a great smiter hanging at his
side, did the like, and being nigh him, reached him a mighty blow on the
head: but he that feared more the Giants Smiter then the Bears strength,
though big and ougly, got between the Giants arms, that he could not hurt
him, making the blow vain, and the Smyter with the swifte force it carried,
lighted on the ground, and flewe out of hand. Meanewhile the Prince struck
the Giant upon the thigh, that no more hurt him then had it fallen on an
Adamant: which he perceiving, turned to the Bear, yet could no more wound
him then the Giant: which vered him to the heart, and ^seeing the Giant
returned upon him, got behind the Pillar, whereon the Letters were, using it
as a Sheelde. But the Giant at this time suddenly came upon him, that he
could scarce effect it, who raising his steeled Smyter with both his hands,
gave such a mighty blow on the head, that he thought it parted in two, yet
it did him no harm, save that the strength thereof forced him backewardes two
or three steps. At this time the Bear look hold of his arm with his
paws, that renting his hunting Jacket, wounded him sor^lie: but seeing
himself in so immenent danger, was once again forced to take the Pillar for
his defense, whereon he espied a Sword fixed, whose workmanship was such,
that the like in no time was ever seen, wherein he more at that time rejoiced,
then had he been invested universal Lord of the whole earth, or made a
greater Monarch then his Father. And without delay stepping to it, very
easily and lightly drew it forth, which he had no sooner done, but that
there was heard a most horrible noise, as if the dissolution of the world were
then, that unable to stand, was feign to get hold of the Pillar. Yet scarce
was the earthquake past, but that deformed Giant prepared himself to fight,
which the Prince seeing, and joyful with the obtained sword, therewith thrust
at his body with the utmost strength of his arm, that the Sword appeared at
his back, that straight the Giant fell to the ground, as does some mighty
Oak, rent with a Whirlewind by the roots. And looking for the Bear, found
him also dead, as things that had no longer term of life, then the lasting
of the inchauntment, which ended with the drawing of the Swoorde from the
Pillar. And that noise being heard of Don A sileo, that remained at the Caves
mouth, tried if he might again enter it, which without any trouble he did.
And taking his hunting Jaueline with him, he c^st himself resolutelie into
it, and came to Don Belianis, at the time he ended the Giants life, and was
giving thanks to God, that he had delivered him from so great peril and
danger, and with wondrous gladness to see themselves again together, ran
to embrace each other, and Arsileo thus said. You have not been long (dear
Coosen) though so sor^lie wounded, as you were in (...)ng this so staunge and
most maruaylous adventure, to your admyrable honor, and blasing fame, whereby
I do assuredly believe, you will terminate all others with like expedition.
So that the perpetual record of your Fathers glorious name (which he in
many years with his great pain obtained) will be, with the never dying
memory of your famous deeds, and the eternity of your acts, in short time
extinguished, and in obliuious darkness overwhelmed. No not so (good Coosen,
replied Don Belianis) but let us read these Letters fixed vpdon this Pillar,
which cost me nolesse blood, then if they contained some matter of great
importance: which they read to this effect.

A Prophecy, and is fulfilled in the 37. Chapter. In the time to come when the
fiercenes of the courageous Lions by the greatness of my skill shall be put in
greater fear by them that in valor had so great part, the fearful keepers of
my cave being slain, and the sword won, wherewith the living shall be lost, and
^he dead put in possession of the reobtained, with the greatest strangeness of
obtainers, which until that time was ever heard of, shall be restored to
theirroyall blooud, and the true possessors know en.

Greatly were the two Princes amazed hereby, not understanding those words,
though plainly they were meant by Don Pelianis, seeing he had ended the
adventure. Great is the ^eede (said Don Bi^ile^) you seem to have of present
care for your wounds which I see to be so deep, that I fear you may fall
into some notable danger, throngh the great quantity of blood you have lost.
Which was true, for though the Prince with the joy of his good success, and in
beholding his rich Swoorde, thought not on his great and dangerous wounds,
which were such that if any other of less, and weaker constitution, and
couragiousnesse of mind had had them, could not so have sustained himself.
But while they were thus talking, from a most sumptuous Chamber, there issued
forth a beauteous Damsel, clothed in a Crimson satin robe, so great, that
the train thereof trayled on the ground.

This Lady was led between two Knights, ancient and of great gravity, and on
her attended twelve Damsels in the same liuerie, all showed by their faces some
heavy cause of melancholic sorrow, who being before the Prince, prostrated
themselves on the ground: which he seeing, did also the like, and entreated
them to rise: to which she said. I will not rise most excellent Prince, until
first you have granted me my demand: I do grant it (gracious Lady) said
the Prince, and not only that, but many others, for my desire is only for
to serve such as your own self.

I do render many infinite thanks (replied she) neither did I look for less
from so high and honored a Prince as you, guarded with such royal bounty,
and magnificent excellency: and rising, took him by the hand, and entered the
Chamber, which, though Don Belianis had seen many very fair and rich, in
his Fathers Palace, yet judged he that to be royallest he might see: for
the walls seemed of crystal, through which appeared such diversity of
pictures, as the whole Uniuerse could scarce contain more: the floor seemed
of Transparant Emeraldes, which so amassed their woondring senses, that they
stood a good while gazing on it: till Don Bellianis turning to the Lady that
held him by the hand, said. Although (fair Lady) the entrance of this Cave
seemed so timorous in sight, yet the variety of these raryties which it within
contains, presents more shows to the outward fight, the^ the whole world
besides, and without reason, was it not made with such extremes, as to be
inhabited with so excellent beauty within, and guarded with so great fear
without, to forbid the entera^ce to all attempters. The Lady co^ceiuing great
pleasure at the Princes words, answered, I could not choose but blush (most
gracious Prince) at your words (though so honored by them) knew I not your
great courtesy, that far surpasses all others of this time, which causes
me to prize my self more then I should, or my merits deserve (though I should
not under your protection do it) because all honored praises and deserved
merits rest in your self. But ouerpassing this which is so well known of
every one, let my entreaties now so prevail with you, that my maidens may
cure your wounds. I have no wound (replied the prince, that so much needs
cure, save my desire to know the end of this adventure, and also who she is
that so honors me. Uerie quickly shall you know it (fair Lord) (says the
Princess) but first must your wounds be cured, least you incur some greater
danger, and after shall you know the cause of your coming hither, whom I am,
and what else you will, all being done by her will that keeps me here.
Thereupon the Prince was unclothed by those Ladies, and one of them cured him
most skilfully, having great knowledge in that art, and laid on a sumptuous
bed, they left him to his rest. The Prince Arsileo remained in talk with the
d^msell of many things, specially of the adventure of that day, greatly
admiring what Don Bellianis his cousin had achieved, being so young of years.
Do not so wonder (most noble Prince (said the Lady, for in comparison of that
this Prince shall do, this is the least. Much maruailed Arsileo to be known in
that place, not remembering that he ever saw any of those Ladies, and so
continued in pleasing that till supper time, when the tables being covered,
they sat them down. And here leave we them, to show what b^fell the
Emperor Don Bellaneo, and what he did.

CHAP. III.
How the Emperor departed to seek out his son.

AT the many outcries the Empress gave Don Bellianis her sonneto return from
the Bears pursuit, diverse of those knights that were ahunting, hastened after,
following the signs of the blood, till they came to the place where he did
sit, and there found so much blood, that they rested wondrous disinaide, yet
saw they not the caves mouth, by reason that the entry thereof was there stopped,
and made on the further side. But not staying there, they began to seek the
Prince among the thick groves, with all speedy diligence, yet could find
neither footing nor sign of him, whereat they were so amazed, seeing every
where such quantity of blood, as they imagined he could not be far from
thence, yet durst not without him return to the Empress. The like happened
the Emperor, whom a certain knight told how a horrible Bear dragged the
Prince Arsileo, as is before mentioned, who understanding it, made no long
stay, but accompanied with many knights began to seek that way he had heard
they were gone, and after long toils seeing himself in that thick wood, and
doubting some mischance might be^all him, called for his armor (whereof he
never went unprovided, as one delighting more in millitarie success, then in
hunting, and was with all speed armed, and mounting on his horse, put himself
through the forest with (...) sole Squire, commanding the rest of his train,
to seek the Prince on the other side (naught prevailing with him their
entreaty to go with him) but he commanded the Prince Don Bryanell to take his
lance, cast his sheeld at his back, and leaving his company, very
sorrowful departed, fully determined not to return to Constantinople, until
he heard either of the princes lives or deaths, for whom he so greatly grieved,
that the more he thought to dissemble it, the more his sorrow increased Thus
in his journey leaving him, we will declare what his Knights did, which a
little after met with all the rest standing by the caves mouth, who knowing of
the cruel chance that befell the Prince Don Bellianis, began greatly to
lament him, but seeing it little prevailed, sought him anew in many places,
till the darkesome night ouertooke them, which forced them to return unto
their tents, where they left the Empress that imaged with grief, would have
commanded their heads to be stricken off, that consented to the Emperor to
depart, not so much esteeming the Princes loss, as his sudden going through
those dangerous woods, where certainly she thought he would be devoured by
savage beasts, inhabiting that forest: wherefore straight recommanded that
with many lights and torches they should again be looked for over all the
mountains: but not finding them worthily they deserved to be excused, and
seeing neither of them could be found, greatly grieved, they all returned to
the City with bitter execrations, cursing the hour they first determined to
come to that place, causer of the Empresses enraged grief, that none durst
speak unto her.

CHAP. IIII.
The strange and dangerous adventure that befell the Emperor in the discovered
Castle, seeking the Prince Don Bellianis his son.

THe Emperor putting himself through that wild grove, taking his way diversely,
having no certainty of any thing, so travailed til it was night, and with
great grief, seeing he could effect nothing to his intent by reason of the
nights obscurity, alighted: so did Brianell, who unbridled their horses, that
they might feed on the green grass, which with overmuch labor were so
tired, that they could hardly any longer bear their Masters. But the Emperor
being in great trouble and anguish of mind for the loss of both the Princes,
yet more sorrowed for the Empresses grief (which was not little) that he
supposed she would conceive, seeing neither of them return, then for ought
else. For he certainly thought that if they were devoured by wild beasts,
some sign thereof would be found, so that persuading himself the contrary,
he parted aside to rest, but he had not slept scarce two hours, when
suddenly he awaked at the loud cries he heard, that all the valleys ecchoed
with the noise, which with more vehemence still seemed to increase, as if they
proceeded from some in great necessity sustaining outrage: whereat the good
Emperor was so amazed, with trouble on all sides, cheefely at that time, yet
as one searching such dangers, commanded Don Bryanell to bridle his horse,
while he laced on his helm, and casting his sheeld at his back, mounted on his
horse, not setting foot in stirrup, and taking his lance, thrust himself
through the grove, following the voice he heard, imagining some of the Princes
might be there: but feeling himself weary with much travel, yet supposing he
approached every foot nigher to the lamentable cry, spied hard by him a high
Castle, well fortified with Towers, though by the darkness of the night he
could little discern it. But coming to the gate, perceived the voice
proceeded thence, and with great desire to know the cause, knocked at the same,
yet none answered him: which more urged him to learn the force and violence
within used, so that he went round about the Castle, but could find no
entrance: whereat fyred with delay, and the lamentable voice increasing, spied
a rope, wherewith from the top of the Castle, they drew up stones, with a
certain devise they had within. So the Emperor finding no other entry, bade
Don Bryanell unarm him, who said, what mean you to do my good Lord? will
you by force have your entrance through these stony walls? I intend nothing
else (replied the Emperor) and therefore alight and unarm me: which done,
bind my Armor to this coard, that therewith, if I have tune, I may Arm my
self aloft. I think it a mere madness (said the Prince) to hazard your
person in so imminent a danger: for besides that, the coming forth seems so
difficult, I believe you hardly will be suffered to see what kind of people does
inhabit it, and so have scarce time to use your Armor. I can do no otherwise
(answered the Emperor) for it would be imputed to my everlasting shame, if I
should suffer this wrong to pass unpunished, or not using that which my state
binds me to. So dismounting, he was disarmed, and getting hold of the rope,
taking with him his sword and sheelde, he clymed thereby to the Castle top, as
easily as if he had gone up a pair of stayres, and calling for his Armor, Don
Brianell began to tie it to the cord. But it otherwise fell out then he
imagined: for through the Castle gallerie, he saw above ten Knights, pursued
by two most fearful giants, and ten other knights that laid on them great and
mighty blows: which the Emperor seeing, and wanting time to arm himself,
embraced his strong sheeld, and opposed himself against the Giants, calling
aloud unto the Knights, they should turn, and not cowardly fly for fear. They
being astonished with their shame, seeing a knight without Armor have the courage
to attempt such an enterprise, returned against the furious Giant, who with
fretting ire, to see that one only man should resist their fury, set upon
him with great battel-axes in their strong hands. But he whose heart never
feared their deeds, with an undaunted mind stayed for them, and making one
loose his blow, received the others on his sheelde, which was such, that
parted in two, it fell to the ground, hardly saving his hand from following it,
yet was it a little wounded. Whereat full of rage, he struck one of them on
the head, that the sword being of a good temper, and governed by so puissant an
arm, it cleft it down to the eyes, wherewith he fell with such violence, as
when a tower is ouerturned by the fury of a sudden earthquake, hereupon the
other ourreached him with his axe, that had he not warded it with his sword, it
had bin the last he should receive, for it descended with such rigor, that his
sword was cut in two, and he wounded pitiously on the head: who then seeing
himself in such danger, closed straight with the Giant, that not able to
shun him, they both took hold of one another arms, demeaning themselves
so valiantly, that the Emperor with the surpassing strength he used, lost much
blood by his wounds, which at length made him (being furiously moved) hoyst his
enemy in the air, and threw him to the ground, even in the place where he
came up, and quickly pushing him with his hands, tumbled him headlong over the
Tower, that with the fall he died: yet least he might revive, looking out of a
window, he called to Don Brianell to kill him before he arose, who straight
cut off his head. By this time the clearenesse of the morning began to
show it self, when the Emperor looking toward the flying Knights,
perceived them to be put to the worst, by reason of one whose valor excelled
the rest, seeming to be of high descent, and their commander, which the
Emperor seeing, took one of the dead Giants sheeldes, meaning to rescue them,
whereat the knight turning to him to see where he had left the Giants, for
being busy in fight with the knights, little thought they should have such
fortune, and seeing that horrible Giant dead, and how the Knight made against
him, rested amazed, yet with great fury taking his sword with both hands,
made toward the Emperor, which raising aloft, gave him such a blow on the
sheeld, that it made him bow to the ground, and doubling with another on the
other side thereof, struck clean from his arm, sorely wounding him on the
thigh, which the Emperor thought he had lost, that with mortal fury gave
such another on the right arm, that the greatest part thereof he cut,
forcing the knight to take his sword in his left hand, who with it would
wound him, but the Emperor that had learned to omit no occasion, sustaining
himself on his thigh, as well as he could struck at him so fierce a blow,
which lighting on his hard tempered helm, it field him almost dead to the
ground: yet greatly praising him for that he had seen him do (though he
much had endaungered him) would not any otherwise hurt him, but going to
succor the knights of the Castle, saw they had valiantly resisted their
adversaries, and so seeing every thing accomplished to his desire, kneeled and
rendered God great thanks for his delivery from so great danger, being the
greatest he ever had been in, finding himself unarmed. But going to rise,
was not able to stand on his legs, though he greatly stirred to do it, by
reason of his wound, which by that time was cold. And turning to them of the
Castle, that already had slain their enemies, who extremely greeuing so to
see him, would unclothe him to cure his wounds. But he would not, till first
they called his Page that remained without, which they did, wonderfully amazed
at the haughty courage of the knight, that so admirable and unheard of deeds
had done, coming to such a place unarmed, which they judged to be the greatest
act that ever was spoken of. And calling Don Bryanell, they told him what the
Knight would have, who very joyful because they told him he was in no
danger of death, straight mounted up the Castle stayres, where the Emperor
was, greatly doubting his life, by reason he enterprised that adventure without
armor, and went to the place where they unclothed him, and there dressed his
wounds: which done, he kneeled down, demanding his royal hands to kiss
them. The Emperor embraced him, and made him rise: to whom Don Bryanell said.
Great was the fear that I was in for you my most excellent Lord, in that I was
barred from bringing you your armor, seeing you run into so certain peril,
yet think I more easily you tumbled down the Giant, then you did your self
mount up unto the top, giving him no leisure to use the rope for his easier
descent. The Emperor much delighted in his pleasant speech, and commanded them
to leave him alone to rest his tired body, which the knight did, taking Don
Bryanell with them, and desired him they might know who his master was, and
his name, assuring themselves, the whole earths circuit could not afford his
like for valor, and what chance had at such time brought him thither.

To whom Don Brianell answered, he was called the unknown knight: and though
he had a long time accompanied him, he knew no other name he had, and that
travailing over these mountains, he heard the great cries within the Castle,
with what else happened. So leaving their discourse, and thinking it time, went
to serve the Emperor meat, whom they found more quiet (the pain of his
wounds being mittigated) and after he had eaten, demanded the occasion that
those Giants so used them. We know not good sir (answered they) save how a
knight that came with them, knocked the last night at the Castle gate,
entreating us to let him in, requiring a lodging for that night, which we
yielding to, opened the gate, mistrusting nothing less, then that which
befell: but in the opening, he set upon us with those pitiless Giants, whom
you slew. And when we saw so many inconveniences, sent forth those cries,
together with many women that were within. This (good sir) is all that we know
of this adventure: so that if you had not come when you did, we had all
suffered a most cruel death.

Tell me, said the Emperor, what is become of a knight clothed in an azure
Armor? he is prisoner in a Tower (replied they) until we know your farther
resolution what shall be don with him, woorthilie deserving to be tormented
with a cruel death for his treachery: but do not so (said the Emperor) for he
is a very good Knight, and deserves no evil usage, and therefore have care he
want nothing he shall need, for I would not for any thing he should miscarrie:
of him shall we know the cause of ^^e^^ traiterous design, which seem is
not without special occasion. Hereupon the knight went straight and dressed
his wounds, who though he had lost much blood, seemed courageous, as if he
were at liberty. And after they had dressed him, he was conuaied to a fair
Chamber, providing him with all necessaries, as the Emperor had commanded.
Who in this order remained ten days in the cure of his wounds: when
remembering the task he had undertook, determining to depart thence, went
first to visit the wounded Knight, whom he found greatly amended of his
wounds: and approaching to his bed side, asked him how he felt himself.
Well enough (answered he) though with no little grief for my badde success:
yet am I not sorry to be overcome, seeing it was by him, whose courage and
valor, the strength of mighty Giants could not abate. But one thing I
entreat of you (sir Knight) by the courtesy you have shown me, you would
vouchsafe to tell me your name, that in those places where I shall come, I may
publish your hautie deeds. It pleases me (replied the Emperor)
conditionally, you also let me know yours, with the cause of your coming
hither, with the truth thereof, whereto such a Knight as you is bound.

I am desirous to know you (said the Knight) that though it be against the
promise I have made, and you promising me to keep it secret, I will not
deny it. Thereto I give you my falth (answered the Emperor) and first know,
I am Don Bellaneo, Emperor of Greece, that by certain adventure, not far
from hence, I parted from my train, the rest having happened, as you have
seen. Ho immortal Gods (said the Knight) fetching a great sigh: are you he,
whose name is so feared among all the Pagan nations? and he that never refused
to assault so terrible and fierce Giants? And in brief, he whose invincible
mind shows how true the everlasting fame of your perpetual deeds is? and
through the world of you is spread? Ho great Sultan, now by this days success,
thy determined purpose is utterly made void, having so strong an adversary
left thee in the world. It therefore behoues thee no more to think of peace? And
turning to the Emperor (who greatly amazed at his words, stood gazing on him)
and dissembling his conceived grief. Supposing (renowned Prince) the matter I
shall disclose, to be of less consequence then it is, I will in few words
unfold the truth thereof, though in the doing of it, to my self more then to
any resulteth greatest loss. I know that your name (so fearful among all
Gentiles) being published in the Sultan of Siconias court, with the great
destruction by you made of his people, and in all Paganism, moved him by
promise to bind himself to give the one half of his dominions with the
marriage of his daughter, to that knight, by whose valor your head were brought
him. Also promising, that if in the enterprise he died, the half of his said
dominions should notwithstanding be granted to his successiue heirs, So I
understanding the great promise the Sultan had made, and greatly loving his
daughter, resolutely resolved, I departed to the kingdom of Antioch, whereof I
am Lord, and with my self having determined what I ought to do, I left my
court, accompanied with 500. knights, and 30. giants, purposing at your coming
out of your palace, either to kill or imprison you: so shipping our selves, and
landed not far from hence, left our ships at anchor, thither to return with
your conquest. And that this we might better compass, unknown, and unseen,
we agreed to take this Castle. and here remain till occasion were offered us
to effect this pretense, being informed of the state of all things by a man
whom on the coast we took, whereby we hither came, as you have heard, and
easily thought to have taken it, being minded to let none survive to carry the
news abroad: but your incomparable valor has frustrated our intent. Thus
have I declared unto you all that in this case I can, whereto your great
bounty, and magnanimous clemency forced me: for notwithstanding I had so
massacred your subjects, you caused me thus to be cured. My name is Don
Gallaneo of Antioch, if you ever heard of me before: and so he made an end to
his speech. The Emperor rested wonderful amazed, seeing with what audacity
don Gallaneo had discovered him a deed of such weight, for which he might
greatly fear his deserved punishment: but judged him of hauty courage,
considering how co^fidently he had put himself in his hands, having against him
committed so high treachery: and showing no manner of alteration, made him this
answer. Truly Prince Don Gallaneo, you have plainly expressed the valiancie of
your mind, in so openly bewraying that, which by any other means I could not
have known, whereby you have doubled the cause of my imaginary thoughts,
seeing in such a knight so little shame, that without further consideration.
should by treason seek to spill my innocent blood, which in so great a Prince
as you, seems more odious then in any other, being by order of knighthoode,
bound to be virtuous, and abhore all such detestable actions, and to be an
example to your subjects, least against your self they might commit the like.
Yet would I not for all my state, you should have had such confidence in me,
so to discover my self, that I might (not knowing it) let your own self, see
your self confounded in your own imaginations. But seeing it is done, here you
shall remain in this Castle, till I further determine of your being. Yet for
all this (said Don Gallaneo) assure your person, for not far hence is the
remainder of my power, and easily may you incur some greater danger, though
your person be such as I have tried: yet among them are so fierce and mighty
Giants, that will not think much to cleave your body armed in two, with one
blow. I have thought (said the Emperor) what in this case shall be done: and
thereupon commanded his horse and Don Brianels, to be sadled. And Don Brianell
foreseeing the peril that might ensue, beseeched the Emperor on his knees to
give him the order of Knighthood, to serve him in that enterprise: which the
Emperor denied, promising to do it an other day. But here we leave them, and
return to the Prince Don Bellianis, and Arfileo, whom we left with the Lady
in the Cave.

CHAP. V.
How Don Bellianis with the Lady departed from the Cave, and by what strange
adventure he and Arsileo were knighted.

IT is recorded by Friston, that the Prince Don Bellianis, with his Coosen
Arsileo, remained ten days in the Damzels cave, till the Prince was able to
travail, who greeuing much for the sorrow the Emperor and Empress would
sustain, and acknowledging how much bound he was to that Lady, determined to
depart, yet greatly desired to know the end of that adventure. Wherefore the
prince Arsileo, a day before their departure, entreated her to declare unto
them the whole occasion of her being in the Cave, and what she would require
them to do in her service: although they needed not make many offers, being as
they were so bound to her for so many favors, that at her command without
entreaty, they ought to do, even with the hazard of their lives. The damzell
with a sorrowful countenance, as one that remembered her forepassed misfortunes,
could not withhold her tears, but with watery cheeks, and eyes like flowing
springs with running streams, at last thus began. I cannot (excellent Princes)
so entirely express unto you the cause of my grief, as I could desire, for
the great sorrow my grieved heart sustaines, suddenly suppressing me, and
breaking into a salt shower of brinish tears, will not give place unto the
exact utterance of my words, yet as I may I will do it. I was (most noble
Princes) daughter unto Pompeiano, (not long since king of Antioch) and am
called Aurora, that being at the Sultan of Babylons court, accompanying his
daughter, the most beautiful Florisbella, whose perfected beauty, and absolute
virtues, so far surpasses al other of her time, as does ye sun al lesser
stars, To this court came a knight whose name for a long time was not known,
saving by certain Images in his sheeld, was called the knight of the three
images, who showed himself so valiant, that there was no ten knights in the
whole Court so strong and hardy, as durst maintain the field against him.
This Knight throughout the Soldanes Empire, performed such deeds of haughty
prowess, that in general, among all men he was accounted a second Mars, and
the Soldane did no less esteem of him, always having him in his company,
whereby he thought himself worthy of greater dignities, and so became amorous
of the divine Florisbella, for whose love a long time he suffered great grief
and much solitude, not daring to manifest it to any: at length seeing nothing
prevail to expel that desire, when one day the Soldane with all his Court was
gone a hunting, he remained alone in the Palace, and after some pleasant
discourses, discovered unto me the secrets of his love, entreating me that in
his name I would entreat the princess to accept him for her knight, wherewith
she finding her self agreeued, answered that by no means she would do it,
commanding him no more to imagine any such madness, least the Soldane her
father should by chance hear thereof, which if he did, it might cost him
little less then his life. But he nothing weighing this her answer, found
means that the Princess might know the extreme anguish of his perplexed
heart, inthralled by her beauty, so that I thinking that some harm might
thereby ensue, declared it to the Soldane, who thereupon commanded him to
depart his Empire, but he not knowing the occasion, very heavily before his
departure, told him that what he did was against reason, in commanding him to
leave his Dominions, for he was a prince able to show him, that such as he
ought not to be so used. And departing the Court toward the Soldane of
Siconia, called the great Sophi of Persia, where suspecting I was cause of his
exile, began with fire and sword to enter the king my fathers territories, in
such sort wasting and spoiling them, that slaying the king, he took possession
of the whole Kingdom, giving it to the knight of the kindred called the Prince
Don Galaneo, reputed a man of great valor. In which time (not knowing of his
success) I went from the Soldanes Court home to my fathers, and fearing to
fall in their hands, by counsel of a wise woman called Bellona, entered in a
boat with these Damsels you here see, together with the said woman, and by
her direction arrived in this country, and was by her conducted to this cave,
where she bad me remain, for I should quickly be delivered by the Prince of
Greece, and his cousin of Hungary, foretelling me every thing that hitherto
has happened, and moreover she bad me give you armor and horses, (which here
she left) wherewith you shall be knighted by a strange adventure, but what it it
was she would not tell. Thus have I declared the occasion of my being here: and
the fearful Bear the wise woman here left, was hither to bring the Prince
Arfileo as you saw, and the mighty Giant which you slew, remained keeper of
the cave, who might not be slain with any weapon but the sword which you drew
out of the Pillar that he guarded. So that (great Lord) the remedy of my
misfortune rests in your hands, and our departure may be when and so soon
as you shall think good. I am content (answered he) wondrous amazed at the
Damsels discourse) but I would willingly take with me an host of men, that you
may more easily recover your kingdom. I attend here no other hope but yours
(said she) and as for any other I was informed we shall not need. Whereat the
Prince (seeing that was her will) commanded straight provision to be made for
his departure: so al necessaries being ready, they mounted a horsback, and the
damsels on their palfraies, accompanied with the two ancient knights that
carried yt armor that the princess Auro^a had spoken of, which they seeing,
took it forth of ye cases, which were as appertained to nouel knights. The
prince Don Belianis armor was of color Orange-tawny, with a sea wave so big,
that it seemed to ouerwhelme a ship there figured. In his sheeld was pourtraide
the picture of a most beautiful Lady, with a knight kneeling before her, as if
he craved mercy at her hands, from whom she turned her face in anger, with an
inscription to this effect.

Let him die for so departing
At our first and sudden meeting:
Leaving thereby my dear sight dim
Of his, when I desired to see him.
Which was written in Arabian letters, that the Prince well understood. The
prince Arfileos were murry, in ye midst whereof was fighting a griffon with a
most terible dragon, which were parted by a damsel that made peace between
them, which when they saw so fair, became desirous to put them on, and causing
the princess and damsel to stay, were armed with them, which so well fitted
them, as if of purpose they had been forged for them, wherewith being armed,
set forwards on their iourny, and having gone not far from the cave, spied
before the^ a fair Castle, which til then they had not seen, nor yet when
they entered the cave. The princess and the Ladies masked themselves, because
ye heat of the sun was great, and the rest were disguised, that they might not
be known, and approaching the Castle they saw two knights come forth thereof,
the one in a white armor like a novel knight, the other that was bigger of
personage, and seemed of great valor, was clad in the richest armor that might
be seen, of an azure color, with many imperial crowns. In ye middle of his
sheeld was figured the image of Mars, as the Pagans use to picture him. These
knights of the casile led with them a man on horseback vnbooted and vnspurde,
and his head musled like a prisoner which made the prince desirous to know what
they were. As God shall help me (said Arfileo) if I were knighted, I would
procure to know those knights, and why they lead yt knight prisoner. Do not
therefore trouble your self (good cousin) said Don Bellianis, for easily may it
be done, and so let it be my charge, for I wish God may never help me if
straight we know it not, so going forward, they met a Squire that came to them,
and said. Sir knights, my master that is he in the white armor, desires you
by me, yt because he received this day his order of knighthood, you would be
content to break a lance with him, for you seeming no less valiant then
courteous, he desires to try if your deeds do agree with your outward
appearance. Tell him (replied Don Bellianis) we would willingly accomplish his
desire, were we but knighted, and would gladly receive such order at the
Grecian Emperors hands, for this and no other cause lets us from
fulfilling his mind. And you may also tell him (said Arsileo) that were it not
for that, it should be commanded him to yield us account of that knight what he
is, and why they lead him prisoner. The Page returned to his master and told
him that answer, which he reputed too great arrogancy in them, but seeing
they expected his answer, he went to them, and somewhat choleric he said.
Which of you is the knight that gave my page so proud an answer? You should
not need to ask it (said Arsileo) were we knighted, desiring nothing more
then to satisfy your request, but seeing said the knight) you go to require
that order at the Emperor Bellaneos hands, to save you that labor, I assure
you he is not at Constantinople, nor of him is there any news, and therefore
know that yonder knight is such a Prince, both in possessions and valor, as
the Emperor little surpasses him, wherefore that our Combat may be effected,
you may receive the order you seek of him, although it were to no other end
then to chastise the madness that possesses you (replied Don Bellianis) we
will now receive that sacred order, and calling one of the damsels, sent her in
their names to the knight in the azure armor, who going where he was, thus
said. The knights you see with yon Ladies (noble Sir) entreat you, seeing they
expected the order of arms at the hands of the Emperor of Greece, whom your
companion says is absent from Constantinople, and they supposing you no less
noble then valiant in outward show, to grace them with the said order, that
they might satisfy your companion with the breaking of some few lances,
certifying you that without scruple you may do it, for they be both of royal
blood, I am right glad to do it (answered he) though it were better they
received it by the Emperor, with those ceremonious rights as such honor
requires, but seeing they are thus content it shall be, and so meeting each
other with such kind greetings and salutations, as if they knew the
consanguinitie between them, and the Princes requested the knight again to
accomplish their request, they all alighted, and he taking their oaths, were
knighted, and the princess Aurora girded Don Beliani: with his sword, whilst
the novel knight did the like to Arsileo: which done, they rested so content,
as they were created the greatest Lords of the world, and the knight embracing
them, said. I pray God fair knights that in all things you may attain no
less honor then the royal state of your descent does require: to whom they
rendered great thanks, for this his kind benediction, and mounted again on
horseback.

CHAP VI.
The brave and dangerous fight between the two Princes and the knights of the
Castle.

AFter the knights were all on horseback mounted, he in the white armor
enraged with kindled wrath of desired revenge against Arsileo, for the arrogant
words he had sent him, that with animated courage proceeded from a valiant
heart, said to him. Sir knight, if with weapons you dare defend your proud
answer sent me by my page, now have you time to do it. Arsileo hearing this,
and being no less furious the^ he, answered never a word, but turned his
horse, and taking so much field as would suffice for his carryer, couched his
lance against his adversary, who with no less fury met him in the middle of
their course, incountering so rigorously, that their lances flew in small
pieces, and meeting with their bodies, the knight of the Castle fell down over
his horse crupper: the like happened to Arsileo, but that he fell on his feet,
with the saddle between his legs, for by the strong encounter his girls broke,
so that both astonished at this chance, laid hands to their well cutting
swords, and joining one to the other, stroke so strong and mighty blows on
their well tempered helmes, that it caused great fear in their companies, each
doubting the loss of their friend, for they wounded one another with admirable
strength, extremely dangering their flesh, cutting their armor, brnsing
themselves, spilling their blood in great abundance, yet the knight of the
Castle was worse wounded by reason of the good armor Arfileo wore, and being
the valia^test knight (next don Bellianis) in those days. But the knight of
the castle, with the desire he had to overcome his adversary, nothing regarded
his wounds: wherefore he in the azure armor, being skilfuller in such matters,
plainly perceived, yt if he gave not over, he either would remain vanquished,
or slain, yet knew he not how to remedy it, norhew to forbid it, which made
him storm like a Lion, seeing no means to prevent the danger like to befall
his friend. On the other side, Don Bellianis viewing the cruel fight, and
though he saw Arfileo more courageously double his blows, yet greatly feared
the event thereof, seeing with what nimblenesse the other fought. And
considering how he might prevent his fear, stepped to the Princess Aurora,
and craved of her leave to prove himself with the knight in the azure armor,
that he might thereby aid the prince Arfileo, if he should be put to any
disadua^tage. The princess though unwilling, co^discended, seeing the
necessity of the case required. Whereupon he went to the knight in blew, and
said. Although valiant sir, it may seem discourtesie (having no occasion to
provoke us to fight) yet the necessity of our companions moves us unto it, and
brgeth me now to crave the breaking of a lance with you, whiles the combat
dureth, if you please. It does please me (replied the knight of the Castle)
with this promise, that either of us may help his fellow in his need. The
Prince that nothing else wished, was exceedingly content thereof. And so both
took that part of the field that they thought meet for their incou^ters, ran
one against the other, their lances couched in their resks, and met so
furiously, that the shiuers of their spears flew up into the air out of
sight, yet moved one another no more then had they run against a tower: which
greatly amazed the knight of the Castle, having hitherto overthrown to the
earth all that ever he iousted with. And so with raging fury returned upon Don
Bellianis, yt also made toward him, who before he could defend himself with
his sheeld, received so strong a blow, that it made him lean his head on his
horses neck, leaving him so astonished, that when the Princess saw it, she was
surprised with a cold sweat over all her body, and doubling another on him,
the Prince lifted up his sheeld, which was thrown quite to the ground, but in
two, that the fine tiper wherewith the wise Bellona did forge it, nothing
prevailed against the never conquered arm of that most valiant knight. But
hereat don Bellianis feeling himself so handled, stroke the knight on his
helm, that he supposed the whole weight of some tower had fallen thereon, and
the blow lighted with such mighty strength, that it had almost thrown him
down, yet the horse by ye force thereof, was forced to set his knees on the
ground, and his helm with his armed headpeece under it, were both cut, and the
surious sword which resting there, descended downwards on the horse, yt al his
capparizons made of hardest steel were cut. The imprisoned knight seeing so
great a blow, cried out and said. I cannot believe that valiant Hector, terror
to ye Greeks, with all his admirable forces could have given the like blow, and
now yon knight has found his match. But they amazed at each others strength,
having again met, bestowed on themselves such terrible strokes, that their
armor being rent in many places, were grievously wounded, and the knight of the
castle turning toward his follow, saw he was to weak, through the much blood
he had lost, yt greatly pitying him, with new courage redoubled his blows on
his adversary, yet al his toil little auailed him, for Don Bellianis seeing
this was the first battle that ever he fought, and greeuing that the other
knight should so long withstand him, having endured 3. hours fight, and lost
his sheeld, and feeling himself wounded in many places, took his sword with
both hands, stretching himself on his s^^rrops, thinking to end the battle
with that sole blow: but the Knight of the Castle, being very circumspect in
such matters, made show to await him, covering himself very well with his
sheeld, and seeing the blow came right downward on his head, closed between
his arms, that he could not strike him, save only with his sword hilts, which
was so mightily, that he could not for a while feel himself: and with the
strength thereof the sword fell out of his hands, hanging at his arm by a little
chain. The knight in the closing wounded him on the arm with a thrust (which
resisted by the armor, ran between the harness and his elbow, making him no
little wound. And Don Bellianis seeing him so nigh took him between his
arms, and spurring his horse, hoysted him very lightly from his saddle: the
Knight likewise getting hold of him, so long strugled together, that both came
to the ground, almost hanging one foot in the stirrup, and bravely holding
together, striued to overthrow each other not daring to loose their hold, so
greatly they feared the ouermatched strength of one another. While they were
thus in this strife, from out the thickest of the wood, they espied the number
of thirty knights, and four Giants, who seeing the knight in the Azure armor
in such danger, all spurred against Don Bellianis, not regarding the outcries
of the imprisoned knight, that said they should not hurt him. But he had bin
slain if they had not feared to harm the Knight in the Azure armor: who
loosing the other, and seeing his horse nigh him (though he were greatly
wounded) mounted thereon, with setting his foot on the stirrup, with such
agilitie, that he made them all marvel, and as one that had done nothing all
that day, with a valiant courage, he rushed in among those knights, and at
three blows he sieve three. The Prince Arsileo, at this time, having withdrawn
himself to breath, seeing his companion in such danger, not looking to his
adversary, leapt on his horse: so did the two old Knights that with the
Princess came, but all of them might little prevail against the furious
multitude, with the knights of the Castle also, that prepared themselves to
aid them. Here declares Friston, that the two first knights of Thessalie, the
Castle were, the Emperor Don Bellaneo, that had knighted Don Brianell, which
was he that fought with Arfileo, having armed himself with Don Gallaneos armor,
and setting him on horsback (as you have heard) meaning to convey himself to
Constantinople, the better to pass unknown through his knights, that were
they that assailed the princes, imagining the Emperor to be Don Gallaneo, and
therefore so furiously assaulted them as is expressed. But the Emperor fearing
that Don Gallaneo (having that opportunity to effect his determination) would
discover himself to his knights, called to him one of those men that came from
the Castle, and commanded him with all speed possible, to haste him to
Constantinople, and tell the king of Hungary, in what necessity he left him,
telling him his name, which till that time he had not discovered to any of the
Castle. And putting off his Gantlet, gave him his royal seal at Arms, which
the King very well knew, commanding him he should with all speed return.
The man greatly amazed, took the Signet, and hasted him to Constantinople,
staying nothing by the way, and in short time arrived in the City, which was
some five leagues distant from the Castle, and demanded for the King of
Hungaries Palace. It was told him that he was in the Empereurs Court,
whither he straight ways went, and finding him, kneeled before him half
speechlesie, and dismayed, told him in what necessity he had left the
Emperor, whereat the King greatly amazed, took the King, and saying nothing
to the Empress, commanded the guarde which continually was in the Palace,
being above two thousand knighte, to begin to march toward the Castle,
commanding also the whole City to arm it self, and follow him, which
fearing some sudden treason to be at hand, raised so great tumult of armor
through all the same, that the inhabitants bred into an uproar, as if with
enemies it had been besieged. And so though the common people kn^we the
present necessity required speedy haste, were somewhat long or they set
forth. And in their way we leave them, till we have shown what in the mean
season befell the Emperor, and the Princes.

CHAP. VII.
The end of the fight between the Emperor and Princes, against Don Gallaneo
and his men.

AS soon as the Emperor had dispatched the Messenger to Constantinople, he
determined to aid the Knights, that maintained a terrible battle with the
Giants, and their troops, being most cruelly wounded, by reason of the
remorcelesie forces of those pitilesse flends, the Prince Don Bellaneo, seeing
his Knights were deceived, with great outcries uncovering his face, called to
them, who when they heard his voice, and saw his face, straight knew him,
greatly amazed at such a chance, and leaving their fight against the Princes
ran to embrace him, not knowing the cause why that Knight should be then
armed with his arrnour. And though the Emperor see him go toward them, yet
could he not stay him. And Don Gallaneo seeing that opportunity which Fortune
offered him, and not minding to spend his time in speeches with his men,
said. Now is it requisite (oh Knights) that you revenge me on him that
wears my armor. For know, if you take him, or slay him, our enterprice
therewith is ended, for he is the Emperor of Constantinople, whom we came from
far Countries to seek, being he that has slain my Knights, and took me
prisoner, using me as you have seen. The Knights that aimed at no other mark,
together in a troop set upon the Emperor, and Don Brianell of Macedon, that
was with him. But when Don Bellianis, and Arfileo heald that he was the
Emperor his Father, greatly grieved, for what with him befell them, and with
eager fury they set upon those traitorous Knights. But those damned Giants
that came before the rest opposed themselves against them, striking strong and
mighty blows. And one of them raising aloft a huge iron mace between his
hands, struck the Emperor therewith, that if he had not warded it on his
sheelde, it had shiuered his head in pieces: yet it rested not there, but
descenced on his horses neck, felling him dead to the ground, with his
matster on his back. The Emperor for all this, struck him on both his arms,
that he threw them to the earth, with the mace between them

Now here was the Emperor in great. danger of his life. For when his horse
fell, he took one of his legs under him, and don Gallaneo, that had already
put on one of the dead Knights armor, coming thither at that time with two
other Giants, all the three alighted from their Horses, intending there to
strike off his head. The Prince don Bellianis that saw his father in that
extremity, dismounting in all haste, went to succor him, but ere he came,
don Gallaneo (as he whom his death would highly advantage) wounded him on
the head, and the two Giants with their Maces raised aloft, with mighty
strength would discharge them on his head: so that he for that time not able
to draw him from under his horse, with one blow ouerth^^we don Gallaneo,
cutting asunder his sheeld and helm, and grievously wounded him on the head.
And being about to avoid those Giants blows, could by no means shun them,
but both discharging their hellish fury on his head, made him bow to the
earth, and so staggard him that he could scarce stand. And though the
spacious world contained not his like for admirable strength, yet with seeing
his Father in that case, and himself so handled by such infernal Monsters,
glorying in nothing but in bloody cruelty, abhorring all good and decent
order of equal Martial discipline, so doubled his undaunted courage in
himself, stroke at one of the Giants heads, who thinking to defend it by
crossing his Mace over his Helm, had it cut clean in two, hard by the
handle, and the furious Sword lighted on the horse gyrts that lay on the
Emperor, that cutting them of on both sides, he gave his Father liberty to
draw his leg away, pushing the Horse from him quickelie, arose yet very
weary. And seeing how Don Bellianis with one side, how he reached one of
the deformed Giants with great strength upon his shigh, he felled him to the
ground, and how with an other he maintained a hot fight. And he also saw
that Don Brianell and Arsileo, with eight Knights that came out of the Castle
to succor them, were in a fierce battle with the other Giant and Knights. And
that Arfileo being busied with the Giant, the other Knights being in number
greatly inferior to their enemies, were by them put to the worse: wherefore
the Emperor went to aid them: but ere he arrived, the Giant and Arsileo,
having closed, dismounted each other, that the Giant leaving his feet in the
stirrup, Arfileo spurred his Horse backewarde, making him run away, and
dragge his master after him, who within a while breathed his last. And so he
turned with the Emperor courageously to help their companions, and arrived
when their adversaries were little able to make them longer resistaunce,
specially because don Bellianis had slain the other Giant: At which instant
arriving where he was, scarce ten of them remained with life, which to save
themselves fled into the wooddes. Whereupon they alighted (not minding to
pursue them) to bind their wounds. But scant had the Emperor time to render
due thanks for their great help, much admiring their exceeding valor, when
the rest of don Gallineos Knights issued from the thickest of the Grove, who
being advertised of the success of their enterprise, and not of their loss,
came in great haste to participate of the glory they should obtain by the
Emperors death.

Before them came those stern and ugly Giants, with their lannces, seeming
huge pine trees, with such tempe^^ous fury, that they had not leisure to bind
their deep wounds. Great was the sorrow the Emperor hereby sustained, seeing
the stay of the King of Hungary. But as neither he nor the other Knights
could by death-seeming terror be daunted, with a courageous heart thus he
said. Now is the time (brave knights) that you must show ye magnanimity of
your invincible minds, since in your first adventure fortune has so directed
you, that the glory of the forepassed worthies by the victory of this one
battle shall be ertinguished, though herein we yield the tribute of our lives
to al-conquering death, which being natural to all men, should least be
feared. But in the omnipotent powers of him that this circled universe did
frame, do I trust he will not permit the valor of such Knights in such short
time to perish, but so stregthen them, that the perpetual fame of their royal
acts may remain eternized to all succeeding ages. Little need we to be
encouraged to suffer the fearful struck of death (replied Arfileo) for where
the person of so victorious an emperor is endangered, ours can be but the least
of all most little losses. I thought no less (answered the Emperor, but I
will speak it, that my self imitating your valor might encourage my decaying
courage by your discreet reply, by which since I perceive you rested
undaunted, and animated against ensuing dangers, it behooued us, least we be
suddenly assaulted and overthrown with their horses, which greatly might
hazard us, that we take before us yon knight that lies upon the ground
(meaning Don Galaneo, that very sorely wounded lay without his helm) for
these that toward us come be his men, and fearing to hurt him, will not molest
us with their horses. This will be very good (said Don Bellianis) as also that
one of these Knights speedily conduct these Ladies into the castle, for I do
more regard their safety, then I esteem my own life. So effecting all
things, they on foot expected the coming of the Giants and Knights, which
were above 500. in number, who approaching, were greatly amazed to see that
slaughter of knights and Giants, which if their knights that fled had not told
them of, they would not have believed it. Hereupon two of the foremost Giants
with a cousin of Don Gallaneo called Don Galfeo the unknown, thinking to ouerrun
them with their horses, perceived they defended themselves with don Gallanco:
wherefore they commanded all their knights to alight on foot, which they would
by no means do, because they saw coming from the city a great troop of
knights, which so soon arrived, as had they alighted, with little trouble they
had al bin slain, yet notwithstanding some ten of them dismounted together,
making account to end ye fight with the emperors death, while the rest went
against the knights yt from the city marched: for being in a strange land,
they reputed every one their enemy. But the King of Hungary that was he which
came with ye knights in such extreme, foreseeing the danger like to ensue,
commanded his men to wheel about to the further side, compassing so much
field, that with safety they might arrive where the Emperor and the other
Knights were combatting, fearing that if they should encounter with their
enemies, the Emperor might in the mean time be slain, and their haste and
aid come in vain: the Knights being all chosen and valiant, such as
continually guarded the Emperors person, and sufficient every one to be a
co^mander of many, took their compass in such manner, that without turning
their backs, or on their adversaries breaking their lances, fell on the sudden
where the emperor and Princes were, who^ they found fighting like angered
lions, for that Don Bryanell was pitiously wounded by two giants, and by them
beaten to the ground, so that the Emperor and Don Belianis to defend him,
bestirred themselves so bravely against them, esteeming them but as two common
knights. On the other side the Prince Arfileo kneeled with his knee on the
ground, for one of the Giants had thrust him quite through the thigh. But when
the King of Hungary arrived with his men, he alighted with some twenty
knights, leaving the rest in fight with their adversaries, whereof some being
round begirt with Grecians, the others set themselves against don Bellianis,
seeing he was the sole causer of their utter ruin, and notwithstanding his
mighty blows two of those Giants closed with him: but he not dismaide
therewith, laid hand on his dagger, which at his back continually he wore,
and stabbed it in the Giants back that held him betwixt his arms: which done
with mighty strength it ran through his body to the hilts. Which was not so
speedily performed, but the other wounded him greeuouslie, that his armor
being in three places rent, and his flesh in many bruised and cut, and seeing
himself in such notorious peril, took the heavy boystrous Giant in his
arms, and with his puissant forces hoysted him aloft, and with a mighty fall
tumbled him to the earth, where presently he chopped off his head: which done,
turning to the emperor, he saw him close with another Giant, and fearing some
sinister hap might befall him through the much blood issuing from his wounds,
whereat the Prince greatlic wondered how he could stand on foot, struck the
Giant such a blow on the leg, that he sundered it quite from the body. All
which notwithstanding, seeing the number of the knights still increase upon
them, and that the trampling of the horses might greatly endanger them, and
doubting that the emperor because he had lost much blood, would not be able to
mount a horsback, took him in his arms, and set him on the giants horse he
last s^ue. The like did he to the Prince Arfileo, that through the wound on
his thigh could not do^ it himself: and greatly esteeming Don Bryanell for
that he had seen him that day do, and because he came in his Fathers
company, he took him from the ground, and commanded a knight to convey him
to the Castle, there to apply him such remedies as that he might recover his
lost senses. And now at the last, when he would get a horse for himself,
could not so easily compass it, for all the rest of the knights had turned
themselves with a hellish fury upon him, where he was like to be slain
outright, for Don Galfeo having vanquished the Emperors men, set on him,
wounding him with cruel and remorselesse blows. But finding himself
encompassed with death, began to strike on every side, that unhappy was he on
whom any lighted, for so fearful and deadly they were, that with six blows
he struck down three knights and two Giants, and seeing Don Galfeo was he
that most molested him, struck at his leg with such strength, that had the
sword fallen with the edge downeright, it had cut it clean off, yet it rased
away all his armor there, and seeing him within his reach, plucked his sheelde
out of his hand, and with it beat him to the ground from himself and so
none daring molest him, without setting foot on stirrup, he mounted on Don
Galfeos horse. At this time hither came the Emperor, that seeing him so nimbly
mounted, being so sorely wounded, was so amazed, that he hardly believed what
his eyes beheld, and that which he most admired, was to see him so fierce and
courageous in this first adventure that ever happened him. And emulating his
valiant deeds, he followed him as if he were his teacher, and he his pupil,
to whom Don Beliani, being nigh him, said. Me thinks Sir knight our men begin
to loose the field: so think I, answered the Emperor, and calling Arfileo,
joined all three together with the King of Hungary, that was in the
vauntguard, animating his fainting knights, that with fresh courage so
gallantly returned to the fight, as if at that present they began, giving and
receiving most terrible blows of those helburned Giants. But Don Belianis
seeing the wonders the Emperor his Father had performed, imagining his own
acts none in compatison of his, with such vehement rigor he assaulted his
foes, that his men regained their lost advantage. About this time Don Galfeo
arose from his trance, and seeing his knights retired back, and that the most
part of the Giants were slain, and that great troops of armed knights, not
far from whence they were fighting, came with speedy haste toward them,
which he judged to be above two thousand, and seeing his intent could not for
that time take effect, turned to Don Gallaneo, that day by him, and taking one
of those horses that loose came about, called one of his Knights, commanding
him to set the Prince his Coozin before him, very secretly, unknown to the
Emperor, and the rest, he put himself through the grove, and learning of a
man whom he met, the next way to the sea coaste, went thither, where finding
his ships, and fearing he might be pursued, stripped himself and Don Galleneo,
commanding the mariners to hoyse the sails, and put unto the Sea: which they
straight did, laying his Coozin on a bed in his Cabin, and applied him many
remedies, to recover his senses, that the better they might dress his wounds:
where we leave them, returning to declare the end, and success of the battle.

CHAP. VIII.
How the battle being ended, Don Bellianis, with his company departed, not
discovering whom they were, And what happened to him and his Coozin, with the
Ladies, in the dangerous grove.

THe battle resting in the manner as is before recyted, very cruel and
bloodye on all parts, the like whereof to that day was never seen of so few
Knights, the one side resolved to effect their enterprise, which by the
victory of that battle they hoped would be by the Emperors death: drew
strength whence none was, judging better in that fight to dye well, revenging
their own deaths, then to abide the mercy of the Emperor, of whom they none
expected. On the other side, the Emperors knights being of such valor as is
expressed, and guided by such Captains, fought so courageously with their
adversaries, that forring them to retire, most of them left their lives in the
field. About this time appeared, along the way from the City, so many
squadrons of Knights that they covered all those fields, keeping no order in
their march, gallopping so fast that quickly they arrived where that unequal
battle was fighting: who being by the Pagans seen, straight put themselves to
flight, thinking to save themselves in the Thickets of those wooddes. But the
Emperors Knights then arriving, so bravely assaulted them, that having no time
to execute their purpose, they were all put to the Sword, none suruiuing to
bear news home of their overthrow. The Emperors and Princes remained so
wounded, that although the joy of their great victory eased the pain of their
wounds, yet thought they could not escape with life, for the quantity of
blood issued from them, was so great, that their Horses were altogether
besmeared therewith. But the Emperor seeing how much bound he was to those
Knights, with great gladness ran to embrace Don Bellianis, whom he so much
prized for his hautie chivalry, that he judged all others in comparison of his
but a dream. The Prince Don Bellianis did the like: and going to dismounte on
foot, to show his humble duty, the Emperor would not permit it, but
holding him in his arms said.

If (most excellent Knight) you regard what you have done for me, and from
what great danger you and your Companions have this day redeemed me, more
reason were it I should kiss your hand, in sign of acknowledging the great
benefit by your magnanimity that I have received, which no less then with my
life I should remunerate: in satisfaction whereof, I pray the Almighty Lord
that has delivered us from so great danger and peril, to guerdon you for it:
for if I should inuest your Lord of all my Emperic, you could not rest
satisfied for the least part of your deserved merits this day obtained.
Wherefore, henceforth I will hold this Monarchy, not as absoiute commander
thereof, but as given me by your hands, and as your deputy to keep it,
acknowledging my lawful homage for the same, at al times when you shall
command.

The Prince Arfileo coming thither at that instant, not letting don Bellianis
answer the Emperor, least thereby he might be known, being loath to
discover themselves, by reason of their promise made to the Damzels, thus
replied. What to day this Knight has in your service done, (most mighty
Emperor) deserves no recompense, nor yet words of ceremonious thanks, for
more then this, every one (knowing the royalty of your person) is bound unto,
and now we resting more then satisfied, with the good will wherewith you seem
to accept this our small service, and having no more need of us at this
present, we instantly beseech you, to grant us leave, that sending for our
Damzels, we may hence depart, for our abiding here may be very dangerous
unto us.

In very deed (victorious Knight) I tell you (replied the Emperor) there is
now a greater battle represented me, then the last: For I cannot believe in
Knights so magnimious in heroycall deeds, there should be such discourtesie,
as to depart, leaving on me the burden of ingratitude, in making me suffer you
to go so grievously wounded, when you deserts merit no satisfaction, and that
which most tormenteth me, is, you should desire to depart, not revealing unto
me your names, that at least I might know to whom my thanks are due. And you
most excellent knight (turning to don Bellianis) do I entreat to do it, which
if you also deny me, I here protest to sollew you about the world, till I
learn it, and joining if to the enterprise, I have undertaken in demand of my
senne don Bellianis, and of his Coosin Arfileo, I will not return to
Constantinople, till I also know this I now request of you. Don Bellianis
fearing to be known, altered his speech, and answered: I cannot but confess
the high discourtesie that we commit (most glorious Emperor) in disobeying the
supreme command of so great a Monarch, whose immortal fame deserves the whole
earths, (and chieflly our obedience.) But men being subject, voluntarily to
promise, and tied by necessity to observance, forces us by disobeying you, to
observe our forepassed word to one of the Ladies that be within the Castle,
which was not to discover our selves to any, until we were out of your Empire,
least thereby we should be deteyned. And as for the demand you undertake of
the Princes your son and Coozin, you may account it ended, for they be living
and not long ago were before this Castle, whom I and this my companion have
seen together: and this we assure you to be true, because we know them very
well, and also they told us, how being on hunting, they were by a certain
adventure, parted from you and your train in the dangerous grove, which is
far from hence. Wherefore, in lieu of this promise and news we entreat you any
longer not to stay us, nor further to enquire of our affairs, nor names,
seeing it lies not in our powers to declare.

The Emperor being about to reply, the king of Hungary came to them that
returned from pursuing his enemies, to whom the Emperorsaid: it behooves you
king of Hungary to constrain these knights to abide with us, for I cannot
entreat it: They will not do so I am sure (answered the king) especially at
your request. I say I cannot obtain it, said the Emperor, yet have they told
me news of my son, and yours, and that it is not long since they departed
away from them, and for all this will they not tell me their names. They are
altogether so unworthy to be known said, Arfileo, that it is unnecessary to
require them. But if it may please your Majesty, we would gladly know the
cause wherefore these Knights would have slain you, though in the beginning,
me thought they meant it by us.

The Emperor thereupon told them the whole occasion, as is already mentioned,
at which instant the Princess Aurora coming thither with her Ladies, and
hearing the Emperor name Don Galaneo, said to Don Belianis. The greatest part
of our enterprise (Sir knight were finished, if that traitor were taken.
Whereupon they commanded him to be sought for about all the field, but could
not find him, yet in the search they met the man that directed Don Galfeo to
the sea coast: of whom by the signs and tokens of their armor, they learned
that they had fled from the battle, whereof the Emperor was exceedingly
sorry, to whom Don Belianis thus spoke. Afflict not your self (dread Lord)
about him, for it is the enterprise I undergo by this Ladies command, and if I
live, I protest and promise you, that the first time he falls into my hands
(though he be before the Soldane his Lord) to give him his death. I would not
have you take such pains (said the Emperor) but ouerpassing that, let me
again entreat you to stay the curing of your wounds in this Castle. We may
here abidr no longer (replied Don Belianis, and so taking their leaves, (the
Prince sending for his sheeld, which was brought him in two pieces) they
straight departed, so sorely wounded as may be imagined, for he that had least
of them both, had above twenty very dangerous wounds, cheefely that which
Arfileo had on his thigh, and the thrust that Don Belianis had, which seemed to
penetrate his entrals. In this manner going on their way the space of three
miles, ascended a high mountain, to find some place to dress their wounds,
and having cut and gathered a great number of branches and boughs, the damsels
made some arbours for the knights, having left behind the two old men, with
many others: for seeing them fall from their horses, supposed them slain in
the fight, and with their gowns, towels, and scarfes, covered them, and after
they had unarmed them, with such things as they had dressed their wounds,
which were so deep and dangerous, that they greatly lamented, certainly
thinking they could not escape death. And leaving them alone to repose their
wearied bodies, fold it their Lady, who bitterly wept for their peril, as if
she had seen them dead, so much she credited her Damsels words, knowing their
skill in that mystery to be singular. But being thus in their laments, they
saw a chariot coming through the air, which seemed to be made of white
transparant Crystal of the mount: it was drawn with six mighty ugly
Griffons that put the Princess and her Ladies in great fear: which chariot
alighted in the place where the knights lay. From it descended two very little
dwarffes that were going to the Prince Don Bellianis with a cheerful voice,
and said. We are messengers sent from the wise Bellona, who for the great love
she bears you and the Prince your Coozin, knowing in what danger your lives
be in, and how nigh death approaches, to crave his tributary duty, by reason
of your great wounds, (for although these Ladies be very skillful in this art,
yet you cannot without great danger be cured, unless that it be by her, and
also because the Emperors men are seeking for you, and will not be long ere
they come hither, she has sent you this carre: in which she requires you, that
without longer delay, both you with the Princess and her ladies, mount
speedily thereon, for that the Emperor has straight need of the selfsame
remedy, and in dalliance he may incur much peril of his life. Whereupon
they seeing that more then the present danger could not happen unto them, that
agreede thereto, and taking the Princess and her Ladies, they all mounted on
the charyot, though the Ladies with some fear did it. But ere we more speak of
them, we must remember what befell the Emperor after she battle was ended.

CHAP. IX.
What the Emperor did after the Princes departure: and how he knew who they
were.

Soon after the Emperor saw the adventure ended to his high honor, he re^red
inmortall thanks to the almighty for his delivery, and with the news he had
of his dear son ^ Coozin, nothing regarded his wounds. Whereupon the king of
Hungaria said: have a care dread Sovereign to cure your wounds, if you will
enjoy the victory you have achieved, for it will be no small thing to escape
with life, being so piteously wounded. My joy is so great, answered the
Emperor, that were it not moderated with seeing these Knights go with such
dangerous wounds, in my defense and delivery from this days peril, that
only were a sufficient remedy to heal me without further cure. But believe
me: if (as I hope) I do escape this danger, recovering my almost lost life, I
will not desist till by some means I know who and whence they be, that so well
revenged me: and commanding all the wounded to be conuaide to the City, he
returned to the Castle, leaving the king of Hungaria to make provision of all
necessaries, and himself was laid in his bed: where his wounds being dressed,
his surgions thought impossible he should without great hazard of his life
escape them.

Whereat the people sorely grieved, cheefely seeing that a while after he was
dressed, through the intolerable pain of the wou^d on his head, he spoke many
things without reason, as a man distract of sense, and half lunatic, which
was judged as tokens of his death, so that none dared to carry any such tidings
to Constantinople. But thus fearing his untimely end, there came a damsel to
the king of Hungary, that having caused the wounded knights to be conducted to
be cured, rested greatly discontent for the Emperors danger, and with a merry
semblance said to him. Do not grieve (most noble King) for the hour is not
come, that so royal and most glorious a Prince should thus suddenly leave the
world, therefore lead me straight unto his presence, and you shall see wonders
by me wrought. The amazed King replying never a word, took her by the hand,
and brought her to the Castle, and set her in the Chamber where the Emperor
lay in the state before recited, more like a dead then a living creature. The
Damzell in the entering drew forth of a little box certain Ointments that she
brought with her, wherewith she Emperor lying in a trance, received his
vital senses, and with a faint voice said. Ho mighty savior of the world, I
do beseech thee, if so it may please thy high omnipotency, not to take this
transitory life from me, before I have seen my dear, dear son, that in
the end of my pilgrimage, I may with comfort die. You shall not yet die (said
the Damzell) therefore strengthen your self, for you must ere you die suffer
many perils, ordained by the divine power of the highest Lord. And if your
heart will serve to drink this potion I bring, you shall presently be
restored ^o your former health: and fear not to drink it, for I come from
those knights that aided you. So drawing forth a little Glass, wherein was a
certain composition so odoriferous, that the Emperor and all that were
present, were greatly comforted with the smell, the Emperor taking it in his
hand, fearelesse drunk it off. And at that instant he felt himself so well,
as he had never been wounded, or ill at all. And rising to thank her, she
went the way she came, and commanded the King of Hungary to kill her, who
astonished at the Emperors sudden recovery, knew not whether he slept or
waked: but following her, she stayed him, and said. Tire not your self
(renowned King of Hungary) in seeking me, for all the world is not sufficient
to find me. But know thou, the Emperor was aided by the nearest kinsman he
and you have, wherewith she flang away so swiftly, that she seemed to outstrip
the wind, and suddenly vanished out of sight.

And here the History declares, this was the sage Bellona, who greatly
tendering the love of Don Bellianis, did for his sake so cure the Emperor, for
otherwise his death had bin sorer then his life. The king of Hungary amazed
with these thinge^, as also (knowing in what danger the Emperor had been in)
to see him now come forth of his chamber, demanded him what was become of the
Lady. To whom he told all that had passed, and what she said. I cannot think*
(the^ replied the Emperor) whom those so vailant Knights may be; having my
self knighted them. Trust me not (answered the king) if they were not cur
lost Sons, for we have no nigher kinsmen, and your knighting them, assures
it to be true, as also the news themselves told you. Who can believe (said
the Emperor) that if they were them, they would so depart from me,? wherefore
I will have all these men separate themselves, to seek them about the forest,
for being wounded, they cannot be far gone, and somewhere they may be
alighted to bind their wounds. So commanding all the Knights to do it, they
went to visit the Prince don Brianell, having heard he was in no less danger
then the Emperor: and going into his chamber, they neither found him nor any
sign of him, but upon his Beds head they found a letter, written in Greek, to
this effect.

This is meant by the Prophecy in the 2. book, and 7. Chap. In the time to
come that the brave Lion of the house of Grecia shall be put in greater
danger, by the unknown Lion defendor of his royal blood, shall also by the
Oriental ha^^s, through the means of their unjust Prince, be put in greater
peril then the last, whereof by him he was delivered, wherein all the power
of my knowledge shall be tried, the most part of them being absent. And thou
great Emperor that this read, desiste from the demand, of thy son and
Knights, and by no means put thy self in their quest, for thy Emperie will
greatly need thee (though not so soon. This I write thee, that thou may
know, the fame of thy glorious deeds will be extinguished by the light of
the new knight, to thy greater eternity. Therefore do no otherwise then this
my letter requires thee, for I wish all thine affairs may succeed according
to thy own desires, which goodwill the present remedy thou did receive by
my damzell well does approve.


The Emperor having read the letter, rested greatly confused therewith, and
turning to the King, said. What think you we may do, concerning this letters
command. I think (answered the king) since you know the writers wisedeme and
zeal toward you, you ought to erecnte the same. Let us awaight the returae
of our knights, replied the Emperor, and then we will depart, for I greatly
desire to have the Empress know these news: and looking out of a window of
the Castle, they saw coming from the City great multitudes of knights,
secming above 30000. What shall we do, said the Emperor, if we should have
a greater conflict then that which is pas^? I think those be your ensigns
(replied the knight) and looking more earnestly to the^, percciued plainclye
they were the same. For when it was bruted about the City, (not knowing the
number of the assaileants that had beset the Emperor) all the knights there,
with Eittizens, Soldiers and their Leaders, armed themselves and came to
rescue their Emperor. With them came the old Prince of Macedon then arrived
in the City, and also the Empress Clarinda, that would by no means stay,
though by the way she understood the whole success of the fight, but would go
to visit the Emperor, who then descended to receive them: to whom the Leaders,
and the rest humbled themselves, with unspeakable joy to see him safe. And
when he knew the Empress was there, without further stay went to her, where
she was, to recounte their glad greetings. What has become of you my most
dear Lord (said the Empress) for I perceive you have not been at no great
passetime, so many sluggarde knights lying in field, for all I see your person
woundlesse? and tell me where is the Prince Don Bryanell. Things have befallen
me (answered he) that requires long time to dylate. Therefore alight and we will
enter the Castle, where I will tell you all. So while they were at supper, the
Knights Jousted and tilted about the field one with another, for joy of the
Emperors safety: and the tables being taken up, after some discourses, the
Empress understanding their success with the Damsels, and how they thought
that those knights were Don Bellianis and Arsileo, she scarce could contain
her self with joy, though somewhat moderated it with fear of their great and
dangerous wounds. Day it not by some means be known (said she) if they were
them? We know no more (replied the king of Hu^gary) then what is said. But the
Emperor remembering the two old knights, that with them came, and seeing at
their departure they went not with them, said to the King: saw you not when
you remained to see the wounded cured, among them two old knights? They be in
this other lodging, said the king, and because they were so grievously wounded,
I durst not send them to Constantinople. Let us go visit them (said the
Empress and so went to their Chambers, whom they found in great p^aine by
reason of their wounds: to whom the Empress thus spoke: how feel you
yourselues? good knights fear not, for you be in place, where you shall well
be looked to, and shall want nothing needful for your health. They in their
pain, thinking her to be their Lady (answered) we are not so sorry for our
wounds, as that we think Don Bellianis slain, and you and we imprisoned, for
of the battle with his father he had, he and his Coozin with the other knight
rested woondrously wounded, and after so many assaulting them, we cannot
choose but judge them dead: yet since we see you at liberty, we beseech you
tell us the success of the same fight, and how the Priacesse remained, it
being ended. The Empress with great joy perceiving by those words, that the
Knights which so (...)d (...)lues in the battle, were the Pr(...) and C(...)
And turning to the Emperor said. What ^^y you now ^r? is not the King of
Hungaries suspicion well verified? The Emperor with wonderful gladness
straight went to the field, where his Knights were with many Dukes, and great
Lords, and meeting with the Duke of Trebento, delivered unto him those good
news: whereupon it was presently spread among all the people, how the Knight
that had performed such deeds of Chivalry in the battle, was their Prince, and
his companion was the Prince Arfileo his Coozin: whose unspeakable joy for
these news, cannot sufficiently be erpressed, greatly praising God that had so
magnanimious a Prince to govern them after his Father. The Empress that
remained with the old Knights, desirous to know more of them, discovered
herself though against her will, and said. I am net she good knights, whom
peradnenture you take me for, and therefore I pray you tell me what fortune
conducted you hither? The knights then recovering their senses, were very sorry
she was not their Princess, with whom they had spoken, and seeming not to
mark her, made no answer but began to groan as through pain of their wounds.
The Empress leaving them, went out of the Chamber, and commanded them to be
again dressed continuing there with the Emperor sir days, in which time: the
two knights were greatly amended of their wounds, of whom they knew the whole
truth of the adventure which Don Bellianis had undertaken: of which the Emperor
was cxceeding glad, determining to aid them with men sufficient for such an
enterprise. So he and all the rest departed to Constantinople, where many and
diverse tryumphes, and games were ordained, in which the Emperor knighted two of
the Duke of Trebento his sons, that in those games, w^^n great honor, the one
called don Castidell of the Roase, the other don Sabian of Trebento, whose
notable daedes shall be at large declared: and another, the son of the Duke of
Ponto named don Persiano the courteous, and also the King of Argos son, by
name don Bryamore, with many more, all which departed to seek don Bellianis,
thinking ^^ find him at Antioch, changing their upper Gamnents, and Armor
according to the Moriscoes: in which journey we leave them and the Emperor,
that minded to send thither a great host of men, and go himself in person.
And now must we turn our course to Don Bellianis, chief subject of our
labors, whom with his company we left in the Christalyne carres, drawn
through the air by the inchaunted Griffons, as haretofore is mentioned.

CHAP. X.
What happened to the Prince drawn in the Griffons Charret. How they were
cured of their wounds by the sage Bellona: and after, how they all departed
toward Antioch.

DOn Bellianis and Arfileo, having mounted the Charret, guided by the Dwatffes,
with the Princess and her Damsels, as before is recyted, not knowing whether
they might be conducted, were so ^wiftlye drawn by the Griffons that in very
short time they were within the kingdom of Persia, not far from the great
city of Persepolis, and on the desolatest mountains of all that l^nd the
Griffons descended, hard by the mouth of a dark and ebscure Cave, from whence
came forth an old woman above two hundredth years of age, who coming before
the weary and faint Princes, kneeled to them, desiring that she might ^^^^
their hands. But when she would rise, she was straight known of the
Princess, who greatly ioying with h^^ her sight, embracing her, accounting
her no less then if she were her own mother: and turning her self to Don
Bellianis said. Now will our affairs (most excellent prince) happily
proceed, for I tell you this is the sage Bellona, that has brought us hither
by these means, so that now I have utterly exiled the fear I conceived of
your wounds. The Princes seeing her so nigh him, very lovingly embraced her:
the like did Don Arfileo, to whom the old woman spoke. Let me entreat you
my good Lord to alight, that with diligence your wounds may be cured,
together with the other knight your champion, whom I have within this cave,
that with no less necessity then your selves I have hither brought. The
Prince recording the Dwarfes words when he mounted the Chariot, demanded
whether it were the Emperor his Father. No my good lord (said she) for there
in no reason that in so perilous a time he should leave his Empire, your self
being thence absent: but it is the Prince Don Bryanell of Macedon. Then tell
me, said Don Bellianis, how remained the Emperor my Father. Well, lusty, and
merry (replied she) for he has learned whom you were that in the battle
aided him. But how came he to know it, demanded Arfileo: whereupon she told
them how. I am sorry for it (said don Bellianis) for they will condemn us of
discourtesie. That is no matter (replied she) besides they will not take it in
ill part, knowing you did it to observe your word. I pray you (said he)
how was my Father so soon healed, for unless I be deceived, he was
grievously wounded. Straight shall you know it (said she) and leading them
through the Cave, she brought them to a Palace, which they judged to be the
stateliest that they ever saw, where with help of many of the sages servants,
they dismounted, with whose diligent service they rested much contented, and
being laid on rich beds, the grave. Matron said to them, having searched
their wounds, I could at once cure your wounds, as I did the Emperors and don
Bryanels, but do it not because I will keep you here a few days: and assure
your solues you shall be straight out of all danger. And then she applied such
ointments, wherewith they felt themselves greatly comforted and eased, as if
they had no pain at all. Don Bellianis entreated her that they might see the
Prince Don Biyanell. You shall (said she) but first rest a while, for you have
thereof great need: and commanding the windows to be shut, took the
Princess by the hand, and leaving the knights, led her through a long
gallerie, not far from thence, that reached to another lodging of the same
making that don Bellianis was in, so curiously wrought, and of so rare
woorkmanshippe, that the Ladies greatly admired it: and entering in another
room, they found the Prince Don Bryanell walking alone, already healed of
his wounds, yet having lost much blood, he looked very pale and wanne: for
the sage Matron greatly commiserating his danger, prouiuided, as heretofore is
specified. For when she went to cure the Emperor, she made one of her
Damsels to enter another way vnseeue, and fetching him thence, brought him
thither in a trance, and for all he was healed with the drink that Bellona
gave him, yet knew he not in what place, nor in whose power he was, neither
knew he whether he was in prison or at liberty, nor in what state the
battle remained, in which he lost the Emperor: and seeing his wounds whole,
was in such a wonder, that almost he persuaded himself, waking out of a
dream, and seeing no body with whom he might speak, walked up and down
the Chamber, seeking and devising how by some means he might resolve his
confused thoughts: and when he saw the Princess Aurora and her Damsels, with
the old woman leading her by the hand, he straight knew her garments, for
as is said, he saw her before he and Arfileo had begun their Combatte:
with whose sight he thought that he and the Emperor were imprisoned by the
knights with whom they had commenced their battle, and yet knew he not how
that might be, having after seen them aided by the Emperor against Don
Gallaneos knights: but seeing them so nigh him, thought that though he were in
the prison (as he imagined) yet ought he use that behavior that his state
required, and seeing they were Ladies, approached with that courtesy which
might beseem one accompanied with such knights. And she having learned of the
old woman who he was, humbled her self at his feet: which he unable to
disturb, did the like, desiring her to grant him her fair hands that he
might kiss them: but they so long striued to surpass each other in courtesy,
that Bellona commanded them to rise, for their state forbad such ceremonies
between them: which they did, though not so free as at first, for they rested
greatly affectionate either of other, and don Bryanell at last thus brake
silence. I do so wonder at the marvelous things yt since yesterday have
happened me, that I know not if any such have bin or no, for being with the
Emperor my sovereign in battle, wherein I remained sore wounded, and not
knowing the end thereof, I find my self at this present well and strong, and
in this rich and sumptuous chamber, with whose like the whole world cannot
compare, nor yet knew whether I be at liberty or captive, though under ye
power of such keepers I should imagine such restraint a greater comfort to my
grief then any I can desire. Wherefore excellent Lady, I entreat you if you
be in the same case my self am in, as one that I suppose was present at all
that befell you would declare it me, and that I may also with your favor know
the true success of the battle, and what is become of those most haughty
knights that accompanied you, whose mighty strength I am sure the whole earth
cannot equal, and for what cause am I here kept, whether with or without your
will? Whilst he uttered these words the Princess earnestly viewed him, and
remained so greatly satisfied with his good disposition, (being a very gallant
knight) and seeing reason willed her to answer all his demands, thus replied.
Not without cause may you be confounded in your own imaginations (excellent
Prince) for I assure you, if now you enjoy your life, it is by your being
here: and though the battle was fought nigh Constantinople, at this instant
you are not so near it, as to the Ryphean mountains, joining upon the great
City of Persepolis, for all which you may thank this grave Matron that here
is with me, seeing by her great knowledge you hither were conducted. The
knights with whom you in the beginning combatted and came in my company, are
the Prince Arfileo, that with you fought, the other, whose battle was with the
Emperor, is his son Don Bellianis. Is it possible? oh God, said Don
Bryanell, that den Bellianis should with such glory principate his haughty
deeds of Chivalry. Account these the least (said Bellona) for I tell you
neither the Emperor his father, nor any knight this day living, may with him
compare. Certainly I think no less (replied don Bryanell) and more then you
say dare I believe of that courageous Prince, having seen him perform such
surpassing wonders in that one fight. But I beseech you let me know the end
thereof, and how the Emperor and he do? The Emperor is well (said she) and
the Princes both be in this house where you are, though sore wounded. Now I
assure you, answered don Bryanell, I account my self most happy that after so
many troubles I hear the most contentedst news that my perplexed soul could
wish, after the tempestous passage of a boisterous storm, with the calm
approach of the al-comforting sun. Wherefore let us without longer stay go
visit them, and there may I know what else happened in this adventure. Even
when you please (said Bellona) for I know they will no less joy with your
sight, then you with theirs. So taking him between them, they returned the way
they came to the chamber, where they left the Princes, and entering it, they
found them talking together of their last adventure. But when the Princes saw
don Bryanell, they would rise to reverence him, but he running to don
Bellianis beds side, bended his knee to the ground, craving he might kiss his
hands. The Prince took him up, and embracing, so held him a while and said. I
do greatly rejoice, renowned Prince, to see you so well, though according to
your great deeds, in the battle whereby you got many dangerous wounds, I
thought we should not so soon see you: For which let us thank this Lady that
with you comes, seeing she took such care of our safety, which with all our
states we cannot sufficiently recompense, having (next unto God) by her means
recovered our lost times. Therefore I think it reason (said Don Bryanell)
seeing she is the isntrumental cause we reposesse them, we in her service to
the death use them, that at least thereby we may seem to satisfy some part of
her many deserts, and so do entreat her to command them as her own. Whereunto
she thus answered. It suffices me great Lords, to have done some service to
such Princes, which does surpass all satisfaction whatsoever I may of you
receive: how much the more, that will not be so little which you must
undertake, in behalf of this disinherited Princess my Coozin, wherewith this
rests fully recompensed, which they again replied with great courtesy: and
then Don Bryanell went to Arfileo and embracing him said.

We now have time noble Prince to know the cause that moved you without my
leave to enter within this place. I am not so weary of the last demand
(replied he) but that I may satisfy you now in this, though your self be
well, and seeing that the last adventure cost so dear, it were no reason to
leave you in this, unsatisfied.

In these and such like speeches continued they till supper time: which come,
they all did eat together, because of the wounded Princes. Here they stayed
fifteen days, till the Princes were well able to travail: in which time and
day Bellona taking don Bellianis a part, she said unto him walking through
those rooms. I do well know most excellent Prince, and so judge my self
altogether unworthy, and it not necessary to give you counsel concerning
your most great actions: Yet because you are a stranger in an unknown
country, and in a place where every one would wish your downfall with
extremest death, and so many needsome aduertisements I presume to tell you,
that though faithfully in heart and with good reason you observe, and
unfeignedly keep the law and religion of your profession, yet must you
conceal it, and by no means manifest it, for if in the least respect you do,
it may cost you your dearest life. And moreover, after that by the virtue of
your invincible arm you have safely established the Princess Aurora in her
usurped royaltyes, you must procure and endeavor to arrive at the Soldane of
Babilons Court, where you must sustain your never fainting heart, with your
accustomed courage: for you shall there see your self in so many great perils,
that you shall a thousand times wish for death, as a remedy for them. But
hereof take no thought, for they are things ordained by the supremest powers,
yet always bear on your sheeld the same devise that you now have, though for
her sake you shall be put in great, and suffer many and tedious passions, yet
shall you be thereby known, and your immortal fame blazed over the whole
earths continent, which you shall still wear, till I advertise you to the
contrary: Wherewith she ended, and the Prince thus replied. I will not render
to you such thanks as this care and great courtesies deserve, for every thing
I possess being at your command, it is reason you guard and protect them as
your own. Herewith they returned to their company, and don Brianell having
seen them both together, said. I would not have you be so long together,
neither that you should learn any thing whereby you might further excel us in
fight, which if it be so, it were no reason that I whose merits be so
inferior to yours, should learn them. You may well do it (replied don
Bellianis) having in the last conflict reaped the profit, fearelesse of any
thing that might have happened unto us. In all things you will seem to yield
unto me the vantage, answered Don Bryanell, though there be nothing in me that
may any way please you or the Prince Arfileo, since as you show, you would
have me had that careful fear of you, as well not knowing as knowing you,
yet do not I know why I should fear you, being accompanied with the divine
beauty of this most fair and excellent Princess. You do well to jest with
us all (replied she) yet is it no matter, since your words express what small
part I have thereof, having been unable to expel the doubt you had of the
Princes being here.

Don Bryanell being of nature pleasant and courteous, kept them in pleasing
chat the rest of the time of their being there, which was some eight days:
which expired, they being desirous to depart thence, had an armor presented
to each of them by Bellona, the richest and fairest that ever was seen. That
which Don Bellianis had, was of a tawny color, with such natural works,
imbossed with pearls so bright, that they yielded as much light as ten
burning Torches in any dark place, but cheefely the sheelde, having the very
self same image it had before, which was drawn with such perfection and
curiosity of art, that if they had ever seen the substance, they would have
judged it the counterfeit or portrature of Florisbella, the Soldane of Babilons
Daughter: which although the Princess Aurora knew, yet said nothing,
imagining the wise woman had not without special cause set it there. About it
was written the aforesaid Motto, so perfectly made with great Orient pearl,
that it forced admiration in each beholder. He had also a scabbard given him
for his sword, made of massy gold, with letters drawn thereon, declaring the
manner of the winning thereof. Arfileos were like them he had in the cave,
and Don Brianels were of diverse colors, whose workmanship was worth a great
treasury. Did not I say I should in all things have the advantage, that for a
white armor of no value, which I did wear in the battle, have given me now
so rich and fair? It is not given you as a gift for your old said Arfileo)
but that you should pay for them. Use not the office of a Merchant (replied Don
Brianell) for who has given me my armor, uses not to sell any. If it be so
said Arfile,) how paid you that which you wear. Strive not about so small
matter (said Don Bellianis) for I will pay for all, having greatest cause for
it. Then straight were they with them armed: and taking leave of the sage
Matrone, she said. You will by the way need Pages to attend on you, therefore
will I give you three of mine, and so presented them three dwarffes, so little
that they greatly delighted to see their smalnesse, specially that of Don
Bellianis, whose shortness reached not to the others middle, though they were
wonderful low. Where inhabit, and are engendered such gentle people as these?
said Don Brianell, I should long remain among them, if I should stay there, to
be accounted nothing as every one of them is else where. You shall not be
accounted nothing (said Don Bellianis dwarffe called Ordino) for they would al
so persecute you that seeing your bigness to theirs, they would (wanting
ground) tread on you in stead of it. That were worse then the other (replied
Don Brianell. But least we further proceed in talk, it were good we set
forward in our journey. Wherewith, with most kind courtesy taking their
farewell of the Lady of the Cave, set forth of the same. And being without,
he seeing the Princess and Ladies all clothed in most rich cloth of Gold,
said with great laughter: Let us (sirs) make more haste, for the destruction
that these Damzels have made, will cause some unseen wanderer demand it at
our hands. But all that is left, is yours (said the Princess) therefore fear
not. If it be so (replied he) I have no less right to that which you carry:
therefore were it not amiss you give it me. The Prince Don Bellianis will not
not suffer it (answered she) he being my guardian. For so much as concerns
me (said the Prince) I will defend you against all the world. That's not
material (quoth Don Brianell) for on my side I have the Prince Arfileo, that
will suffer none wronged in his presence. I cannot help you in this demand
(said he) least I should incur such punishment, as to my ill satisfaction,
and less reason I should defend.

CHAP. XI.
What happened Don Bellianis, and his companions with duke Alfyron the courteous,
and how they proved the adventure of the unhappy bridge.

IN this order traveled these Princes with as much pleasure as their young
years could require, fearing nothing that might anoy them, taking their
straight way toward a Castle, some three miles distant from Antioch, for the
Princess told them it was a strong fortress, and never won by any foreign
foes: and that she and her Damzels would there remain, where also they might
determine of their affairs. For which cause they had a man to guide them
thither, whom they received of Bellona. Which way they had not far gone, but by
the same they saw toward them come the number of twenty thousand knights,
whereof the greatest part were very sumptuously apparelled, and many clad
with rich and bright armor, insomuch that the Prince and his companions took
great delight in seeing the^, and Don Bellianis stepping to one of the foremost,
that greatly admired him being so bravely armed, and on so mighty a courser
mounted, and demanded thus. I pray you in courtesy tell me, sir knight, to
whom belongs this fair company of Knights? he should be of no small account
that such a train maintains. They belong (sir knight) answered he, unto Duke
A firon the Courteous, that now goes to the City of Persepolis, because the
great Sophy has ordained great triumphs and iousts, whereunto he has invited
all the nobility of his Empire. Why prepares he so great feasts? demanded the
Prince. Marie sir (replied the other) not long since he promised to give one
only daughter that he has, to what Knight soever should slay the Emperor of
Greece, or take him prisoner: which enterprise the Prince Don Gallaneo of
Antioch undertook, accompanied with many Knights: who is now returned with
one coosen of his, by whom, and others that with them came, the Sophie is
certified, how they left the Emperor so wounded, that he could by no means
escape. For which cause he has determined to give him his daughter in marriage,
and therefore in these triumphs does he feast all his Nobles. But demanded
Don Bellianis) why does the Sophy so, being uncertain of the truth? He
thinks this sufficient (answered the Knight) that if it should otherwise
be, it is thought impossible ever to effect it, for the Emperor being
thereof forewarned, will with greater regard look to himself: and besides,
his Daughter will not be evil matched, he being one of the best Knights in
this land. Though (to tell you truly) we be not well contented with this
marriage, for that the Duke our Master was first greatly favored of the
Princess Persiana (for so is the Sophies Daughter called) and seeing now he
will marry her to Don Gallaneo, he goes very passionate.

I commit you to God said don Bellianis) for you have much pleased me with your
discoursiue news: and turning to the Prince and his companions, told them all
his talk with the knight, and demanded of them, if they thought good to see
those iousts at Persepolis, ere they passed forwarder. It will be well done
(said don Brianell) yet how shall we do, being unprovided of a Tent? What need
you care for that answered Arfileo) for it may be some will intertaine us: if
not, we must lie in the fields. And thus unresolved, stood still till that
troop past along. At which time some of them went to the Duke, (that at that
time was very pensiuely imagining on the Princess Perfiana) and said to him.
See you not (sir) yonder three knights armed with the richest armor you have
this day seen, whose gallant disposition cannot but content you, and stand in
the n^ddest of the way, seeming to demand the breaking of some Lances, and do
also conduct with them about twelve Damzels, as it seems no less adorned with
beauty, then they with valor. The Duke being desirous to see them, stepped
forth, being armed in a tawnie armor like Don Bellianis, and over the same he
had a coat of cloth of gold, most richly embrodered with Pearls, whose
brightness being ouercast with beams of the shining Sun, dazeled the
beholders sight. On his sheeld was pictured the God of Love, of whom a Knight
begged mercy, he rigorously denied it. And thus went he straight to the
Princes while they gazed on him) going like a valorous and well disposed
Knight. The Duke no less wondering to see their gallant demeanor, and riches
of armor, specially Don Bellianis, whose sight surprised him with sudden
admiration: and being nigh them, he kindly saluted them (being of nature
mild, gentle, and affable, for which he had obtained the name of courteous)
and thus said. I am so astonished (brave and valiant knights) in seeing the
brave disposition of your persons, and strange manner of traveling, that I have
received such content, as the like I shall never obtain, chiefly at this time,
being subject to a grievous melancholy grief. And because I suppose ye are
going to the triumph at Persepolis, I entreat you to employ me in this
journey, for that you seem strangers of some remote Country. And although
the valor of our own persons may merit far greater service, yet I pray you
deny me not this request: for I hope herein to diminish part of my boisterous
and troublesome sorrow, with your gentle conversation. The Princes entreating
one another to answer, Don Bellianis at last replied. The offers (most noble
Duke) which by your liberal bounty we receive, are so great, (as we being
no other then errant knights) can no way deserve. And though we had not
determined to be at those triumphs: yet to accomplish your request willingly
do condescend thereto, yielding the accomptelesse thanks of duetifull
seruitors at your command. For which the Duke very joyfully entertained the^,
with the Ladies in his own company, and so made to Persepolis, discoursing by
the way of pleasant matters, till they came within a mile of the City, hard
by a great river, over which they must of necessity pass by a bridge that
there was. Which the Duke seeing, said: Confounded in our own discourses (Sirs
knights) we have lost our way. Don Bellianis seeing the City, and not knowing
to what end the Duke spoke it, replied. If that be the city, I think this
is the right way. It Is, answered the Duke. But we may not pass this bridge, for
it will be mightily defended. Who be they, (demanded he) that will defend it
against such Knights as be with us? They that do it, will defend it against
the whole world (answered the Duke) For in this kingdom are four Knights,
the valiantest that on the earth do breath, all brothers. Which in one battle
that the Souldan had against the Souldan of Babylon, performed in it such
haughty deeds, that by their proper valor, the victory was obtained, which
got them such honor, that till this day, they are reputed the stro^gest
knights that may be found. Wheruppon the Sophy, to honor them, bad them demand
what they would, and he would grant it. (They answered) they would have
nothing but this Castle and the Bridge, that no Knights might go that way,
unless he should leave his armor and horse, or ouercomming them all in
fight, pass by. The Sophy granted it, with a great living be sides to mantaine
their states. So they being come to this bridge, have brought with them two
mighty and strong Giants, whose fierceness no hundredth Knights dare abide in
combat together. And have above three years defended this passage, and not
any knight hithertoo has vanquished them. For though they be strong and
valiant, yet in their combat do not proceed like good knights; For if it
happens that any knight vnhorseth any of them, he must Joust with the
others, till he overthrow them all: but if he be by any blow himself
ouerturned, he straight loses his arms. Or if he should unhorse them all,
he must after combat with all six together, being the vnreasonablest thing
that ever was heard of. And this is the cause why this bridge and way is no
more used, by reason of the mishappes that there befalls to wandering knights:
and therefore is called the Unhappy bridge. The Princes greatly wondered at
this adventure, yet having great desire to prove it ( don Bellianis thus
said.) Truly, most honored Lord, we never heard of the like adventure: but
if so it please you, we will try the favors of blind Fortune therein. So will
it be rather judged madness, then valor (replied the Duke.) For it lies not
within the compass of one man's strength, to vanquish them: For the least of
them is able to withstand the famous Emperor of Constantinople, that is the
knight most feared in these parts: whose sole name makes the Souldan himself
tremble when he hears it: and also dares oppose, and confronte the strength
of our Prince, that is no less famoused then he. Wherefore if you think
good, let us leave this way: for I perceive some of our company do see it will
be a perpetual blotte to our names (replied Don Bellianis) if through fear
we should not adventure our persons herein. Therefore command them to stay:
for I will not hence leaving this unattempted. While they were thus talking,
they saw on the other side of the bridge, a great number of Knights and
Ladies, clothed in triumphant robes, that were coming thither to sport
themselves. What fair assembly is yonder? (demanded Don Bellianis.) It may
be (said the Duke) it is the Sophy, and his daughter the Princess Persiana,
that come to see if there arrive any aduenturer to the bridge. Although our
falls were but to make them sport (said Don Bellianis) we will try our
fortunes. Do as you will (said the Duke) though more willinglye I would take
another way. Thereuppon they straight went toward the bridge: commandi^g all
their knights to do the like, while they proved the adventure of the Castle:
which they did, yet not with any good will. The Prince Arfileo entreated don
Bellianis to grant him the first battle. I will in no wise do it (said he:)
but because Don Gallaneo is yonder, put on an upper coat over your armor,
lest you be known. I will, (replied he:) but you must grant me this first
combat. In reason it longes to me (answered Don Bellianis) seeing in this
journey I am the Conducter of these Ladies. We have (said Arfileo) as long
accompanied them: therefore shall you not so excuse your self. Then, let the
battle be his (said don Brianell) whom the Princess shall command. Strive
not so about it (said the Duke) for you shall have all enough to do. Now I
judge (said the Princess) seeing Don Brianell by my sentence demands the
iouste, that the first be his, and next your: and the last be his that would
be first, being reason that his strength be best tried when the others fail.
Don Brianell grieved much because he should be last: but seeing it could no
otherwise be, dissembled it, and stepping to the Duke said. I believe we shall
have the bridge freer then I thought. The Duke smilde (as one that supposed
their labor should be but in vain.) And at length arriving at the bridge, don
Brianell began to be foremoste, seeing on the other side all the company come
also thither. And stepping thereon, a Knight armed in an armor of diverse
colors, mounted on a mighty horse, approaching nigh him, said.

What madness has posseste this Knight, to secke a passage over this bridge
by me defended? With mightier force was Hell defended (answered he) yet the
universal Savior of the world did overcome it: In whose name I coming, it
will be no great matter for me to abate thy swelling pride.

By thy speech (replied the Knight) thou seeme^t a Christian. That auayles not
to our purpose (said Don Brianell) therefore prepare thy self. The Knight
with great angerf thinking he had him in little account, turned his horse, and
took so much of the bridge as would suffice for his course, while Don Brianell
did the like. All the men that came with the Duke, and the people come from the
city, approached to see the battle, and many said, every fair Horse and
Armor shall the Knight give unto him of the bridge.

At which time the knights having turned their horses, ran one against the
other, and met so furiously, that the Lances flewe in pieces, and the knight
of the bridge went to the ground, sorely bruzed, and Don Brianell so much bowed
with his horse, that he had almost done the like, but seeing what company
beheld him, raised himself with great courage, considering, it was the first
thing that ye Princess had commanded him. A great murmr arose among the
beholders, for they never had seen any of the Brethren leave the saddle
before. Whereupon the other three Knights and the two Giants being armed,
issued all mounted on great and lusty horses: who when they saw their brother
on the ground, one of them made toward Don Brianell, that already had took
a Lance from his Dwarffe. The Princess Persiana, that was she on the other
side of the bridge, and Don Gallaneo, already called her Spouse, with ye Sophy
his father in law, said to don Gallaneo. I have not seen gallanter knights
then those on the further side, especially you four (poynting to the two
Princes, the Duke, and he that Jousted on the bridge) and greatly do desire
to know who they be. It is no other then the Duke Alfiron (replied don
Gallaneo) for I heard he slept not far hence this last night. The Princess
Persiana hearing the Duke named, fetched a deep sigh, as one that loved him
with in the secret of her heart, but for fear to displease her father, durst
say nothing, yet thought she by the riches of his armor, it should be he,
stood and viewed him very attentively, and seeing how the enraged knights with
puisant force incountred each other, in such sort that their Lances brake in a
thousand sh^uers, and meeting with their horses, shieldes, and helmes, both
fell to the ground: but if Don Brianells horse had been so good as his
adversaries, he had passed without a fall, which he had seant done when the
men of the Castle closed to unarm him. But the Prince Arfileo desirous to
avoid it, with great choler entered the bridge: so did another of the adverse
part, with such swiftnes as does an arrow shot from a bow fly through the
Air, or a thunderbolt breaking from some swelling cloud: and with such
mightynes incountred on the bridge, that the knight of the Castle was
overthrown, with a piece of ye lance sticking in his body. If it proceeds as
it begins said the Duke) we shall freely pass. So shall it be (answered don
Bellianis) for with your auspicious favor, they may be brought to our wished
end. The Sophy was astonished to see the strong incounters of the knights, and
speaking to Don Gallaneo, said. I never thought there could be better knights
then those of the bridge, but now I see what advantage these have over them.
Wonder not thereat (said don Gallaneo) for in the battle we had with the
Emperor, there was in his aid one novel knight, whom he there knighted,
that performed such haughty deeds in arms, that neither Hector, nor Achilles
ever did the like. For believe me, he no more esteemed to be assaulted by
four, or by two Giants, then with one knight, and with his own hands in the
battle he slew above 12. Giants, and 50, knights of mine. But as for the
Emperor, I have told you what happened me with him in the Castle, he being
unarmed: so that you need not wonder what these do, though any of them do
end this adventure, which I cannot believe: and if they do, I will acknowledge
it the greatest act that ever I heard of, by reason their swordfighting will
be so unequal. Which having said, the eldest and the greatest of the
brethren, came against Arfileo, intending to revenge his Brothers death, whose
incounters were so furious, that their lances were made in little pieces: and
in such sort met with their bodies, that the knight of the Castle was
overthrown with a great wound on his side. And Arfilleos horse with the strong
stroke recoyled back three or four paces, that at last unable to stay him,
with admirable lightness he leapt from his back, being a little wounded on
the breast. The servants of the castle went to him, to do as they would have
don with don Bryanell: but the first that arrived, for his boldness lost his
head: For Arfileo thinking he should not be judged overthrown, laid hand on
his sword to defend himself: wherewith he would have made them know his
valor, extended farther then thitherto he had showen. But the two brothers
that Don Bryanell had unhorsed, arrived with their drawn swords: the like did
the Giants. And on the otherside Don Bellianis and the Duke did so, that in
short time among them all there began a terryble and fearful battle: For all
the Dukes knights would pass over the Bridge, But the Sophy, the Princess
Persiana, and Don Gallaneo went and parted them, and demanded the cause why
they were so mingled together, and did not proceed with their combat as they
had begun: which either they should do, or let them pass? We are content to
do either (said Don Bellianis:) but this knight fell not, seeing by another
strength he left not the saddle, and therefore ought not to loose his horse
until the ioustes be ended. He may no more mount (said they.) Who shall judge
it (demanded Don Bellianis.) We need no judge (said they) for it is our
custom: but if any must be, let it be the Souldan (our Lord) here present.
Be it so, (said the Duke.) Then (said the Sophy) I awarde, that since the
knight was not by another unhorsed, he loose not his horse nor armor, but
that he be vanquished, seeing he forsook his horse: so that he may ioust
no more.

Great profit do they get by this sentence (said a proud knight) that on the
Souldan attended, and was a near Alley to the Giants that defended the Bridge.
It is well indged (said Don Bellianis:) and believe me, had not the Souldan
done it, no less wrong received we, then they.

But what art thou that should not a little count thy self, being more
prouder then vallyant, to speak against the Souldan thy Lords judgment.

The knight enraged with desire to revenge those words, answered. Let us set
aside the Souldans judgment as a matter impertinent to us: But if thou will,
upon whither of the knights be overcome accept this my gage, I give it thee.

I accept it (answered don Bellianis) on condition we may not pass the
bridge, unless by force we do it. You defer it too long (said the knight)
and our fight will be void if you mean to win the bridge by strength: for
these knights earnestly desire your armor, being so rich. But I give thee
leave to help them (answered don Bellianis) whereby thou shall see how
little I account what thou so much esteemest.

All the beholders admired him, to see with what courage he spoke: but chiefly
the Princess Persiana, that going to the Duke Alfiron (whom she did not know)
being among the knights and not knowing what end that enterprise would have,
did not discover himself, and said. I pray thee (good knight) tell me who be
these knights, for I greatly desire to know it. The Duke softly, that none
might hear, answered.

No marvel (most beauteous Princess) and Lady of my heart, you at this time
know me not, having employed my service in your behalf to so little regard:
But if (dear Lady) you had determined I should by your cruelty dye, why did
you not command me to be my own executioner, and not permit my eyes to see
the sight of my living death. The Princess by his speech straight knew him,
whereupon for very grief her eyes flowed with pearled tears: but dissembling
least it should be discerned, replied.

The Gods know (great Duke) my grief, for this marryage my Father intendes,
is no less than yours, and therefore must we perforce have patience.

The Duke would have answered her, but that he perceived don Bellianis had
ended the accepting of the battle against the proud knight. and that they of
the bridge had granted them the combat therein, condicionally, that if don
Bellianis were overcome, his horse and armor should be theirs: who greatly
grieved for their brothers death: and more that they could not be revenged on
him that had slain him.

CHAP. XII.
What happened Don Bellianis in the battle with the Knights of the Bridge.

DON Bellianis inflamed with anger against the Knight, withdrewe himself, to
whom the Princess Aurora thus said. As much as other knights do shun the
most dangerous fightes, even so much, and more do you seek them. I can do no
less (replied he.) At this time arrived the Duke, having left the Princess,
and said to him. It were good you encorage your self sir knight, for you have
a very mighty adversary. All his strength will scant suffice him (said the
Princess Aurora) though he be never so valiant. Which word the Duke did so
little set by as the first, seeing the Knights so well confirmed them by their
haughty ex ployts

Don Bellianis with the enraged choler he had conceived, opposed himself
against the knight, that also came toward him: who very strongly^ in the
middle of his shield made his encounter, yet not hurting him at all, brake his
lance, not moving him in his saddle, for the inpenetrable virtue of the shield
retorted back the furious Iron. Don Bellianis with the great desire he had to
hit him, mist his encounter, so that their horses passed on their course with
admirable fury. The great ire the Prince hereat conceived by missing his
encounter, is not described for want of skill, but very furiously turned upon
the Knight, that did the like, and judging it cowardice, having mist his
encounter, and lost his lance, to draw his sword against so vile and insolent
a man, went toward him, receiving a most heavy blow upon his helmet, and
with incredible swiftness running at him, snatched him twixt his strong arms,
and as he were a little child, plucked him from his saddle, and impatiently
governed by his present fury stepped to the bridge side, and over it tumbled him
down into the river, where through the weight of his armor, he was straight
overwhelmed, leaving the beholders so amazed at the deed, that the Sultan cried
out. Oh immortal Gods, what mighty strength is this in one knight? It is
wonderful great, (said Don Gallaneo) that was something moved seeing him, and
more circumspectly looking on him, thought that was the devise of the novel
knight at Constantinople: yet he doubted it, being so far distant thence,
imagining he would come thither, by reason of the difference of religion. Yet
seeing those Ladies there, did greatly suspect it. And again turning his eyes
toward him, he saw one of the knights of the Bridge pricked forwards against
him. Don Bellianis that also went to meet him without lance, although the
Duke called to him to take his, said. I have no need thereof, having employed
mine own so ill: but meeting the knight in the middle of the bridge, was
forced to lose his stirrup by the encounter, and meeting with horses, sheelds,
and bodies, the kinght fell down bruised, with his head all battered. Don
Bellianis horse with the sheck rested immouable, till with his spurs he made
him like a whirlewind fly, even to the place where the Sultan and his company
were, that firmly had their gazing eyes fixed on him. The Sophie seeing one of
the Giants coming against him, said. Take a lance (sir knight) for you will
greatly need it in this ioust preparing for you. It is my Countries custom
(most excellent Lord) that the Knight which in iousting before a King or
Emperor, loses his encounter, through the little valor of his worth may
not until he have ended the battle take another, which makes me now against my
necessity, ride without it: and so prauncing, and with great courage managing
his Horse, he spurd against the Giant, who not minding to leave his Lance,
though he saw the Prince without any, pricked against him: but he drawing his
sword before they met, cut it in two, and stepping aside with his Horse, let
him pass in such an amazement, that missing whereon to hitte and stay
himself, ran headlong forwards, and at last Horse and all tumbled down, the
Giant resting sore battered with the terrible fall: and the Prince seeing it,
set himself in his place, expecting the rest of his adversaries: against whom
came the knight that first iousted with Don Brianel, and staying for him, at
the instant he would encounter him with his Lance, leapt aside with his Horse,
making him loose his stroke, and with great fury turning upon him, snacht his
lance out of his hands, and therewith with one blow feld him to the earth,
and returning to his place, brandished it with great joy. The lookers on, had
almost persuaded themselves to dream with the sight of such admirable
exployts. The Duke was so ravished with gladness, that he knew not what to
say, to whom the Princess Aurora spoke. What think you (Sir) of the knight in
the Tawnye armor? What may I think or say? (said he) but yt in no time nor
age of men, were never like herroike actions performed: and if he can so well
use his sword, as he can his lance mounted on his courser, I doubt not but
without impediment we shall pass ye bridge. Straight shall you be assured
thereof (said she.) And so brake of their talk: for don Bell. with the spear
he had taken from the knight, opposed himself against y^ mighty giant, that
blaspheming old Mahomet, came against him with such fierceness, that soming
like a Boar, and guided with a hellish rage, most thick smoke issued from the
Uysor of his helm, and in the middle of the spacious Bridge incountred that
the giant brake his lance on don Bellianis shield: which slyding on it made
him a great wound, whence issued much blood. The Prince struck in such manner,
that piercing his shield and armor, mightily wounded him on the breast: and
both meeting with their horses, the Giant measured his length on the earth, and
the Prince horse set both knees on the ground, wherewith he rested so amazed,
that he had not ye remembrance to spur him. Whereat the Prince Arsileo that
saw him in such a trance, and thinking him wounded to the death, would have
helped him, if the Duke had not bid him stand still, to see what the knights
would do: who greatly abasht at their unhappy success, did together go all
against him: but before they arrived, the Prince had recovered himself, and
very choleric through that accident, straight dismounted, and embracing his
shield, drew his sword with such furye, and little fear, as if he had to do
but with one knight. The knight is not in his wites (said the Sophy) to leave
his horse in such a time, having to do with so hardye knights, who in
compassing him, did bestow such mighty blows, as might dissolve the limping
Gods black steeled forge. The Giants being somewhat slow in arryuing, by
reason of their boysterousnesse, hoys^ed up their slyeing battle axes,
thinking to end the battle with their first blows: but the discrete Prince
knowing how grievous those strokes were to suffer, stepped aside, that both
alighted in vain, and he reached one of them such a blow on the leg, that
he cut it quite a sunder: who not able to sustain himself thereon, fell
down: yet was he struck in such manner, that he was wounded in two places,
while he laid the other Giant on the head, that the blood ran down his eyes,
and defending himself with his shield from ye knights blows, struck him on
the arm, he held the axe that both fell together for company, and the giant
going to take that with his other hand, could not through the excessive pain
of the fall by the encounter: and again he was so mightily wounded on ye head,
that he tu^bled at his feet: and because he had put him in such trouble, soght
al means to cut of his head, but ye knights laid on him as did the Cyclops,
when at Venus request by Vulcans command, they forged Aeneas armor in the ever
burning Aetna mount, which forced him to sustain himself on the ground with
his hand: but he redubling his forces, with enraged valiancie, seeing the
Giants troubled him no more, turned upon the three brethren, and wounded one of
them (which most vexed him) on the head, that he cleaued it in two: the others
embraced him, thinking to ouerturne him, but they might as well tell the stars
of heaven or with casting water fill the wide vast Ocean sea. For the prince
being the strongest knight of forces in the world, that few or no Giants could
equal him therein, so bravely held one between his arms, that he thrust the
pieces of his armor into his flesh, that the crimson blood gusht from his
veins exceeding fast. And seeing that himself also lost no small quantity,
procured to shorten the fight, least he might therein faint* and so made them
think (drawing them both to the bridge side) that he would throw them into the
river: which they perceiving, and the extreme state they were brought to,
demanded of him mercy for their lost lives. At which instant arrived the
Sophy, and said: Seeing they can no longer defend themselves sir knight) be
satisfied with that you have done. For which our victorious name shall ever be
eternised throughout the spacious co^tinent of this earthly bal, having to end
the greatest adventure, yt ever knight attempted. I am content to obey your
command (most excellent Lord) answered the Prince, on this condition, that they
no more maintain this custom. That can not they do (replied the Sophy) for it
was their own agreement. Then the Prince leaving the knights, gave God thanks,
that so delivered him from that great danger which they thought he did to their
Gods. The Princes Arfileo and don Brianell, whose armor was taken away (with
hope to do the like by them all with the Duke Alfiron, and the princess, went
and embraced him with such love, as if he had revived from death to life. And
the Duke was somewhat abashed of the little confidence he had shown of them.

CHAP. XIII.
How the Knights were received of the Soldane of Persia: and their conference
with the Princess Persiana.

THe Princess Persiana and Don Gallaneo, being desirous to speak with the
duke Alfyron, having understood by some of the knights, that he was there, were
going to him: but he alighting from his horse, went to kiss the Sophies
hands, and humbled himself before him, who^ the Sophie but then seeing,
embraced, and raising him from the ground, said. I am glad Duke, to see you
come to honor our tryumphes, cheefely bringing to our Court such knights as
these, specially he in the tawny armor, whom I would have you tell me what
they be, assuring you the world cannot afford his like, and I rest so amazed,
that I know not if any humane strength be able to accomplish what he has. All the rest of his company affirmed it, scarce believing what their own eyes had
seen: and the Duke thus answered. It was you (my gracious lord) whom I would
entreat to demand it of them, for though they came in my company, it is but
very little since I met them, and if they do not declare it to you, I doubt
they will not do it to any other. Speakto the Princess, duke, said the
Sophy, while I talk with the knights: and going a little further, said to Don
Bellianis that was mounting on the giants horse, with whom he first iusted,
whose like for bigness, strength, and well made body the whole Persian Empire
did not then contain: but perceiving the Sophy came toward him, would not
mount, but as he was on foot, humbl^d himself to kiss his royal hands. The
Sophie holding him with one hand because he should not kneel, with the other
(...)ed, and embracing him with great affection, said. Th(...) reason Sir
knight, why you should kneel to any, deserving for your valor and
incomparable bounty the same duty of every one. But for one only thing must
I needs now entreat you, which I am sure you will not deny me, judging your
courtesy no less then your haughty courage, of which all such knights as you
should as much prise themselves, as of their proper valor, which thing before I
express it, I will thereto bind you by your promise. Tell me (most mighty
Lord) answered Don Bellianis what you will command me, for barbarous and
uncivil were he that should deny so great a Lord any thing, in the highest
degree appertaining to your royal service, although a knight of such small
consequence as I, less then your behest should satisfy. Hereupon the Duke,
Don Gallaneo, and Princess Persiana, after their greetings, came thither to
know the conference between him and the knight: so did the Princess Aurora
and the rest of her company, who were entertained with such courtesy, as if
they were known to be the greatest peers of the world. At length the
princess Persiana thus said to the Princess Aurora. I do entreat you (fair
Lady) least we should derogate from the honor by your exterior show and the
valor of your attendant knights you seem to deserve, you would manifest the
state and royalty of your descent: for although you desire to conceal it, yet
your worthiness will shine from the dignity of your birth. She humbling her
self, replied: I rather desire (most excellent Princess) you should still
conceive that opinion of me (though undeserved) for after you should know me,
my small deserts will then loose the favors you now show me: for the
meannesse of my state is such, that it does not merit the fruition of these
favors. Seeing you will have it so, I will no longer importune you (replied
the beauteous Persiana) so evidently telling me we merit not to know you,
save only by your outward signs. But setting aside the worthiness of your
person, that well deserves we should all obey you, let me then receive the
favor, that you would vouchsafe to lodge within the Soldane my fathers
Palace. We may say nor do any thing herein, (said Arsileo) more then the
knight in the tawnie armor will command, to whom all obedience is due. Nay
then (said the Soldane) if we list to know it, we shall easily know it by
force of arms, but seeing he has promised me a boon, this shall be it (said
he turning to don Bellianis) that you all take off your helmes, and that we
may know your names. Don Belliani, stood somewhat pensive, not knowing what to
answer, yet thinking that the longer he kept silence, they would the more
suspect, he at last thus replied. Truly excellent Lord, you have demanded me a
thing that by my will I never would discover, but seeing I can do no less,
there is no reason I should deny it, and therefore will declare it with license of
this my company. We will allow whatsoever you shall do, said they. The princess
Aurora was at this time in great fear least they should be known, thinking yt
don Gallaneo had seen them in the castle when don Brianell was carried thither,
but they deceived themselves, for he had not seen the^ but armed, when he was
there taken. Don Bellianis replying, the Soldane said. You shall know (my good
Lord) I am called the knight of the golden Image, because I bear it on my
sheeld, and I assure you at this present I have no other name, neither may I
have it, till I be commanded the contrary. This my companion, poynting to don
Brianell, is nominated the venturous knight, and this other is the Prince
Arfileo, if ever you heard him named before, Prince and sole heir of the
kingdom of Rasia. This Lady whom we accompany, is the King of Carcasias
Daughter, with whom through a certain adventure, we were al going to the king
her fathers Court. This is almost noble Lord, what in this case I can declare,
protesting by the faith of a Knight, I may not more discover, for I my self
do not know it. You have done with me (replied the Soldane) although I
desired larger information: and seeing there remains no more to do, I pray
you unlace your h^lmes, that my desire may further be satisfied. Arfileo and
Don Bryanell straight way obeyed, being very glad to hear how well don
Bellianis had answered: which done, they all highly commended the^ for their
brave disposition. The Princess Aurora till that time being sorrowful, not
knowing what reply don Bellianis would make, with great joy stepped unto him,
unlaced his helm: whose fair complexion, with the gallant constitution of
his well knit members, and strength of body, was highly admired, having his
hair like thread of massy gold, disheueled hanging on his shoulders. The
sight of this his rare favor, with his haughty exployts in arms, made them
amazedly think him the offspring of the mighty god of war, judging it impossible
that any mortal creature should possess two such extremes, wherein he
surpassed al within ye compass of the earth. He was of stature higher the^ any
knight in that time, his hands long and finowy, betokening his excessive
strength, his shoulders big and large, whose breadth might mainely bear the
puissant burden of old Atlas forces. His face whiter then the purest
Alabaster, commixt with the Roseate color of a natural red. Therein was
placed his eagle-penetrating instruments of sight, as bright as the resplendant
rays of the meridiall sun: and to conclude, there was none afflicted with
black heart oppressing melancholy, but in examining his perfections, would on
a sudden banish that enemy to quiet pleasure. He had moreover a certain
manner of mild gravity, that with it he drew unto him the love of the
admirers: for it being with anger moved, there could be no countenance more
stern then his, yet he so refrained himself by forcing it from him, that
straight he would expel it. He was a great maintainer and lover of justice,
that if any did commit a fault or erred, he himself would see him punished.
None in his time could equal him in forces. His speech was rare but wise, and
never spoke but premeditated upon occasion. When ye Soldane saw such
accomplished perfections and complete valor in one knight, he again embraced
him, conceiving so great pleasure, yt had not the marriage of his daughter bin
so forward, he would willingly without further knowledge what he was, given her
him for his wife, and at last he brake their silence with these words: Most
glorious knight, I impute it no fault in you in being so unwilling to discover
unto us your rare parts, which only to ye high immortal gods, as things
altogether proper and appertaining to themselves, do belong: to whom I render
recountlesse thanks, that in my time they have vouchsafed to send so great a
wonder among us, in this our age. At the time that Don Bellianis would have
kissed his hands, which he not consented, arrived the Princess Persiana with
Don Gallaneo, leading with them the Princess Aurora. Whereupon the Souldane
and the Knight mounted on their horses, and the Ladies on their Palfrayes, and
don Bellianis having his wounds first dressed by the Damsels, who also did the
like to the knights of the bridge, they took their way toward Persepolis. The
Dukes train was exceeding merry, to have in their company so famous knights,
for those tryumphes: don Bryanell, that was called the aduenturous Knight,
stepped to the beauteous Persiana, and as one that in courtly courtesy, and
pleasant discourses was inferior to none, said unto her. Seeing fair
Princess, my name is not opposite against any favor I may receive, I beseech
you make me thereby assured firm against all changes of al reuoluing chance:
in sign whereof, grace me by your grant, with the leading of your palfray by
the raynes, whereby I may with the fruition of your divine company, enjoy all
that I may desire, which is to rest sole yours for ever, since yonder knight
(meaning don Gallaneo) has taken on him my office with the Princess my Lady.
This he said because don Gallaneo did lead the Princess Auroraes palfraye,
which though she suffered, was to dissemble that she knew him not, rather
desiring his death, then at his hands any such favor. The like wish wished the
Duke Alfyron. The Princess Persiana, no less gallant in talk, then rareness
of beauty, replied.

I would not sir Knight, that about your service, the Princess your Lady and I
should ^arre: but seeing she does accept a stranger for her seruitor, she shall
receive the guerdon of her change: and therewith she gave him the raines, which
he gladly took: to whom the Princess Aurora said. I know not sir
aduenturous knight, wherein I have so much discontented you, that you should so
soon drown me in oblivion: but if it were in commanding you to prove the
adventure of the bridge: henceforth will I be more considerate, and so you
shall be less grieved, yet notwithstanding all things have so well befallen
you, that you have no cause of greeuance. True, said he, if the Prince Arfileo
had not got more by that proof then I. What have I obtained more? demanded
Arfileo. The commandment of my Lady the Princess (said he) besides the
horse you have under you. So have you got your armor which you had lost
(answered Arfileo) for which you are beholding to the knight of the golden
Image. I have no reason to thank him for it replied he) for he did it more to
keep his own that are so excellent, then because I should not loose mine.
Then were it good (said don Bellianis) since you will not thank me for them,
that you restore them back to me. We shall not so soon end this quarrel as
you did the other (replied Don Bryanell) for the knights looking for yours,
would to have them willingly let me have mine. Let this pass (said Don
Gallaneo) for had you lost these your gallant dispositions, you would have
gotten others. In this manner at length they arrived at the City, even at the
days departing, giving place unto the mighty glistering stars, twinkling in
the firmament, where they found the people attending for their coming with
lights and torches, who in troops filled up the streets, that they had no way
to pass: for the news being spread, that one knight had vanquished the
keepers of the unhappy Bridge, they all flocked to see him, as a wonder,
demanding one of another which was he, never enough satisfied with his sight,
that all this while talked with Don Gallaneo, till they all came to the palace
gate, where they alighted. The beatious Persiana was dismou^ted by don
Bellianis, that said to don Brianell: I have at this time (Sir aduenturous
knight) deceived you of the reward of your labor, having on foot obtained
more, the^ you in all this journey. You are all against me (replied he) but I
may have a time to cry quittance with you for it. Don Gallaneo taking the
Princess Aurora in his arms, they all entered the royal Hall: whence all
their company departed, The Souldan importuned the three knights to stay
within the palace, which he could not obtain. For they answered they would
in no wise leave the Duke, till the triumphs were ended: so said the Princess
Aurora that never would disassociate her knights: and so with leave of the
Souldan and his daughter, they also departed.

Well did don Bellianis note when they were taking their leave, how the Duke
Alfiron showed no good will toward Gallaneo, wherefore he was desirous to
be certified thereof: and being come to the Dukes Palace, that was one of the
best and greatest in the city, Don Bellianis would not stay for supper: but
finding himself weak through the much blood he had lost, cast himself on a
bed that was made for him, where his damzels did again dress his wounds,
while the Duke and the rest satte to supper: where they were so well served as
they had been in Constantinople, and after went to visit Don Bellianis: whence
departing, they went to repose their wearied bodies.

CHAP. XIIII.
The conference between the Princess Persiana, and the Duke Alfyron, with the
knight of the golden image.

THe next morning, scarce had the son mounted on his fiery wayne, to make
his orbed course about the world, but the Duke Alfyron went to visit the Knight
of the Golden image, for by no other name would he be known to them, unless
it were to the Princess and ladies, and entering his chamber, he found him
rising, though his wounds were great. The Duke with a kind congye gave him the
goodmorrow, and said. Trouble not your self to rise sir knight, for your wounds
may put you in great pain. Thinking you went to the tourney (answered the
Prince) I would make me ready. What shall we do there to day? (replied the
Duke) but I believe if the Souldane knew you were so weak, he would come to
visit you. Then were it not amiss (said the Prince) that I did rise to save
him that labor.

With this entered the Ladies also to visit him, bidding him in no case rise,
till they further advised him: wherewith he lay still, and so the Ladies left
him with the Duke. But he having great desire to be avenged on don Gallaneo, by
reason of the promise he had made his father, and perceiving the Duke had like
intent, and desiring to know it, said to him. Tell me sir which of all those
knights was the Prince don Gallaneo of Antioch? That was he (replied the Duke)
that led the Princess Aurora by the raynes of her palfray, borne to rob me of
my earthly joys. What is the cause thereof, demanded he, for so great a Lord
as you should easily be revenged on any person whatsoever, being moved
thereto. That is not the thing that may remedy my grief (said the Duke) yet I
pray you let me know it (said Don Belliani^.) Then thus began the duke. I
was a long time captiuated in the love of the beatious Princess Persiana, and
of her so highly favored, that with little labor I might have obtained her
for my wife, if my reuoluing fates had not opposed themselves against my
happinesse^ and so declared to him the whole process of his love, with such
sorrow, that Don Bellianis could not restrain his tears, taking great
compassion of him, though glad in that this might be a means to effect his
own intent, and thus answered. De not think your matter so happelesse, but
imagine you may by some means attain the Princess Persiana to your wife. I
cannot persuade my self (replied the Duke) there may be any remedy for my
grief. For to morrow after dinner the iousts begins, and the same morning
the Princess is married to Don Gallaneo, whereby I see no hope but death, for
anchorage and end of all my pains, or to deprive my life of my vital senses,
before my eyes do view it. Do not so afflict your soul (said Don Bellianis)
for I have thought upon a mean, which if you agree thereto, is, that to morrow
we all meet at the Tourney, where, if Don Gallaneo, thinking himself the best
Knight within this Court) does enter, there also I mean to be in an unknown
armor, and meeting with him will disappoint him of his new betrothed love. For
I have no less desire then you, to send him out of the world. And to the end
with more secrecy we may do it, you shall give out, I am so sore wounded,
that I rest unable to rise, and so Don Gallaneo shall not escape my hands, and
your intent shall be at full accomplished. If this fail, you have such knights,
that with the^ maugre all the court, I will conduct her where you will. The
duke hearing this, knew not where he was, with joy, and imbrasing him said. Not
without great cause (renowned knight of the golden image) did I from the first
hour I saw you, comprize such love of you, and was so suddenly affected, as
the man in whom might consisted the remedy of my torments, although we know
not fully how we shall accomplish it, by reason at this present there is
above fifty thousand knights in the court, that I doubt we shall not so easily
escape with our lives, for all I little regard my own. Think not so much on
the end (replied Don Bellianis) if you see the matter happily begun: for
there is nothing so surely grounded, but the beginning will require great
labor, especially such enterprises as these. Wherefore my opinion is, seeing
our time is so short, that you send half of your men to attend our coming in
the way we must take, some ten miles hence, taking with them double horsing,
that when we arrive with ours tired, and being there forced to fight, we may
find fresh horses. And this done, 1000. chosen men will serve to fetch her
hence, so that they perfectly kaow the way. The duke liked well of this
counsel: where they broke of, being advertised how the Sultan, and the
princess Persiana, with all the chief nobility (except don Gallaneo, that
remained about another matter, which straight shall be declared) came to visit
him: wherefore the duke hearing it, went to meet him, yet for all his have he
found him coming up the stairs talking with the princes Arfileo, don
Brianell, and Aurora, that went forth to receive them: who when they saw the
duke go toward the^) the princess Persiana said. I fear (great duke) you are
already assured of the victory of the iousts, being in company of such
valiant knights, which makes you thus keep your Chamber at this time a day,
notwithstanding I can tell you, you have many adversaries: therefore advise
your self, and look well what you have to do, and must in your own defense
perform. The duke kneeling before her, demanded her beauteous hands to kiss
them, for that favor she did him by her good counsel, and that none might hear
replied if your divine favor, most excellent Lady, does not forsake me, I may
securely rest fearlesse of all dangers: but I doubt I shall with your absence
remain altogether unable thereto, having lost the fruition of your divine
favor, possessed by a stranger in my sight. The princess made him rise, and
that she might more at her pleasure talk with him, took him by the hand, and
that every one might hear, said. Seeing you have thus long bin idle I mean
now to task you for your labor: for you shall be this day my guardian, for that
the aduenturous knight may not be both the princesses and mine, and therefore
will I renounce him, having so soon forgotten me. Then belike my self being
desirous (said don Brianell) to obtain both your favors, must now fear to
loose all: yet am I content, that my Lord the duke may have the inheritance of
my place. Thus chatting they arrived at don Bellianis lodging, who would have
risen to receive the^, but the Sultan would not suffer it. And going to his beds
side, demanded how he felt himself: whereunto he replied. I cannot but be well
(most dread Lord) resting so bound to your imperial majesty, that I know not
how I may acknowledge satisfaction for ye Lest of these your royal favors,
which forces in me no less pain, then the grief of my late received wounds.
While they were all earnestly talking, the Princess Persiana said to the
Duke. What pretend you to do against to morrows turname^t, or will you not be
there? I will do no more (answered he) then you will command me: for I came
with no other intent. Then she said: seeing you leave it to my dispose, I
think, because the knight of the golden image, by reason of his wounds cannot
be there, that you fail not, for you shall reap greater favor at my hands then
don Galleano: in toke^ whereof I present you this flag, and set it on the top of
your creast, which with my hands I wrought, unknown to any: which that none
did see, she took it out of her pocket, and gave it him. The duke received it
with wonderful content, and kis^ her hand, resting the ioyfullest man alive.
Think not much of that I do, for my father does force it, and I would put my
self in danger to avoid it: and I have greatly reioiced that you have brought
with you such valiant warriers, as at the unhappy bridge I saw. For if the
knight of the golden image were not as he is, I would have entreated him to
procure to dissolve this match, done contrary to my hearts intent. He and I
have co^ferred about this matter (said the Duke) yet speak you with him about
it, that he may know this to be with your consent. whereupon she then went to
his beds side, while the Souldane talked apart with Arfileo, whom he highly
esteemed, knowing him to be so great a Prince as Don Bellianis had said. The
princess Persiana seeing so good occasion, demanding how he felt himself with
his great wounds, as much greeuing for them, as though he were the Prince her
brother, and the more, being in time wherein she so much needed the help of
his unconquered strength, to the subuerting of her enemies: whereto he
answered: I do feel my self (most excellent Princess) very well, especially
to accomplish any thing appertaining to your high service, wherefore assuredly
command and employ me any way wherein my worthiness may prevail for your
behoof. It is no small promise (replied she) you offer me, for as I do greatly
need it, so shall I have cause to employ the greatest part of your valor. And
therefore (most glorious knight) know, as you already have understood of the
Duke, that the Soldane my father has determined to marry me to the Prince Don
Gallaneo: which does so torment my passion-broken heart, that I here vow, if al
other means of my desired remedy do fail me, my proper hand shall finish the
tragic scene of my afflicted life, ere I will consent to this unfortunate
wedding: and though many nobles have solicited my father to the contrary, yet
will he not be satisfied, answering them words unbeseeming both his majesty
and their estates. Wherefore if I have cause so to complain of my
soule-consuming greefes (if ever you felt the like) you may easily judge. And
to conclude, I have determined to marry none but the Duke Alfyron the
Courteous. For when I saw your high admired deeds in the battle, I then
assured my self of help. But now through your grievous wounds it has since so
increased, that had I not discovered my discontent unto you, I had to morrow
wedded me to death, rather then to him I so abhor. Therefore this only I
entreat you, that commiserating the state of me the most unhappiest Princess
living, you would procure some redress to terminate my woes, that I may not
fall in his hands whom mortally I hate: I mean Don Gallaneo, wherein you shall
commit no error against my father, whose decaying honor with his life, will be
augmented by his death. For Don Gallaneo is not the man that merits his
Daughter, being a knight of the least faith at this time living. And I cannot
be persuaded, that so famous and glorious a Prince as the Emperor of Greece,
could by him be assaulted, unless it were with treason and such like. And the
greatest corasiue to my heart is, I cannot in some night steal out of the
Palace, and so depart with the Duke, wheresoever he would convey me: which my
father suspecting, keeps me with a great guard. Thus have I (sir knight)
disclosed the tenor of my greefes, beseeching you that if any hope of remedy
hang in the angry skies for my release, you would let me know it, assuring your
self, I will refuse no danger, and will undergo al perils, accounting them as
greatest pleasures, so thereby I may frustrate this detested match. Don
Bellianis all this while rested much amazed, to see how passionately the
Princess grieved, and with what confidence she had manifested unto him her
mind: and without longer deliberating on the matter, as if he had resolved
thereon with consent of his Companion, replied. Great is the pleasure I have
received (most excellent Princess) with the knowledge of this your resolve,
having thereon ere this conferred with the Duke, and so I only expected this
your high command, and also hoping you would bind me to your perpetual
observation, by your visitation I remained thus in bed, by which occasion I
more conveniently might know the resolution of your mind, which now being
assured of you, shall need no more, then commit the execution of all unto my
charge, your self seeming to know nothing: for I protest and promise you never
more after to put on armor, if this marriage be effected with Don Gallaneo,
And doubt not but with the help of the immortal Gods, it shall be as I say:
But least we should force suspicion by our long discourse, I will not any
longer stay you. With which conclusion she rested the contentedst Lady in the
world, seeing how well those af^^^res would proceed according to her desire,
only for that the knight of the golden Image had so co^fidently undertaken so
weighty a charge. And so after some ceremonics between them, she fell in
discourse with the other Knights and Ladies, while the Sultan was taking his
leave of don Bellianis, and the Princess Aurora: and the like did his
Daughter. Which done, and both parties resting content, they departed toward
the Palace, and with them the Princess Arsileo, and Don Brianell with the
Duke, who leaving them there, returned to their lodgings to order the
determined purposes: whereupon they straight commanded that two thousand
Knights should that night depart, and attend their coming at Dianas grove. And
themselves prepared how and in what manner they would meet in the tourney the
ensuing day, and so expecting the next morrow with hope to execute their
determination.

CHAP. XV.
What conference passed between the Prince Don Gallaneo, and his cosen Don
Galfeo the unknown: and how they resolved to kill the knight of the golden
Image, and his Companions.

MAny and great were the thoughts that troubled Don Gallaneo, seeing that the
Knight of the Golden Image had ended the adventure of the Bridge, which made
him imagine he should know him by comparing the haughty deeds he then had
done in that battle, to equal those he saw him do in the conflict of
Constantinople where he aided the Emperor Don Bellaneo: wherefore taking a
part his Coosen don Galfeo the unknown, brake into these speeches. I cannot
tell (good Coose^) whether you have marked what I have, and known that which
greeues me to the heart: yet notwithstanding, know for certainty, and I am so
persuaded that the Knight of the golden Image is he that sought against us at
Constantinople, in the battle of the Emperor don Bellaneo: whom if he be, then
commes he only to procure our utter overthrow, with untimely death. For though
the Emperor should be living, yet I so fear them, that until I have the
Princess in my power, I shall not rest, through extremity of passions, of
those disturbing thoughts which have so bereft me of my senses, that I know not
what course to take. Don Galfeo hereat amazed, did reply. Either I have been
blind, or not in my self, in not ^^ting those Knights, as you have: yet
assure your self (for so do I) that the Emperor is himself come disguised
with them. For in the conflict with him, there was but two, and now there are
three which does confirm it, else could no knight in the world perform such
admirable deeds against the Knights of the bridge, but the Emperor. Therefore
determine what you will have done with them, since we have them at our
pleasure in the Dukes Palace. None of them is the Emperor, for I know him
very well (said don Gallaneo.) But know (I think it best) that to morrow
when the iousts begins, the Duke being General of all the adventurers, and I
of the Courtiers, you shall take five hundred chosen Knights, and with them
march to the Dukes lodging, which you shall find without my guard. There go up
to the Chamber the Knight lies in sore wounded, where you may easily deprive
him of his life, and the like will I do by his companions in the field. All
this approved don Galfeo, being as false a traitor as his coosen, and that
night they prepared those men they thought meet for that enterprise,
determining to put the princes to death before their malice were known.

CHAP. XVI.
How the journey began: and in what anger the aduenturous knight, and Arfileo
were put by Don Gallaneos Knights.

NO sooner had the resplendent Sun, expelling the obscure darkness from the
gloomie skies, clearing the morn with his bright light, on that in every
place so celebrated day of S. John, but with unspeakable, and long hoped joys
there began in the City of Persepolis, such ecchoing noise of military
instruments, as if it had been like to be subverted by fury of some terrible
assault, of foreign foes. Through the streets were nothing seen but most
sumptuous and rich furnitures, and many and diverse rare inventions, for all
manner of new devised pastimes. All the people prepared themselves as
appertained to the celebration of so mighty a Princess nuptials. The knights
on the other side, though they apparelled themselves with rich triumphant
roabs, yet had they special care of their armor and horse, which in the
afternoon they should use. The Prince Don Gallaneo (after he had agreed with
his coosen that toward the evening he should be in readiness to execute their
appointment) did superbiously adorn himself, and accompanied with many
Knights and Lords in number 2000. he went to the palace, where by the way he
met the kings of Arminea, and Tessifanty, with many other strangers, amongst
whom were above 30. dukes and Earls, and with the sound of innumerable
trumpets, and al other sort of harmonious instruments, whose far resounding
noise made all the valleys there adioining echo with the sound till they
arrived at the palace, where they attended their return, while the excellent
and fair Princess Persiana issued forth with such admiring beauty, that it
more increased the Duke Alfirons grief. Her gown was of white Saten, cut upon
cloth of gold, tackt with silk, and golden twist, and drawn forth in
Roses. In the middle of every one was set an orient Pearl of great bigness,
that it made the gown of such excessive valor, that every one esteemed it
worth no less then the whole City of Persepolis: her Amber hair like the
threeds of finest gold, was in tresses in a net of the same stuff knit
together, whereon was placed a Coronet, set with great and fair Saphires, in
the midst whereof stood a stone graven with the Image of the God of Love,
with his bow and arrows, whose sparkling brightness would have darkened the
light of a great Torch. The Duke Alfiron when he saw her in this manner,
remained altogether without feeling: which Arfileo (that was nigh him) seeing,
said unto him very softly. Look to your self (most noble Duke) least you
discover what hitherto has been unknown. Whereat the Duke recovered
himself, greatly abashed at the accident: but every one was so occupied in
eying the Princess, that they little regarded any other. Whereupon the Prince
Arfileo, and Don Brianell, took her by the hands, and led her to the
Palace stayres, where they all mounted on such horses and palfrayes as
appertained to their high state: in which equipage they went to their chief
Temple, where by the high Priest they were married, according to the Pagan
rytes: which done they returned to dinner, dyning together drowned in all
earthly joys, wanting nothing that any mortal heart could by wishing
comprehend, though at the banquet the thoughts of many were diverse: For the
Duke Alfiron thought how he might take the Princess from Don Gallaneo, and
enjoy her after the taking. Don Brianell, and Arfileo, how they might spoil
him of his life: and he of theirs, with the Knights of the golden Image: but
the Princess Persiana had all her imagination busied more on the promise of
the Knight of the golden Image, then on the diversity of dishes before her.

And dinner being ended, all the knights went to arm them, to be ready at the
appointed hour, with their captain in field. The Jousts were ordained to be
made with out the City, in a spacious and large field, for that purpose
appointed. Don Bellianis, though sore wounded, rose and armed him in green
armor, interlaced with many strokes of gold, which the Duke had given him, who
commanded all the knights to march away, leaving him alone, that he might more
secretly go himself. The Duke went accompanied with Arfileo and don Brianell,
ordering his men as one little esteeming his enemies, having so great defense
in those two valiant warriors, and his hope in the knight of the golden Image.
With him joined the kings of Armenia and Thessifanty, having on their side
above 25. thousand chosen knights, which in comparison of the courtiers were
but a ha^dful, for Don Gallaneo trebled that number: who by this appeared on
the other side with all his troops, well ordered, and with gallant demonstration.
Then on an imperial theater mounted the Soldane, the two princesses Persiana
and Aurora, that till that time had not gone abroad: who so soon as they were
all settled, the Soldane commanded the signal to be given by the trumpets,
whereat Don Brianell that had the leading of the first squadron, set forwards
with it against a valiant knight, a kinsman of don Gallaneos, whom he unhorsed
with four more before he brake his lance. The squadrons breaking through
each other, made such tumult with encounter of spears, swords, and diverse
other weapons, that the beholders thought all the strength of ye world had bin
there met: who so closed together, that having no room to handy blows, would
by wrestling overthrow each other, that horsemen tumbled to the ground; and he
that once fell, did more strive to get out of the prease, then to return to
the fight. But Don Bryanell seeing his enemies to double his men in number,
thrust himself within the most fury of the battle, where hard by the
Soldanes theater, meeting with a knight of stature like a giant called Fydasto
the cruel, raised both their swords, and together at one time discharged on
each other such blows, that Fydasto was overthrown and wounded on the head,
and don Bryanell bowed to the pummel of his saddle, with great courage staying
himself. This was one of the knights that don Gallaneo had charged to kill don
Bryanell and Arfileo: who seeing himself down, with a devilish rage rose, and
with a hoarse voice cried, Down with the knight, that against the order and
law of tourney, bears an edged sword: whereof he had no cause to complain,
for he and the other two knights that had the like charge, did wear the like.
Straight was the venturous knight encompassed with above 1000. Knights, that
leaving their tilt, only procured his death. But he so demeaned himself among
them, that in a trise he beat to the ground above twenty sore wounded: and
yet his men could not come to help him, by reason of the multitude that had
enclosed him. Then Arfileo seeing this, most valiantly pricked forth with his
troop, and don Gallaneo, that naught imagined but their deaths, brandeshing
his trunchion, made against him with all his battle, that don Bryanell might
not be succored: the like did the Duke Alfyron with the remnant of his men,
and in the midst of the field they met with such force, that most of them
wished themselves far thence at that time. The Duke and the two knights
straight entered among their adversaries, performing it very bravely. But
Arfileo that had no other intent then to help don Bryanell, passed through the
thickest of the squadron, that none durst withstand him, and entered within
their ring, where they slew their horses, procuring the like by them. But they
began to make such destruction of them, that they had laid at their feet
above a humdred knights, some slain outright, and some grievously wounded: and
all that beheld the fight, thought it ill done that so many knights should only
set upon two, insomuch that the Soldane was about to descend and part them.
Where we leave them, for we must a while discourse what befell Don Bellianis in
his lodging.

CHAP. XVII.
What happened Don Bellianis in the Dukes Palace, with Galfeo the unknown and
his Knights: his death, with the end of the Tourney.

AS soon as Don Gallaneo was departed to the Tourney, his cousin Galfeo the
unknown took the fifty knights, and went to the Duks lodging, having
understood by his spies how he was thence going, and that the knight of the
golden Image remained there alone, where being arrived, he commanded his men
to follow him up: but then Don Bellianis having put on the Dukes armor, was
ready to go to the tilt, thinking it time to be gone. But hearing a noise at
the gate, looked out at a window falling upon the stayres, and seeing so many
knights there, was amazed, and with a loud voice said: what seek you here
knights, at such time when all are gone to the tourney. Don Galfeo looked up,
and seeing him in that armor, knew him not, and dissembling his intent, said.
Good knight, I pray you show us him of the golden Image, for we must needs
speak with him. You may not enter here (said he) for the Duke my master
has so commanded. And having so said, went toward the stairs in great have,
where hefou^d don Galfeo entering the gallerie, and drawing forth his Sword,
said. It is in vain knight, whatsoever thou art, to pass further here, thou
or any else, without the Duke my Masters leave. Don Galfeo hereat conceived
such ire by these words, that also drawing forth his Sword said. Down with
the treacher that will deny us the entry. But Don Bellianis with his sword
put himself among, them, that in little space with great fury and force he
slew above thirty of them: which so amazed the rest, that they began to retire
back as far as the stairs. But with the fury that possessed Don Bellianis
he so handled them, that in an evil hour they came to seek him: and seeing
don Galfeo above the rest troubled him, struck him such a blow on the sword
arm, that cut in two it fell on the earth: and after he gave him another on she
head, that he cleft it down to his eyes. Never was there seen a knight behave
himself better among so many. But they preased on him in such sort, that he
had like to have bin greatly inda^gered: yet he driving them all before him
down stairs, made such distraction of them, that for very have they tumbled
one upon another: and he seeing them give back, followed them out of the
palace, and in their despite did beat them into a broad yard, thinking
better to defend himself there then in so close a room: where he so used the
strength of his mighty arms, that he got a horse, of many that ran loose,
wherewith he renewed his massacring of them. There was already gathered much
people of the City with their weapons, not knowing ye cause why so many were
assembled in the dukes palace, and when they saw them all upon one knight,
they helped him. Don Gallaneos knights, with more the^ the third part of their
fellows dead, and seeing Don Gaifeo slain, and how their treason for that
time could not be effected, by the extreme valor of that knight, fled away.
Don Bellianis not willing to follow them, turned toward the Dukes palace,
where taking one of them, he set his sword to his throat, and threatened to kill
him if he denied ye cause of their coming in that manner to seek the knight of
the golden image, and in presence of many of the city he confessed, how,
commanded by their Lord Don Gallaneo, they came to murder him. What meant your
Lord by doing so? (said don Bellianis) I know no more then I have said (replied
the man.) God ^ee praised (said don Bellianis) that your Lords treachery has
not taken effect. Then mounting his horse, he rid ^o the tilt-yard, where he
looked on every side, and saw how the dukes men retired back and: seeking for
the Princes Arfileo and Don Bryanel, and not seeing them, he took a big
lance, and put himself against don Gallaneos knights, and the first he met he
overthrew to the ground, doing the like by above thirty before he brake it,
and encouraging the Dukes failing troops, renewed their fight so fiercely upon
the Courtiers, that they feared to loose what they had before woonne. And like
a man distract, not seeing his companions, so wounded his adversaries, that
happy was he that furthest could get from him, whereby every one made him
ample passage to go by, for never a blow he gave either with sword or lance,
but he overthrow a knight. Which the Sophie seeing, cried out: Oh mighty
Mahomet, what admirable strength is this of your knight. But all this while Don
Gallaneo and his knights had so roundly beset Don Brianell and Arfileo, that it
was impossible they should escape alive, though most valiantly they defended
themselves. When there arrived a knight to Don Gallaneo, and in his ear told
him all that befell his cousin Don Galfeo with Don Bellianis, who being not far
off from them, he poynted to him and said. This is the knight that so has
massacred your men. Don Gallaneo turning to see him, saw how with an
incredible fury he assailed his knights that had encompassed the Princes, and
that with four blows he struck down four knights, and making little
account of the rest, alighted, and seeing they would not suffer the Princes to
mount a horseback, said, that every one might hear: Get upon this my
horse Prince Arsileo, for since with so great treacherous cowardice you are
used, make it known even on their dearest lives. They knowing his voice,
conceived such joy, that almost they knew not what they did: who ^oing about
to take a fresh horse, so many knights laid on them, that they could not do
it. Which Don Bellianis seeing, and how it wared late to be revenged on Don
Gallaneo, taking Don Brianell in his arms, in despite of all the knights
set him on his horse: and being on his own, with rage and thirsty fury of
long desired reuen^e, began such destruction on them, that he made wide
passage for himself and his companions. And seeing two Giants come against
him, of four which Don Gallaneo had brought to the Joustes for the purpose
aforesaid, he prspared for them, and receiving one of their blows on his
sheeld, that was so cruel that it cut it in pieces, he so wounded the other
with like strength, that falling on his fingers it cut them off clean with
the mace he held: but the other did second so huge a stroke, that he was
forced to hold by his horse neck. There was never Tiger seen more fierce,
nor Lion more furious, then Don Bellianis seemed, who raising himself on the
stirrops, and holding his sword with both hands, gave him such a terrible blow
on his thigh, that it entered as far as the bone, wherewith he shortly after
died. What knight so valiant may this be (replied the Soldane yt does such
wonders, I would willingly have had the knight of the golden Image here, yt he
might try his force with this. That knights deeds be not comparable to these
(said the princess Persiana to her father the more to cover her intent of any
thing that might after happen: for well she knew that Don Bellianis would be in
that battle, and so judged that was he. But he following in search of Don
Gallaneo, found him at last not far from the Soldanes scaffolde, where
likewise the Princess was, and as a swift hounde that has his game on foot,
fearing to loose it, so did he against Don Gallaneo, wh^ also made toward him,
and meeting, struck each other such puissant blows, that the sparkles of fire
flewe from their armor. But don Gallaneo tumbled to the ground sore wounded.
When don Bellianis so saw him, he suddenly alighted from his horse: so did
many of don Gallaneos Knights, to help their master. Then arrived the Duke
Alfiron with four thousand knights, and set so furiously upon them, that
maugre their force, he made them retire back. In which time Don Bellianis
wounded him again, wherewith the sword fell out of his hand. And the duke
seeing him on foot, and that to be the time for his revenge, ran against his
horse, and ouerturned him flat on the ground, and trampled twice or thrice on
him with his horses feet, making him breath his last. Which the Souldane
seeing, cried out, commanding him he should not hurt him: but the Duke made as
though he heard him not. Whereupon the Souldane seeing the little account was
made of him, like to burst with extreme grief, descended, still more and more
renewing his laments for Don Gallaneos death: crying kill kill the traitors,
that so villainously in my presence murdered my son. All the people at the
Souldanes command, set on the Duke and don Belliani: whence the Jou^^s
began, for tryumphe and pleasure were turned to death and destruction, that
the fields flowed with blood.

The kings of Armenia and Persia that saw the battle so hot and cruel, went
to the Souldane and said to him. (Suffer not dread Souereign) all this company
to perish, seeing you know the Duke has as much power to defend, as you to
offend him. Therefore command the fight to cease: for if the Duke be guilty
of Don Gallaneos death, you may by law convict him. The Souldane knowing it to
be so, and that before the Duke dyed by that means, none would remain with
life, took this counsel, and commanding the battle there to end, said thus
to the Duke. Get you out of my Persepolis, (Duke) unless you will here dye,
unheard, and vnexcused.

The Prince Don Bellianis being with him, bad him obey the Souldanes
command, assuring himself their purpose could not but have a good end. The
Duke taking his counsel, very joyfully commanded the retrayt to be sounded:
whereat the knights as well of the one as of the other party, left their
fight, returning every one to their Captain, attending his command. Who were
here able to express what great gladness the Princess Persiana conceived
with Don Gallaneos death? which least, it might be discerned, called out upon
all the knights of her gar^, to imprison, and bring before her ye Duke, and the
Knight that committed that treachery. The guarde replied they might not,
because the Souldane was there: who returned extreme sorrowful, and so
furious with rage, that very fire seemed to sparkle from his eyes, that all
which behold were astonished at his stern looks. And although the Kings of
Tessiffanty entreated him to return to his palace, yet he could like no
counsel, save what sauoured of revenge. But turning to the dead body, saw
his Daughter bewail his untimely death, and knowing she always refused
willingly to marry him, and now seeing her grievous laments, for his decease,
suspected it was done by her appointment, and not regarding his Fathers love,
but governed with rage, took her from the ground and said.

It boots thee not now Princess to dissemble, for I am sure don Gallaneo was
slain with your consent, and since you would not obey me when I would, I
will now punish you as you deserve.

Whereupon he commanded her to be shut up in a Tower and surely guarded,
not hearing her speak. And going thence, commanded all the people of the
City to arm them, intending to imprison the Duke in his house, imagining don
Gallaneos death had bin with his consent: and greatly grieved because he
could not know that Knight that so indaungered him in the battle, not
thinking on don Bellianis, having left him sore wouuded.

CHAP. XVIII.
What happened to don Bellianis without Persepolis. How he delivered two
damsels from certain knights and whence they were: and how he slew the dragon
of the Riphean wood.

THe Duke seeing his purpose thitherto sort as he wished, with don Gallaneos
death, resolved altogether to follow the counsel of the knight of the golden
image. Whereupon he returned to his palace: and the night having darkened the
world, don Bellianis left him in the plain field, faining to go out of the
City, though all the knights there endured to stay him, desiring to know him
ere he went. But getting from them all, escaped out of the City, the better in
that obscurity to return unknown to his lodging: and he had not gone far,
but his wounds began extremely to grieve him, insomuch he could not stay
himself on horseback. for with their new bleeding, they opened, making him
seem a fountain with so many springs: and seeing himself so ill, he thought he
should not be able to return to Persepolis, unless his wounds were bound up.
And so alighting from his horse, he saw two damsels come toward him, ryding
in such haste as he thought they did rather fly then on their palfrayes swiftly
run. Don Bellianis putting himself before them, said. What is the cause
(fair Ladies) that makes you ride so fast? Oh for Gods sake stay us not, but
if you will save your life follow us, and by the way we will declare the
whole circumstance unto you. Here will it be better (said he) and among these
trees you may hide your selves. So they taking his counsel, followed his
advice, and beginning to discover their adventure: lo they perceived through
those trees a terrible Dragon, so fearful in sight, that it struck amazement
in the beholders, and although the night were very dark, yet such light issued
from him, through the great abundance of fire proceeding from his jaws, that
it seemed h^ls mouth opened to swallow them at that instant. The Ladies being
overcome with fear, betook themselves about the knight of the golden Image,
having lost the power of their pretended flight. But he seeing it was no time
to be idle, rose from the ground with his sword in hand, and made against that
hellish monster, at that time wishing rather to have his armor given him by
Bellona buckled about his body, the^ be invested Emperor of a larger Empire
then his fathers. At this instant the dragon with an infernal fury, flying
against him, ouerthr^w him with his breast, and returning to catch him with his
tale^ts, to pluck him in pieces. He who^ fear never could blind, lept aside,
but with great difficulty: for being ouerreached, the cruel beast with one of his
paws drew him to him, and pearst both armor and flesh, even to ye bones with
his deadly claws: but the knight forsaking his sword stabd his dagger 4. or 5.
times into his heart under his wings. The fearful beast through extremity of
pain left him, stretching himself, and laboring in the pangs of death. He was
of such a wonderful greatness, that he was above 25. foot long, in bigness biger
then a great bull, whose like was never seen by any. After the knight of the
golden image had finished this hautie deed, and most unequal fight, he fell on
his knees, rendering thanks to his heavenly protector, that had delivered him
from so great danger, though with fear to escape the peril of his mortal
wounds, wondering how he had blood left in his veins, having lost such great
quantity thereof. And going to the damzels that with fear were not able to
fly, he said. Fear now no more (fair Ladies) for the causer of your timorous
trance, shall put you in no further peril. They recovering their be^^mmed
senses, scarce knowing what to say, the one lifting up her voice replied. We
cannot (sir knight) express the many thanks due by us, for this so great good
work, whose greatness our merits can never deserve, unless by memorating
through the earth your high prowesses, that the perpetual remembrance of this
ample act may never be drowned in the black center of oblivion. And seeing (as
it should seem) you were before wounded, we beseech you to withdraw your self
within this forest, that being unseen of passengers, we may dress them. I
will obey any thing you shall commaud (said he) and so sleeping among those
trees, they disarmed him, and began to search his wounds (being very skilful in
that mystery) and greatly meruailed how it had bin possible he escaped death:
yet though dispairing of his safety, performed their duty with all diligence,
and having dressed his wounds, they demanded what he determined to do. To
whom he answered. We will presently to the City, that I may there have my
wounds cured? But how came you hither? said they, being thus wounded: whereto
he answered Doubting I should be bloodlesse through the great quantity that
thereof I had lost, and through faintness, being able to go no further, here
I stayed to bind them. Shall we (said they) take your Armor with us to the
city? No, leave it here replied he) I little need it respecting the occasion
of my going thither. And so mounting on horseback (but with much pain) and
the Damsels on their palfraies, he by the way thus spoke. Tell me I pray you
the occasion of your flight, when I first met you? To whom they answered. You
shall know (Sir Knight) we do belong to the most excellent peerless and above
all the most fair, the fairest Princess Floresbella, that having sent us to a
wise woman, whose havitacion is far hence, on a most craggy and barren
Mountain (and Bellona is her name) to know the fortunes of a beauteous
Princess conducted by her (called Aurora, of whom since that time ^^ news
has been heard, through the death of King Pompeiano her father, trayterouslye
slain by Don Gallaneo, and his Kingdom woonne by a son of this Sophye,
called the knight of the images: And we having heard that the said Sophy now
marryeth his Daughter, to the said don Gallaneo, disguisedly we came to see
the said festiuals: and coming not far hence, we were suddenly surprised by a
most fearful giant accompanied with some twenty knights almost in bigness
like himself: who having taken us, (in the knights approach) spying a far of
some 20. knights. we crying to them for help, yielded to our request. But the
Giant and his knights at the first incounters unhorsed above the half of them.
And so we foreseeing the ill success like to ensue, betook our selves to the
swift courses of our palfrayes, till we met you. And now, (Sir knight) for all
we discourst the success of our fortunes, yet still fear the ouertaking of
those uncivil knights: because through our weakness we are like to suffer the
cruel stroke of none sparing death. So approaching near the city, they
descryed three men clad all in armor, who having them within view, kn^we the
Damzells: whereat they said. Our travel is now at an end, for we have found
what we sought.

The Ladies perceiving them to be Giants knights, were like to fall from their
palfrayes: to whom the knight said. Ye now shall not escape us, but shall go
to our Lord and Master the Giant Fillistore, that sends for you. Don Bellianis
became exceeding wrath, seeing himself both sore wounded and without armor:
yet he thus said to them. In courtesy (brave knights) I pray you opoose not
your vyolent hands against poor distressed Ladies, that with me are going.
We thought (replied they) you would content your self with your own liberty,
meddling not with theirs: but since you would not know when you were well, you
shall also go with us: wherewith they would have bound him. He perceiving yt
his courteous words preuailde not, stepped to one and snatched his lance out
of his hand in dispight of him and his fellows, tumbling him headlong to the
ground. The others would have stricken him with their spears: but he warily
escaped their blows, and fiercely running at one, he thrust the lance through
his body, that lifelesse he measured his length on the earth. The third struck
at him so mightily, that had he not lightlye stepped aside (being as he went
unarmed) he had made his lance appear at his back: yet nevertheless he
ran his spear through his thigh: so he feeing himself fore wounded, drew
his never failing sword, and gave him so cruel a blow on his shoulders, that
he cut him down right, that his parted body fell on each side of his horse.
Don Bellianis going to dismount, to dispatch him that first fell, felt his
thigh pind to his Saddle with a trunchion of the Spear: but seeing the Knight
did not stir, left him. All this while the Damzell stood amazed with wonder,
seeing such destruction in so short time, and with extreme joy they thus
said. We can never end (sir Knight) the celebrating of your most high and
more then humane chiualries, though thereby we be not credited, which for all
our selves have seen them, yet their admiration so asconisheth us. that we
scarce dare acknowledge them for true. He hearing himself thus commended
replied. Ouerpassing these unworthy praises, let us (fair Ladies) enter the
city, for my great wounds require speedy remedy: and know yt your travel is
now ended: for I do belong unto the Princess Aurora: who^ when you see before
any, dissemble her knowledge, for her present occasions so require it. They
joyful of such news, answered they would. And so keeping on their pace, they
came to the Dukes palace, where they found all the knights in armor. Don
Bellianis discovering himself to a knight entreated to lead him to his lodging,
if he could, unknown to the duke til the next morning. Who replied, he might
not, for the duke said for him with the rest of the knights, not minding to
sleep until his coming. The^ help me off my horse (said don Bellianis.) The
knight going to do it, spied the spears trunchion, which he had not taken away,
fearing to bleed himself to death. And the knight said: you are so sore
wounded, that it were best I call the duke. Unhorse me first (said don
Bellianis) and take out this trunchion. The knight did so, which was so imbrued
in his blood, wherewith it stuck so fast in his flesh, that the drawing thereof
so extremely increased his pain, that after he was not able to stand, but was
carried in two knights arms, into the hal, where they found ye duke, with many
other Lords: also accompanied with the princes don Brianell, and Arfileo, who
though they were greatly wounded, were determined presently to ride in demand
of the knight of the golden Image, if they heard not of him. But seeing him
come into the hall in that manner, waxed pale, thinking him wounded to death,
and ran to him. And the princess Aurora that first spied him, was first that
approached, who with tears in great abundance trickling down her iuory-rosed
cheeks, to see him in such danger: without impeach of any, and respect of
none, fell on her knees before him, kissing his hands, both with joy and
grief, insomuch that in her good will toward him it may be believed she
passed his coosen Arfileo. The prince don Bellianis raising her from the
ground, and most kindly imbrasing her, said. Use not so much undeserved
courtesy (most sovereign lady) to so mean a knight, of such small fame as
my self, whose little services will never merit any of these favors, except in
cou^ting me as one of your meanest seruitors. Then were these greetings
interrupted by Don Brianell, and the rest, that received him with no less
courtesies and imbracings, the^ if he were their general co^mander, especially
the duke, who needs would welcome him on his knees, though he knew not his
high descent, save that he acknowledged he had by his means repossest his whole
estate, and life, and with infinite gladness he thus began. I greatly wonder most
renowned knight of the golden image) how you were able to be at the tourney,
after I here saw the great prowess by you done. To whom he replied, I have
most excellent Duke) done no act worthy your memory. So will said he) none of
Don Galfeos Knights affirm. For at our return we found above two hundred of
them with their masters slain. And we entreat you to dilate unto us the cause
of their coming to our Palace, and what after happened to you since your
departure, having staid so long, returning thus cruelly wounded. Then thus
(replied he) they purposed treacherously ^o murder me, though by the help of
the immortal Gods, their intent was frustrated. The rest I am not able to
discourse, for my wounds will not permit me: but of these Ladies shall you
know the event of all things, whese good intertainment I request even as to my
Lady and Mistress the Princess here present.

Whereupon Don Bellianis was carried to his lodging, and laid in his bed,
where by the Damzells he was again dressed, who greatly wondered at his many
and dangerous wounds: and having done, they left him alone, quietlye to take
his rest: for his extreme pain, chiefly of the wound of his thigh, made him
rore like a bull bayted with many dogs. The Ladies being come forth, were most
courteously entertained of the Lords, greatly admyring the haughty deeds they
heard of that valorous knight. Straight were the tables covered (good order
being given for the Palaces safety) and they all sat down to supper, where
the Damzells discoursed the acts of the knight of the goulden image, in their
presence done, saying. Scarce dare we report his admirable Cheualries, least
our words be not credited: yet have we been eye witnesses of his deeds.
Then were they entreated by the knights to unfold them, saying that if they had
seen what him before happened* they would little esteem those they seared to
rehearse.

There can none be comparable to t h^se ((...) Damzels:) and therefore will
we satisfy you: and so recounted all that him befell after they met with him,
with words of high renown, to the enternising of his glory. Whosoever shall
hear (said the Duke) the admyring wonders of this knight, may hardly believe
them: And sure I am no knight will ever perform what he has done in so short
time: and so reiterating al his exploytes (as heereafore are s^t down.) Oh
what Pesterity will believe in future ages these no less great then admirable
prowesses, of this not only victorious, but happy and never sufficient praised
knight. These and such like matters did these Princes ^^^a^e of at table
concerning Don Belliani. The Princess had by (...) known the Damzels: and
they her, yet either thought the contrary by their silence. But the (...)
imagining the cause was, that they were so forewarned by don Bellianis, said
she would withdraw herself to rest, and take those Damzells with her, and was
conducted to their chamber. The knights after her departure settled themselves
to the ordering of all their necessaries, touching their manaced peril: for
they had intelligeuce how the Sophy having understood of don Galfeos death, at
his departing from the turney, by some of the escaped knights: yet not informed
of the truth, but that going to the Dukes Palace to accompany him to the
turney, he was there flai^e. Whereupon willed al in the City should arm
themselves. But the Duke and his faction little feared him: having within the
said City above fifteen thousand knights his friends all in arms, in
readynes well appointed at command. The Princess being in her chamber, made
fast the door, before whom the damzels humbled themselves, craving to kiss
her hands: But the not suffering it, embraced the^ with great joy, to whom
they thus spoke.

What has become of your royal person? Oh most excellent Madame, whose loss
we could not but imagine, having been so toste and subject to misfortunes,
and calamities? We cannot (great Princess declare the sufficiency of our joy
conceived with your presence. And no less will the Princess Florisbella
receive: who only for this cause sent us to our Aunt the sage Bellona:
Wherefore we beseech you, tell us who these knights be, whose personages,
compositions, and excellent conditions deserve admiration, especially him that
brought us to the inioying of your company. I (replied she) know no other, but
that I met them in a most strange place, and I thank the immortal Gods,
unconstrained they condiscended to the promise of their aids, and already my
fathers most unfortunate death has partly been revenged, for this knight has
slain Don Gallaneo. And thus continued their chat without sleeping, till the
better two parts of the night were paste.

CHAP. XIX.
What the Sophy did after the battle: and how the green armor of Don
Bellianis was brought him to the city,

THere is no tongue able to express the great grief that the Sophy did
conceive by Don Gallaneo, and his Cosins death, whom he dearly loved: and
seeing that the Duke kept within his Palace, he sent earlye the next morning
above a thousand knights to seek him in the green armor: for he determined
by all means to know who he was, having understood he was not gone home
with the Duke.

The knights obeying his command, came to the place where the ugly monstrous
beast lay slain, the sight whereof so feared their horses, that not able to
stay them, in dispight of their ryders, they ran away with them. The like
timorousnes surprysed the knights, beholding the monstroussie of the dragon,
that they durst not approach to discern what he was: yet seeing he sturred
not, one of them taking Heart* agrace, esteeming himself less fearful then
the rest, alighted on foot, and trembling went where the dead beast lay, and
seeing him not move, with the huge quantity of blood wherein he wallowed,
called his companions, bidding them not fear, for it was not alive: who well
viewing it, were greatly astonished to see so deformed a thing, and searching
where he had been stricken, they saw his wounds above the legs and
wings, whereby they judged the knight that had slain him, could not but be
sorely hurt, by being so nigh, that ye wounds showed they had been been made
with a dagger. And one following the signs of the blood, found the Damzels
mantells, that they had left, with the knights armor, which presently they
knew, and assured themselves he sl^we that most ugly beast: in respect
whereof they nothing esteemed what he had performed to their costs in the
turney, with the sight of y^ prodigious and infernal monster slain by his
hands. And so they took great compassion on him for the much blood he there
had shed: and so finding no sign nor tracing of his, to find him, and seeing
him armourlesse, resolved to return unto the Sophy, and tell him what they had
seen, presenting him the knights armor, and the damzells mantells: Wherewith
going out of the wood, lighted on the two knights slain, and turning them
over, much mused at the horrible blow which the one had, whose like they never
had seen before: and going away, they met with four knights, that knowing the
Damzells mantells, said: We beseech you (gentle knights) tell us where we may
find the Ladies, owners of those mantells. We know not (said they- but why
do you demand it? To know what became of a knight that accompanies them.
Why seek ye him? (demanded they) for we also would employ the utmost of our
power to find and carrye him to our Lord the Soldane. Then know (said the
four) that the Giant Fillistone (well known of you) commanded us to find
him, to give him his due chastisement: Though truly yester night he performed
such an attempt, that we believe there breaths not in the vniuerie any able
to do the like: for three knights of our company going to seek those damzells
(which from us fled, and about to take them against his will* wounded these
two as you see, leaving the other on the earth little better them dead. And
since we understood they be all within the City.

Then go along with us: for if they be there, they cannot be hid. And besides
these things he has done others of greater admiration. So in such talk they
continued their way to the City, till they arrived at the Souldanes Palace,
who seeing the Knights armor, thought they also brought him: which greatly
gladded him, descending half way to meet them, demanded for the knight: to
whom they answered. We bring him not (right mighty Sovereign) but come to tell
you the greatest wonder ye ever you heard of, for he alone has put to death
the mighty Dragon of the Ryphean woods, your whole kingedomes destruction. Oh
mighty Jove (said the Soldane) who may believe, but with great difficulty
such a thing, except his eyes should see it. Surely (dread Lord) it is so
(replied they) and we judge by the great abundance of of blood in that place
shed, that he cannot but be almost dead. Moreover he has done another act
of no less wonder: for coming unarmed with our two Damzells, he combated with
three knights, and vanquished them, cleaving one down right in the middle, and
it is also said that he came unto the city. The Soldane stood musing with
himself whither the knight of the golden Image might be he, disguisedly
entering the tourney for the Dukes sake. Yet thought he this unlikely, knowing
he remained sore wounded at the combat had with the knights of the unhappy
bridge. But still persuaded himself it should be he, imagining no knight in
all the city so hardy, as for to attempt the like. And seeing the Knight could
not be found, he commanded all the people of the city to arms, and came to
his Palace, for he determined to assault the Duke: who fearing the same, had
all his men in readiness. Great was the hurlyburly through the city among the
popularity inquiring one of another what they should do, foreseeing some
cruel battle to be impendent over their heads.

CHAP. XX.
How the kings of Armenia and Tessifanty conferred with the Sophe of the order
taken between them, about the Duke: and how he presented himself before the
Sophy.

THe doubtful state of these tumultious cares on either side, hanging on ye
uncertain arbitrating sentence of fortune: the rumor of the comunalty of the
City seemed no less then if the utter ruin thereof were evidently known.
Whereby the Sold an supposing many inclyning to the dukes fa^tion, proclaimed by
sound of trumpet, that none should aid nor favor him on pain of death, and
take him for a taitor, for he only purposed to do according to law and
justice, if he were found guilty. The beauteous Princess Persiana well heard
of these proceedings, whose woes for them penetrated her tender heart, though
it was thought she sore lamented, because her father had imprisoned her. But
she sending for the Kings of Arminea and Tessifantie, they presently went to
her, who being alone, admitted them to her presence, whom she with many tears
entreated to become mediators betwixt the Sultan and the duke, and that they
would not consent to the terminating of those affairs to be by the event of
war, seeing in the end she only should be the only looser, her honor being
tossed too and fro on such vndesent trials. They with great willingness promised
to do the uttermost of their possibility: and seeing the matter suffered no
delay, and that they like wise ventured some part of their own, in that they
were the dukes near allies, did then take leave of the princess, and departed
toward the Sultan, whom they found with all his men ready to march. So
approaching to him, he greatly rejoiced with their presence, thereby thinking
they would join with him, supposing at first they were gone to the duke.
Whereupon he courteously made out to meet them: who (their customed honor
performed) humbled themselves to kiss his hands: but he would not by any means
consent thereto: whereat they thus began. Alas (dread Lord what pretends these
your troops, whose sudden arms cannot but threaten death, and utter
desolatio^ to this city: but most of al what means your self to be in person
in so dangerous an enterprise, having so many hardy knights able to attempt any
important action at your command? I have never (replied the Sophy) whose
dutious service and loyalty to me has deserved such confidence as these
affairs require, specially since the absence of the prince my son. And well
may you see the treason done against me by the duke* for I am sure it was both
by his consent, ^ my daughters command done, and am certain that he which all
these harms has wrought, is the knight of the golden image, and so discoursed
what he had understood of the knights, and how he was so sore wounded, that his
life was in suspense, and also that he was the same that slew Don Galfeo. All
which was true: for the distressed knight was in such case, that all his
companions greatly doubted his recovery: for which their sorrow was so great,
that they wished to disburden themselves thereof* they might be even in their
enemies chiefest troops. For in readiness and willingness of mind, they
wanted naught but the beginning of the conflict. The two kings not a little
maruailed at the Soldans discourse. Whereupon the King of Armenia, took
occasion to speak as follows. The knight of the golden Image, is not in that
greatness of fault as you judge him in (most mighty Lord:) for if you would
but in the equal balance of right reason, weigh the cause you may plainly see
how greatly Don Gallaneo labored to kill the aduenterous knight, and the
Prince Arfileo, against all the laws and rights of Turney, naught regarding
your awful clamours to the contrary: but then more procured their deaths:
whereat no marvel if the Knight of the golden Image, and the Duke, in their
own defense did slay him. And we know, that the knight in the green armor
was he of the golden Image, for we learned it of some of them that fled when
don Galfeo died* that he which slew him, and vanquished them, was the same that
returned victor of the Turney, So that you may well think he determined to do
by them, what they did to him, and his. Of all which things you should better
inform yourselfe, before you come to these extremes. But if notwithstanding,
you will persevere in these rigorous determinations, consider the many thousand
deaths thereby like to ensue: for the Duke will endure no wrong. Remember also
(great Lord) the knight of the golden Image is he (though the chiefest cause of
Don Gallaneos death) that freed you from two great, inconveniences, one from
the adventure of the unhappy Bridge, the other by the death of the Rypliean
dragon, and that hereof consists your own honor in your daughters
innocence, and that the Duke may plead his cause, and we our selves will go
with him, and procure this matter to be tried by combat, or by any other means
by you thought fitter, which if you grant, you shall eternally bind us to your
allegiance. If you cause the duke (replied the Sophy) to come and submit
himself, I promise you there shall be no wrong proffered him, nor any thing
contrary to the right of law and justice, which I only do, that if any of Don
Gallaneos kindred should expect any revenge at my hands for his death, they may
know what I have done herein* And hereupon I pawn my kingly faith, and royal
word unto you. Then said they, upon this order you may dismiss your men unto
their several homes: for we will perform what we have promised. Whereupon the
Soldane commanded every man to retire to his quarter, he himself going to his
Court, to expect the kings return, who straight repaired to the Dukes Palace,
where they greatly rejoiced to see the good order, and care by them kept:
insomuch that the Sultan was not there able to enter by force of arms, though
he brought all his forces redoubled. They being their demanded for the Duke,
and understanding that he was in don Bellianis Chamber, thither went to speak
with him: where they saw how the knight of the golden Image had his wounds by
those Dumzels dressed. The duke received them according to their state, and
would have led them into another room, but they would not, looking on the
kings wounds, which they judged the greatest yt ever they had seen, whereat
they much sorowed, supposing he would not escape them, though they were greatly
satisfied to see with what nimblenes those ladies dressed him. And having don,
they thus said: with such surgeons (sir knight) you ought to feel half the
pain enforced by your wounds: whereto he answered. It is so great lords) for
though I should feel never so much, this is double comfort unto me, for else I
should not be made happy with the fruition of your royal presence, jointly
with the duty you bind me to, in vouchsafing the remembrance of so mean a
knight, being thus pitiously wounded, and not able to leave my bed to employ my
self in these troublesome affairs of my lord ye duke. Take no care for them.
Sir knight, said the king of Tessifantie, for we come to none other effect, and
hope we shall have no great denial about them, and though we should find any
contradiction, yet the duke shall be so favored, as he shall reasonably doubt
nothing that may to him happen. And they declared ye manner of the appointment
made with the Soldane, so that the dukes justice should be evidently seen, and
be at liberty to answer all objections, or else present his champion to try
it in the battle, against whosoever should at his hands demand the death of
Don Gallaneo, and that in mean space, the duke would yield himself to prison
or we for him: all which was between him and us so agreed. And know (Sir
knight) it is certainly bruted abroad, that he which vanquished the Tourney
and was cause of Don Gallaneos death, with his cosins Don Galfeo, and that slew
the Riphian Dragon, and the Giants Filistones three knights, is your self. Don
Bellianis somewhat altered his countenance hearing this, yet seeing the Sophie
and others knew all his doings, faintly made this reply. First mighty
Lords) have a care in what they demand of the Duke, and after we shall have
time (if I escape these wounds) to provide for all things else. And moreover, on
my faith, the Sultan deals unadvisedly and unjustly in his demands against
the Duke, and should not make account of two such traitors as Don Gallaneo and
Galfeo, whom if in case I did stay, I did very well, considering with what
treachery the one would have murdered me in my bed, and the other my
companions in the Tourney: and had I bin in that state at more ease, I had
better with my deeds shown, what I cannot so well now express in words. They
were all amazed to see with what passion Don Bellianis pronounced these
speeches, and they perceiving he had reason, would proceed no further in that
talk, but turning to the duke, prayed him to resolve with himself to do what
they required. I will do (replied he) neither more nor less in any thing, then
what the knight of the golden Image shall command me. I humbly kiss your hand
(said he) for this your high favor, though in all things else it is well
known that my duty binds me to obey you. But to our matter: I am of opinion,
saving better judgment, and repo^ing our confidence on the royal words of
these great kings, you may fearelesse present your self before the Soldane:
for I trust you shall have no injury offered you. Thereof be assured (said the
kings) for so the Soldane has vowed. The damsels that came with don Bellianis,
after he killed the dragon, stepping to him said. We have heard (Sir knight)
the Princess Persiana is in a strong tower imprisoned, by the commandment of
the Soldane her father* wherefore consider what best in this case may be done,
talking as little as you may, because of indangering your wounds and your
self. When the duke was departing, don Bellianis called to him Don Bryanell
and Arfileo, and prayed them to accompany the duke, and answer for the
Princess Persiana and himself, as occasion should be offered. They being all
readse, straight took their way to the Soldanes Palace, leaving the knight of
the golden Image in talk with the Princess Aurora, and Florisbellas damsels,
which were both beautiful and witty, greatly admiring his courage and
magnanimity, from whose presence they were not parted day nor night, but had
placed their beds a little from his, the better to watch and help him at his
need, who (excepting the divine powers of the omnipotent God) were cause of
his health, being in that science both singular and excellent.

CHAP. XXI.
What happened to the Duke with the Soldane. How the Knight of the golden
Image and the Princess Persiana were challenged for the deaths of don Gallaneo
and Galfeo, by the fearful Felistone and his brethren: and how the challenge
was accepted.

SO soon as the duke was arrived at the Soldanes palace, with the company
mentioned in the precedent Chapter, and thinking it unmeet to advertise him
thereof, they al dismounted, and on foot entered the great hall where the Sophy
sat: who, when he saw him come with his blood changed in his face, as being the
man that mortally hated the duke, which now being nigh him* humbled himself on
his knees, requesting the kissing of his royal hands. You need them not Duke
(said the Sophy) since you account your deserts so meritorious, and of your
self so highly, that I sending for you to appear before me, utterly denied it,
and with all your power resisted my commandes. The Gods forbid I should have
committed any such offense (replied the Duke.) And well do you know (dread
soueraigue) that I never esteemed in any your affairs, to hazard both life,
and my whole estate in your service. But doubting (your highness being full of
ire) would not hear me, according to the justice of my cause, I rather chose to
withdraw my self unto my lodging, where to this instant I remained: from
whence I was now called bythese noble knights, to appear before your
mightiness. So being in this conference, there entered the hall three giants,
the greatest, vgliest and fiercest that any humane nature could produce: they
were al armed saving ye heads, whose helms and sheelds were borne by their
squires: on them attended 30. knights, not much inferior to the^ in bigness:
all their outward garments were of mourning cloth, who went directly to the
sultan, that thoroughly viewing them, greatly wo^dred at their monstrous
fierceness. Lo one that was most deformed, and seemed to command the rest,
without duty to the Sultan, began thus with a voice, whose hollow roaring made
all the hall resounde. High and mighty lord we believe that small is the
notice come to your ears of us, having but little traced thy dominions,
although we have endeavored with all our power, and the utmost of our desire, the
adua^cing of your house by our service, whereof your son the prince Perianeo is
a sufficient witness, as the man in the wars of Antioch being termed the
knight of the Image, we aided, of him may you know I am king of Cyprus,
otherwise called Fellestone the fierce, brother to these knigts here present
that knowing you married the Princess Persiana to our cousin don Gallaneo of
Antioch, we came to honor his nuptials: and arriving near this city, two of
my knights who^ I sent to seek two damzels of my company, were slain, by one
which I understood is called the knight of the golden Image, of who^ there are
also many tales bruted of their valor. Moreover we were certified, that he and
the duke Alfiron, slew in the turney most trecherously, the prince don
Gallaneo, and his cousin don Galfeo. And though we are assured you will execute on
them the punishment that so vile treason requires (for we have understood the
imprisonment of your daughter the princess Persiana, consenter to their
deaths.) Notwithstanding, we being persons to who^ this aforesaid matter
concerns, do accuse as well the duke as the knight of the golden Image, with
the princess Persiana your daughter, as authors, and actors of their deaths,
and therefore traitors and malefactors. And I vow to approve it against the^
both together, or with what knight soever the princess shall appoint in her
defense: for I will not be counted a giant nor king of the land where any of us
is known, if I make the^ not presently confess this their treason, that you
may chastise it as you shall better judge: and herewith ended his speech. The
great rage conceived by the knights, hearing themselves called traitors, cannot
be sufficiently expressed. The Sultan understanding of the Giant what he was,
rose from his seat to intertain him, as his state required, entreating him to
sit down. It boots not (said he) but only that ye send for these traitors, to
answer my objections: for I have sworn not to put off my armor, till I be
satisfied with my revenge. The Duke stepping even where the Giant was talking
who^ when he better saw his deformity and bigness (for though himself were
of a good stature, yet reached not to his middle) somewhat feared him: but
remembering by what valiant knights he was backed, resolutely made this answer to
the giants former speeches. If we had not heretofore heard, and now by
experience seen thy great pride (king of Ciprus) we had reason to think no
humane creature could have procreated a thing so monstrous, and to her self so
contrary, though such as thou art are always seen, from the offspring of so
vilde a kind, whereby thou seem to color thy evil grounded reasons, and
arrogant pride, in joining kindred with the Sultan (our dread Sovereign.) And
if in case thou be such a one, as thy speech declares, thou more obscurest
with thy evil deeds his his royal progeny, then ever with words thou
may amplify it. Moreover, know I am the Duke Alfyron, whom thou come to
accuse: and whereas thou say, I and the Knight of the golden Image have
trecherouslie slain Don Gallaneo, I reply, thou most falsely lie, which my
self am ready to approve in battle, or present my Champion for the same. The
Prince Arfileo all this while ready to choke with extreme rage, yet
moderately said thus. Since thou art altogether overwhelmed in the treasons
thou speak off ( Cyprus King) know that touching the knight of the golden
Image, thou have most falsely lied in thy throat, and therefore bring with
thee in field one of thy brothers, or whom else thou will. For if thou will not
stay until his wounds be whole, my self in his place will approve the
utmost of thy speeches, to be meerelie false: for he is not a Prince nor knight
that would have procured Don Gallaneos death, except forced thereunto, through
his great treasons and demerits, yet his Coosen, like a vilde traitor died
treacherously, going to murder him in his bed. Don Brianell dissembling his
anger, with a scoffing laughter, not suffering the King of Cyprus to roplie,
said to him. I think, King, Knight, or Giant, or what thou will, thou
thoughtest thy challenge would return vnaccepted, because no knight might be
here able in bigness and deforme, to answer thee. And yet in my opinion, thy
pride is far greater then thy body. But passing this, know, that in the
Princess Persianaes name, I will make the third in Combatte against thy
brothers or thy self, to prove (with the help of the immortal Gods) that in
the great untroth breathed forth by thee, thou most treacherously lie.

And seeing we are all prepared to fight, be it presently whiles the passion of
thy furiousnes is hot, least after thou do excuse thy self by the weight of
thy armor euerlong worn. The fearful Giant seeing with what courage and
audacitie of speech those knights spoke to him, was diverse times about to lay
hands upon his boisterous are, thereby to punish the lavish of their tongues,
no more esteeming the combatte with a hundred of them, then does the furious
Bull a troop of little whelps, and being ready to burst with fury, uttered
these words to the Soldane.

By the high powers of the Gods (dread Lord) if these sillye madmen were not
before thy sacred presence, I would have inflicted such heavy punishment on
them, that they should be examples to all others as should presume to speak
in such manner to any of my degree. But I will this once restrain my self, and
expect the combat till the Knight of the golden image be brought well of his
wounds, that my revenge may be the greater: For I mean to wage the fight
with all four. Nor would I have you repute my words vain, for I have diverse
other times done the like against a hundred better then the best of them.
Whereunto Don Brianell made this answer.

Do thou confirm my former speeches in so long prolonging this fight,
daring say thou will do it against them all: knowing us to be such knights
that will not suffer one another to enter the fight with any such advantage.
Th^n the Seldan commanded them all silence, saying: that the king of Cyprus
accusing three knights, the like number must be against him: to wit, the king
and his two brothren, that shall agree thereto. Be it as you shall command
(said the King) and my two brothers shall accompany me, though more willing I
would have had this combat my self, against three, or four, or more, that
they might thereby see how little I esteem of them. Then the Soldane again
commanded silence to be kept, and called the two Lords of Armenia, and
Tessifantie, with other Lords, to council, touching the confirmation of the
challenge, which being ended, they returned, and commanding the knights and
Giants to attend, he said: Having consulted concerning the accusation made by
the king of Cyprus, against the Duke Alfiron, the knight of the golden Image,
and my daughter, we have found he may lawfully do it, being as he is, the
mightiest of kindred that Don Gallaneo has. And moreover, because the Duke
himself is accused, he may not in person enter the combatte: and so much for
the knight of the golden Image.

Therefore it behooues you (Duke) to find a Champion to undertake this battle
for you, seeing the Prince Arfileo does it for the knight of the golden Image,
and his companion, for my daughter, and it must be forthwith.

Now though the Duke seemed outwardly displeased, being forbidden the combatte
in person, yet was it not so, for he greatly feared the Giants forces:
Nevertheless, he answered the Sultan in this manner. Seeing I must seek a
Champion to defend my right, grant me some time (dread sovereign) to do it. I
give you (said the Sultan) twelve days, wherein look to it, and consider on
all things you shall need, that after you complain not, I have done you
injustice. Then was the Princess Persiana sent for, that she would agree that
the same knight should be her defender. On this message went the Kings of
Armenia and Tessifontie, and also to bring her, who acquainted her with all
they had therein labored, according to her request, and how the king of Cyprus
being come to the Court, had not accused her alone, but also the knight of the
golden Image, and that the Sultan had sent for her, to know if she would allow
the aduenturous knight for her Champion. Whereupon being conducted to her
fathers presence, she prostrated her self before him, but he sternely looking
on her, said: Consider Princess on the answer you must make to the king of
Cyprus. She answered she knew not his demand: then had she it reiterated.
Whereunto she replied: I know not what I should answer to such a false and
unjust request, and most untrue suggestion: But since you also join with me
the knight of the golden Image, let him answer both for himself and me, to
whom I commit my life, honor, right, and justice. We sent not for you to this
end (said the Sophy) for the knight of the golden image must not combat
himself, but see if you will have the venturous knight defend your cause or
no. I care not if he do (replied she) and yet I think he would willingly
accept it, having all right and justice on his behalf, defending the innocence
of a distressed Princess: And I beseech the immortal Gods, I may live to
acknowledge and gratify this his great courtesy.

To this replied Don Bryanell, your self (divine Lady) having so great
justice to defense your innocence, makes me the debtor for this high favor,
whose grace has decreede to lay the confidence of so great a charge, on so
mean and undeserving a knight, whose service for this honor, is in perpetual
bond to your gracious Highness. Upon the end of which speeches, the gages were
on either side accepted, and the day of battle assigned to be twelve days
after.

The Sultan commanded both the Duke and Princess to be surely guarded in
several strong Towers: and turning to the king of Cyprus, instantly requested
him to lodge in his palace until the battle were paste. The King easily
condiscended thereto, having already purposed, that if he remained victor of
the fight, to require the Sultan to pardon his daughter, and give her him, with
the kingdom of Antioche, as his right, being next Heir to Don Gallaneo: for
which cause he remained there, where the Sultan greatly honored him.

The Prince Arfileo, Don Bryanell, with the Kings, Dukes, and Earls, returned
to the Dukes Palace, to tell Don Bellianis the order taken: and entering where
he was, they found him now somewhat better then they before had left him, to
whom they then declared all that had passed between them and the Soldon, and
how the day of battle was assigned, and that the Duke had in Champion for
himself, and how they had accepted the combatte* no his and the Princess
Persianis name, expressing also the great fiercenes of the Giants, particularly
descrybing ye deformed misshapen features of the King of Cyprus, protesting they
had never seen the like. Don Belhanis conceived an extreme rage, hearing that
discourse, and how the Soldane would not permit him to the combat at such time
wherein he was reputed a traitor, wherewith being almost besides himself,
with unrestrained fary said. What, thinks the Soldane this shall be suffered
that he has ordained, and that with so great maliciousn^s against the law of
arms: his desire shall be fulfilled? No* the powers divine will not permit
it. And therewithal he rose and sat upon his bed, and in all haste called
for his clothes. The Damsels seeing him thus determined, entreated him not to
do it, which he would not, but in all haste made himself ready, resisting al
their requests, and also the Princess Auroras, and commanding, that none
should accompany him, save the Princes there present, that led him by the arms
least he should fall. But a little, after, the Princess Florisbellas Damzells
followed him, in which manner they went through the City, until they came
unto the Soldanes Palace, who being seen and known by the common people,
said one to another, viewing him so fainte and weak. Behold here the knight
which overcame the knights of the vnhappybridge, and that took the Dukes part
in the last turney. Many followed him, to know the cause of his so going in
such ill disposition: who being at the Palace gate, sent the Soldane word he
was come to speak with him. When it was so told the Sophy* he was at table
accompanied with the King of Cyprus and his brothers, who understanding he was
there, commanded he should be admitted to his presence. Is this the Knight
of the golden Image (demanded the King) whom I come both to accuse and
challenge, for the treachery he committed by the deaths of my dear Cosins:
This is he (replied the Sultan) and do assure you, that his peer the sun
shines not on, to equal him in strength and valor. That may be (said the
King) mong such as himself: and it were a blotte to my honor to make any
account of 100. such as he. You wrong your self to think so (answered the
Sultan) for if he should enter in the fight, I would not for the world assure
you of the victory: and therefore I ordered what I did. Now you have told me
so (said the Giant) it behoues me in any wise to crave the combatte against
him, for if I should not do it, I am for ever dishonored. I will have no more
words heereon (said the Sophy) for in doing otherwise, I should not be
revenged on him and the Duke as I desire. The king disdainfully laughed at his
words, and said. If the others that in this battle shallenter, were as you
make him, yet should my will be accompliwed: But since you will have it
otherwise, I yield unto you. Thereon (said the Soldane) give me your hand
and word, not to accept at this time any battle against him. I promised you so
to do (said ye Giant) though it be to my lasting blame.

CHAP. XXII.
What speeches passed between the Knight of the golden Image and the Sultan:
and how he was stayed in the Palace till the end of the battle.

DON Bellianis being before the Sophies presence, showing no kind of duty,
thinking that one of his state, and pretending such a challenge, should rather
seem stern and fierce, the^ humble and mild, though his weakness through the
greenousnes of his wounds, was so great, that no Knight under the cope of
heaven, was able with such patience to endure half the pain yt he perforce
sustained: which notwithstanding, with a clear voice, that he might be heard
of all the assembly, dissembling his sorrow as much as he could, said.

I am (most mighty Lord) forced to come to your presence in this manner that
you see, by hearing certain things that here have bin debated in prejudice of
my honor and reputation: which most exceedingly have augmented the pain and
grief of my great sickness: for which cause I fear I shall not be able to
utter the imaginations of my pensive heart, with so great decoram and reverence,
as appertains to so high a personage. And I protest I had not hither come,
but presuming on ye equalness of thy justice. The Sultan seeing him in such
distress, commanded him ere he further proceeded, to sit down (a chair being
brought him) he humbling himself for the courtesy, sat him down, being in
such case, that he had like a thousand times to have sounded as he stood,
through ye great debilitie of his body. But drawing strength from his never
fainting courage (seeing Filistone that fierce gazed on him, resting astonished
at his great monstruositie) turned to the Souldane with these words. If
according to the justice of my cause (most mighty lord) committed to the
administration of those men to that end, placed by the immortal gods, on this
terrestrial ball, promising such large guerdons, in their future life of
everlasting happiness, if with equity and right, they execute the function of
so high commanding powers: whereunto the spacious territories of your vaste
Empery binds you, you look into this whole matter, searching ye true ground
thereof, not suffering the unbridled passion, of base parcialitie, to blind the
eyes of your admiring judgment, which most often is wont to obscure, and
utterly with ignominy, besmeares the magnanimity of the Noblest minds.

Then I cannot but greatly marvel for what reasons you have so far
proceeded in my affairs: seeing my self endeavored with the utmost of my
strength, to show my prostrate service to your highness: whose gentle regard
might have been the cause that the least reason proceeding from your royal
self, should have contentedly satisfied me at your command.

And I vow by the high immortal gods, no reproach should have scandalizde your
mightiness, nor any injurious infamy stained the honor of your estate, if my
self had been first heard, and my consent granted to the assigned Combatte.
For in my judgment, it is against all natural reason, that I being willing
to defend the truth (whereof my own heart only can bear witness) another
altogether ignorant thereof, should in my cause indaunger his sweet life.
Touching which: I cannot see, nor yet conceive, on what foundation you should
build your rash decree, to suffer the accusation of the Duke, and the
Princess your Daughter, who in no respect could be partakers, nor
councillors in what is past. For if I slew Don Galfeo, I did it because he
treacherously would have done the like by me, that was then altogether
suspicionlesse, of any such treason, which fact, made me after verify my
suspicion, seeing in what peril of their lives, Don Galfeo indaungered my
companions in the Turney, that forced me to shed his blood as he would
have done theyrs. Of which action, I should then rather have hoped for a more
larger guerdon for this good deed, then now to procure new Combattes. For it
were high dishonor to your high name, that such as he inuried to treasons,
treacheries, and villainies, should be accounted the son of so great a
Monarch. Having not only used such as love practices against strangers, as the
Emperor Don Bellaneo, but also against his own friends.

Wherefore you may most certainlye believe, my self being now informed of
the truth, I have understood that he le^t all his Knights in the same fight:
whereby they were all ^laine, whilst he most cowardlye fled with his Coozin
Don Galfeo. And moreover, he was a Traitor against your self and dignity,
in thus persuading you that the Emperor was dead, or by him mortally wounded,
that he could by no means escape death: whom at this present, both lives,
and is in perfect health: whereof fearing to be accused by me and my
companions, that were hereof assured by a certain adventure, he procured our
deaths: mine in the Dukes Palace by Don Galfeo: while he so did of my
companions in the Turnyes: where if he received his condign deserts, through
so pitiless death, his be the loss: wherefore since there is none can better
bear testimony of this troath then my self, not only against the Knights
here present, accusing me, but also against all those which shall challenge me
hereof. I will ten days hence answer it them in field, and approve it on
their steel plumed burgonet^es: neither will I hereupon (whatsoever may
befall me) deny them the Combat: wherein I will make them know the great
trecheries which they would have used against me. And when you should refuse to
do me this justice, assure your self, I am a man able more stricktly to
require it at your hands: For the eternal powers of the heavenly and earthly
orbs, have not infused so little courage in my vncoloured heart, that any fear
but theirs should daunt my mind: where he ended his speech, not able to
proceed any further.

The Souldane all this while stood gazing on him with great admiration, in his
doubtful breast, reuoluing many things, saying to himself, that his like for
courage, he never heard of, and greatly woondred who he should be that in such
open terms durst presume to defy him to his face, and in his own land. But as
a man not able to restrain the reigns of his passion, wanting the cheifest
thing well and justly to judge of matters, shaped him this unbeseeming answer,
holding the King of Cyrus by the hand, that willingly would have first
replied.

Think not Knight of the golden Image, that in what is done, you have received
any dishonor: For it is not lawful you should enter Combat in your proper
cause. For were it good or bad, you would (howsoever it might happen) procure
the good success of your pretencion: for I am persuaded you fight by
enchantment, seeing the knights of the unhappy bridge were not able to
indaunger you. And therefore is it reason none be admitted in battle against
you: and concerning the rest of your threats, you shall do what you may, if the
time will permit you. For in vain the Gods have made me Arch-ruler over so many
territories, if I should not accomplish the utmost of my will. In which season
I will have you remain in my Palace* until the good or bad success of the
Combat be by trial known, that according thereunto my pleasure may be
fulfilled to the full.

But the King of Cyprus being very big swolen with such extreme pride* that he
was ready to burst, said to Don Bellianis with so hideous voice, as he would
swallowe him down alive. Great is thy desperate madness, Knight of the Golden
Image, that I know not where thou should be borne: For with my only sight I
was wont to terrify others, both mightier, and in courage hardier then thou.
And now think thou to escape unpunished? I assure thee, that if the end of
the battle consisted in naught else, but with the first encounter of my Lance,
to bring thee to such extremity, that thou never should be more able to
enter any other fight: whereby also we should after eschew the Souldanes
judgment in this case, thou should thereunto be admitted. But because thou
being convicted with the treasons thou have committed, he determines
otherwise to chastise thy insolency, and so has suspended thee from the
battle.

I have no great need to attempt it (replied Don Bellianis) for I am sure thou
shall hau^ to do with such Knights, that when the Combatte is ended, it shall
b^e publicklye seen that I am not of condition like thy treacherous Cozins.

But I desired with my own person, to rid thee of the great doubt that thou
art in. And after to require account of the outrage, thou offeredst to two
damzels of my company, upon whom thou did show part of thy Consanguinitie
with the Traitor Don Gallaneo.

All this Don Bellianis uttered, the more to inrage the enraged Giant, to make
him accept the combatte with him, though he needed not to spur a forward
horse: For he was impatient to see himself vpbrayded with such opprobrious
tauntes, in presence of that royal assembly: but he had, as is before
mentioned, promised the Sultan to the contrary, who fearing they should
attempt more then words, said to Don Bellianis.

Heereon (knight) talk no more, for what is decreed shall be executed. Be it as
you have said (answered he) but by the way, remember the great injustice you
offer me. The furious Sultan would not answer him, but by his commandment
he was committed to a strange Tower, and most surely guarded, leaving with him
the Damzels of the Princess Florisbella to cure his wounds.

Arfileo and Don Bryanell, fearing by their speeches to add fuel to the
kindled fire, said nothing, but desiring the day of combatte were come,
returned to their lodgings, sending straight ways for the knights they before
had sent to the wood, whose help did afterward greatly avail them. The
Sultan remained in his palace very glad, thinking to execute both the Duke,
and the knight of the golden Image, and likewise quieted the king of Cyprus,
that much importuned him to suffer Don Bellianis to enter in the combatte,
alleging he might better to his content be revenged that way for all his
treacheries.

CHAP. XXIII.
How Don Bellianis disguised, issued out of the Tower. What happened him with
Don Contumeliano of Phaenicia, and how he returned unknown into the City.

ALl necessary preparations being ordered against the day of the famous
battle, ten days were paste of the appointed time, and yet the Duke had
not, nor could find any, that would in his behalf undertake that combatte,
which extremely grieved him, yet the magnanimity of his coragious heart,
permitted no outward show thereof. No less was the sorrow of the^ beauteous
Persiana sustained, continually beseeching her Gods, not to suffer her honors
wrack, nor the downfall of her maidens fame, through want of a Champion to
maintain the justice of her cause

On the otherside, the great anguish of mind, that Don Bellianis conceived,
cannot be expressed, which was so grievous, that his Damsels could by no means
diminish, nor himself could find no comfort for his troubled fantasies: but
at length he so recovered his weak strength, that he was able to walk about
his chamber, feeling himself in disposition to buckle on his armor: And
certainly had he but it and his sword, he had broke forth among the
strongest watch that guarded him, which in the day time were above 30. men, and
in the night that number was doubled. In the mean time, he used to send one of
the Damsels to know if the duke had got any to sight in his quarrel, and when
he heard of ^^ne, ^n whom he durst trust ^o weighty a charge, (though he had
many good and valiant knights) by reason of the fierceness of the king of
Cyprus, and his brothers, his grievous passions were redoubled. One of his
damsels yt accompanied him, by name Floriana, daughter to the duke of Tursia,
being Lord of many countries, under the Sultan of Babylon, which was the
chiefest, and best beloved of the Princess Florisbella.

The other was daughter to the Earl of Cellanea, named Persiana. But the first
said to Don Bellianis, the sorrow of my grieved heart is such (renowned sir) to
see the course of these things, that I cannot in words show it, as also seeing
you cannot use your valor to remedy them, wheren your life and honor does
depend. Wherefore reuoluing many things in my troubled thoughts, have in ye end,
affying on the rare courage of your admirable strength, though now made weak by
treacherous desines, and sinister occasions, devised this as the last refuge, to
redress these wrongs: and this it is. You know that we oftentimes go forth
unsuspected, or mistrusted of the guard: Now may you disguised and attired in
the apparel of one of us, having no hair on your face, get abroad, where you
may easily procure horse and Armor, and do what you else think best, returning
unknown unto the palace, and there undertake the Combat, and in mean time I
will remain in bed, faining to be you, suffering none to speak with me, saying
I am extreme sick. Don Bellianis was so joyful with this unlooked and
unthought remedy, as hardly it may be expressed, hoping thereby not only to
assure his own life, but also his companions, in that manifest danger, though
he nothing doubted their valor, and embracing the damsel said. Pray unto the
gods (my good friend Floriana) that these troubles may have their desired end,
and then I promise you this great care shall be fully gratefied to your
content. There is no reason (replied she) why you should bind your self to
any such gratificatio^, without desert, seeing my duty binds me to your
perpetual service, and so think not much of this I cou^seld you. And I entreat
you to govern your self well abroad, for being yet weak, you might fall in
some other greater danger. Whereupon seeing the night approached, he put on
Florianas apparel, wherewith he became so fair, that the damzels not a little
wondered to see him so beautiful, that Persiana cried out. Is it possible oh
gods? such beauty should be on earth, you had bin better reserved it to
glorify your imperial thrones, unless here you will inhabit to manifest your
great powers among us.

And truly (Sir knight) such beauty was never seen but in the Princess
Florisbella our Lady Mistress: And well is it for all knights, you are not of
our sex, else so many would by you perish, as by the Princess our Mistress,
whose only sight kills (though not outright, yet with living death) like the
murdering eyes of a slaying base iske. Is her beauty so admirable, to cause
such alterations in men? (demanded he) you cannot believe, nor we set down
(said Floriana) the greatness thereof. And because you may know I bear with
me so great a beauty as yours, I will show it you, which I continually carry
with me.

And so she drew it out of her pocket, and gave it him, which he straight
knew to be the same that was portrayed on his shield, though his was more
lively, and for all he viewed it continually, did never ask whose it was,
imagining no such perfection could be on the earth, and that Bellona had only
set it there for a show: Then suddenly was he wounded to the heart, with the
unresisted darte of all conquering Love, and not able to withstand it, was
inflamed with the fire that lasted all the days of his life, surprysed with so
great desire to see the substance of that shaddowe, that straight he would
depart thither, leaving al things he then had in hand unfinished.

In this new accident was he a good while, not knowing how to resolve
himself, save in fixing his longing eyes on that dainty picture, having no
more color then in a dead man, which the Damzels seeing, and thinking his
rising had caused that alteration, held him by the arms least he should fall,
he recovering and feeling himself touched, through shamefacestnes dyed his
face with such a vermilion blush, yt he redoubled his fairness, to whom they
said. What extraordinary passion did you feel? Which made us fear some new
peril had befallen you in that strange chance? Whereto he replied. A sudden
grief surprysed me on my left side, so strongly, that it almost benumbd my
veins, and reast me of my vital senses. If any wound be the cause thereof
(said they) unclothe your self, and we will see it.

It shall not need (answered Don Bellianis) for I shall stay too long. But I
pray you give me this picture, that so much resembles another I have. It is at
your command (replied the Ladies) but take heed you loose it not: for if you
do, it shall cost you yours.

Then he taking his leave of them, leaving Floriana a bed in his stead, went
out of the Chamber, to descend the Tower, and by the way he met the Kings of
Armenia and Tessifanty, that came to visit the Knight of the golden Image: whom
he knowing, said in presence of most of the guard: Your Majesty's may not
enter: for the Knight of the golden Image is a sleep, and so sick, that I
fear he will hardly escape the danger of these wounds: and I come to tell
these knights, that for a few days, they should suffer none to visit him, for
it would be very troublesome to him, and now I will go to know what the Duke
determines about his cause.

The Kings hearing this, would go no further, but charging the guarde to let
none enter his Chamber, returned back, leading Don Bellianis with them, whom
they knew not through the obscurity of the night, and had it not been, his
pensive and sullen melancholy, they could not but have known him by the
tallnesse of his body, although he stooped as much as he could, and being all
without the palace, the Kings would accompany him to the Dukes Tower, but he
thanking them for that courtesy, would not suffer them, and so parted going
alone, and being nigh the Dukes Palace, he espied his companions talking with
many knights, and because he would not be known, he took an other by way,
which led him without the City gate, through which he went, till he came to
a fair grove of trees, somewhat out of the high way, where under a spreading
beech, he lay till the Moon began with her light to show her self, there
wash surprised with the remembrance of the beauty of the most honorable
Princess Florisbella, which he so contemplated that he was carried away with
the deep imaginations of her divine persections, that he knew not whether
he was in Heaven or in earth, and drawing forth the picture that the Damzells
had given him, with heartbreaking sighs, he uttered these words, proceeding
from the bottom of his love sick soul. Oh divine, and most Angelical
beauty of the absolutest Princess living on this mossey orb, unhappy was
the hour wherein I heard thee named, and more unfortunate, when my eyes were
captiuated in the admyred sight of thy pictured beauty, for seeing the sole
shaddawe of thy nominated rareness has the power to drown me in heavy
soule-tormented passions, what then will the substance of thy immortal deity
do, when the fruition of that sight shall rob me of my ioying senses. Then
must I only call and continually cry for death, as cheifest anchorage and
remedy of my wound, and with my life to end these my extreme, and
intolerable sorrewes. But fool that I am, where may I obtain more glory
then to norish such conceits, or what happy fortune then possessing this sight
burthening torment, if I do not altogether despair of y^ curing salve, for my
mortal wound. Oh (wise Bellona) not without cause did thou bid me come to
the Soldanes Court, and remember me, I should not there, in my greatest
affections, loose the reigns of my high courage. But who is he, that is able
to do so, having no strength to counterpoyz^ my greefes, nor cure for my
oppressed heart, being so far removed from the causer of my torments, whose
supreme thoughts cannot deigne to be^d their favors on so mean a knight? and if
they did, how should I merit, and deserve them by conioyning both desires in
one, when the large continents of the spacious world, does not contain two
greater enemies then hers, and my father, or where is there a greater
difference of laws, and religion, then betwixt them, whereby I may not only
despair of remedy, but live perpetually the disgracest Knight that in this
age suruiueth. Oh Floriana, when, or wherein, did I so much injury thee, that
thou should on me so cruelly be revenged: and herewith fixing his eees on
his imaginary sorrows, and unable to resist the violence of the sudden
pasion, fell in a trance. Wherein he continued, till a knight arrived there,
which travailed that way by the light of the then shyning Moon, who seeing
that Lady, lie with the picture in manner rehearsed, alighted, and tied his
horse to a tree, and going to her, took her in his arms, using those remedies
that he knew to recover her, if she were not dead, which he feared, seeing her
stur neither hand nor foot.

Don Bellianis with what was done unto him returned to himself, greatly amazed
to see that Knight there, thinking he had heard his complaint. But the Knight
rested no less astonished, to see his excellent beantie, that he could not
utter one word, yet with a trembling voice caused by the sudden fye^t of love
that burnt his heart said. What great misfortune has befallen you (most fair
Lady) that in this sollitarie place should put you in such extreme: And I
swear by the order of knighthood, I received that with the uttermost of my
power, even with my death, to procure your present remedy. Therefore I beseech
you courteous damsel to tell it me, for I shall account my self more happy to
be employed in your service, then to be created Emperor of Constantinople,
seeing your rare beauty binds all the world to your service, no more being
therein to desire, then to live and dye at your command.

The Prince Don Bellianis heard his speech to the end, and smiled in himself
to see the Knights deceit, although those words added a greater flame to his
burning fire, with remembrance of his mistress. And he determined to answer
him according to his opinion, (that his own purpose might not be discovered)
though he should thereby more torment the knight, greatly delighting with such
discourses, hoping himself to use them, if at any time he saw the Princess
Florisbella, and therefore replied thus.

Truly (sir knight) although my misfortune were not for no other cause then now
to joy your presence, I should have taken it for my greatest consolation. And I
think my self most happy, that the Gods have permitted me to arrive in this
place, to enjoy the promise which you of your mere bounty and courtesy have
so liberally made. For my chance is the strangest that ever you heard: and
therefore it behooues me, that you grant me a boon, nothing disaduantaging
your self thereby. The Knight ioying more thereat then at any thing in all his
life, answered. Command me what you will (fair Lady) for you need not
demand any thing by entreaty. Then before we proceed any thing further
(said Don Bellianis) unclasp your helm, and after you shall know what I
require. The knight straight did it, and sitting down (having thitherto stood)
discoursed togiter of diverse things, chiefly touching amourous matters. Don
Bellianis was greatly pleased with his talk, and the more to ease his own
grief. It is needless to describe the features of the Knight, being of a
gallant disposition, and young, not above five and twenty years of age: of
whom don Bellianis demanded his name: whereto he said, he would do it, if she
would accept him for hers. Don Bellianis said, I will if that will please you,
and so forward with your discourse. Then (my dear Lady) know my name is Don
Contumeliano, of Phenicia, son and heir unto the King of that country: and
by another name am called the solitary Knight, because I possess nothing that
better agrees with my conditions, then to wander through solitary and unknown
places, shunning the habitation of populated Cities, and towns, thinking
thereby that the blind God of Love should have no power over me, and therefore
would I not this night lie in Persepolis: but he has at his pleasure revenged
himself on me, with your gracious sight, whose speedy remedy if I want, will
leave me altogether breathless. The hearing of your state (most noble Prince)
has highly contented me (said Don Be(...) I discontent, suffering the like
torments that you through such a passion, for procuring to avoid the cause of
such effect, have been this night so plagued with Loves all conquering power,
that now I feel the force of his tributarie pains. In this chat they spent
the better two parts of the night: which don Bellianis seeing, resolved to
demand of the Prince, what he wanted for the combat, desiring that by no
means his Companions should know his intent, for he durst not trust them with
a battle of such import, hoping also to obtain his request, said. I do desire
you (most honored prince) that you will perform the promise you made me, which
is this. I left not far hence, a Knight in an extreme dangerous adventure,
destitute of an armor, weapons, and horse, to perform a most notable combat,
and were it not (sir knight) that I also promised to procure it him, I would
not now presume so much to injury you as to request them. But believe me, if I
live, I will to your content gratify this good turn. For at this time can I
not do otherwise, being requested by that knight to get him them. And seeing
it has been my hap to meet with you, I do beseech you, to make me so
happy by your gracious grant, promising if I revive to morrow at this time,
to return them, and this is my boon, and your promise. The knight was very
joyful to have occasion to pleasure his mistress, especially expecting so
great a benefit as she promised, cared not whether he never should have them,
although they were the richest in the world (saving don Bellianis.) They were
of color yellow, rarely engraven with curious works, and set with rich Orient
Pearls, whose inestimable worth cannot be vallued. In his sheeld was pictured
a mighty mountain, with a knight lying under an Oak, with his hand under his
cheek, leaning upon the sheeld, staring and gazing on the cruel god of Love,
sitting on the top with his bow and arrows, drawn so naturally, that every
looker on might easily believe it to be alive. And he said to don Bellianis.
Fair mistress, seeing all my heart is yours, what need you more? save command
all I else possess as your own: for my a^mor and (...) rest Tr(...) at your
desposing: more desiring to undertake that combat under your service, then with
my armor to pleasure you. But seeing you will have it so, stay while I call my
page, that is not far hence, knowing I would not go into the City this
night: whereupon he sounded a horn, whose value was more then might be
thought. The force of which blast, was heard through all the city, wherewith
he made a certain sign, at which the page straight came, who seeing his
master accompanied with that lady, greatly marvelled, knowing it to be against
his condition: and alighting off his palfray, said. What wonder is this (sir)
to see you in such a place with so fair a Goddess in your company? I fear
she has of purpose descended the heavens, to penetrate the flintie wars of
your adamant heart, seeing on earth there is none that could do it. It greatly
pleased the knight to hear his page praise his mistress so highly, and
commanded him, saying: Give me my other apparel (Bruneo) for this Goddess
thou speak off staieth for me. Whereupon the page drew forth of a male, the
richest suite of apparel that ever Don Bellianis saw. It was all of a Rubie
color, imbrodered with many of those stones, and other of unvalued price: and
vnbuckling his armor, gave them him, and put on those garments. Don Bellianis
admired, and highly commended the knights gallant liberality, and the more,
that deceitful love should make him so kind, and desirous to requite his
bounty said. Most noble and renowned Prince, I do accept the gift of your lent
armor, and for the same do promise ere 20. days do pass, to remedy your
grief to your great profit, and so require no more of me. For this promise the
prince kneeled to kiss his hands. Don Bellianis would not suffer it, taking him
up in his arms, and embraced him kindly, which exceedingly gladded his heart.
And therewith did help him to mount on his horse, saying. You may (sweet
mistress) sit without fear: for though my horse seems as he does, yet is
he so gentle and tractable, as may be desired. I believe no less (my good
lord, replied don Bellianis) and taking his armor bound in a cloth) before
him, and don Contumelianos sword in his hand (who took his pages) said: I
entreat you to enter the City to day, where you shall see your armor used,
and after follow the Knight, for you shall find me in this place: and so taking
leave, departed through the thick Groaue, leaving him as a man that firmly
gazeth on some wonder: and rapt with admiring contemplation thereof,
suddenly loses the sight of his delightful object. So rested Don
Contumeliano, who not knowing what to do, lay him down to sleep, till it
should be time to enter the City, which he did, mounted on his Pages
Horse, in which City he never had been, where taking his Inn, expected the
hour to go to Court: where we leave him, to return to Don Bellianis,
travailing through the wood, as aforesaid.

CHAP. XXIIII.
What happened to Don Bellianis in the Court, armed in Don Contumelias armor.
How he accepted the battle. His talk with the Princess Persiana before the
fight, and what befell him in the same.

DOn Bellianis going through the wood, (as is said) came at last to a Cave,
where in Winter the Shepheardes used to withdraw themselves, which he seeing
to fit his turn, alighted more easier then Don Contumeliano, did mount him a
horseback, and so went in, and straight put off Florianaes garments, and armed
him as well as he might, having no help, which done, he hid his female
Robes, covering them with some bows, which he cut with his sword, that none
that there should arrive might think them otherwise: and so took his way
toward Persepolis, at such time as the giver of all light began with his
resplendent rays to clear the duskie ^^^e, and chase the darkened clouds
from the ayrie Region, when the chirping birds with their melodious harmony
saluted the mornings vprise, whose varying notes, and pleasing music, struck
such thoughts into the passionate Prince, of his contemplative mistress, that
he regarded not his way, nor knew not where he was, till he found himself at
the city gate: which entering, he came to the lodging that Don Contumeliano had
taken, who being at the door, presently knew each other, yet spoke never a
word: whereupon he took another horse, and followed Don Bellianis to the
Palace, to know the end of that adventure: and by the way, were greatly
admyred of all men, the one for the richness of his armor, and the other for
the sumptuousness of his apparel (as before is mentioned.) Don Bellianis
lighted at the Court gate, and having none to hold his horse, Don Contumeliano
said, give your horse to my Page, who shall look unto him: For though you know
me not, yet am I bound to do you any service. Don Bellianis requiting his
courtesy, did as he requested, and said. Such favors (sir Knight) cannot but
presage a happy success to my enterprise. And taking him by the hand, passed
into a long Gallery, where they sent the Soldane word of their coming, craving
access to his presence: which granted, they entered, and found him talking
with the King of Cyprus, who then with his brothers began to arm themselves
for the fight, highly rejoicing, imagining their enterprise ended, assuring
themselves that five hundred good knights were not able to withstand them in
field. And when they saw those Knights enter in so royal armor and apparel,
with such gallant disposition, they much praised them. They being before the
Sultan, kneeled on the ground, demanding his princely hands to kiss them, who
courteously took them up, and embraced them, and said they might utter what
they would, and what they came for: whereto don Bellianis replied. Command
(dread Lord) the duke Alfiron to be sent for, and then you shall know what we
require. The Sultan sent for him straight, who came guarded with a thousand
armed men. And not knowing the cause of his sending for, was very sorrowful,
seeing that day to be the last of his prefixed time, for the trial of his
cause, and that he had got no Champion to defend his right by fight. Don
Bellianis seeing him, with an audible voice that al might hear him, said. Most
mighty Sophy of Syconia, and imperious Soldane of this great Persian
Monarchy, know, I am called the Solitary knight, if my name have ever
penetrated your ears, son unto the king of Phenicia, who wandering about the
world in search of strange adventures, have by chance arrived in this your
kingdom, where I heard the occasion that the King of Cyprus, otherwise named
the Giant Filistone the fierce, has made against duke Alfiron the courteous,
and other Knights of his company, as also against thy daughter the beauteous
Persiana, touching the death of the prince of Antioch, who he says they
trech^rously ^^ue. I do well know the duke Alfiron, (although his memory does
not comprehend any remembrance of his favors toward me) and am assured he would
do nothing against the laws and duties of a good knight. But to be brief, I
am resolved to undertake, and fight the co^bat for him, if he has none to do
it, and I entreat him to grant it me. For though I deserve not he should trust
me with so great a charge, yet my endeavor, and his justice herein, shall supply
my want. The whole assembly much admired him, judging he was of no little
valor, that durst co^bat with so terrible and deformed Giants, though they
mightily doubted his victory. The Sultan was sore grieved, thinking eue^^^
small let to be great, according to his desire to see y^ matter ended, as he
would, and willingly would he give that city to be fully revenged of the duke.
Yet dissembling his inward thoughts, said. You may try (sir knight) whether
the duke will grant you the fight, and then do what you therein best may.
Notwithstanding I know not why you should procure this co^bat, getting nothing
but the losing of your life. Al shall be as pleases the gods (replied don
Bellianis.) The duke hearing these speeches, said: I cannot hitherto call to
mind (most excellent prince) wherein my deserts should so bind you to succor me
in this my greatest need. But I do assuredly believe the immortal gods has
sent you, because they will not suffer so great villainy proceed further. And
with this, as an auspicious toke^ (assuring me of your victory through your
incomparable countesie, and more valor) I grant you the fight, and persuade
your self, that all right and justice you this day defend. I am so persuaded
(answered don Bellianis) and therefore say no more. But who is your accuser?
The king of Cyprus stepped forth, saying: I am he. Wherefore, see if still thou
be so resolved. More assuredly will I now maintain it, then at first (said don
Bellianis) for thy presence shows there can be no reasou nor justice in any
thing thou attemptest. The Giant enraged with these words, and seeming through
choler to spit fire, in treated the Sultan to command the prisoner to be
brought into the field: for being all armed they had nothing to stay for*
Hereat don Bellianis was somewhat moved, thinking it would be known he was not
in ye tower. Many of those knights went for the prisoners, and entering don
Bellianis lodging, they ^ound Floriana a bed in his place: but her fellow was
up, and had closed the curtains so close, that none could see who was a bed.
Who when she saw the guard come in, said very softly to them. Go no further
(good knights) for the knight of the golded Image lies in the extreme pain of
his life. The Sophy said they) has sent us for him, to carry him to the field.
See (said she) where he lies, but I beseech you stir him not, and I will go
with you to the Sultan, and see what he will command. Whereupon they went to the
Sophy with her, who declared unto him in what case don Bellianis was. The
Sultan commanded he should not be molested, and that she should see him want
nothing. He now needs nothing but this (said she) and seeing the knight yt
had undertaken the co^bat, she knew him to be don Bellianis, by his gallant
demeanor, and the tallness of his body, and wondered to see him f^rnished with
so rich armor: and returning to the tower, told it. Floriana, who with her
greatly r^ioyced, assuring themselves, that don Bellianis would obtain the
victory: reasoning together, that he seemed to be yoked in the amorous bonds
of their Lady, by that which be^ell him when they named her.

At this time was the Princess and the Duke conducted to the field, seeming
very pleasant. The Princes don Brianel, and Arfileo, were advertised how the
duke had gotten a champion. They were glad thereof, because the imprisoned
knights might rest more contented and secure of their good succ^sse, and so
they mounted on their horses. The King of Arminia did bear Don Brianels
sheeld, and Arfileos was borne by the king of Tessifantie. The Duke Gariano did
bear one helm, and the Prince of Brandalia the other: and in this manner they
were accompanied to the field, with the sound of many military instruments,
where at that time they met the knight of the golden Image, whose lance and
sheeld was borne by Don Contumeliano, whose gallant disposition every one
admired, thinking he should be whom in effect he was: and al they ioining
together, most lovingly saluted each other, and entered the lists, where they
alighted, within a Pauilion (prepared for them) till the Soldans coming, where
Don Bellianis had the buckles of his armor closer guirt. There then also entered
above ten thousand armed men, and in the midst of them they brought the
Princess Persiana, and the Duke. The Princess was mounted upon a scaffold
richly appointed for her, but the Duke remained among the guard, who spread
themselves round about the yard, for the better assurance both of the
prisoners, and combattants. When suddenly the earth seemed to tremble and quake
with the noise and sound of drums and trumpets, that the knights could not
hear one another. The knights came forth of their Pauilion (which was heard by
the Princess) and mounted a horseback, to e^pect the coming of the Giants,
who then appeared in ^ight. But Don Bellianis seeing so many eyes fixed on him,
desirous to do n^ less then he was wont, set one hand on the pummell of his
Saddle, and lept therein, not setting foot in the stirrup, and with the force
he put ther^^^, the blood issued out of his armor, from the wounds that were
not yet whole, which seen of many, they counseled him to leave the the
combat, being ^o sore wounded. The Princess Persiana sent him word that he
should come to her, for she should speak with him, which he did, where she
entreated him to mount aloft. The guard seeing him go alone, did not let him:
Which was at such time that the Princess Aurora arrived, well accompanied, who
was conducted to that scaffold. These two Ladies entertained each other with
such court^s^e, as belonged to their high states. And the Princess Aurora
seeing that knight there, demanded why he was called. To whom the Princess
Persiana replied: she should straight know why, and so softly, that ne^e but
they three might hear, said to him. By the life of that thing which you must
love in this world most noble knight) and so the immortal Gods may bl^sse you,
with the everliving glory of a famous victory at this present, and most happy
su^^^s^e to all enterpryses and adventures you shall undertake, I d^e entreat
you to declare your name, for either I am new ^^inde, or I do certainly know
you, having dreamed this ^ight, that I was delivered by the hands of a knight
I greatly affected, and so would I know it (though I think it impossible you
should be he) which you may assuredly do, knowing how it behooues (...) to
keep it secret.

And here the History says, that she in deed did dream that night, she
was delivered by Don Belliani^: who made this answer. I cannot conceive (fair
Princess wherefore you should desire my name, having nothing less therein,
but to increase your sorr^w: yet know, I am your k^^ght of the golden Image,
and so pardon me, for you shall kn^w the rest hereafter. Wherewith he
descended, least he were suspected, though every one thought the Princess did
but encourage him, with the justice of her cause, who was advertised by don
Bellianis, she should not disclose that secret by no (...)* neither to his
^ellowes, nor to any other living, and mounting a horseback, the Giants entered
the li^tes, with their (...) an: whereat the Ladies were much as^onished in
seeing (...)* and in knowing him to be the knight of the golden image,
something feared his life, because of the blood that issued from his old (...),
yet rested assured of the victory, maruelling how he should get out of
prison, and ^e furnished with so rich armor, and turning to the knights, he
saw the Sultan marsh^lling the ^^eld (being himself judge of the fight, and
placing the knights one against the other, and coming to the knight of the
golden Image, he said, seeing him bloody through his armor. How will you enter
in fight (^i^ knight) being thus wounded: It is no matter (said he) for this
only am I knighted.

The Sultan urged it no more, but withdrawing himself, commanded the signal
of the fight to be given by the Trumpets, at whose sound, the knights with
armed fury, in such ^orte made against each other, that they rather seemed so
many sudden flashes of lightnings, renting through the Ayri^ passage of the
heavens, then men, and met in the midst of the field, with so mighty
incounters, as if so many pieces of Ordinance had been discharged.

Arfileo and Don Bryanell incountred the king of Cyprus two brothers, that all
four measured their lengthes on the earth, sore wounded. Don Bryanell having
one foot hanging in the stirrope, that he could by no means rise. Don
Belliani^ and the fearful Feliston, so cruelly met, that Don Bellianis shield
was pierced, together with his arm, and the furious lance not resting there,
penetrated both armor and coat of male, where his arm was nailed with a
piece of the spear, to his breast, making there a wide wou^d, from whence
issued infinite blood.

But Don Bellianis incountred the Giant in the middle of his steeled shield,
which also was pierced, with his breast plate, and the shocke was so strong,
that the lance guided by so brave an arm, and the fury of so good a horse,
that therewith the king of Cyprus lost his stirropes, and meeting body with
body, and breast with breast, the diuel^ish Giant having nothing to stay his
feet, fell to the ground: Don Bellianis had done the like, if he had not
gotten hold by his horse neck. Who is able to express the amazed wonder of
the beholders, at that brave encounter, having never seen the like, that they
raised a murmurre among themselves, with high praise honoring the extreme
valor of that knight, who seeing that it beh^^ued him to loose no time, was
alighting off his horse, when the king made toward him, more enraged then a
fierce baited ^ul. But first looking to his companions, perceived the ve^turous
knight to have one leg still in his stirr^pe, and in great danger, because his
adversary was going upon him, intending to end his life, which easily
without disturbance he might have done, wherefore seeing his friends sure
peri^l, set aparte his woonted courtesy, and ran with his horse against the
Giant, that he returned to the ground, and himself lepping from his saddle,
went to help Don Bryanell, which purpose was leted by the kings coming, that
thereby he was feign to stay, to repair himself from the Giants sudden blow,
who raising his battell*a^e, would have discharged it on his head.

But the knight of the golden Image, seeing he could not help himself with
^is left arm, by reason of the piece of lance that was in it, stepped aside,
that the axe struck on the earth, and therein ran above a yard: and going
upon the King, was unawares surprysed by his brother that he ouerthr^we, who
gave him so cruel a bl^we on his H^lme, that it made him to bow to the
ground, which made the rage to kindle in the Knights breast, that very ^yer
sparkled from his eyes, and like a hot chafed Boar, or hungrye Lyan bent to
his pray, wounded the Giant that had struck him, with so puissant a b^^we on
the H^lme, that he cut it in two, as if it had been of paper, sorely wounding
his head, that he was like to fall, yet with the force of the blow, his
semitor fell out of his hands, resting so astonished, that he knew not
whether he were alive or dead.

But the knights sword flewe in two pieces, that only the hiltes remained in
his hands, to defend himself in such extreme danger, and of so puisant
enemies as those. Who at that time had beheld the two Princess, Persiana and
Aurora, with the good Duke Alfiron, and the towre^ D^mz^ls of the beauteous
Princess Flori^bell^, that thence beheld the fight, had no need to seek else
where, the proall color of timorous death. For in their f^c^s was it so
perfect to be seen, that no Painter ever did better draw it in varity of
colors, which sight did so terrify the dolorous Ladies, that they desired no
longer life, then it might be guarded by the knight of the golden Images
safety.

But the good Prince of Phaenicia, was there like to dye, for very sorrow and
anguish of mind, seeing all that evil had happened through the weakness of
his defective sword, and cursing of himself, thought his Mistress would for
ever abhor him for that cause, which would be the loss of the best knight
that ever put on armor. Yet hitherto Don Bryanell could by no means get his
foot loose, but with the strength that he set, drew his horse upon all his
leg, that the very pain thereof had almost killed him, only the Sultan
rejoiced at this dissastrous accident, thinking hereby to effect his desire.
The Cyprus king was so highly glad, that hoysting his axe alo^te, cried aloude,
this blow shall execute my will. The Prince Arfileo that in such state saw
his companions, would have gone to help them, but his adversary perceiving
it, let fall his semitor, and slung himself upon him, whereat unable to
shun it, did the like, stryuing with their excessive strength to overthrow
one another.

Don Bellianis though he saw himself without sword, and not able to help
him with one arm, was not therefore daunted with the fearful sight of
present death, that he before him saw, but seeing the most fierce Giant come
toward him, flung with all his strength the piece of sword remaining in his
hand, that lighting on his helm, the force thereof threw him backwardes to
the ground, and before his brother could remedy it (with admirable quickness
which the present danger did augment) he took up the semitor that he let fall,
as is already said, and leaving the fight at that stay, st^pped to Don
Brianell, and cutting the horse girts, set him on his feet.

The ^ierce ^ing that then came upon him gave him a blow on the head, which if
it had not bin given him unadvisedly, it had cloven it in the middle, but not
staying there, it descended on the sheeld, cutting it all overthwart, and
falling on his thigh, parting all the Armor, ^^ opened his flesh most
^it^ously. Don Belliani^ feeling his wound, struck the King sideling with the
heavy semitor, yt if he had not warded y^ blow with his sheeld, it had clean
cut of his leg, yet it threw the sheeld in two pieces to the ground, together
with his hand, and being close one to another, the King would have cast his
arms upon him* but the Knight leapt aside, unwilling to wrestle: whereupon
they wounded themselves most grievously, that with their mighti^ strokes, they
sometime bowed their heads to their breast* sometime they bended their knees,
and set their hands to the ground, and the King wanting his left arm, it
made him to rore like a chased Bull, that he scantly felt any of the knights
blows.

Don Brianell seeing himself rid from his horse, drew his sword, making
against the king, but he was stayed by his br^ther, wh^ met him with a heavy
Mace, which he had on his saddle pummel, using it in stead of his loose
semitor, and so piteously wounded one another, that the vnterous knight was
fain to help himself with his ^imblenesse, to avoid the giants intolerable
blows, having wounded him in many places. The like did ^he Prince Arfileo, who
having let loose his adversary, laid close to it with their sharp swords,
with such admiration of the beholders, as if the universal judgment consisted
in the victory of that battle, and none durst utter one word, but with amazed
gaze stared in one another faces, to to see those knights escaped that great
danger, (who a little before, they accounted dead) by the mere courage and
valor of the knight of the golden Image, might not compare for haughty deeds
of honored Chivalry, and whom they so much esteemed. And returning to the
grieved Princess, they kn^w not what to say, through conceived gladness, and
had much to do to dissemble it in time of sorrow: no less glad were the Ladies
of the Princess Florisbella, who for joy embraced each other, especially
Floriana, that with tears in her eyes, said. Oh (most unhappy maiden that I
am) for I never gave worse counsel in all my life to any, then I did to this
knight if he here had dyed. But his death should not have been without
company: For in the instant my eyes had seen such a thing, I would headlong
have tumbled my self from of this Tower, that it might be known, with what
sincerity and faithfulness I counpelled him. Peace said the other, for we
shall see him straight victoriously tryumphe over his enemies, and therefore
let us procure all necessaries, for to cure his wounds.

At this time all the knights and Giants were besmeared in their own blood,
that where they set their feet, they left their signs printed with the
same, and so tired with weariness, having fought almost five hours, that they
could^ ^^arce hold their swords in their hands The fearful Fil^ston, almost
with sweatie fury choked, and tired, withdr^we himself a part to breathe,
which grieved not Don Bellianis: who doing so, drew forth the piece of spear
from his arm, that embrued in his blood, it stuck so fast that it put him in
extreme pain: and walking up and down because their wounds should cool,
they looked on their fellows, and saw the venterous knight reduoble his
strength, through anger of the pause, wherewith he had brought the Giant, with
whom he fought, (having a mortal wound given him before, by the Solitary
Knight) to such pass, that he could not long defend himself. Which when the
king of Cyprus did see, he would with his Cour^lea^e wound the knight, that
then he might incur great danger, being taken unawares, but at that instant,
the watchful Prince Don Belliani^ perceiving it, being not far from the
King, disturbed that his purpose, pushing him on his breast so strongly that he
recoyled back three or four steps, whereby they renewed their fight more
fiercely and brave, then in the whole day before.

But Don Bellianis perceiving, that if the Combatte long continued, he was like
to faint, through the infinite bl^^d he had lost, adventured himself, to
receive a blow of the Giant. Which when he saw descended on him, commending
himself from the bottom of his heart, unto the Almighty, to deliver him from
that danger, and thrust at the Giant so bravely under his arm, that being
there unarmed, and with such excessive force performed, that the sword ran
into his flesh up to the hilts, piercing his heart in the middle, wherewith he
fell down dead. But he was by the Giant cruelly wounded on the head, that he
also fell down in a trance, which grieved every one, chiefly the Princess
Aurora, that was forced to cry out. Oh immortal Gods why have you suffered so
great an evil: for without doubt, the best knight that ever gyrded sword is
s^aine. But her sorrow was turned to a general gladness, seeing him amazedly
rise, and was going to aid his companions, if he had not seeue Arfileo at one
blow cut off one of the Giants legs, and with an other his head. The like
did Don Brianell, not regarding the Souldanes cries, requiring him that he
would not do it, for he yielded him vanquished. Which done, they in their
hearts rendered immortal thanks unto the Almighty, for their victorious
delivery, from so unspeakable peril, and with great love embraced the Knight
in the yelowe Armor, whom they imagined to be Don Contumeliano, yielding to
him all the honor of the victory.

Whereupon, (not expecting the Soldans command) the general assembly shouted
out for joy, sounding a number numberless of all manner of military
instruments, running about the field for gladness, which cut the Soldane to
the heart, having no patience to endure it.

CHAP. XXV.
What the Knight of the Golden Image did after the battle ended: And how the
Sultan commanded the duke to be borne to prison.

SO soon as the Princess Persiana did see the battle ended, with such joy as
every one may judge, descended the scaffold, and going to the knights that yet
were talking together, she would have kneeled before don Bellianis, but he
prevented it by doing so himself, very courteously, saying. You have no cause
(most excellent Lady, to thank me, being bound to do more then this for the
Duke Alfiron. But if you will, then (royal Princess) gratify these knights,
whose valor has so well defended your right, and i^stice: for my service is of
no worth, but while it be shadowed under their haughty deeds. I will not
(famous knight) said the Princess, extol the honor you have won in this
battle, with such dear loss of your blood, (besides the ouerthr^we of such
great treachery as was ordained against us) being more then any hundred
knights might attain. And since you will not have me rest your debtor, for
this incomparable favor, speak to him for whom you undertook the Combat, who
is no less bound to you then I So leaving him with the Duke, and the princess
Aurora, she embraced the other knight, using betwixt them words of great
kindness, according to their high estate. Don Bellianis leaving the Duke,
whent to the Sophy, (that was returning to the Palace, having commanded his
daughter and the duke to be returned to prison) and being nigh h^^, and
followed by many knights, said unto him. ^^ince mighty Lord the truth cannot
be more clear and manifest, I beseec^e your highness, command that the
Princess Persiana, the knight of the golden image, and the Duke Alf^^on may
beset at lib^^tie, their innocence being saved and confirmed, by the happy
success of this battle, which entreat to be forthwith, resp^^ting the great
necessity we have of ^are for our most dangerous wounds.

The Sophy that minded no such thing, replied. I do believe you know (Sir
knight) I am not bound to what you said: for if they be cleared of Don
Gallaneos death, as you will have it, the Duke notwithstanding is not freed of
his trespass committed against me, having resisted my will, with hostile arms,
which being so plain, I had no cause to put it in trial of battle, but reserve
unto my self the punishment of that fault, according as it deserves: therefore
talk to me no more thereof, for I will do nothing, more then I have said.
Whereto Don Bellianis answered.

We expected no such usage at the hands of so great a lord, I undertook the
fight for all matters concerning the Duke, and if he be clear of Don
Galleanos death, it follows then, that he is fr^e of all other things
whatsoever. Reply no more (said the Souldan) for I will have it so: Whereupon
he commanded the Duke to be returned to prison, who straight was there
conducted himself going to his Palace, and would hear none speak: whereat Don
Bellianis was like to burst, through rage. Don Br^anell and Ar^^l^o disguised
him to go with the^ to their lodging, to be cured: to whom he answered. I have
no need of cure, since the Duke remains imprisoned, and so I humbly take my
l^^ue, for I will depart ^ut of the Cit^ie.

Wherewith he l^^t them (...), taking his way to the wood, only followed by
don Contumeliano. The knights and the Princess Aurora returned to their
lodging, reasoning on nothing but on the Sollitarie knight, whom they thought
never enough praised, having by him received so great help in the battle. I
should not have believed said Arfileo, that the world contained such a knight
as the Prince of Phenicia. You did not see his deeds so well as I (replied don
Brianell) because you were busy in Combat, and believe me, he no more feared
(being without sword) then if he had been confronted with no foes, which if it
had not broken, he needed none of our help.

Thus talking together, they laid themselves in their several beds, where
they were cured, having many and dangerous wounds. The Princess Aurora leaving
them, went well accompanied to the palace, to see what was done in the Dukes
liberty, where she found the Princess Persiana, that for the words spoken
by the knight of the Golden Image, was set free, who received each other, as
their great love testified, and after sent to see what the Souldane did, who
brought them word, he commanded the Dukes guarde to be doubled, and that also
he had sent the aduenterous knight word, commanding him, that since he would
not at his entreaties spare the King of Cyprus brothers life, he should
forthwith depart his Land, or else his life should pay the forfit of his stay.

The Ladies greatly grieved, hearing this, demanded his answer: which was,
that he was contented to obey him within three days, but he should regard,
that he did it against law and justice, which being so, he would reuisit
him against his will, since he would not observe them the conditions of the
Combatte, and therefore he should prepare to entertain him, which indeed
was so: for they determined to be revenged at full upon the Souldane, who was
guarded in his Palace with more then ten thousand Armed men, to prevent all
occasions of conspyracies against him.

The Kings of Armenia and Tessifinty, spoke with him, and entreating him not to
break his promise, which they in his behalf had made unto the Duke. But he
would not hear them. Whereupon they went to the Dukes Palace to visit the
wounded knights, where among them, they laid the plot and manner, how to free
the Duke (as hereafter shall be showen) which cost many lives, with loss of
infinite blood.

CHAP. XXVI.
What befell the Knight of the Golden Image, and Don Contumeliano, who being
at the point of death, was succoure with the adventure of the Desperation of
love.

DOn Bellianis having left his companions in field, took the next way to the
place ^om whence that morning he came, going out of the City gate, at such
time, that the darkness (through absence of the clear light, and
daye-resplending sun) ouerspread the face of the earth, giving place unto the
watery brightness of Dianaes beams, whose pale riflect increased the pain of
Don Bellianis deep stars, as also with one memorating the excellencye, and
divine beauty of his (al^u^ all others fair mistress, the princess
Florisbella. whose remembrance made him forget Don Co^tumeliano that followed
him a little after, and being come to the wood, and seeing him come toward
him, stayed to talk together.

The Prince don Contumeliano coming to him said. Whither do you mean to go
(Sir Knight so sore wounded, leaving the City where you might be cured. I
have no need (answered the knight) of any other thing but your sight (most
excellent Prince) to heal me. The Prince woondred at these words, and thought
by this, and by what he saw him do in the palace, calling himself by his
name, that he so was counseled to do by his Lady the Damzell, to whom he lent
his armor, but very courteously thanking him for his kind speeches, thus said.

I cannot express the great desire I have, to know whom you are, thereby to see
the end of the adventure which happened to me, since yesterday at this time:
which (by the immortal gods I protest) I cannot comprehend. And tell me what
is become of a most fair Lady, to whom the last night, I delivered those
Arms, whnse most dear sight, I only wish now to see Follow me (most
excellent Lord, replied Don Bellianis) and I will conduct you where you
desire: and so they went through those trees, till they came to the Cave, where
Don Bellianis had left the Garments, and there both alighting on foot, he
went thereto (amazing Don Contumeliano) what should be the end of it, and
finding the robes, showing them to him, said.

Know you Sir these? He looking on them, answered he did, (having engraven in
his heart, all the tokens of his mistress) and that she did wear them, that
deserved the rule of all the world: and therefore tell me the rest, for the
more I look on them, the more I marvel.

Take of my Helm (said don Bellianis) while the Damzell comes. The Prince Don
Contumeliano did so, and gazing on his face, was straight strooken into such a
trance, and rested so amazed, that he knew not what to faye: and had not
Don Bellianis cast his Arms about his neck, he had presentlye fallen down
to the ground: notwithstanding he was in such case, that the Prince was feign
to sit down, and take the knights head on his knees, while ye Page went to
seek for water, out of a spring or fountain, to cast in his face. But before
he returned, Don Contumeliano, a little recovered his lost senses, and with a
de^re sigh, seeming to send his soul after, complained in this manner. Ay m^e,
unfortunate, and disgraced Don Contumelian, unhappy was the day thou
determinedst to see Persepolis, seeing such great disasters lay hidden in these
herbs, to ensnare thee. Oh deceit to drive me from deceit, how haste thou
manifestly showed me the small interest I have in the large dominions of sole
conquering Love, being entangled in the deceitful snares of a Ladies garment.
Ay m^e, how many years have I shunned habitable cities, now to come and dye
in this desarte wood? Oh renowned knight, the best that ever buckled armor,
how little do I now esteem your immortal victories, since you had the heart to
captiuate me with so cunning a slight, having committed no fault nor cause, nor
given any occasion to move you thereto, unless my starre-^rost hap procures
my vntunely fatal end. For if you needed my armor, why should you seek such
means, to require that of me, which I never could deny any, being thereunto
bound by the order I maintain, unless you desired the desolation of my
unlucky life. Which he no sooner ended, but sounded again, in such manner,
that no remedy that Don Bellianis used, could recover him, nor yet his Page
that was returned, which trance was so vehement, that they judged him dead,
which in deed he was not far from, being oppressed with so extreme an
evil, that he lay hopeless, his heart panting with in his body, with his
vytall spirits stopped, that he could neither speak, nor breath, that with the
intolerable pain, and agony thereof, he lay groaning, and tumbling,
expecting the last minute, as those that for want of their natural heat and
moisture, without other disease dye. Which so grieved the grieved Prince Don
Bellianis, that the tears ran down the eyes of y^ herroicke knight like
streams of flowing waters, in such abundance as if his own dear Lady were
in that case: and truly there could be no danger so great, which that Prince
would not attempt, then for the safety of that good knight Don Contumelian,
rather then to see him so languish in that extremity. Thus lay they a good
while, judging him altogether dead, and Don Bellianis through grief and loss
of infinite blood, so faint, that he could not almost stir. Where there
coming toward them, from among those trees, a beast, the vglyest and
deformedst that ever they saw, or in the world might be found. This beast was
so horrible in sight, casting fire out of her mouth, that for fear of her
Gontumelianos Page, fell down almost dead. Don Bellianis as well as he could,
rose from the ground (which he could scant do taking the Curtleaxe in his
hand, which he got of the King of Cyprus his brother, and awayted her coming:
whose furious passage making against him, was so vehement, that she tumbled
down all the trees in her way, and being nigh him, straight vanished, leaving
in her place a huge white Pillar, with a letter thereon, encompassed about with
much fire. Don Bellianis amazed at what he saw, stepped to the Pillar and
took the letter, which opening, he read to this effect.

To thee Supreme and excellent Prince of Greece: The sage Bellona thy great
friend saluteth thee:
Knowing by my Art and skill, which I continually use for thy fake, the great
and mortal duanger, which through thy means should befall the (Solitary
knight) and also thy sorrow and languishment, therefore moved me, to make thee
know the manner of his recovery: Wherefore I send this letter by a messenger
of mine, that the Pillar of wonders might be manifested to thee. Within this
Pillar thou see, shall thou find his remedy, and therefore leave it not
untried. Always remembering what I told thee in my lodging, as briefly as I
could, for therein all thy labor is assured thee. I say no more, but so rest
thine, as thy self may testifiing


Don Bellianis having read the letter, rejoiced to see there was yet remedy for
the distressed Prince, and so resolutely was casting himself into the huge
fire, to see what therein he could find. But before he could effect his
purpose, there came toward him four valiant knights, against whom preparing
himself, there also at that time assaults him four Lions, big and fierce,
who with their wide mouths (as though they cast fire) embraced him, maugre all
his strength, and drew him into the same. He seeing himself in such peril,
letting fall his axe, would have drawn his dagger, which at his back he had,
but his arm was held so fast, that he could not stir it, and turning to
see what did it, saw it was a most beauteous Lady: whereupon the Lions and
knights vanshed. Oh God (said Don Bellianis) is this possible I see? Marvel
not knight at what you see (replied the Lady) letting go his arm, for this is
called the Pillar of wonders, though it be a long time since any thing has
been seen, wherein many have found remedy for their dispairing love, yet
never ending the adventure. Wherefore with more reason it might be named the
despair of Love. And so was it true, as in the end of the second part of this
History shall be seen: for whose cause many dyed not tormented with that
deadly wound. And seeing for your companyons remedy, you here have entered,
though it could not be seen but by a third person with you, you
notwithstanding enjoy the secret thereof: and taking him by the hand, went
where Contumeliano lay at the last point of life: the Lady carried a kindled
cole of the same fire of the Pillar, which she cast upon the breast of the
Phenician Prince, wherewith he straight returned out of his trance, somewhat
agaste to see himself in that case: and going to rise, Don Bellianis with much
gladness embraced him, saying:

What is the matter (excellent Prince) for your infirmity has greatly grieved
us:

My evil has been nothing, in refpect of the great gladness (replied he) I
conceive in knowing you, and since I am free of the last deceit, I entreat
you of your special favor, to manifest it me, not hyding any of your acts.
I am content (answered Don Bellianis) to please you therein, but thank this
Lady, for your lives liberty. Which he going to do, she returned suddenly
through that fire, leaving every thing, as before. What is this (my good Lord)
demanded don Contumeliano? Whereupon Don Bellianis discoursed that adventure,
and how he being ready to breathe his last, it appeared, called the
desperation of Love, and how he proved it, with what else happened: And
proceeding, said. I know not (sovereign Prince) the occasion of your extreme
passion. Let us talk no more hereof (replied he:) for I assure you, as soon
as I felt the cole of fire set upon me, I lost all that vehement dolor and
agony: yet not so, but that I shall always remember the deceit done me, hard
by the City of Persepolis. And so was it true, for still after when he saw
the knight of the golden Image, his pulses and spirits would beat, with
alteration, like one struck with an vncoueth fear. And I pray you let me
know your name, with the causes of your other adventure. My name (replied Don
Bellianis) is the knight of the golden Image, which I am sure you never heard,
and so recounted the rest, how he came out of prison in a Ladies garments, to
undertake that combatte, as is before said. Don Contumeliano greatly wondered,
when he knew that was the knight of the golden Image, of whom passing through
the unhappy bridge, he heard such wonders of, and greatly rejoicing to have
met with such a knight, said. I do new sir knight of the golden Image)
altogether believe, and confirm the high deeds published of you, and dee
render infinite thanks to our immortal Gods, that have brought me to enjoy the
fruition of your company, and so very leuingly embraced together, knitting
twixt them, the inviolable knot of friendship, which all their life lasted, as
the History mentions.

Don Bellionis was unarmed by Contumelianos Page, and his wounds by him
dressed, and attired in Florianaes garments, which refreshed the dying flames
in the heart of the amourous Prince, and agreed together, that don Contumeliano
should stay for it in a strong city, forty miles from Persepolis, belonging
to the Duke Alfiron, called Bollera, appointing to be with him within thirty
days: wherefore embracing again each other, and taking their leaves, they
went to see the pillar, to read the letters thereon, which by the light of the
fire there, don Bellianis thus read.

The Pillar of the wonders, for remedy of the dispairers in Love, shall be
henceforth manifested, where every one shall be remedied according to their
meede. And if in Love he never have erred, or in arms been overcome, by the
gardians here placed by the sage Medea: he that so has not been, shall not
prove himself therein.

Well might I have hoped for remedy (said don Contumeliano) of the guard you
here saw, if you had not been here. But I desire to see the end of so great an
adventure, and how it may be brought thereto: for I think the letters do not
show it. A little lower I think it does express the manner how (answered Don
Bellianis) by him that through despair shall hither come. Then good cause have
I to prove it (replied don Contumeliano) for I never hope for remedy. Don
Bellianis greatly laughed at what the Prince said. And so taking leave one of
another, departed. Don Contumeliano putting on his own armor, taking the
Giants Curtelax instead of his sword, took his next way to Bollen, where he
found all the people very sorrowful for the Duke their Lords imprisonment,
who was of them greatly loved. He recounted to them what had happened in the
battle, and how the duke their Lord was already at liberty, whereat they
were much ioyed, and highly honored him, who remained there till don
Bellianis came, as hereafter shall be expressed.

CHAP. XXVII.
How Don Bellianis returned to prison, and what past between him and the
Ladies of the Princess Florisbella.

DOn Bellianis, being departed from the Prince of Phenicia, arrived in the
City, when two parts of the night was past, and went till he came to the
Soldanes Palace, not staying any where, though he greatly desired to know of
his Companions. And thinking to find all the people quiet, he found them
otherwise busied, and the Palace guarded with ten thousand men, with many
light Torches. But he closely passing between them, had nothing said to him,
thinking that he was some of the Princess Auroraes, or Perfianaes
Gentlewomen: and going up the Tower, required the watch to let him in to visit
the Knight of the golden Image: they thinking he was a a woman, let him in,
demanding why she had been all day abroad, the knight being so sore
wounded? I could do no otherwise, (replied Don Bellianis) and thereupon
entered his Chamber, where Floriana, and her fellow stayed for him: who seeing
him come, Persiana ran to embrace him: so did Floriana, who casting a Mantie
over her, did rise out of the bed. Don Bellianis seeing it, said. It behooues
not (fair Ladies) you should bestow such favors on so mean a knight,
specially in so suspicious a place. There is no place to be suspected, where
such a knight is, deserving greater favors then these, even at the hands of
the fa^^est Princess living.

But leaving this, let us cure you now, that you may tell us all that befell
you abroad: and so making him unready, laid him in a bed, and by their
hands dressed him. Which done, they gave him his Supper, who eat it with a
good stomach, having tasted no food in a day and a half before: and when
they would have left him, he would not let them go, because he could not
sleep, and so told them all his adventure from his departing. And when he
spoke of Don Contumeliano, they could not stand for laughter.

I am much glad of your success (said Floriana) because you shall not think
us fools in what we have said of your beauty, whereby you may imagine the
greatness of our. Lady the Princess Florisbella, and now you may render to
us her counterfeite, for you no more need it. Let me yet keep it, (gracious
Damozell) forthat I have not coated it with that I have in my Sheelde, to see
which is more natural: for the meaning I know is all one. And tell me the
reason why the Soldane did command the Prince Perianeo, to depart his
Dominions, which the Princess Aurora was the other day telling me, but she
was interrupted by a sudden occasion, and since I have had no time to know
it? We have not effectually learned it, (said she) but it is thought the
Souldane imagined that he was in love with the Princess: and least he
should attempt any thing against her honor, commanded him to leave his
Kingdom, being the valiantest knight then known in the whole universal
world.

What loss had there been (said Don Bellianis) if he had been married to
her, being so good a knight, and so great a Prince. In faith none (replied
she) if for possessions, or any thing else she should have been given to
any, he well deserved her. But we thought, that according to her excellency
and beauty, some of our Gods would descend the heavens, to enjoy her on
earth. And if he had demanded her of the Soldane our Lord, we think he
would not have denied her him, but he never would declare his name, which was
known after the wars of Antioch,

This they told Don Bellianis, who was greatly discomforted to hear of the
love betwixt the Knight and the Princess, as also to hear, that every where
the wonders of the knight of the Images sounded in his ears, being so highly
esteemed in his Ladies Country, and so purposed never to rest till he met
with him, supposing he should never be favored of his Mistress, unless he
should remove that knight out of her sight, and so said to the Damzels. Has
there been no news of him since his departing, or did he so soon forget the
Princess? No (said they) for it was said, he every day came into the court
with several horse and armor, and then writ diverse letters to her,
beseeching her to receive him as her knight, letting her know he was Prince of
this land. The letter was delivered to us, and we fearing some evil to ensue
thereby, durst not give it her. But what answer made you (said Don Bellianis)
to him that gave you the letter: None other (answered the Damzell) save that
the Princess would not answer it. Yet might you have given her it. There is
none for their lives that durst have done so: for besides that, she does
injury herself, being but seldom seen, and abhorring such matters
extremely, she hates this Prince greatly, because he was the cause that the
Princess Aurora lost her kingdom, with her fathers life, which was Uncle to
our Lady Princess, and brother to her mother. With that Don Bellianis rested
somewhat comforted, and to give place to his thoughts, prayed the Damzels to go
to bed, because he would sleep: which they did: and being withdrawn, they
reasoned, that the knight of the golden Image should be in love with their
Lady. Believe not (said Beriana) if since you named the Princess Florisbella,
he has not been captiuated with her praises, else why should he so
particularly inquire for her. Will you know it certainly (said Floriana?) Let
us rise softly and hearken what he says, for it is not possible but he
should utter the abundance of his heart, and so rose in their smocks to hear
him, who to himself complained, and now and then groned, and sighed so
bitterly, as if his heart would break. But at last with a soft voice he burst
into these passions. Ay me unfortunate Knight of the golden Image, and most
unhappy Prince, what accursed Stars, void of all pity, have conducted thee
to Persepolis, to receive so distastrous a death? Ah, wretch that I am, whom
the power of hearts-penetrating love, contenteth not with such cruelty to
torment thee, but tells thee thou art not worthy to serve whom thou
desyrest. But thrice happy art thou Knight of the Images: for if thou do
suffer any passions, and hearts languishment for the diuined beauty of the
excellentest Princess that ever was borne: yet are thy thoughts made known to
her, where thou may immortallize thy self, and call thee the only blessed
of all mortal men. But aye me, more unhappy far, then thou art happy, that
must hear the intolerable burden of my greeuaunces, without comfort,
without help, and without hope. For though my souls true pain were known,
where are the merittes to reap the benefit of so large a guerdon? But let
Fortune do her woorst, yet will not I leave, till I see how long my despised
life will labor in the Laborinth of misfortune. And if I do meet with the
Knight of the Images, I do protest by the sacred order I have received, to
make it known upon his steeled Burgonet, that none but I deserve the fruition
of such thoughts, though he more largely do possess the favor of time,
smiling chance, which I will obtain, unless my tributarie death deny me
passage to effect my will, that hardly will be maintained with these
oppressing tormentors, where with many groans and sighs, drowned in a flood
of tears, wetted all his bed.

Oh God (said Floriana) did you ever hear such a complaint of a Knight in so
short a time, not hauiug seen her whom he loves? And I believe, (unless he
be remedied) he will hardly escape with his life, being thus deeply wounded.

I know not what to say, (replied her fellow Periana) for it is the straungest
thing I have seen, that the love of a Lady should so wound the heart of a
Knight, against whom neither the fury of hell-bred beasts, nor the strength
of mighty Giants can prevail, and whom we have seen do such deeds, that
scarce our selves can believe: and this is the greatest of all, that so strong
a Competitor in Love, is offered at this present to the Persian Prince. The
Knight of the golden Image is not so great as you esteem him (said Floriana)
for I well know the high deeds and great state of the other, and though he be
now disgraced by the Sultan, he may be reconciled.

All this know I (said the other) yet is not he like to this, if he should
be compared. And this Knight may be some great Prince, since (knowing the
other sueth for her) he determines the like. And as for his beauty, you see
the world cannot equal it: and also for his valor, we our selves are good
witnesses. And for my part, though I were sure to die, I would procure all
means to effect his desire, seeing the danger he freed us from, and the love
we bare him, and he us, deserves all our endeavor in this case. In this they
continued while they fell a sleep, till the next morning, that they again
dressed him. And truly the great desire he had to see himself out of that
City, greatly helped his wounds, that the Damzels said he would be well
within ten days, and able to travel, which greatly ioyed him, hoping to be
quickly in the great City of Babylon, there to possess the sight of his
heavenly Princess.

CHAP. XXVIII.
How between the Princes Don Bryanell, and Arfileo, with the two kings, it
was determined, in what manner the Duke Alfiron, and the Knight of the golden
Image should be set at libertic: And how the Princess Aurora spoke with about
it him: by whose counsel she departed from the Soldans Court.

THe prince Arfileo knowing how the Sultan governed himself with a dist^mpered
passion of an unbridled rage, resolved with the two kings his friends (who^
this matter also concerned) because the Sophi had with them broken promise, to
procure the end of these affairs: and thereupon coucluded, that seeing the
Sultan would not free the Knight of the golden Image, and the Duke, by
intreatiue means, to make it known unto Don Bellianis, and to this end, the
Princess Aurora should visit him in Prison, and being there, found him
conuersing with the Damzelles about the Princess Florisbella, who knowing his
passion, always devised discorsiue matter upon their Lady, which some time
both pleased, and displeased him, as the speeches accorded with his humor, or
delighted his waxe-mollified heart, apt for any impression of that quality.

Now when the Princess entered, the Ladies rose to receive her, with that
obeysaunce that befitted her state, and the Prince Don Bellianis, about to do
the like, was stayed by her, who so soon stepped to him, that he could not
do it: to whom she would have kneeled, but he not permitting it, embraced
her between his arms with more affection then thitherto he had, because of
his conceived love of the Princess Florisbella, that so dearly loved this
Lady, hoping by her means (through the help he should employ in her
service) to obtain his Mistress favor. The Princess Aurora sitting by him,
demanded how he felt himself of his dangerous wounds. Well, (dear Lady,
replied he) that seeing I am in such company, there is no cause to demand of
me that, for if that fortune should lend her force to my harm, her power is so
weakened hereby that she cannot. I gladly ^^y therein (answered she) and yet
you are not content to have hitherto yielded no satisfaction for your cure, but
that you will with words jest at us. Then were it good we require it (said
Persiana) least he think to pay us with conceyts. I can not satisfy you
(replied the Prince) according to your merits, or the great favor I have
received: for if I could, you should not keep me in prison for it, as you do.
What prison, (said they?) if the Sultan would set you at liberty, you should
not be stayed by us. If I could so soon free my self of that jail, I mean,
(replied Don Bellianis) as I can of this the Soldanes, the grief I sustain
should not thus torment me. Let us leave this talk (said the Princess) for
the time will come, that you shall be free of all your prisons, and these
Ladies also satisfied to their content: wherein if you shall disagree, I as
vmpere will moderate the strife between you, though I now it will not be
requisite. But to the purpose, I will tell you the effect of my coming. You
already know, how the Sultan (having been entreated, and importuned about it)
has always refused to grant you liberty with the Duke Alfiron, denying it
also to the Kings of Armenia and Tessifantie, that greatly labored your
delivery. And the last answer he gave them, was, they should no more
immortune him therein, for if they did, it should not a little disadauntage
them, that if they became of your faction, he would also apprehend them, as
traitors to his state, and person. New they have determined to end this matter
one way or other forthwith, because the venturous knight, may not stay within
the City, being commanded to the contrary by the Sultan, who knows no
otherwise, but that he is come, yet will not they conclude any thing without
your advise. What power have they said Don Bellianis:) They have (replied she)
eight thousand men well appointed, and here they gave me your sword to bring
you, which I did as secretly as I could, tying it under my gown, and so gave
it him. Don Bellianis took it, and more rejoiced therewith, then if he had
been presented with a kingdom. The Damzells greatly wondered to see the great
riches thereof, which was invaluable.

Tell those knights (most excellent Princess) that six days hence, they
prepare and have then in readiness, al their men, and that in the evening they
suddenly assault the Soldans palace, and procuring naught else but the
liberty of the Duke Alsiron: and in any case they take with them, the
Princess Persiana, for it must needs be so, and you (dear Lady) shall take
your leave of the Sultan, saying you will depart hence, seeing he will not
let me go, and stay for us in the first Uillage that we must pass, being
thither directed by some of the Dukes folks, which otherwise would greatly let
us, and I will send these Ladies to accompany you, least we loose them in this
attempt, and so herein let them not fail: and as for me, let the Prince
Arfileo, Don Bryanell, and the knights, take no care, for so soon as they
shall assault the Palace, I will be with them. You say well (replied the
Princess) and if it please you, I will aduertyse the Princess Persiana
thereof, that against the time she prepare her self, and not hyde her at the
noise. It will not be amiss (said Don Bellianis where^ppon the Princess
Aurora, after she had been there a while, departed, leaving Don Bellianis in
his that wish the Damzells, and she her self went straight to the Princess
Persiana, to advise her of that which had been determined, which ^^ was highly
contented her, that she thought she was not able to distimble it: in which
content, the Princess Aurora left her, and w^nt to the Lords of the faction,
with them partaking of the knight of the golden Images determination, which
greatly pleased them. The kings advertised the Soldiers, how they would set
the Duke Alfiron at liberty, seeing the Sultan refused to do it, which they
ought to do, being his subjects, and true hearted friends. Whereunto they
yielded, making account, that as in that hurley-burley they should sack the
Soldans Palace, so they might also utterly subvert the City, putting it to
spoil and pillage.

Which made them think every hour, a month, till they met with the Soldans
power, to be revenged on him for all his iniueies done them, and for the
breach of his word. Many in mean time solicited the Sultan to quietness, but
nothing would prevail with him, determining to put the Duke to death, which if
he did not, was, for that he expected the daily coming of the Prince
Perianeo his son, with whose presence, he feared not the whole power of the
whole united power universe, thinking then more safely to effect his will. Thus
were five of the six days paste, that Don Bellianis had appointed, wherein
he was up, and walked about, and in a manner well, and able to bear armor,
who seeing the determinate time approached, sent the Damzels to accompany the
Princess Aurora, who seeing it to be requisite, did accordingly: telling the
Sophy, that the knight of the golden Image was well, and not needed more their
help. He requested them to remain in ye Palace, til they minded to depart.
They thanked him: for that courtesy, answering they would go attend the
pleasure of the Princess Aurora, whom they found with all her Ladies, in
readiness to depart, and was coming to take her leave of the Sultan, but ere
they went, the Ladies were furnished with good palfrayes, who returned to the
Sultan with the Princess, that being before him, thus began. Great is the
wrong (most mighty Lord) which in thy Land thou haste offered me, giving me
cause to complain abroad of thy discourteous entertainment, having against
all right and kingly justice, imprisoned the knight of the golden Image, that
accompanied me, and to bannish from thy territories, so brave a man as the
aduenturous knight, with what else thou know. Wherefore seeing within thy
house, court, and Palace, these injuries I received, I have determined to
return unto the King my Father, though grieved to the heart, through want of
the best company that ever Lady had And I do wish, that with mildness you
would cut of the dangers that hereby may ensue, that I fear my heart
denies: which if you will not do at my intreates, every one will repute it to
proceed of your supreme virtues, saluing thereby all things paste.

And remember the blood spilt by the Prince of Phenicia, in the battle, which
(through your ingratitude) will else disparage and scandalize your royal name:
being heretofore reputed for so mighty a king, now to defame and stain thy
spotless state, with the name oftyrannous crueltye, and bloody barbarism. And
so ended, expecting the Soldans answer, who a little stood in suspense,
whether he should set at liberty Don Bellianis or no: but being altogether
blinded with a passionate rage, and selfe-wil, respecting no law, made this
reply.

I know not (fair Princess) why you should thus cholerickly argue against me,
for the thing, that if I did not, weuld ruinate the honor of my vaste Emperie,
and make me little feared of my subjects: so that were it not for this, I
would willingly give you the knight of the golden Image. What committed or
intended offense, can you impute to the Knight of the golden Image (said Don
Arfileo, that did come with her) being none of your subjects? or else do you
think there shall be no other Judge of this matter, but you, which with your
unjust, and blind passion, will but badly be determinated.

Great is your pride Prince of Rasia, (replied the Sultan) to presume to give
me counsel, that need it not. I command you to speak no more hereof, and
straight get you out of my Empire, doing me all the harm you can, for I
nothing esteem you, nor the greatness of your kingdoms, whereo you and your
companions so much vaunt of.

Arfileo became so full of choler, that he would have replied according to
those speeches, but the Princess stayed and required him notto do it,
dissembling his anger for that present, for he should have time to be revenged
at full, making him repent every thing he had done: and so took their leaves
of him, expecting the next morrow for their revenge, and for that time, set
forwards on their journey. The chiefest Nobility of the City, with an
infinite number of Knights, accompanied the Princess Aurora, till they brought
her to a little Uillage six miles from the City, where leaving her, they all
returned back.

Arfileo seeming to go with the Princess, returned also so soon as it was
night, the better to pass unknown, where he ordered what should be done the
evening following, commanding all their men, to go to the King of Armenias
Palace, from whence they might the better march. The Prince Don Bellianis not
forgetting what he had to do, expected the appointed hour, very attentively,
as one that should pass through the Gates of death, wanting his good armor.
The Sultan on the other side, was not without great fear, daring almost to
trust none, that he would in person visit his watch and cintinells. Like a man
that unadvisedly, and without sound counsel, procures with rage and unlawful
means, to effect a vain opinion, as at this present happened to the Sultan of
Siconia, a King most puissant and mighty, of the Persians, whom the overmuch
and arrogant pride of his large Government, and Empire, with so bold and
valiant a son as the Prince Peri^eo, otherwise called the Knight of the
Images, whose equal the world could hardly yield: did make him violate his
royal word (a thing so odious in any Prince) which made him fear and doubt
his safety in his own kingdom and Palace, and among his subjects, and not
be able to punish them.

And also his Daughter, that though at that present she desired not his death,
yet sought she the overthrow of his content, like a mortal and Capital foe.
This now was the state of the Siconian Souldane, and great Emperor of the
Persian Monarchy, who to compass and bring to pass, the foolish and mad
opinion of a vain intent, esteemed not the valor of such great Princes, and
hardy knights. Wherefore if he escaped with his life, in recompense of his
ingratitudes, he may account it no little good. But leaving this, we will
return to our former purpose, as in the Chapter following shall be declared.

CHAP. VI.
The brave and dangerous battle fought in Persepolis, between the Princes and
knights, with the Soldans power, about the liberty of the Duke Alfiron, with
the whole success thereof.

AS soon as the bright splendour of heavens, al^persing eye had ended his
diarnal course about the compass of the orbed earth, some heart* impouerisht
Knights through dismaying fear, and pale timorous cowardice, dispaired, (as
in such cases, often happens) of their sure success, whilst the Princes Don
Brianell and Arfileo, accompanied with the kings of Armenia and Tessifanty,
commanded all their knights to mount on their horses, expecting farther order.
Don Brianell caused Don Bellianis Dwarffes to convey his Armor, where the
Princess Aurora stayed. And charging all their troops upon their assault to
cry alloude, Phenicia, Phenicia, they issued forth as closely as they could.
And for that all the city was up in arms that day, there was no regard taken
of them, thinking they went to guard the palace, whither being come, and
finding the guard aforesaid, they began crying, Phenicia, (...) assa^lt them
with such fury, that they v^horsed above two thousand at the first encounter.
But they perceiving the dece^^, gathered themselves together in such sort, that
the ^ight on both parties, wa^ed most bloody, with the death of an infinite
number of men: though through the nights obscurity it could not be disc^rned,
ye^ by these cries, knew they one an other: for the Souldanes men had their
watchwords among them, whereby the battle still continued very fiecce,
defendi^^ so courageously the entry, that for all Don Brianell and Arfileo
performed woonders, yet their men could win no advantage: whereupon they
determined to alight on f^^te, to do it more easily, when suddenly there was
brought so many lights, that one might well know the other. The Prince Don
Bellianis no sooner heard the outcryes, but casting his mantle about his arm,
drew his sword, and descended the stayres, but ^re he was at the foot of them,
the guarde beset him, especially the Captain, that would have given him a
dangerous blow, on the head, to have cl^aued it in twain, had not he taken
it upon his sword, wherewith he cut his leg in two, but ^re he fell on the
ground ( Don Bellianis defending himself of the other knights blows) drew the
Captain to him by the sheelde, that he took it from him, and stepping back,
buckled it about his arm, and with them, he began so brave and so ^ruell a
fight, as if as great a number were with him, but the place being somewhat
narrow, he took all their blows upon his sword and sheelde, his being so
deadly, that in little time he had thrown down dead above thirty knights:
whose huge and monstrous wounds would make any afraid to see them, and so
oppressed the others, that their clamor and out^ryes seemed to ^uerwhelme the
Palace.

The Knights being with the fear of death dismayed, and not able to abide the
f^ri^ of the knight of the Golden Image, turned their backs and fled.

Don Bellianis letting them go, armed himself with one of the dead knights
Armor, and not longer staying, entered the palace, wherein, in the great hall,
he espied the Souldane at the light of torches that were there, who with a
troop of chosen knights was going to succor the palace, which he heard was
assaulted by the Prince of Phenicia, for so they thought by their adversaries
clamours. Whom seeing, he conceived such rage against him, that aloude he
said. I have thee now in time false Souldane of Persia, violater of thy royal
faith and word, that thou shall see how little thou shall get by my
imprisonment, for know I am the knight of the Golden Image: who is able to set
down the extreme fear that surprised the Souldane at those words, judging
himself at that instant utterly destroyed.

The Knights put themselves before the Souldane to defend him, which Don
Bellianis seeing, redoubled his rage, and maugre their force, set so furiously
upon them, that as a wolf among a troop of sheep, he beat them down
together, who not able to resist him, made him large way to pass by them,
which he did to revenge himself at full on the S^uldane. Who seeing him so
determinate come against him, retired to a window, falling over a garden,
through which for his best sauegarde, he cast himself down, that according to
the fall, it was a great wonder, he beat not out his brains. Yet, it bruised
all his body, and dis^oynted both arms and legs: the like befell to above
thirty Knights, following him, flying from the knight, as from the touch of a
very death-stinging Basiliske.

The Prince Don Bellianis would have done so, such was his hate against the
Souldane, but determined first, to end the battle, thinking afterward, to
have some time to execute his will, and so turning to the knights, saw them
run headlong out of the Palace, and thrusting himself in among them, found
his companions, that had forced the Soldans me^ to retire back to the
stayres, which they defended like them that expected the fearful stroke of
death: so that Don Bellianis assayling them at their backs, made such
desolation of them, that they thought so great a number behind as before,
which so bereft them of their senses, that how to resolve they knew, till the
death gining wound, piearst their daunted hearts, that most of them rested
wounded and dead. The Dukes soldiers seeing this, began to sack and rob the
palace: the ransaking of whose treasury, was their cheifest hope of gains.

Don Bellianis and Arfileo in the mean time rusht into the Princess
Persianaes Chamber, who before her, seemed very grieved, and being by the
Prince seen, he aloude said. It behooues thee Pri^cesse Persiana, to go with
me, in recompense of the wro^gs, and imprisonment your father put me in,
against law and justice, and thereupon took her betwixt his arms, and some
other knights did so, by two or three of her ladies: whose lamentable shrikes
made the Palace echo with the noise. And so carrying them, were met by the
aduenturous Knight, that was coming for her, having set at liberty the Duke
that came with him, who with such great admiration and exceeding joy to see
his Lady, had almost fowned to the ground.

Thereupon Don Bellianis commanded the Trumpets to sound the retrait, to
withdraw the soldiers, and n^eeting with the Kings of Armenia and Fe^^ifanty
led them to their own quarters, which they could hardly do, being so given to
the spoil. But being united together, don Bellianis charged the Dukes
Captains to conduct their men to their masters City, that was in the
Kingdom of Persia, which they did with great have, seeing their enterprise so
happ^ly succeeded, and also because there was above 40. thousand men armed
there. And themselves having no guides, stayed within ye city, til ye morrow,
least they should loose themselves in the night. But the dukes men kept on their
way so well, that at the appearing of the Sun, they were hard by the place,
where the day before they left the Princess Aurora, whither also came the
Princes, and there they all alighted to rest them, where the Princess Aurora
welcomed them with the duke Al^iron, whose gladness was as great as his
sorrow had been before, rendering together with the other Princess innumerable
thanks unto the two Kings for their aid, promising and confirming an
euerla^^ing in^iolable bond of amity, ^that lasted all their lives, as the
course of this great History amply dilat^th. And not staying in this place,
departed thence, where we leave them, to set down what the Soldane did.

CHAP. IIII.
What the Soldane did, having understood his daughters loss: And how Coroliano
and Boraldo his brother, followed the Dukes power, with great troops, with the
success of a most cruel battle that passed between them.

WHat tongue is able to express the many and loud laments, and lamentable
cries made in the Palace, by the popularitie and others, which also the Ladies
and damoselles with their great clamours augmented, for the loss of the
Princess Persiana. Now the Knights that escaped the deadly fury of the lost
battle, seeing their adversaries gone, went to seek the Sultan, whom they
found in the Garden, as before is mentioned, they took him and did bear him
thence to his Chamber, and laid him in his bed, and hearing the pittious
shreekes of the damsels, enquired the cause, which was told him to be, for
that their adversaries had taken with them the Princess Persiana his daughter,
and had set at liberty the Duke Alfiron, and all that more he had not seen:
which when he knew, the extreme anguish and sorrow of these evils, almost
bereft him of his living breath. But thereupon he called a cousin of his, a
lusty and courageous Knight called Coroliano, and commanded him to follow the
enemy wi^h all the people in the City, to rescue his stolen Daughter, and that
he should spare no man's life that fell into his hands: Which he uttered with
such ^^raged greet, that the ^eares tri^kled down his face. Coroliano did all
like the man accuston^^d in such dangers, assuring himself ^o be au^nged on
their foes, for all their losses: Wherefore at his command the city straight
^^cho^d with the sound of all manner of millitarie instruments, and all that
were able to bear arms, armed themselves, and w^nt to the palace, so that in
little time there were gathered above 40. th^usand men, which in all haste he
l^d ^ut of Per^^p^lis, keeping no order i^ their march* yt their enemies might
not get far before them, who then were above 15. miles a^ore. In this manner
they went till they came to a City belonging to the Souldane, where they that
night rested, and understanding there how the enemy determined to dyne the
next morrow at Bolle^a, thought if he stayed, he should not overtake them as
he would. Wherefore about midnight he set forwards with all his men, making
such haste, that by br^ake of day he espied them, des^^n^ing a hill in good
order, which much ioyed him, that he presently commanded his Tr^^pets to
s^^^de: which Don ^ellianis hearing, looked back, and saw so ^^any men make
toward them, that they covered the plain: it s^mewhat troubled him, wanting
means to guarde the Princess* Yet with as much c^l^ritie as the time
af^oorded, he wheeled his companies about, setting the Princess at one side
of the mountain, guarded with five hundred knights: and seeing his men began
to ^aint with the sight of such multitudes, he encouraged them, repraying and
^^treating them to, consider that those troops were of little moment, and
less valo^r, coming half vanquished, being only led by the eager^^sse of
r^^^nge, for the late slaughter was made of them, which like blind men brought
them to their vtt^r destruction. This sai^^, he took with him the adu^nterous
Knight, the Prince Arfileo, the two knights and the Duke, and placing
themselves before their men, expected their adversaries.

Coroliano being descended on the plain, divided his Soldiers in two
Squadrons, the one he committed to his Brother Boraldo, and the other he led
himself, and imagining what they had done, he command^d two thousand chosen
knights, to assault the corner of the mount, certainly supposing that the
Princess Persiana was there, and so with great clamours they furiously ran
upon the Dukes men, who with their valiant guides were to receive them, and
so terrible were their incounters on that plain, that above four thousand of
Corolianos knights were unhorsed, by reason that their horses were weary and
tired, with the haste they had made, that they could scant hold out thitherto.
Don Bellianis, and his companions on their side, ouerthrewe above sixty to the
ground dead: and thrusting themselves among their enemies, that they seemed so
many furies sent for their utter desolation. But the adverse numbers were so
many, that the dead nothing discouraged the living, especially for that
Coroliano so animated them, that it may be be said, he only vpheld the
battle. Which Arfileo seeing, took a Lance from one of his company, and
made against him, Coroliano did the like, and met so furiously, that their
sheeldes and Armor were piersed, and themselves rested on horseback, sorely
wounded, then drawing their strong swords, forced each other at every blow to
bow^ their heads to the Saddle pummell.

While they were thus in fight, Don Bellianis men through his strength, (and
their enemies having no other Captain but the other) began to win some
ground, with such slaughter of both sides, that neither part might well boast
of the victory in the end. Which thing, when Boraldo perceived, would no
longer stay nor expect any word from his Brother, but like an arrowe sent
from a steeled bow* makes his swift way through their airie passage, so he
with his fresh Battalion, set against his adversaries, and looking on whom h^
might with most honor break his Lance, esp^^^ the King of Armenia, that with
devilish rage ^^a^sacred his me^, against whom resting his spear, ouerturned
him there with, doing the like to the King of Tessifantie* on whom he brake his
spear. Whereat with a loud voice, he encouraged his fainting soldiers,
commanding them to spare none of their lives, that had committed such
rebellious treason. And so passing along he met the Duke Alfiron, who
discharged upon one another the fury of their cutting swords, that Boraldo
received a little wound on the head, and the Duke fell in a trance, and had
fallen had he not held by his Horses neck. Boraldo not staying there, passed
forwards, proud of the blow that he gave. At this time the Soldanes men
recovered, and began to win much ground, insomuch that Don Bellianis, nor the
aduenterous Knight, being not able with their valor to stay their men, they
began to retire back: which when the Knight of the golden Image saw, like a
chased Lion wanting his pray, he thrust himself among the thickest of his
adversaries, that unhappy was he whom his blewes reached: in such manner
beating and overthrowing Knights with their Horses, that his Armor was all
covered, and his sword reeked with blood, which forced every one to fly his
fury, as does the fearful Partridge fly from the deadly pursuit of a towering
Fawlkon. For there was no Knight that he met, how valiant soever, but with one
blow he struck down from his Horse* And passing thus along where Arfileo and
Coroliano were fiercely in ^ight t^gither, both which had such piteous wounds,
that it moved the Prince to compassion.

Here then arrived Boraldo, and seeing his brother in such case, and to have
the worst, raised himself in his ^^yrr^pes, and (unable to be r^sisted by Don
Bellianis, that in great have pri^ked toward him) gave him so mighty a blow
backwards on the head, that cutting his Helm, it made a grievous wound, and
had like to have fallen, having altogether l^st his s^nces. Which so enraged
the heart of Don Bellianis, that very blood seemed to run down his eyes, to
see him so used in his presence. And in this fury he struck at Coroliano (that
was discharging another blow on Arfileo) which fell with such huge strength,
that lighting on his shield, it divided it in two, and the s^^ord descending on
the Horses neck, it also cut it off, falling on the earth with Coroliano and
his Horse. But Boraldo at this instant wounded Don Bellianis on the one side,
that pear^ing his Armor, it pitteously opened his flesh, and so swiftly
redoubled another on his Helm, that it cut all his buckles, leaving his head
disarmed. Never was there any Basiliske more environed, nor Lion more eager of
his pray, then Don Bellianis was now burning in fury of revenge. And turning
upon Boraldo, with one blow tumbled his shield in two, together with
himself sore wounded to the ground. Coroliano that by this had risen, knowing
him by his Armor to be the haughty Knight of the golden Image, on whose
ouerthr^w consisted the good success of his enterprise, thrust his Horse into
the belly, that he fell dead with his master on his back. Which Don Bellianis
seeing, leapt from him with great celeritie, which he had scant done, but he
was as^aulted by above 2000. Knights that came to aid Coroliano, yet this
help little helped him, for Don Bellianis struck him out of his senses, and
looking ^or Arfilio, saw him in great danger, fighting with Boraldo, in whose
behalf, many there arriu^d, but he joining with his cousin (having laced his
Helm) wounded so furiously on all sides, that they had encompassed themselves
with carcasses of ^laughtred men. Yet for all this, they were so oppressed with
fresh multitudes, that by no means they could mount on hors^ack, which Don
Bellianis perceiving, doubling his anger, laid about him, that in* despite of
them, he mounted on a Horse, on which he somewhat easier labored in the fight,
till Arfilio had done the like, where with they brake their passage through the
thickest of them, who also mounted Boraldo, that was sorely wounded, and
carried Coroliano out of battle, which grew more cruel then all the* day
before* Don Bellianis by mere forced valor, making his way through the sharp
printed spears, and swords, came where the kings of Armenia and Tessifantie
were on foot, and like to be taken prisoners, and had they been known, they
had there lost their lives: who by his arryuall, got freshlie mountings, and
together renewed the fight more fiercer then at first. The battle being at
this stay, the 2000. Knights that Coroliano had sent, assaulted the corner of
the hill, where the Princes were. But the 500. Knights, which were the
valiantest of the Dukes whole troops, left not their charge, but in their
places began so fierce a skirmidge, that many fell down dead on both sides.
But the Soldans men being many more in number, brake through them, spoiling
their order: whereat the two Ladies, the Princess Persiana and Aurora, seemed
more dead then alive. But at this time, from the other side of the valley,
there appeared the number of 4000. Knights well appointed, which made toward
that place: from whence there was a knight sent to know on whose behalf they
came, who a far of discerned him to be the courageous Prince Don Contumeliano
of Phenicia, whose armor they very well knew, (as is said:) Which greatly
grieved the Soldans men, judging, that of necessity he would be against
them, and on the contrary, the Duke Alfirons troops were very glad thereof,
whose approach revived the sorrowful Ladies. And the Duke aloude cried,
courage, courage, brave Knights, and animate your fainting forces, against your
feare-frighted adversaries, for the admired honor of time-wondering Chivalry,
comes in your aid. Which he nothing missaide, for in the whole Camp, there
was none that excelled him, except him that in disguised habit, had subiugated
his heart, with great courtesy and bounty, which is the true honor of all
brave knights. He now being come to the dangerous skirmidge, bravely
ouerthrewe a Knight, and drawing him aparte, informed himself by him, of all
that he desired to know, and turning to his followers, that were all subicts
unto the Duke Alfiron, of whom at Don Contumeliano* command, a great multitude
had before gone to Persepolis, from Bollera, to aid the Duke, if their help
he should need, who having here met the 4000. aforesaid, united themselves
together, so bravely assaulting them that in the corner of the Hill were
fighting, that not daring longer to stay, turned their backs, and fled toward
their other company, where the furious battle still continued, entering by
that side where Don Bellianis, was killing his horse under him, and he bruzed
with the great fall, rose up in extreme danger of his life, for me^ began to
give back, which forced him with mere strength and sole labor of his valor,
to withstand the adversaries fury, laying on all sides to get a horse.

But his enemies seeing him to be their only destruction, rusht in multitudes
upon him, no more fearing his death-giuing-sword, then if he had that day hurt
none. Whereby though many dyed by him, yet was he sorelie wounded, both with
swords and lances, for though they were not great by reason of his good
armor, yet through diverse places there issued infinite blood.

But his adversaries eager of revenge, procured naught but his death, in so
much that they would often close their eyes and fall upon him, because they
would not see his strokes, and had not he leapt sometimes here, and sometimes
there, some one would have got him fast, which if they did, he greatly
hazarded his life.

Yet could he not so defend himself, but that at last some 50. of them
despising death, fell upon him together, laying fast hold on his arms, wherein
it behooued him to use his strength, only to get from them, kicking and
spurning with his feet, that in the end he fell down with above half of
them upon him, and seeing himself in such danger, having there received
above ten wounds, suddenly stepped away, rising on his feet on the other
side, bestowing deablie wounds on all sides, that here arose such great and
mighty clamours and outcries, that the rest of the battle was nothing to this
fight, encouraging one another only to kill that Knight, on whose death
depended their victory.

In this season arrived here the Prince of Phenicia, with his company that came
in pursuit of those that fled, and hearing there that great noise, so bravely
set upon them, that they unhorsed above 2000. Knights: with which fury, this
Prince pressed through them, till he came where the Knight of the golden Image
was, whom he knew (though he never saw him) by the devise of his shield, and
seeing him do such wonders, said to himself, that not without cause he enjoyed
the name, and deserved to be called the sole-worthie of admyred Chivalry: and
being about to alight to give his Horse unto Don Bellianis, the mighty
Boraldo, came thither, to succor his men that here lost their gotten vantage,
which they did not on the otherside, because he valiantly had withstood the
force of the Princes Don Brianell, and Arfileo. And espying that Knight,
straight know him by his Armor, thinking him to be he that had slain the King
of Cyprus, and fearing his force, durst not like a good Knight confront him
face to face, supposing that in a battle any thing was tolerable, raised
himself on his stirropes, and with his hand behind his back, gave his so huge
a blow, that it made him bend his head lower then his Horses ears. Which Don
Bellianis perceiving, having known ye Prince, and thinking he would have
fallen from his Horse, ran to help him. But the Prince Don Contumelian
losing no whit of his high valor, at such blows returned upon him, with his
sword hoysted aloft, determining at that blow to part his head in two. The
other with like intent came also upon him, and at one instant discharged their
rage on each other, that Contumeliano was like to fall. But Boraldo lost his
senses. The Prince seconded another, that therewith he tumbled from his Horse,
and alighting to cut off his head, unlaced his Helm, and found it in such
case, that he judging him dead, let him lie, though it had been better for him,
there to have made him sure, then for his after harm to give him his life, as
this History discourses. And going to the Knight of the golden Image, with
great courtesy thus said. Mount upon this my Horse (most hautie Knight,
usurper of another heart) and follow the victory ordained by the Gods, to all
your happy and glorious acts.

The Knight of the golden Image replied. Leave not your Horse form, (high and
renowned Prince) for though I in this battle do miscarry, there is nothing
lost in respect of your royal person, how much the more that this knights
horse whom you have slain, suffiseth me. And so mounting on Beraldos horse,
the Phenician Prince did the like upon his own, together so ouerturned the
fury of the fight, that through want of an infinite number of the Soldans men,
his Captains began to yield the field. Which their adversaries seeing, so
hotely renewed their decaying forces, that their enemies were constrained to
save their lives, by giving the rained liberty to their horses, in which
flight, being bravely pursued, there was an innumerable number slain, that
after the fight, it was found, ethat of the Souldans men were slain above 25.
thousand. With not above two thousand loss on the Dukes behalf. Which good
success, being by those Kings and Princes woorthily attained, every one with
immortal praises thanked him: to whom their devotion was most (being in that
whole Camp, but only three Christian Knights.) This done, they went to meet
the Princesses that were coming to them: Between whom, their courteous
greetings and kind salutes, were such, as if they never before had seen one
another.

Every one greatly honored the Princess Contumeliano, some for his aid in
that great danger newly past, the others (that knew no otherwise) not only for
the same thanked him, but also for the overthrow he had given the fearful
Feliston, King of Cyprus.

At which time arrived the Duke Alfiron, who seeing the Phenician Prince, would
have alighted, being sorely wounded, but he would by no means suffer it. Give
me your royal white hands (most excellent Prince) that I may kiss them (said
the Duke) in token that I twice have received my despised life by your means.
Don Contumelian seeing the Dukes error, would not longer seem to rob the
glory from the Uictor, by ioying in another honor, contenting himself with
that he had won in that battle, and the obtaining of such friends, replied.
I will not (Magnanimious Duke, and you heroike Knights) suffer your error no
farther to proceed, nor longer usurp the honor of so high a victory, from
him that vindeth all wandering Knights in the orbed earth to his fury, and
seeing there is now no danger in discovering it, know (great Lords) that he
which has won the immortal glory of the victory, is your friend, and Lord
of us all, the never inogh praised, the Knight of the golden Image, to whom by
a strange adventure I lent my Armor, wherewith he undertook the fight,
wherein befell all that you saw, and dylated the manner how he found him, and
in what habit, concealing nothing but what happened after the fight. Which heard
of the Duke, Kings, Princes, and the Knights there present, they highly wondered
at his discourse: whereto the Duke thus said. Now am I not (renowned Prince) so
much indebted as I thought, for having given all my self unto the Knight of
the golden Image, he does in taking care for my matters, busy himself in his
own, whereby my duty can be no greater then it was before.

You have nothing so much cause (said Don Brianell) to thank him, for what he
did in that battle, having therein as great a part as your self, or else had
he not been there present, very ill should we have defended his honor.
Whereupon they newly embraced Don Bellianis, saying he had not done well in
not disclosing himself to them, that they might with more confidence have
used their Arms in that battle.

Speak no more of this (said Don Bellianis) for it is evident, if any honor I
have, or any thing performed therein, it only proceeds from you. Wherefore it
is I that am only bound to you all.

Marry if that were so (replied Don Brianell) I had there lost my life, being
unable to defend it. The Prince Arfileo, and the Princesses, disturbed this
conference, coming to greet Don Bellianis, where they renewed their thanks.
Which done (their men having ransackt their enemies camp) the two Kings, the
Princesses, Don Bellianis, with the Prince Arfileo, the Phenician Prince, and
the venterous Knight, directed their way toward Bollera, by the same
discoursing of many things. Don Bellianis being of opinion they should return
and sack Persepolis, which they might easily have don, being left without any
Garrison.

But the Princess Persiana, with the other Princes, put himself from it,
alleging their men to be weak, and weary of their last travel. And so at
last arrived in the City, where well ordering their troops, and other
business, went to the Dukes Palace to repose themselves, where their wounds
were dressed.

The Prince Don Contumeliano, lodged with Don Bellianis, at his entreaty, who
greatly ioyed with his company, being a Knight of pleasant discourse. Where we
leave them, till we have set down what the Souldans men did, after they were
overthrown and put to flight.

CHAP. XXXI.
What the Souldanes men did after the battle: And how they carried news of
their discomfiture to the Souldan.

THe battle being ended in manner aforesaid, part of the Soldans men I suruiued,
took their way to Persepolis, and hid themselves in the woods, and some that
were more hardy, closely mingled themselves with their adversaries, having
left behind them those things that might discover them, who heard Don Contume
lianos discourse, how the Knight of the golden Image was he that had slain the
fearful King of Cyprus.

These Knights having closely hid themselves, expected the dark nights
approach, and the closest that they might, departed thence, having not entered
into the City, and by the pale reflect of the shining Moon, looking about the
field for the bodies of Coroliano and Boraldo, to carry them to Persepolis, did
at last find them. Coroliano being in perfect sense, but Beraldo yet lay in
his trance, being piteously wounded, and extreme faint, with the loss of
much more blood then his brother: and setting them on horseback, with two
Knights behind to guide them, came the next day to Persepolis, where
incomparable was the lamentable grief, generally of all, all participating of
the present loss, and certainly according to their grieved clamours, and
languishing cries, their adversaries (had they come upon them) might easily
have taken and sacked the City, for being overwhelmed in bloody tears
breaking from their hearts, that they knew not one another.

But above all the rest, the distressed Souldane of Persia, with madding rage
renting his clothes, tearing the ancient hairs off his grave beard, and
blaspheming and defying his Gods, with hideous shrikes cried out. Oh unhappy
Souldane of Persia, Is it possible the Gods should honor thee with so large
an Empire, to disgrace thy glory with this shame, and that thou ar^ not able
to revenge thee on thy rebellious subject, that has slain thy son in law,
and in despite of thee stolen thy only daughter.

But thrice happy are you Coroliano and Boraldo, that have in defense of your
dear Prince and Country, wrastled with all conquering death, leaving your
lives for an immortal trophy of your true loyalty. And unhappy am I, that is
not able to die, when and where my fame and glory is drowned in the lasting
Center of black oblivion. But let Fortune do her worst, as she already has
in times past. For I vow by the immortal Gods, never to cease till I have put
to utter desolation he and his accomplices, that has been cause of al these my
evils.

Thus as he was most bitterly raging and er^layming against his cruel hate,
there entered the hall gate the horses, that as (it is said) brought his
Cousens, who (though piteously wounded as may be believed) spoke unto the
Souldane, that somewhat comforted himself, to see them not altogether dead,
and commanded them to be laid in a bed, in his own Chamber, where they were
cured. And the other knight beginning to discrye their overthrow, said: that
having almost utterly defeated their enemies, there arrived the Prince
Contumeliano of Phenicia with four thousand men, with whom after a bloody
conflict, we rested thus vanquished, and defeated, Oh me, disgraced that I am
(said the Souldane) and was that devilish Knight there, that slew the mighty
King of Cyptus? I do not now think much of your defeature, seeing he and the
knight of the Golden Image were against you, yet I assure you I rejoice to
know they are both there, that our revenge may be greater. We have been
greatly deceived herein, dread sovereign (said the knights for that Knight
that deprived the King of Cyprus of his life, is not the Prince of Phenicia,
b^t is the invincible Knight of the Golden Image, that only for the same
effect came forth of prison, disguised in habit of one of his Damzels, and
repeated all Contumeliano^ report. Is it possible (Oh immortal Gods) that such
a thing should be, which I yet dare not believe, and surely there was not in
the world a man blynder to know him then I. For seeing him so wounded, and
bleeding through his armor, should have imagined, it could be none but he. But
tell me what is Don Contumeliano? Which should be no bad knight, seeing the
knight of the Golden Image took his name and Arms? One of the valiantest
knights in that whole Camp, is that Prince (said they) for at two blows did
he bring your Cousin Boraldo to this pass you see, with many other worthy
deeds that in the battle he performed.

These news much discomforted the Souldane, in which state he continued eight
days, till he was altogether well of his fall, in which time, he heard by
report of many Knights, of the adventure that was not far from the City. Who
greatly desiring to see, went thither, accompanied with many Knights. Where
being come, and reading the Letters of the Pillar, diverse would prove it, but
in a little space, as many as did, were overcome, and yet could see no body.

I have many years ago heard of this adventure (said the Souldan) and how it
was here, and I know that in the Souldan my graund-fathers time, many ancient
Knights proved it. And so from that time it was published abroad, that many
wandering knights from diverse places, came to prove themselves in it.

The Souldane after this returned to the City, and caused his command to be
proclaimed throughout his large Empire, that every one able to bear Arms,
should within two months be at Persepolis. Whereby he began to order the
mightiest and strongest Army by land, that until that time was ever seen in
those parts. For within one month, there were arrided in that City above
three hundredth thousand valiant horsemen, and well appointed. The Souldane sent
to many places, as well abroad as at home, to seek for his son, the Prince
Perianeo, to lead those troops against his adversaries: with whose coming,
he so assured himself to be revenged, as if it were already executed. For he
not only thought to destroy the Duke Alfiron, and the Prince of Phenicia, but
also thought to subvert the kingdom, and King of Rasia, whom he imagined to be
father unto Arfilio, and if those wars happily succeeded, to pass against
the Grecian Emperor, whom he knew to be free of the danger that Don Galaneo
of Antioch, had put him in. So that these imaginations made him longerstaie
then he had purposed, preparing all necessaries for those wars.

CHAP. XXXII.
How don Brianell, required by the Prince don Bellianis, departed toward the
Kingdom of Antioch. How the duke Alfiron married the Princes Persiana, and
what strange things happened in the Iousts unto the Princes Contumeliano,
Arfileo, and Florispiano.

THe Knight (as is said) being within the City of Bollera, made famous by
their being there, were within fifteen days thoroughly whole of their wounds,
though not of that which the amorous Prince don Bellianis had in his heart, for
the love of the bewteous Princess Florisbella, which had so penetrated his
tender breast, that he determined (upon the good success of those affairs)
never to cease till his eyes might enjoy her happy sight, thinking therewith
to mitigate the crueil passions of his tormented heart.

Thus continuing there upon a day, taking apart the Princess Persiana, told
her, that he thought it not amiss, if she desired the accomplishing of her
desires, she should forthwith wed the Duke Alfiron, lest the chaunges of
Fortune might hereafter disturb it, and that the Souldan her father would not
be so cruel, that hearing it would not rejoice to see her married to her
content. She that nothing else desired, said, she would in every thing accord
to his will, derogating in no respect from it. Wherefore thanking her for that
honor, he conferred of it with the Duke, who thereto agreed, appoynting the
nuptials to be solemnized ten days after, which was the time they
celebrated a feast dedicated to their Mahomet.

All the Knights greatly rejoiced at that don Bellianis had done, preparing
themselves very sumpteously against the marriage day, ordering a most stately
Tourney in honor of the nuptials. And in the mean time, hearing of the
Souldanes preparations, and innumerable multitudes, neglected not to demand
the aid of all her friends and Allies.

And the kings sent to their kingdoms, that all their help might there with
speed be united. And so these great enemies being thus nigh one to the other,
were by their spyalls still advertised of eythers doings.

The knight of the Golden Image much grieved to see these delays, because they
hindered and kept him there, from prosecuting his attended journey: dispayring
of hoped joys, wanting the presence of the causer of his grief, which he
somewhat lightened, by daily conuersing with the damsels of his mistress, else
otherwise he hardly could have stayed there all that while, which he beguiled
with pleasant discourses, with those Princes and Ladies, and one day talking
with the Princess Aurora, about her affairs in Antioch, she said to him, it
would not be unnecessary she should write unto the Governor of that
kingdom, placed by the Prince Don Gallaneo, on whom she reposed great trust.

I think it not amiss (answered Don Bellianis) if you suppose it will not
disadvantage you. But who shall carry it, when it is made? I shall want no
knight to do it (replied she) or if I do, one of my Damzels shall undertake
the troublesome toil.

Whereupon Don Bellianis taking pen, yncke and paper, writ the letter, and when
it was done, called the Prince Don Brianell (whom as is said) greatly desired
to be employed in that Princess service, said to him, he should be the
bearer of that letter, being a matter to be trusted on none but he. There is no
reason (my good Lord) said the Princess, that you should undergo such trouble:
having already hitherto taken so much for my sake, you need not now farther
endanger your self in these new, and such seldom seen toiles, having at my
hands received no favor for any. It is no trouble (dear lady said he) which
is vndertake^ in your behalf, especially in ye advancing of your glory: and
therefore I am encouraged straight to depart hence. I gladly would have
accompanied you (replied she) if this present war did not hinder me, where don
Bellianis is also necessarily stayed.

It is better that you remain here (said Don Bellianis) for the Prince Don
Brianell will quickly return with answer. And thus they agreed, that the
next day he should depart, telling those knights that he went about an earnest
matter of his own, which forced him so to leave them, assuring them his
return should be with speed. And so taking his parting leave, the ensuing
morning, he went forwards on his voyage, continuing his daily iourneyes, till
he arrived at Antioch, where there be fell him great adventures, as shall be
set down in his due place. So leaving him, and returning to our former
purpose, the day was at length come, wherein the royal nuptials of the
Princess Persiana, with the Duke Alfiron should be celebrated: against which
time, every one provided themselves, according to their estate, in such
tumultuous times, wherein they daily expected the arrival of their enemies:
for which cause, least they should suddenly be surprised, they kept in armor
above eight thousand men, which they had within the City, besides their camp
they had without the walls, intrencht about the furthest place of the city,
because one should not trouble the other in their salve. Which multitudes were
equally divided in squadrons and battalions, as they were ready to fight some
pitched battle. The day come, the Princess Persiana issued forth (the
contentedst Lady living) she was led by the arm by Don Bellianis, going
all a foot, because they would be the better seen, with a soft pace. When
they were seen by their armed troops, they all showted out aloud, saying. It
is a just thing, that we all spend our dearest lives for the safety of such
Lords, or impall their heads with the imperial Dia^^m, which they so well
deserve, and therewith discharged so many pieces of Ordinance, and sounded so
many Instruments of all sorts, as it seemed the total subversion of the
universal world: in which manner they arrived in the temple, where they were
married: which done, they returned with like triumph to the Palace, where the
Tables being covered, they di^ed the Bride and Bridegroom at one Table, with
the two Kings, and the three Princes, and at another dined many of their
Nobisitie. The dinner done, they daunced according to their manner, while the
knights, maintainers of the iousts entered the lystes. They which that day were
challengers, were the Princes Arsileo, Contumeliano, and a Cosen of his,
thither came a little before, a very valiant and courageous knight, called Don
Florispiano of Su^ui^, whem being greatly loved of the Princes, casily obtained
the breaking of the first lances, and so ordering himself for it, he began
the ioustes, (the Duke, with the Princes, and all his company, being mounted
on their Theater) which he performed so gallantly, that ere he lost any
Stirrope, he unhorsed thirty Knights, all which according to the order of
those iousts, hung up their Sheeldes, with their names, one higher then the
other, as the Knight of the Golden Image judged his deserts, so that many,
only to be counted valiaunter then his follow, though they thought they
could not vanquish the maintayner presented themselves against him, that for
haste to be before one an other, they almost tumbled one upon an other,
calling him no Knight that did not ioust.

At this time there came one to the Duke from the City gate, and said to him
aloude, hew there were arrived four Knights, that craved license to enter,
and try their fortune in the ionsis: for having heard of those festiuals, they
came to joy their triumphs. There is no reason we sheuld fear any said Don
Belhanis,) and therefore let them come, for were they spies they can do little
harm. The Knights having this leave, entered, whese gallant semblance drew upon
themselves all the gazers eyes, three of them were armed in a rose color
armor, garnished with many little Eagles. The devises on their sheelds were
all of one fashion, the one half white with black Eagles, and the other half
black wish white Eagles. The other knight being of a bigger constitution, was
all plated in black armor, and on his Sheelde was portrayted the wheel of
Fortune, with a Knight placed on the top thereof, from whence he seemed
headlong to tumble down, dragged by the hand of death, with this Motto.

Well deserves such a fall,
Becoming deaths cruel thrall:
That does attempt so rashly.
He seemed to be as brave a knight as ^uer was any seen* (except him of the
golden Image) the knight being within the Tilt-yarde, approached where the Duke
Alsiron was, and changing his voice (which the present state of those matters
brged him to) yet that he might be of all heard, said: Which is the valtantest
and chiefest knight in this assembly, whose command the rest obeyes? And yet
by the immortal Gods, I think every one might rather judge, each of you
fitter to command then to be commanded of any. To which words the mighty king
of Armenia replied. Why do you require it sir knight?) whose gallant presence,
and liberal speech, deserves no less part in the domination you speak of,
then in any thing else. And you may declare your mind to any of us here, having
neither more nor less superiority the one then the other, being all equal
in the bond of true amity. If it be so said the knight) I then demand of you
all, to assure me you will let us return as we came, unknown, (the iousts
finished) and that you require of us nothing against our wills. The Duke
Alfiron thus answered. You may ioust when you will (sir knight for the
assurance you demand, we grant it you, although you needed not to request
it* being admitted within our Gates. It is so (replied ^he knight but tell me
n^w, which is here the Duke Alfiron? I am he (answered the duke) but wherefore
ask you for him? I do inquire for him replied the knight) because I thought so
brave a knight as he, and this day married, would have maintained the field
within the lists, against all adventurers, and not sit and behold the falling
of other knights.

These words some what moved the duke, that he was about sharply to answer
him, had not the knight of the golden Image stayed him, who taking the knight
by the hand, derie courteously said. You may sir knight teust when you please,
for I assure you, you shall not want whereon to employ the valor of your
mind, else were it a shame that the Duke should enter the listes on such a
day, having so many good knights at his command. Then shall we see the
bounty of these your knights (replied he in the black armor whereupon I take
my leave, and so went to behold the iousts* All the dukes knights made way,
that the four strangers might ioust, which they seeing, one of the knights of
the Eagles, put himself against Florispiano, who resting his Lance, gave one
another so fierce incounters, that Florispiano lost his stirreps, and had
fallen, but that he held by his horses neck, and his adversary measured his
length on the ground, and straight his sheeld was taken from him, and
demanding his name, he replied he had no other, but the knight of the Eagle.
Don Bellianis commanded it to be set higher then all the rest, which so
angered the black knight, that he would by no means suffer the other two to
ioust: but himself choking with rage, ran against Florispiano, who with the
great encounter tumbled to the ground, bravely shiuering their Lances in
pieces. Whereat the multitude showted out at Florispianoes fall. The black
knight past suriously forwards, and recovered one stirrope he had lost, and
Florispiano was conuaied out of the field, and unarmed, to take the air, for
the closeness of his armor had almost choked him, but quickly recovering
himself, returned to the scaffold, very glad, as if he that day had don
nothing. The prince of Phenicia, setting himself against the black knight, met
both in middle of their course, with such terrible incounters, that the knight
of Fortune (for so was he called in the black armor doubled backwards upon his
horse, loosing both his stirrops, but Contumeliano had fallen, if he had not
valiantly staid himself by his horse neck, which went three or four steps
back, insemuch that every one thought he would have fallen, but giving him
the spurs, made him furiously pass forward. Greatly astonished was all the
beholders, and spe(...)y the knight of the goldeu Image, that demanded of his
company if any of them knew that knight, but none could tell what he was. The
beauteous Persiana calling the knight of the golden Image, said to him softly
that none might hear: you shall know, sir knight, that it is the Prince
Berianeo of Persi^, my brother. Is it possible (said the knight of the golden
Image?) It is replied she for I well know him, not only by his incounters,
but specially by the speeches he used to us: therefore look what you have to
do, for certainly he came with intent to kill our duke Alfiron. He shall not
effect his intent so replied the knight of the golden Image) for so many of us
are here for nothing. And so turning to beheld the ioust, commanded his armor
secretly to be brought him. But in the mean time, Don Contumeliano and the
knight of Fortune, wounded one another with piteous blows, that at last the
Prince of Phenicia fell to the earth from his horse. The knight of Fortune
passed forward, though with mighty trouble, for in all his life, he not
received so strong incounters. At this time the Prince Alfileo ready to burst
with anger, took the biggest lance he could find, and spurred against the
knight of Fortune, that also came against him with incredible furic, that both
brake their Lances in the middle of their shields, so bravely, that only the
handles remained in their hands, making the rest ^he in a thousand shiuers,
higher then the region of the air: the like they did by the second: but at the
third time, burning in choler, that the one could not overthrow the other,
they met with such vehement rigor, staying themselves in their stirrops, and
in such anger incountred, that the prince Arfileo came to the ground over his
horse crupper, receining a monstrous fall: and the knight of Fortune lost both
his stirrops, and with much a do got hold by his horse mane, staying himself
most courageously rather desiring to die, then to fall in that place. The
Prince Arfileo rose, greatly ashamed of his chance before that company.
Straight were all the sheelds of the adventurers taken away, and in their places
were only set those of the three challengers: for so commanded the Knight of
the golden Image, who seeing him of Fortune remained sole maintainer, in great
haste began to arm himself, commanding his horse to be brought him.

CHAP. XXXIII.
The end of the Iousts.

WHile things were thus uncertain, there entered the yard two Knights, both
armed in one kind of white armor, engraven with many Imperial crowns, whose
brave presence highly delighted all the beholders: who coming within the
Tilt-yard, one of them spurred his Courser with such gallantnesse, that
arriving to the scaffold where the Ladies and Princes were, he made his horse
bend both his knees unto the ground, making him pass forward, like to a deadly
bullet shot from a Canons furious month. The other went to the place where the
knight of the golden Image was, and as if he knew him and were joyful of their
meeting, said thus unto him. If you give us leave sir knight) we will try our
fortune with yonder knight that seems to expect the iousts, desiring to save
you the labor of arming your self where we be? I repute it as a high favor
worthy sir replied don Bellianis, besides every one has liberty to ioust,
especially your self, whose courage I doubt not, but will attempt far higher
matters. The knight humbling himself for that courtesy, said. I beseech you
(sir knight) in courtesy to favor me with your sheeld, seeing mine cannot
defend any encounter. It greatly pleases me replied don Bellianis) and in lue
whereof, you shall leave me yours. The knight gave him his, which was pierst in
above ten places, by ye incounters of lances though it was of a most sine
temper^ and taking don Bellianis, went to the knight of Fortune, and thus
began. How shall our fight be (sir knight) for I have always seen the victory
known only by the strength of arms, whereby none may be called vanquished,
but by default of his own valor, which is seldom found in iousting, for often
th^ron do kn^ghts miscarie, through the weakness of their horses, and not of
their force. Belike you crave the combat at my hands, (said the Knight of
Fortune) and not the iousting? You have understood me right (said the knight
of the Crowns) for that is it I seek for. The Knight of Fortune (seeing the
picture on his adversaries sheeld, so highly to resemble another which he had
engraven in his heart, so greatly desired the combatte with him, that he
thought long till he began it,) with a loud voice said. Then (sir Knight) be
our battle as you will, for I am ready for all things. And so taking a strong
Lance from his Page, with a sharp and strong steeled Pike, came out of the
listes, into a broad field thereby: the like did the knight of the Crown. But
while they were thus talking, the other knight of the Crowns, demanded of the
other knights of the Eagles, if they would break their lances with him. They
that nothing else desired, yielded thereto, and so parted one from the other,
beginning the gallantest ioust that in all that day was seen. For the Knights
of the Eagles were of the best within a great way of them, yet both were
overthrown from their horses, for hardly in the world was a better knight
then he of the Crowns, whose seemly bounty was of all much admyred. But at
this time the two heroicke warriors the knights of the Crowns, and of
Fortune, spurred their fiery Coursers against each other, that with their
furious noise, the earth seemed to tremble and shake under them, and met like
the fury of two tempestuous Currents, breaking through the earth, to run
into the devouring Ocean, and on their Sheeldes staying their Lances, pierced
them together, with their armor, and coats of male, both resting wounded on
their breasts. The pieces of their lances mounted higher then the clouds,
themselves meeting with their horses, bodies, sheelds, and helmes, in such
manner, that both horses fell down dead under them, and their masters seemed
but in little better case then they, in such a trance they fell, that every one
judged them dead. Ohimmortall Gods (cried out the valiant knight of the golden
Image) what terrible incounters were these? Dead without doubt are the best
knights this day living, and within himself greatly marvelled to see his
sheeld pierced, which till then could never be penetrated with any Iron. But
this effect work the armor of the brave Knight of Fortune, against which no
enchantment prevailed, being forged by the art of the wise Friston, as
hereafter shall be showen. And being about to descend to see if the Knights
were dead, saw both rise together, who seeing the state wherein they were,
more furious then the furious Tygres of Hireania, came one against the other
with drawn swords in their hands, with whese flising edges they wounded one
another, with the puissant force of their untamed arms, that they forced their
heads oftentimes to touch their knees by bending, and at last to stay their
bodies, set their hands on the ground, and so raising themselves, began the
cruellest combat, and most dangerous fight, whose like the beholders till then
never saw. These Combattants were so enraged against one another, that they
should so resist their cutting blades, which never befell them before. But the
courageous Knight of Fortune, that greatly hastened the end of the fight,
warding a blow of his brave adversary with his sheeld, ran within him, and
gave him such and so great a blow, that he cut his armor, with a piece of his
flesh, from which wound there issued an abundant stream of blood, and quickly
stepping back, thrust at him with his sword, that it pierced all his defensive
arms, making him feel the point, almost a finger within the flesh.

The Knight of the Crowns feeling himself so wounded, and seeing his
adversary so nigh him, would not strike him with his sword, but with one of
his hands got held of his sheelde, and so strongly plucked him thereby, that he
had not time to second any more blows upon him, and letting his sword hang
down, drew his dagger, and therewith gave him two such blows, that
penetrating his harness, they deeply opened his flesh, that any other but he
could no more have fought. The knight of Fortune seeing his enemy so use him,
took his body overthwart in his arms, with such fury, that both had like to
have fallen. The knight of the Crowns did the like, and so strongly pressed
each other, that through diverse places they lost much blood, in which manner
they continued half an hour, never able to overthrow one another: and so
parting asunder, withdrew a while to breathe, but with their fight they could
scarce stand on their feet, yet walked the best they might, because their
wounds might not close with cold blood, least they should not after end their
fight: Who may express the wonder of the gazing multitude to see so fierce a
fight, whose like none ever heard of: and with that the night so suddenly came
upon them, that they could by no means end their Combat. The Princess
Persiana, that very well knew her brother, said to Don Bellianis.

Suffer not (dear sir) that such knights here dye with out cause: for if you
do, the whole world will blame you for us besides that, our royal virtues will
thereby be scandalized with reproach, to my everlasting grief, if it should
happen. Don Bellianis buckled on his Helm, and mounted upon his horse,
accompanied with all those Kings, Princes, and Lords, who showed him as great
honor as in the Emperor his Fathers Court he could not have a greater, and
together they went to the field, in the place where those knights were
fighting, who for all their approach, would presecute their Combatte, calling
for knights to end the same: But the Knight of the Golden Image then stepping
between them, thus began, and said.

These Jousres (renowined knights) were begun only for pleasure, that our
Knights might show their v^lour, and not that any controversy should be
desided in i^ by the uncertain end of so cruel a battle, especially
between two so brave knights.

Wherefore seeing the heroyke virtues of your untamed hearts needs no farther
experience, having amply showed the rare strengths of your strong bodies,
leaving no time for others to do the like since your coming: In the behalf
of this royal company, and knightly presence, and for my own sake I do
entreat you, to be pleased to leave this Combat in the state it is, procuring
on neither side the end thereof: since neither side may tolerate it, giving no
more honor, nor adiudging more praises to the one then to the other. The
knights being as courteous as valiant, adorned with no le^e virtue, and bounty,
the^ courage and fortitude: entreating each other to answer, thinking that he
which first replied, should be less accounted in leaving of the battle: which
neither of them would do, which and so stood, answering never a word: the knight
of the Crowns seeing, requested Don Beiliants to suffer them to ^^^^sh their
work.

I may not do so replied he) and therefore do again entreat you to leave it:
for I should be reputed of little worth, if my entreaties might not so much
preu^^^ with you. The knight of the Crowns requested him to stand a while
aside, till (...) spoken with his adversary, (which Don Belhanis doing the
other thus said to the knight of Fortune. You see sir Knight) what great
discourtesie ^^^s were, to discontent such Knights, therefore let us leave our
battle at this time, as it is, and we will end it thirty daics hence, where
you will. I am content so to do. (answered the Knight of Fortune, and let our
meeting be in the V^^ley of the three tountaines, which is three miles from
this City, where you shall find me only with my Page.

This agreed between both, the knight of Fortune turned to Don Bellianis,
saying: (Remember sir knight) how against our wills, you disturb our tembat,
for this present time, which makes me rest disco^tented of you, You have no
reason to say so (replted Don Bellia^s) for as I have perceived what has been
done, is to your advantage, and if you so think, stay with us, where you shall
have your wounds cured to your content, and after will I answer you as you
will. I may not stay answered the Knight of Fortune) but hereafter w^^ may
meet when all this shall be see^e, and so awayting no other answer, mounted
upon a horse, which don Be^lia^s presented him* and taking his leave, went out
of the way he came And here the Histor^e says, this knight of Fortune, was the
valiant ^rince Per^aneo, who having understood the estate of these affairs,
came with intent to do by the Duke, if he entered in the icusts) what he had
done by Don Gallaneo, but seeing his purpose to sort otherwise, went so out of
the City, causing his knights to bind his wounds: which done, he never
rested (accompanied with them which were his nigh Allies, the one called Don
Fermose^^ of Solsh^^a, the Prince of that Island, and the others, were Brothers,
named Don C^^salaneo, and Don G^amal^s of Th^^ce, till he came to Persepolis.
Where (to be brief) we leave out the great ^oye that the Souldane co^c^iued,
with their arrwall.

That straight many prepared themselves to march forwards, thinking every hour
a year, til they might constent their enemies. And the general ^oy of all was
so great, or the arrival or their Prince, that it very hardly can be ^^to
down.

CHAP. XXXIIII.
How the Knights with the imperial Crowns* were known to be the Emperor Don
Bellaneo, and Fab^^^ of Trebento. And how the Emperor went to the Valley of
the three fountains, to Combat with the Prince Pe^iano, of Persia.

DOn Bellianis rested something malecon^ent, after the departing of the Prince
Pe^ane^, thinking he had made little ac^ount of him, and was d^uers times about
to follow him, but that her membred he was sorely wou ded, and so let him
go, hoping to meet with him ere those w^ts ended, greatly commending his high
valor, remaining greatly satisfied of the manner of his fight, having never
seen any knight that ther^ in more cont^nted him, except the same that with
him combatted, whose admirable courage and supreme excellency he not a little
admyred, and going to him that was going away with his compa^^ons, said. You
shall not so much discontent me (magnanimious knight) as he did that with you
fought: and therefore I earnestly entreat you both to tell me your name, and
to remain with us until your most dangerous wounds be very well cured.

The knowing of my name is need^l^sse, Sir Knight, for I shall not any way be
known, having never wandered these parts. But if this will please you, I will
unlace my helm, upon condition you crave no more at my hands against my will.

While they were thus talking, the Prince Arfileo, Don Contu^n (...),
Florispiano of Sue^^a, and the princess Persiana and Au^ora, with the Duke
Als^on came th^ther, and thinking he would go, entreated them to stay the
curing of their wounds: they humbling themselves for that high favor,
accepted their pr^ffer, and he which wish the Persian Prince had combatted,
took off his H^lm^, which he no sooner did but Don Bellianis and Arfileo knew
him to be the Emperor Bellaneo, their Lord, whose sight so amazed them, that
they thought they saw him in a shadow, and not in substance, and their present
^oy was so great, that it almost made them discover themselves. And the
Emperor seeing them so amazed with ^oy, could no longer stay himself, but
embracing his son, said in the Greek language: What is the thing (^it
Knight) that has so amazed you? Don Bellianis after his duty done, demanded
of him in ye same tongue, what the ^ther Knight was. It is replied the
Emperor) Sabian of T^eb^nto, son unto the Duke of that Country, who came
with me out of Constan^i^^p^e to seek you.

All the rest of those Princes wondered at their acquain^ance, insomuch that the
galla^t Princess Peisiana, going ^^gher them, said with admirable grace. I am
very glad (re^^^med Knights) and we all rest much beholding unto you, that at
our entreaties, you would satisfy our longing d^s^r^e, in manifesting your
old acquaintance, and not conceal your selves in these tumultious broils:
and ^^ right joyful that ye knight of the golden Image, has been conversant
in such good company, especially so much resembling you in favor, and no
l^sse for valiant deeds of haughty Chivalry. The like said many others
besides her: for in deed the Prince Don Bellianis so much favored his Father,
that were they both of one age, hardly might they be distinguished one from the
other. Yet the Emperor Bellan^o was somewhat lower of stature, and bigger set
then he, having his face honored with a large beard, something graye,
representing there with a high Maiesticall gravity, with so pleasing a
countenance, that it excelled all Knights of his age. The Princess Au^ora (as
before is expressed, having seen him in the discovered Cas^^e, when he
combatted against Don Gallaneo of Antioche, nigh Constantinople, knew him
straight, and he her, but seeing how dangerous it might be to discover him,
made as though she knew him not, yet thrusting among the company that talked
about, him and seeing him alone, said that none could hear. I do not doubt but
I shall obtain your Graces pardon (most excellent Lord If I do not show you
that high honor, and royal intertainement, that your Emperious state and
person meriteth, being forced thereto by this times present necessity. The
Emperor more narowlye regarding her, recalled her former sight to his
rememberance, knowing her to be she that had led away his son, and
lovingly embracing her, said.

Greater is my entertainment by your kind words Supreme Lady then any other
effect that might be done by me, being spoken of so absolute a Lady. Then
was Sabian of Trebento very lovingly received of them all, as if he were their
general brother. And so with the noise of infinite musicail, and millitarie
instruments, and an innumerable multituded of, they were conducted to the
Palace, where the Emperor being laid on a most rich bed, and having his
wounds dressed, was left alone to repose his weary body.

And Don Bellianis taking Sabian of Trebento by ye hand, brought him to the
hall, where they were expected by those princes to supper, with such abu^dant
soruice, as every one may imagine: Where Don Bellianis was demanded by all those
Lords, what the Knights were: Who said, they were his nigh Kinsmen, and that
the wounded knight was his Uncle, whose admired valor they all commended.

May we not know (said ye king of Armenia, what ye knight offortune was, that
with him did combatte, be having himself so gallantly therein: We followed him
hither (said Sabian of Frebento) for on a bridge ten miles hence, lousting
with me at the first encounter my horse dyed, and after would by no means
draw his sword, and so my cempanion coming to me, I took my Pages horse,
and both of us followed him, till we heard he was come to the City. But by
the way we understood of a knight, who is son unto ye Sophy of Siconia,
called the Knight of the three Images. Is it possible (said the Duke Alfiron
and certainly I think no less, remembering his words, and had I known it,
the matter had otherwise paste. And I assure you, I nothing wonder at what he
did, or he is the best knight that ever was in these countries, therefore it
behooues us hourly to expect the Soldanes arrival, for ^he expected nothing
but his coming.

In an ill hour may he resolve to come (Flonspiano) for little is the harm
he now can do us. In such talk they a while were in, till it was bed time,
when giving each other the good night, were all lighted to their chambers. Th.
Duke Alfiron, and the Princess Persiana, lay together in a sumptuens bed,
where they set an end to their long tormented Loves, consumating that night to
their great pleasures, though not well content, remembering within what short
time they were to be besieged, with so puissant an Hoaste, as the great Sultan
had assembled in Persepolis.

The valiant Knight of the golden Image, after they were al gone to bed went to
visit the watch and Centinells of the city, as his use was to do cuerie
night, and took with him, the Prince Arfileo, and Sabtan of Trebento, that by
the way told him, how from Constantinople, a great Navy of ships with many
worthy knights besides the Empercur, with whom also came out his brothers,
Don Clarineo of Spain, and Don Lucidomore of Thessalie, being first knighted
by their father, all which companies had taken their way after him, to the
kingdom of Antioche.

But the Empereur and my self landing by the way in an Island, at our return
to the shore found no ship, ^eeing carried away by a sudden storm that
arose, and so we stayed there, ending some adventures, all we departed
thence, and arriving in this country, came to this City in request of the
Knight of Forune. know you not (said Don Bellianis) what became of ye ships,
or were they all sincked in the tempest? We could learn nothing of the^ said
he) but our better hope is, they are not al lost, What number of Soldiers
brought they (demanded Don Bellianis?) They brought replied Sabiano) above two
thousand fighting men, both well appointed, and the cheysest of all the Empire.
In this conference they spent the better two parts of the night, that at length
they returned to the Palace, and went to visit the Emperor, with whem they
stayed till it was morning, never satisfying himself with asking all that had
befallen them in that Kingdom. The Prince Don Bellianis discoursed unto him,
every thing at large, telling him he greatly wondered that he had undertaken
so great toil, as to come to seek them.

To discharge the debt I was in (replied the Emperor) for the succor I
received at the unknown Castle, both of you, and of your Cousin, for our manner
(as you know, is to make satisfaction in the same Coin. And yet your duty
was, net to go aw^i, not making your selves known. But letting it pass, What
was the reason you did so? We could do no otherwise (replied Arfileo having
promised so to do.

They had thus chatted till the next morrow, if the Emperor had not sent them
to bed: Which they did, lying in that chamber, and slept til the Sun had the
following morning dried the could deawe on the moist earth. And rising out of
their beds, made them ready, and went altogether into the field, where the
ioustes were kept, whose pryze the good Knight Sabian of Trebento obtained,
with immortal honor, by his brave deeds.

In this manner rested they a month, vnmolested of any, by reason of the
boisterous cold winter, which kept the Soldane from incamping his Hoaste. In
which time the Prince Don Bellianis (though he greatly delighted in the
Empereur his Fathers presence, whom all the rest called the Knight of the
Crowns, sustained such grievous passions, and torments of weart, for the
absence of his dear Lady, that he often sounned to the death: nothing with
him prevailing, the consolating words of his Damzels, nor the Princess
Aurora, to whom he made known his grief. But every day grew worse and
worse, which the Emperor his Father seeing, armed himself upon a day (though
he could hardly do it) being not altogether well, walked with him out of the
City, and inquired of him very earnestly, the cause of his melancholy
greefes, charging him not to conceal if by any means. The Prince don
Bellianis told him, he knew not whence proceeded his grief, but that he felt
extreme anguish of mind, and could not conceive the cause thereof. The
Emperor perceiving some love passion tormented him, having many times seen
him sighe without cause, ouerpaste that talk and said. Tell me, where abouts
is the valley of the three fountains, for I must needs go thither: It is some
three miles hence (said Don Bellianis) whither we may make an easy walk.
Whereupon the Emperor took his lance from his sons Dwarffe, and sending
him with his own Page back to the City, they went toward the valley.

The Prince demanded of his Father, why he went thither? You shall know
(replied he) I have engaged my self to the Combatte there, with the Persian
Prince this day, and I am determined to meet him there alone without any
company, for so we agreed, and therefore here we must part, for we must not
go together. Don Bellianis grieved that the Emperor had undertaken so
dangerous a fight, and the more because he might not go to aid him, if any
sinister chance should befall. But seeming to fear nothing, said: I will obey
your commauede (dear Lord) seeing you will have it so, and will return unto
the City, and excuse you till you come back. And so showed him the valley,
and departed something better satisfied, to see what little account the
Emperor made of the battle: yet he resolved to frustrate it, as hereafter
shall be shown.

But here we leave them, till we have set down the matter contained in the
ensuing Chapter, which greatly avails this History.

CHAP. XXXV.
Who the sage Fristone was, and what he did, that the battle between those
Princes might not be effected.

IN the Kingdom of Persia, where then al those knights were, dwelt a Wiseman,
which was he that writ this great History, called Fristone, whose equal in
the Magicke-art the world: contained not, excelling therein all those of his
time, for they procured to learn of him. This rare Magician was so great a
friend to the Persian Prince Perianco, that all his labor and study, was to
no ^ther office, but for the good success of his affairs, consunting the
greatest part of his time to that end. For which purpose, he had given him a
most excellent, rich, and well tempered sword, that the like was not within ye
earthly continent, except that of Don Bellianis, which before times appertained
unto that valorous Knight Jason, the which that excellent Inchauntresse Medea
had given him, when they enjoyed their Loves, which she forged under the
constillation and predominance of such Plannets, that no iuchauntment might
against it preuaill.

This sword procured the sage Fristone, for the use of the Prince Perianeo, but
he never could obtain it, because Medea by her Prophecies had bequeathd it to
the successiue heirs of the House of Greece, placing it where Don Bellianis
won it, by the means of the sage Bellona. But this wise Fristone being in
the desert of death, where he made his habitation, he there calling to mind
his friend the Persian Prince, came to know, that for all his valor was so
excellent, and very felve that might equal him in strength, he notwithstanding
might incur wondrous danger. And casting about with his Art to know the end
of that battle, the almighty God would not suffer him to find out the
success thereof, reserving to his divine Majesty, the knowledge of the event
of things, which to none others might be permitted, and the more he sought
to know it, the farther he was from it. Which thing so confounded him in his
imagination, that he could not think what it might be. Wherefore he resolved
by all means to disturb the fight, judging that afterward, the Persian
Prince might better revenge himself upon the Duke Alfiron, for the injury he
had done his Father, and therefore devised, what you shall know in the next
Chapter.

CHAP. XXXVI.
What Don Bellianis did, being gone from the Emperor, and how he combatted
with the Persian Prince, and were parted by the means of the sage Fristone. And
how the Soldanes Host besieged the City of Bollera.

DOn Bellianis being departed from the Emperor his Father, so spurred his
Horse, that quickly he returned to the city, wherein he entered very quict,
showing no manner of alteration, but telling every one, that by the way
inquired of him for he Knight of the^ Crowns, yt he stayed not far thence,
for Sabian of Trebento, his companion. He entered the Palace, where meeting
with Sabian, requested him to lend him his armor, to supply his present need.
May not I accompany you (said he) No, (replied Don Bellianis) besides I will
presently return. Where left you my Lord the Emperor, (demanded he?) Hard
by (replied the Prince) staying for me. Which said he buckled on Sabians
armor, which nothing differed from his fathers: and mounting a horseback, he
took his way to the valley of the three fountains, to meet with the Persian
Prince, and coming to a large plain ^he spied the Emperor lying under a
tree. But taking another way stayed at a place through which the knight must of
necessitic pass, if he came: whose coming he attended, walking on his Horse,
and reuolued with himself what he had to do, and remembering that knight loved
his Lady, he thought therein he stood disgraced, which so moved his desires
to encounter him, that he judged himself so unfortunate, that the same Prince
would rather break his promise, then come. Wherein he greatly was deceived,
for he rather would have induced a thousand deaths, then in the least degree
falsilie his engaged word. For the day before he marched from Persepolis, with
all his troops, containing above three hundred thousand Horsemen, besides
Footmen, that covered all the mountains and plains they passed by, and he
so set forth with the manner of his march, that none could escape to aduertize
his adversaries thereof: on whom he arrived with such a sudden fury, that
it had not been much if they had taken the City at their first assault, but
that those valiant Knights were within, whose strength supplied the want of a
competent Army to resist their ^oes, and issuing forth in the cities
defenses, begun so fierce and bloody a battle as ever was any seen.

The Princess Arfileo, Contumeliano, and the Kings of Armenia, wi^h the Duke
Alfiron, went out of the City into their Camps, through a secret door,
accompanied with all the rest of the chiefest Knights, which they found in
seem danger by the adverse multitudes, with whose coming on al sides, their
began such cruel massacring of their men, that with in a while, the earth
was dyed with human blood, and coucred with dead bodies, slain by their
furious arms: which the Prince Perianeo seeing, thought he could have no
better occasion to depart secretly to the valley of the 3. fountains, where he
know the knight of the Crewnes expected him, to end their former quarrel, and
that he might the better pass unknown, he had put on a sanguine armor,
without any devise in his shield, in which manner he went till he came to the
place where Don Bellianis stayed, whem he thought did then but come, seeing him
walk about, and very glad cried out, he should there stay, for it was a place
convenient for their combatte. Don Bellianis turning about, and seeing him so
altered in his Armor, kn^w him not, (but that he thus said.) I am the knight
that has established this combat with you this day: for which we are now in a
good place, where none shall disturb us. You came so disguised (replied Don
Bellianis that I knew you not. But I am right glad we are so well met, to end
our commenced enterprise. But first tell me (said the Persian Prince) since
one, or both of us shall here remain, what you are? and how you are called?
And I promise to do the like. It does not please me replied the valiant prince
Don Bellianis) for I well know you are the renowned Perianeo, Prince of Persia.
Then if not so (answered Persian Prince) satisfy me with knowing the cause why
you bear portraied the picture of that divine Lady in your sheeld? It is the
shadow (replied Don Bellianis) of that c^listial substance, that imperates my
heart and soul, and therefore ^o I continually bear it with me. Oh unhappy
knight. shall in the world live any to dare say such a thing in thy presence?
and with a fiery choler that gnawde his heart, he turned his horse to take
his full carreare on the field. The like did Don Bellianis, meeting in the
middle of their course with such admirable force and lightness, that they
seemed more to fly, then on the ground to run. Oh who would not have desired to
see this fight betwixt the flower of the worlds Chivalry, here opposed one
against the other? For the Prince Perianeo had not his like on the universe,
except Don Bellianis and his father, and yet his father had Princes his
brothers, though they were knighted, had not yet thitherto used their Arms.
But to return to our former discourse.

The two Combattants encountered each other with such imp^tous and sudden
strength, that their Lances being big, and knottie, and their forses without
compare: all their defensive armor was pierced, and their lances past between
their left sides and arms, and meeting body with body, sheelds and helmes
together, made so huge a noise, as if two towers had met. Don Bellianis lost
both his surrops. But the Prince Perianeo, if he had not very quickly got hold
by his horses neck, he had surely gone to the ground, making many signs of
falling, yet governed with inplacable rage, he bravely recovered his stirrops,
turning toward Don Bellianis, that also made against him, and regreeting one
another with such rigorous blows, that all the Valley did resound with the
noise, so monstrous were they, and where their swords lighted, from thence it
carried armor and flesh, and laid so thick upon one another, that they had no
time toward any blow with their sheeldes. In this manner labored they, above
four hours, being so wounded, that it would have made any adamantiue breast to
pity them, and not speaking any word, withdrew apart to breathe.

The Prince Perianeo thus with himself began: Is it possible that the envious
stars that governed the fatal hour of my birth, should make me thus
unhappy, to hear a knight in my presence say, he loves thy Lady, and that thou
art not able to satisfy that proud fault, with ye dearest blood of his stout
heart, but suffer him to bring thee to such a point, as to wish the pitiless
stroke of an impartial cruel death? and either this knight is enchanted, or I
am deceived if his forces be not now far greater then the other time I tried
them, and neither toil nor labor does diminish them. But oh, Imperious
Gouernesse of my afflicted soul? What is he shall tell thee, that this thy
knight dies, confessing ye immooueable faith he owes thee, having left no hope
evermore to see the glorious splendor of thy divine beauty. But let the
reuoluing heavens dispose the resolucion of my destined Fates, as they please,
yet one of us ere we dye, shall confess the other most worthy of thy service.
On the other side, Don Bellianis walking, considering with himself, the valor
of his adversary, imagining he never felt crueller blows (but of his father)
and that his forces more and more increased, and recording the cause of his
fight, thus of himself complained. Oh Don Bellianis, unworthy to be called
knight, and lover of so Divine a Princess, to suffer an other knight thus to
let thee blood, and not to make his tributary life do homage to thy sword,
whereby thou have lost both the honor and tylle of a Knight, un(...) thou
recouerest it by making his deaths passage through his life.

With the end of which words, he became so enraged, that his heart seemed to
burn in the fiery coals of his irefull breast, and so redoubled his most
furious courage, that if there had been ^oure such Knights as the Persian
Prince before him, he thought that in short time to reduce them all to the
mercy of his mortal Blade. With which, betwixt both hands he w^nt, against
his lou^-crossing adversary, which did the like also, and raising his Median
Sword aloft, to descend it with a more fury, there appeared before him a Lady
altogether like to her, whose Picture had with cruel yoke subiugated his
commanding heart* which said unto him. What do you h^^re (renowned Prince of
Greece) knew you not your love that is toward me, cannot take any effect, if
first you free me not from this danger?

And therewith he thought he saw four monstrous Giants, like a whyrle-winde
snatch her thence, and that one dragged her amber guided hair with such
barbarous savageness, that his unconquered heart resolved to liquid blood at
the cruel, yet a pitiful ^ight: and moreover, an other following the^, cried
out, let me alone with that vilde wretch for she must dye by my hand. Which
that valiant Prince Don Bellianis seeing, not respecting the fight, pursued
that illusion that he saw, which took the way down the Valley. Hereupon his
fine Armor with devise of the imperial Crowns, lost their hew, becoming
like those that the Prince Perianeo did wear at the Jousts in Bollera.

The Persian Prince, that nothing of that had seen, thinking his adversary had
left the battle for some other reason, began to follow him, but suddenly his
raines were taken out of his hands, and looking about to see who should do so,
saw before him the dearest friend he had, the Sage Fristone, who thus said
unto him.

What is the matter (dear Prince of Persia) that you follow whom you know not,
nor whether it be your advantage so to do? Take my counsel: return to
Ballero, for I have laid such a snare for him, that you shall be fully
revenged on your enemies, and therefore follow not that knight. So this said,
he vanished away.

The Persian Prince was greatly amazed hereat, and so great was his hate
against the valiant knight of the imperial Crowns, that he was about to
follow him: yet notwithstanding, resolving the contrary, returned to his
fathers Camp, where arriving, he found the battle still to endure very
fierce, through which he thrust himself, to help his men. Where we leave him,
till we have expressed what happened to Don Bellianis, pursuing those
enchantments.

CHAP. XXXVII.
How Don Bellianis following the Sage Fristones enchantments, Combatted with
the Emperor his father, in the Valley of three Fountains: and how Don
Bellianis was led away by the wise Bellona, to end a certain adventure.

THe Prince Don Bellianis, as is said, pursued those Giants, whom he thought
carried prisoner, the Princess Florisbella, in which pursuit, he had remained
enchanted, by the sage Fristone, had it not been for his sword, yet was he by
him deceived, seeming otherwise the^ he was: which was all the Magician could
do. And thus going alo^g, he espied before him a knight, armed as he thought in
the Persian Princes armor, with whom he not long before fought with. And so
soon as they approached together, all those enchantments vanished away:
whereat, like one amazed, wakened out of some dream, stood still. But the
knight that came up the valley was his father, had, by Fristones device his
Armor also changed. For that of Don Bellianis seemed like the knights of
Fortune, and the Emperors nothing differed from the same. Who seeing him come
with such haste, and without Lance, left his own, and drawing forth his
sword, went to meet him with it raised aloft. Don Bellianis doing the like,
there began between them the cruellest fight that in all that day was fought,
making their heads bow to the saddle pummell with their terrible strokes, so
fast redoubling blow upon blow, that the mightiness of them struck fire out
of their armor, and made them often loose the sight of one another. Don
Bellianis at this time, thinking his adversaries strength increased more and
more, more furious then a furious Bear, having lost none of former rage,
struck at him so huge a blow, that cutting his shield in two, it tumbled to
ye ground, with a piece of his helm. But the Emperor struck at him below his
shield, that cutting his armor, it also pierced his coat of male, wounding him
two fingers deep in his right side, and entering within him, with a furious
thrust, penetrated all his armor to the flesh, forcing him to give back two or
three steps, and seeing that was the time wherein he should show the utmost of
his mighty forces, letting fall the remnant of his shield, would have with
both his hands struck him on the head. But Don Bellianis seeing the cutting
sword descend with such fury, spurred his horse forwards, and closing with him
ere he could discharge his blow, took him twixt his strong arms, and lifting
him out of his saddle, shaking the stirropes from his own feet, he lept with
him on the ground, where he opened both armor and flesh with one mighty blow.
But overcome with rage, both at one time raised their slicing swords, which
falling with such strength, the Emperor had the buckles of his helm cut,
which fell on the earth, and the sword descending on his left arm, it made him
there a grievous wound. But don Bellianis was so ouerladen with the Emperors
blow, that he was forced to set both knees and hands on the ground. And the
Emperor seeing himself without the helm, struck his adversary so suddeinly
again with such strength, that he sorely wounded him on ye left shoulder, and
the sword ran three handfuls into the earth. But Don Bellianis never loosing
any spark of his admirable courage at any sinister accident, raised himself
upon his feet, and turned upon the Emperor ere he had time to draw his sword
from the ground. At this instant was ye Emperors life in wondrous danger,
being without shield and helm, and not able to help himself with his sword
so quickly as he should. And Don Bellianis being on foot, with his sword
raised with both hands, and ready to discharge it, did suddeinly know him,
and with the greatest wonder that ever before he was in, cried out. Oh
Almighty God, in whom I do believe, is it possible my hands should commit
so heinous treachery? And therewith stayed his hand.

The Emperor hearing these words, said: Know you me knight? Or what is the
reason you end not your fight? Whereunto Don Bellianis replied. I do most
humbly beseech you my very dear Lord and Emperor, even by that Lord that
has permitted we should not die by so great deceits, that you omit and pardon
this my error, wherein I am guilty of no fault committed against you. And
having said so, unlaced his helm, whereat the Emperor straight knew him,
which struck him into so great an anguish to see his dear son so cruelly
wounded by his hands, that he was feign to set him down, not being able to
stand on his legs, looking like a man ready to breathe his last.

Don Bellianis thinking his wounds were the cause of it, sat him down,
lamenting that unhappy chance, loosing their blood so fast, that it had made
two Chanells, as if they proceeded from two rising springs, and overtaken by
the darksome night, were put into so great fear, that they dispaired of
remedy. Especially Don Bellianis, doubting thereby his fathers life, who
because the sudden amazement more troubled him then the danger of his
wounds, quickly recovered himself, and embracing the Prince his son, said.

Oh dear son! tell me I*pray you, why come you armed in the Armor of the
Knight of Fortune? Did he peradventure di^ by your hands? or how is it? for I
cannot express the alteration I suffer, till I know it.

I wear the Arms of Sabian of Trebento, and no others: for those of the
Persian Prince your self wears. I have not changed mine said the Emperor.
But tell me, what has befallen you since you lest me, for surely we have bn
wondrously deceived?

Don Bellianis told it him. Whereupon the Emperor spoke. Surely Prince we
have been inchaunted, and yet cannot devise by what means: but this is the
straungest case I ever heard of, that both should seem to wear one kind of
armor, and not perceive it, each of us imagining the other to be the Persian
Prince. And it may be, that Lady that cried to you for help, was she that so
deceived us. But let us part from hence, for we loose much blood.

When they were upon going, they espied coming toward them, an ancient
Matrone, conducted by four monstrous Giants, before them was carried a Pillar
of fire, which lighted them their way, they came with such haste, that ere they
could rise, she was upon them, whom presently the Giants took from her
Palfray, and kneeling before the Emperor, she required his royal hands to
kiss them. The Emperor refusing to do it, took her up, and she unmasking her
self, was straight known of Don Bellianis, to be the sage Bellona, his dear
friend. Whereat conceiving as much pleasure as before displeasure, and
accounting all his danger none, embracing her, said.

What chance has brought you hither (my good friend) at such a time, which is
not without some special cause. The great love I bear you, and the Emperor
your father, (replied she) is the cause thereof.

But for you incur great peril through your wounds, eat this which I will
give you, for with the like medicine you were before cured. They did so, and
were therewith presently so well, as if they had had no ill at all, and their
armor returned unto their former color and devises. The Emperor embracing
her, said.

For Gods sake (Lady) tell me this adventure, for it does more amaze me then
any thing in all my life? I will (replied she) and hardly shall you know it of
any but of me. You well remember the Combatte, you had agreed with the Persian
Prince: now know, he has to his friend a great Magician, in that Art the
skilfullest in all the world, this man knowing the great danger his friend
should pass, with the Prince your son, did ordain all that which you have
seen, changing both your armours, that you might stay one another, each of
you thinking you fought with the valourous Prince Perianeo: And trust me, his
desire had taken effect, had it not been for Don Bellianis sword, which for
that purpose the wise Medea many years before kept in the Cave, where Don
Bellianis woune it, being the man she wished might have it, always desiring to
benefit the house of Greece, as often heretofore she has done. For so was it
written, where your son found the sword, if he does remember the words. I do
well remember them (replied Don Bellianis) for thus they said.

This Prophecy is mentioned in the seeond Chapter: and here explained with
effect. That with this Sword, the living should be lost, and the dead put in
possession of the recovered, and they restored to their royal blood, with
knowledge of their possessors. You see now how it has come to pass: and
moreover, they said, this should be.

At the time when the fierceness of the courageous Lions, which are you two,
by the greatness of his skill, which is that of the wise man, called Fristone,
that in knowledge equals her, because he has all her ^ookes, should be put in
greater fear, (but this know not he, for he did not look whether the Sword
were won or no, or whether the valorous Prince your son did wear it.) Then
the living which were lost (that ar^ you two, that being living were lost, by
the alteration of your Armor, and supposing you already dead, which would
have happened, if the fight had been ended with the blow of this Sword, that
cut the laces of your Helm) were put in possession of your recovered selves,
being restored to your royal bloods, (which was at the point utterly to have
been lost.) And the true possessors known (which are both you,) taking one
another for the Persian Prince.

Now I hope you understand the adventure you have past, which not without cause
you have accounted strange. Greatly wondered the knights at these Ladies words,
who again said. But for another cause has my coming been, which is to have
with me the Prince Don Bellianis, your dear son, whom I must presently use
in a dear employ, that ne less concerns him, then his life.

Take us both with you said the Emperor. I would willingly do it (replied
she) but that the brave Duke Alsiron greatly needs your help, and therefore
it is no reason to leave him alone, and your son shall quickly return
again. And here do as I counsel you, for I well knew this would happen,
which made me write unto you, that you should by no means depart from the
City of Constantinople, but you would not do it, wherein it had not been much
if you had lost your life. I will not go against your counsel (replied the
Emperor) but tell me if my son shall quickly return? He shall (said she) and
therefore go to the City, the soonest that you may, and so making Don
Bellianis mount on horseback, who had taken the Emperors blessing (which with
many tears did give it him) departed as swift as the wind, leaving the
Emperor so occupied with imaginations, whither his son might be carried,
that he knew not how to resolve himself.

CHAP. XXXVIII.
How the Emperor returned to the City of Bollera, and what happened him in
the Souldanes Camp, before he entered into the City.

THe Emperor remembering the Sages words, took his Lance and mounted on
horsbacke, approaching the City of Bollera, almost by break of day, which he
found begyt with so many multitudes, that he greatly wondered at their sudden
arrival, and not knowing on which side the Duke lay entrenched, because the
City was round about besieged, he rushed among those Tents, as if he had been
one of the Sentinels, and thus he went till he came unto a great pauilion,
which he thought to be the Generals of those troops, and looking into it, he
saw many knights talking with another that lay in his bed, whom he judged
according to his manner and conditions, to be the Sophy, and hard by him, he
spied armed without his helm, the Prince of Persia, that had been cured after
by the same means that he was, their conference was, that it would be good, to
give another assault unto the City, for if it were but only to affright them
within, it would not be amiss. And the Emperor being busily harkoning to
this, there came unto him, a knight, that was Collonell of ye Court of guard,
and said. What do you here, you are not in your quarters? I was walking about
(said the Emperor) and here I stayed to look upon this Tent. And therefore
shall you go to prison (replied the other) seeing you have no more care. The
Emperor said, let us go whither you will. Here upon the Collonell turned to
four knights, and charged them to convey that knight to his Tent. Which they
going to do, the Emperor sorely wounded, overthrew them one after an other to
the ground with his lance* and about to do the like by the Colonel, he thrust
himself among the Tents, calling out for help. But the Emperor that hereat
became furious, reached his lance at the Souldan (that lay a bed* with such
force, raising himself on his stirrops, which if it had gone straight, he had
no more need to make war, yet it missed him so little, that the Lance past
betwixt his arm and left side, and ran through all the bedding, nayling it
above a handful in the ground. Which the Knights seeing that were talking
with him, gathered about him, thinking he had been slain, and some went out to
see what he was that had been so hardy to do such a deed: among whom was the
Prince Perianeo.

But the Emperor thinking it no wisdom to oppose himself against so many,
closely thrust among those knights that were come thither, and so past till he
came to the farther side of the Camp, at such time that the Sun began to
appear, and fearing some might meet and know him, and so frustrate his
intent, he rushed with great violence upon the guard on that side, and maugre
their force, he passed through the midst of them, leaving above twenty,
pitteously wounded on the earth. And at length arrived in his own Camp, where
being straight known, was with great gladness received, and so entered the
City, where the Duke and all the rest joyfully welcomed him, and being
demanded for the valiant Knight of the golden Image, he replied, he departed
from him at the Valley of the three Fountains, and would quickly return.

So leaving them, he went to rest himself, for he greatly needed it. The
Prince Perianeo being come forth of the Tent, thinking his father had been
slain, inquiring for him that had done it, came to the place where the
Emperor had made that slaughter, there he found some dead, some grievously
wounded, and some in such case as they could hardly live long, and demannding
who had so handled them, they replied they knew not, save that a devilish
Knight clad in Armor, bearing certain Crowns upon his shield, had done those
wonders, and in despite of us all, has entered the City of Bollera.

By this the Prince knew, the Knight that would have slain his Father, was
he with whom he did Combatte, though he much doubled it, because his dear
frined the wise Fristone, had told him, he would set him in place, where he
should leave both honor and life: yet discontented and amazed he returned to
the Tent, where he found the Souldan up, whereat he greatly rejoiced, and with
no little gladness, demanded how he felt himself, and whether the lance had
done him any harm? None (replied the Souldan) but what I conceived with fear
of death, and I assuredly think that was the knight of the golden Image, for
none else could have the heart to do it. So great is the bounty of this
knight, replied ye prince) that none might do it but he. In these words you
shall see it (answered the Souldane) for he that does not see his deeds, will
hardly believe them, my self having seen him perform so hautie acts of
Chiualry, which else none should have persuaded me, that any humane creature
could atchiue them: for he being wounded, slew the horrible Dragon of the
Ryphean desert, and the King of Cyprus assuring you, that when he entered with
him in the listes, the blood issued twixt the joints of his Armor from his
old wounds. He also discovered the adventure of the Despair in Love, with
many other things which of him you have heard. I long to try (replied the
Prince) how far his valor does extend. For I know not whether it be a
Knight that did disturb me from ending a certain Combat, and if it be he, I
do protest to procure all means til I meet with him.

It is no wisdom (said the Souldan) to hazard your person ^^ so certain
danger, seeing with our soldiers you have here, we shall easily be revenged
on them all. I will never leave such a battle (answered the Prince,) for if he
be such a knight as he that hurld his Lance at you, he ought with reason to be
esteemed. Do you know him, (said the Souldan?) Yes (replied the Prince) for
yesterday I did Combat with him in the valley of the three Fountains. But how
did you with him (said ye sultan?) My friend the Sage Fristone, did part us,
answered Perianeo. In such talk continued they till the ensuing morrow,
aduertizing a whole Camp to be in readiness against ye next assalt. The duke
Alfiron, and the Kings, seeing the knight of the golden Image came not, they
altogether very sorrowfully entreated the Emperor, to undertake the general
charge over them all: which he did though unwillingly. And having heard his
enemies intent, taking with him the prince Arfileo, and Sabian of Trebento, he
mustred all his men, dividing them into 5. squadrons. The first he committed to
the leading of the Phenician prince, and with him his valiant cosen
Florispiano, with 20. thousand well appointed knights. The second he committed
to the duke Alfiron, with all his men, which were as many. The third led the
kings of Armenia, and Tessifantie. The fourth conducted Sabian of Trebento. And
the fifth governed a brother of the Dukes called Sallatell of the valley. And
for himself he would have none. The Prince Perianeo, divided his troops in
sire battalions, and every one of 50. thousand knights, and gave order, that
other fifty thousand, with all the footmen, should assault the City, which
were above forty thousand, with so many millitarie engines, that they made
sure account to lay it level with the ground, with utter desolation of all the
knights, at their first encounter.

CHAP. XXXIX.
The cruel battle fought between the Dukes camp, and the Soldanes troops,
and what therein happened: with the strange acts the Emperor Don Bellaneo
performed: and the terrible assaults given to the City.

THe cold gloomy winter being ouerblowne, with the warm approach of the wanton
spring, wherein the amourous passions in the hearts of loue-oppressed knights,
began to stir up the almost extinguished flames, and chiefly in them, that
hoped of little remedy for their grief, continually contemplating in the
perpetual captivity of their alienated joys, when Perianeo the Persian
Prince, desiring speedily to terminate these wars in strong battailions,
drew forth all his men in field, which were so gallant and seemly, as any
that ever were seen in those parts, with such diversity of devises,
Scutchions, Ancients, and Flagges, worn about their Spears, which displayed
in the air, made a most gallant show together, with the brightness of their
armor, that with the Sun beams reuerberating on them, seemed so many
Christaline Glasses, and the clamourous noise of such multitudes, being so
diverse, required a Captain of no less valor then his they had. Where though
they were very quiet, yet the neighing and trampling of their horses, and
their Masters noise guiding them, raising such a rebounding echo, that they
could not hear one another.

The Emperor Don Bellaneo, like the man that had been in far more
dangerous enterprises then those, taking with him the Prince Arfileo, the
better to range about the battle) drew in field his furious Squadrons: and
perceiving that the Sun when he rose shined against his enemies faces,
dazeling their eyes with his brightness. Which falling out well to his
advantage, and desiring to loose no good occasion, passing to the foremost
Squadron, commanded that with a violent fury, they should set upon them,
keeping themselves together united, least their adversaries breaking through
them, should disorder their ranks. And therevppon cowching their Lances,
encountered their enemies, that were so blinded with the Sun, that they saw
them not come. But the Emperors men so bravely gave the onsette, that their
adversaries could not break their fil^s on no side, whereupon their
slaughter was so great, that in less then half an hour, that Squadron was
vanquished and altogether overcome, leaving behind above thirty thousand
slain and wounded. The valiant acts that the Emperor in the mean time
performed, are hard to believe. He with such valiancie brake through the middle
of those ranks, as the Reapers used in the Month of Julie to reap the
Harvest of their ripened grain: so he left on the ground so many head by
head, that none durst confront him, and sometimes he so turned his battle,
that he forced them to fight, through whom he would with such courage
break, that neither the Princes Arfileo, nor Contumeliano, nor the valiant
Florispiano, were able to follow him: but letting him so far go before them,
that they often left him out of sight. At this time the Prince Perianeo seeing
the disorder of his men, took with him Don Fermosell, and the two brothers
Crisalaneo, and Gramalis, of Thrace, with thirty monstrous Giants, and past to
his second Squadron, with which gathering the remnant of the dispersed men,
encountered the Emperor, commanding all his troops together to assault the
either side of the battle. But the Emperor that was more politic in military
discipline the^ Perianeo, quickly perceived his meaning: wherefore calling
Florispiano, sent him to tell the Duke Alfiron, he should command the whole
battle to unite it self with him, giving no time to their adversaries to
recover the advantage they had over them, and that it should be with the
greatest speed possible, for therein consisted that days victory, ere the
Sun mounted aloft. Which was done so suddenly, that they almost met their
enemies. The Persian Prince perceiving what his adversaries had done, fearing
to be put to fight, commanded all his Squadrons to do so, and spying Sauian
of Trebento, which then entered in the battle) thinking him to be the Knight of
the golden Image, because he did wear his armor, cowched his Lance against
him, who did the like, meeting with such force, that they were forced to hold
by their horses necks. When unawares ere he could remedy it, two firece
Giants that gyrded Perianeo, wounded Sauiano so rigorously, that he tumbled
from his horse. Perianeo alighted to kill him, but Sabiano, that was already
on his feet, gave him so great a blow that he staggered him four steps
backwards: yet so many laid upon him with such boystrous blows, that though
he valiantly defended himself, yet hardly had he escaped with life, if that the
noise had not thither brought the Emperor, with the Princes Contumeliano, and
Arfileo, Florispiano, the Duke Alfiron, and the King of Armenia, with many
other chosen knights. On the other side, there arrived the Sultan with twenty
Giants in his company. with him also came Coroliano and Doraldo, where there
began so great a fight, that all the other battle was nothing in comparison of
that. But the courageous Emperor seeing his dear Sabiano in such peril, in
despite of them all, went where he was fighting, and not knowing what
Perianeo was, overthrew him to the ground with his horse breast, and also
tumbling down a Giant, took his horse, and gave it Sabeano, saying. Mount
upon this horse knight, if you mean to live. Which he did very lightly,
though he were sore wounded, and with their mortal blows, they quickly cut
their passage through their enemes. The Prince Perianeo with extreme rage
foming like chaffed boar, taking a horse turned against him whom had
overthrown him: but ere he did it, the Souldan, and the Duke Alfiron meeting,
and knowing each other, discharged two such blows upon themselves, that their
heads were both wounded, from whence there ran much blood. The duke here had
incurred great danger, if the Emperor had not arrived with his company, who
knowing the Soldane, came so nigh, that raising his sword to strike him being
so close unto him, did no otherwise, but with the hiltes throw him off his
horse, and going after to kill him, was ouerreached backwardes by the Prince
Periance, with so cruel a stroke, that he had fallen down. Coroliano wounded
him also upon the shoulder, that he felt the sword raze his flesh. Whereupon
there began so cruel a fight between them, that one side to take the Soldane,
and another to defend him, above four thousand knights lost their lives
through their obstinacy. On this side where the Emperor was, his men h^lde
out courageously, though the Sun were high, and they weary with long
fighting. But one the other side, the Emperors men lost their advantage,
unable to resist their adversaries. At this time the assault given to the
city, was so fierce, that on either side infinite numbers died, that currents
of blood ran through the field: and being few within to defend the City,
it easily might have been taken. When there came a knight to the Emperor, and
said. Withdraw your self sir, unless you will have us al destroyed: for they
within the citi^ have need of present help. Is it possible (said the
Emperor?) Assure your self (replied the knight) that if the City be taken,
which is easily to be done, we shall be all utterly destroyed. The Emperor
remembering it might be so, and the Sun being very high was in their faces,
commanded a retreat to be sounded: whereupon there enemies thinking they fled,
set furiou^^y upon them. But the Emperor gathering his men in form of a
Pyramedes, defended them in such such sort, that none miscarried, and they
entered safely within their trenches, where the Emperor leaving sufficient
guard, made most of his men enter the City, to defend it, where, because the
assault of the wall might some what slaken, opened one of the Gates, which he
with the Phenician Prince, and Florispiano, valourously kept, by whose hands
many their died, with ten of the terriblest giants in all the adverse camp.
But overtaken with the darkness of the night, they were forced to leave, and
return to their Tents. The like did the Emperor, King, and Princess, who
leaving good guarde in the City, returned to the Palace, where they were
received with more outward gladness, then inwardly was conceived, by the
princess Persiana, and Aurora, the one for greafe to see those wars, the other
wanting the presence of her dear friend, the Prince don Bellianis. And supper
being ended, the Emperor withdrawing himself to his chamber, was taken apart
by the Princess Aurora, that said unto him. I beseech your Majesty tell me
what is become of Don Bellianis, for I fear some diaster accident may have
befallen him? The Emperor to comfort her, told her all that had happened in
the valley of the three Fountains, and how the sage Bellona had taken him
with her. Now am I very glad, (said the Princess) for I am assured he shall
have no harm in her company. And so giving one another the good night,
departed. The Emperor to his Chamber, and she to hers, with the Princess
Florisbellaes Ladies, that were very sorrowful for the absence of the knight
of the golden Image. The Princess told them, that the wise Bellona had
conducted him with her, which were some better news for them. In this muner
remained the besieged knights, and every day came fresh supply unto the
Soldane, with which he every day assaulted the City, sometimes winning, and
sometimes loosing, as in such accidents is often seen. But they within the
City receiving no aid, had commonly the woorst. Where we leave them, till we
have dilated the strange adventures of the knight of the Golden Image,
conducted by the wise woman.

CHAP. XL.
Whap happened the Knight of the golden Image, going with Bellona: and how he
proved the adventure of Brandezar, on the Nycaonian mountains.

IN manner above expressed, the knight of the golden Image posted with such
swiftness, that by the next morning Sun, he found himself upon a high
mountain, the barrennest that might be seen, and turning to the sage Bellona,
with who^ thitherto he had not spoken, said unto her. Tell me Lady) what
Country is this where we are? for I assure you I never saw worse. We are now
(replied she) in the Kingdom of Egypt, on the mountains of the King Nycaon,
and there must you end an adventure, which will be to your eternal benefit:
excelling all that hitherto you have done. And therefore know, that this
kingdom in times past being the mightiest Monarchy over the world many
years: in which time there swaied the empire, a worthy king called Nycaon, by
whose name this mountain is called, that you are on. This king was at great
jar, with another named Brandezar, Emperor of Babylon, whom so pursued him,
that he was fame to immure himself within a strong City he possessed, hard by
the river Euphrates, where Brandezar begirt him with a fearful siege, that
hoping of no remedy to obtain his liberty, was driven to use his Art, being
the greatest Magician in his time, that ever had b^^n before him, and resolved
to do what you shall now hear.

One night by his Arche went to Brandezars Camp, and caused him to be brought
upon this Mountain: but first he called his Subjects together, and counseled
them to compounde with those Caldeans, and Babylonians, for he had determined
to leave them, because his enemies should not execute their revenge on him. His
subjects that greatly loved him, with great sorrow entreated him to stay, and
see how they would spend their lives in his service. But he promising them
quickelie to return, assured them he would ease them of their grief, caused
by Brandezar. And so he did: for coming hither, he wrought such
inchauntments upon him, that he remained in the greatest torments and pains,
that any tongue can express: and thinking that if by his inchauntments, he
lost his understanding and senses, he should not be revenged at his
pleasure, resolved to leave in his perfect judicial wits: and for that cause
inchaunted a King, with such virtue and coniuration, that he which on his
finger wears it, should never be offended by any inchauntment, but enjoy his
true senses, with all the liberty his heart else might wish, saving bodies
imprisonment. This might he well do, as the only man that in this Art
tutered Medea, being never equalled in this s^ience. And a while after, that
he knew his vassalles were quitted, minded to return, and descending this
mighty Monntaine, met with his valian^ brother, who in his absence was
crowned King. Nycaon (as is said) meeting, and knowing him, ran to embrace
him. But his brother busied with other imaginations, was greatly displeased to
see him, and thinking he should loose that mighty Empire by his coming,
closing within him, stabbed him, till he died, and after commanded his
followers, to say they found him so there, which they did. And he remained
king, and Nycaon was buried at his mountains foot.

That which you need this present time, is to end this adventure, and to take
the King from the Emperor Brandezar, which you must use in a dear employ, and
without it you shall live the grieuousest life that may be thought. And
because you shall have the greater desire to attempt it, I tell you that the
sage F^^stone, did ordain all those things you saw to disturb your battle,
and is now gone into the City of Babylon, for he knows by his Art (wherein
he excelles all those of his profession) that if at this present, he get not
in his power the Princess Florisbella, to give her to his friend the Princess
Perianeo of Persia, he after shall not so easily obtain her, (at least by
force) and therefore intendes he by one means or other, to have her for the
Prince Perianeo, very shortly: Wherefore it behooues her to have that King,
that his determination may be frustrated. And if from the same Emperor, you
can take the armor he wears, they would greatly avail you: for he that
wears them, can not be molested by any inchauntment, whatsoever, nor be
known, unless he will himself. You have told me wonders (said Don
Bellianis:) and is this man's skill so great, that he may force the Princess
Florisbella against her will, and give her to the Prince of Persia? Doubt it
not (replied Bellona) for more then this can he perform: and believe me, you
shall sustain for this cause great travail, and therefore let us not defer
the passing time. Here I commit you to God, leaving you to the valor of your
heart, to finish what you have to do, and take this way, which will bring you
to the place, for I must go no further with you.

Don Bellianis taking his leave of her, descended down that way in such haste,
that he quickly saw before him a strong and well towred Castle, and looking
about, could find no Porche, nor Portall to enter into it. But going to the
other side of it, he espied a little mouth of an obscure Cave: and looking
down into it, he thought that it descended to the infernal Pit. And also
before it, he saw a great Pillar of fine Crystal, so transparaunt, that it
seemed to take his light from the suns own light that then shined, on it
were set certain letters, made with rich Rubies, to this effect.

The inscription of the first Pillar. The strange lodgings of Brandezar, in
remembrance of Nycaons great euenge, chief in the Magic Ault, shall be
concea^ed from all men, till the str^ngest Lion conducted by the little wol^e
shall, wi^h extreme n^cestitie in search of my skill, h(...)her arrive Whose
val^ur must excel the fo^ce of my monstrou^ guardiants leaving all his fine
tempered armor at the entrance of my cave, if he be adorned with Virtue and
Fortitude. And thou courageous knight, that ^i^t this adventure try, must arm
thy self with naught, but the war like virtue of thy magnanimious heart.

Don Bellianis having read the letters, made no other account, then if he had
seen none, but animating his resolution, drew forth his sword, and would have
entered the cave, but ere he was aware, it vanished from his sight. Oh God
(said he) what strange things be these? Is it possible I must without Armor
pass through so fearful a place? And thinking it cowardice to lingur so
long, presently unarmed himself, resting in his hose and doublet, and having
his sword in his hand, kissed it, and laid it down, and recommended his safety
to the Almighty, as a man that had been going to buckle with death. And
considering with himself, that in the accomplishment of that adventure,
consisted the utter loss, or lasting liberty of his Lady, fearelesse he cast
himself into the Cave, wherein he scant had set his feet, but he thought he
descended into the most lowest Center of the earth, sometimes stryking his
head, sometimes his feet, against the sides thereof, that he was so bruised,
he felt not himself, and when he came to the bottom, he lighted with so great
a fall, that he verily thought he was beaten all to pieces. And rising with
no small pain thereof, looked to see where he was, but could deserve no more,
then if he were in the darkest night, closed within an obscure Dungeon, and
searching on all sides for light, at last he espied a little hole, from whence
there issued so very little, that he could not almost see his hands. But he was
srant at it, when he felt himself drawn backwards, with such force, that he
had almost tumbled with his shoulders on the earth, and turning to see who
plucked him back, saw him to be a mighty giant, having in his hand a most
sharp and puissant battell-axe, whith him came two Centaures, on either side,
each of them led a Lion, the fiercest that ever he saw. They all came toward
him to discharge their puissant blows upon his head, but he stepping back,
escaped them all* Heereuppon the Centaures unchained their Lions, which
presently ran upon him, and one thinking to rent his body with his sharp
paws, leapt at him. But he stretching forth his strong arms, caught him by
the neck, and choked him. At this time received he two such cruel blows, that
he was constrained to set his knees on the ground, shedding much blood: And he
seeing the Giant hard by him, closed within him to wring his are out of his
hands, whereon he cast his mighty strength, the Giant perceiving his intent,
did also lay fast hold on him: here the Centaures incempassed him, procuring
both to draw him from the Giant, where there was seen the most vnequallest
wrestling that ever was heard of.

Don Bellianis still persisting in his purpose, was so oppressed with their
several inchaunted forces, that he often lost his breath, and they making the
cave to tremble cuen with the whorse echo of their resounding Clamors. But
here the Prince setting the utmost of his sirength, wrencht the Fawchen out of
his hand, with whith go^^g to strike the centaures, he saw them all at that
instant va^tsh from his sight, which more amazed him then anything else, and
seeing a little pain of stayres before him, mounted up, with as great courage,
having that Fawchen, as if with all his Armor he had been Armed.

And having ascended the stayres, he saw a fair Hall, so which he should
pass by, so straight a way, that unarmed he could haroly go through it, where
there was many Armed Knights, that kept the pass^ge, with their naked swords.
These were of thos^ knights that were enchanted with Brandezar, being of the
strongest then ^uing, whom Nycaon left for the Emperors guarde, with no other
thought then to loose their lives ere he should be taken away, or killed him that
there would enter. Which Don Bellianis seeing, and that he must ^eeds of
necessity p^sse through with an invincible heart, with the fawthen in his
hand, cast himself among them, where he no sooner came, but two of them
s^tting their shoulders against him, most branely made him go three or four
steps back, weunding him grievously on the leg, and on his head: and being
unarmed had almost killed him.

Don Bellianis feeling the strength of the Knights to be so great, determined
to b^haue himself otherwise with him, and returning again to the door,
struck at them diverse times, thinking they would give back, but they had no
other care but to offend and defend, not stirring any way. Hereat the Prince
warding their blows with his Fawchen, drew one of them unto him by his
sheeld, with such haughty strength, made him headlong tumble at his feet, and
took his sheelde from him, and with it about his arm, he rusht among all
these Knights, in such a cruel fight, leaping on all sides to sh^n their
blewes. In this manner lasted their fight above three hours, that in the end
the Prince so b^haued himself, that he overcame them all, which were above
thirty, leaving them all breathless, in the Hall. He entered into another
lodging that was nert that, being wounded in twenty places, and thinking it no
wisdom to go through such a place disarmed, turned back, and buckled about
him one of those dead knights atmor, and so proceeding forwards, till he came
to an other staire, and as^^nding it, he saw on the top there of, an ugly
and infernal Monster, which made against him, and with such force came upon
him, that he tumbled down those steps he had gone up, with so great a fall,
that in all that day he had not felt such pain, resting so feeble, that he
scarce had strength to stand up. But burning in the flames of ire, for that
which befell him, mounted up again, with more advised resolution, least the
like might happen to him again. And being at the star head, he saw the
fearful monster, accompanied with a horrible dragon, which would also have
thrown him down, but he leaning his back against the wall, set the pummell
of his sword to his breast, and with the point toward the Dragon, expected his
encounter, which was so mighty, that his own force gave him his death: for
running upon the sharp sword it piersed all his body, side through side. But
the fierce encounters he received of both those beasts, so bereft him of
strength, and senses, that he was feign to sit down upon the stayres. Where
returning unto his remembrance, found himself in fair large green yard, in
midst whereof, was erected a gallant Pillar, like that he saw at the Caves
mouth, whereon there was written these words in Caldean letters.

The inscription of the second Pillar. What haughty Knight soever, whose high
valor has hither brought, by the supreme courage of his hear, ^let him enter
by that door, where he shall find the end of his demand if he exce^^ in
strength, he mighty Emperor B^a^d^zer, whose pulslant forces never any in
ancient ages, equalled.

Don Bellianis that longed with desire to terminate with a happy end that
adventure, went to the portall that the letters showed him.

CHAP. XLI.
The cruel battle fough the ween Don Bellianis, and the Emperor Brandezar, with
whose death the adventure was ended.

THrough the which he was scant entered, but he heard the pitt^fulest la^^ents
that ever he heard, proceeding from a a Knight that suffered some great
torments, and harkening from whence the voice might come, he past forwards,
entering into a chamb^r, where he saw a Knight a^med in a fiery armor, that
seemed to burn him. Round about him were many snakes and adders, with many
other venomous worms, that now and then bit all his body ever, and these
holding him fast, there came two mighty Bass^liskes, which would cast upon
him, all the poyion and blood in their body. Yet saw not Don Bellianis, who
with fieric buttons seared his flesh, which penetrated the very boane: the
intolerable pain whereof, made him breath forth those lamentabic cries, and
then begin to complain in this manner,

Oh unhappy Brandezar, the most vnfortunatest that ever breathed on the orbed
earth. May it be, that the l^uish giver of unconstant happiness, the blind
Guydresse of the round reuoluing wheeled chunce (for thy greater unhappiness
and perpetuity of languishing pains, and plaguing grief) should subiugate
under thy command, the vaste Empiers of Babylon, Persia, and ^rebisond,
knitting thy joints with mightier forces, then any in the universal world? to
give thee new so high a fall, ouerwhelming thee in this present everlasting
misery, and put thee in such continual tormenis by the hands of thy greatest
enemy, and that death has not the power to vanquish thee. Oh is it pessible,
that he that for a God was on earth adored, should now tolerate such hellish
pain^^? Oh (...)uell death, why come thou not to crave possession of thy ^ue
tribute? Oh life why docst thou haunt me, being haunted with such contrarious
stars of maligning, and unhappy ^^rtune? And with these and other words,
renewing his old laments, so molified the Princes tender heart, that he fell
in a deep consideration of the mut^bileti^s of Fortune, with ^ememberance of
the high Majesty of that Emperor, being the puissantest both in possessione
of Kingdon s and countries, as of propper strength, that in his age lived none
to equa(...) whose life and Chiualries he had read being a child. But
recording that was he whem he must conquer, stopped forward, whereat the two
Bassiliskes that lay by Brandezar, leapt about him and so fast held him, that
he could not stir: the like did all the other scrpents, which so cruelly
bitte him, that they (...)e his boanes shrink within his armor. Don Bell(...)
began to strike on all sides, but it was in vain, for all his strokes wounded
but the air, which he perceiving, procured with mere strength to pass away.
Here was his labor doubled to no great purpose, yet with often falling and
rising, he so toyled, that at length he arrived to the Chair where the
Emperor sat, which somewhat eased him, for all those cruel beasts left him.
But Brandezar that by him saw that knight, thinking it was his mortal for, the
king Nycaon, he took hun so brauclie betwixt his arms, that he easily drew
him to him. Don Bellianis letting fall his Fawchon, got also hold on the
Emperor, though he more willingly would have with ^r^wne from him, because of
the extreme heat that proceeded from his armor, and so continu^d in their
wrestling till they ouerth^^we the Emperors Chair, and so parting from one an
other, Brandezar drew forth his sooord, and the Pr^^ce took his fawchon, and
began so dangerous a fight, s the like in no age was seen, in short time so
mangling their shields, that they had no use of them, abundantly shedding
their blood. Don Bellianis at this time was in extreme peril, for that the
Emperors strength was incomparable, and himself fore wounden, which he
perceiving, awaited a blow of the Emperor, which threw the remnant of his
shield to the ground, and wounded him on the arm, but he gave him so terrible
a blow on the leg, that Brandezar could no longer stand thereon. But loosing
none of his courage, defended himself upon his knees, that made Don Bellianis
discharge his blow s so fast, that at length thinking to end the contention
with one stroke on his head, the Emperor warded it with his sword, and so
bravely thrust at him, that had it taken him full, he might have called it the
last that should have ended his life, yet the fur^cus sword ran through his
right side, renting the flesh, with the greatest wound he had received all that
day

Don Bellianis foming through the mouth, for anger of the terrible wound,
struck at the Emperor with both hands, that he cut his thigh in sunder, where
at he fell down, where within a while he dyed. With whose death, there began
so hortible a noise in all the Castle, with so monstrous an earthquake, that
Don Bellianis fell in a trance, who recovering his senses, felt himself well
and lusty without any wound, seeing neither sign nor memory of Castle nor
Cave. But before him laydead the Emperor Brandezar, and his knights, which
greatly grieved him, there also he found his armor he had left, and putting of
those he had on, armed himself with them of the Emperor, which were the
richest till that hour seen. They were all green, guarnished with many
Bassiliskes of gould and Azure, with many invaluable pearls of exceeding
brightness, and gyrding his good sword, went to the Emperor for the ring, the
wise man ha^ told him of, which he took from a finger of his right hand, the
preciousnesse of which Jemme, much amazed him: the stone of it was a little
Carbuncle, yielding as great light as feure burning torches. But scarce had he
taken the ring, when hard by he saw a T^^be, as fair as ever he saw any, set
upon twelve Pillars of Crystal, which sustained an Altar made of the richest
Emeraldes, in all the Oriental regions. Upon every Pillar stood sour
Angels, holding four burning torches that never wasted* Upon the Sepulcher
was a shield held up by two great ^reeffions, with the Arms of the Emperor
Brandezar* and about them were written these words.

The Incription on the shield upon the Emperors Sepulcher. Nycaon King of
Egypt, chief Magician of his time, in perpetual memory of his revenge, for
the destruction made of (...) kingdom, by Brandezar Emperor of Babylon,
Persia, and Trebizond, has erected this monument, wherein after the many
torments sustained by his skill, being vanquished, he lies dead, by his
hands that in valor excels all Knights in the universe. Here shall he
lie buiryed in this lasting monument, till the Son of the brave Lion, with
his force shall overcome the power of my Art, obtaining the sight herein
enclosed, not using the rare valor of his heart.

On the other side of the Tomb was set another shield, expressing the manner
of the Emperors inchauntment, and for what cause Nycaon had so donc, with the
manner of his liberty by Don Bellianis, who attentively beholding that
wondrous work, with great joy for the obtained ring, he ^pted Bellona in great
haste come to him, in manner as h^e left her, and demanded of him how he did.
Very well (replied he) for I have accomplished what you commanded me, yet am
much amazed at what here is, for having seen none to do it. Here lies buried
the Emperor Brandezar, and do greatly desire to see what is within. That may
not be (answered she) for our staying may much prejudice us. Yet I long to
try it (said he:) But I will leave it, seeing you will have it so. And one of
the Giants that came with her, gave him a shield, according to his armor, but
in the middle of it, was his accustoined devise. Don Bellianis greatly ^oy^d to
see the picture of his Lady. And so departed in the manner that they came, in
little time posting in any miles. But here we leave them, returning to the
great Magician History.

CHAP. XLII.
What Fristone w^ou^ht, after the two Princes battle, to get into his power
the Princess Florisbella and how she was succored by the Knight of the golden
Image.

THe battle being ended between the two Princes, a^ before is mentioned, the
sage Fristone having cured the Prince Persiano of his wounds, returned to his
habitatien in the desert of death: where cailing to his remembrance the love
that Persiano did bear the Princesle Florisbella, which she so little
regarded, and wherein she contiuually languished. He cast about with his
co^iurations, by which he came to know, that if under the domination of the
Plannet Marcury that then reigned, he got not to his hands the beauteous
Princess Florisbella, he should after suffer mortal torments: for her sake,
yet could he not learn, whether the Persian prince should marry her or no.
And in these tumultuous times, thinking easily to get and present her to the
Perfian Prince, before the end of those wars, taking the necessaries to
employ his Art, arrived in little time within the superbeous Babylonian walls:
Where he raised a Tent, the richest and most stateliest that ever was seen:
with so many gallant devises, that it admyred every beholder. Which no sooner
was seen, but it was presently told the Souldane, who with the Empress
Siluiana his wife, and the princess Florisbella his daughter, came forth to
see it, greatly woondring at the fayrenesse, and riches thereof: from whence
they heard so sweet a mellodious consort of music, that it ravished their
delicate senses: and after so many Trumpets sounded, as if some pitched field
were to be fought. Which being done, there issued out of the tent, four
beauteous Ladies, clothed in long rich robes of imbrodered work, they were
led by their hands, by four valiant Knights, clad all in green Armor, with
many golden stars thereon, with their helmes laced on their heads. Which
troop went toward the gallant princess Florisbella, yt was discoursing with
her father about the tent, and being before her, they all kneeled, refusing to
rise both at her, and the Emperors entreaties. And one of the ladies with a
clear voice, that all might hear her, thus began.

High and mighty Potentate, Emperor of Babylon, Sovereign Monarch of the
oriental regions, and most renowned Souloan, to whose supreme command, the
Universal globe of all the orbed earth, might deservedly owe tributary duty,
excelling all mortal Kings in honor, and in bounty, by maintaining equal
and upright justice, through his vaste Empery, with the continual glory of
haughty Chivalry, daily honored in his Courts, whose magnificent estate, the
immortal Gods do emmulate through the incomparable beauty of his excellent
Daughter, for whose sake, his Empire shall still augment with eternal
happiness, to perpetual ages. Know, that the dear hope to find redress for
our troubled thoughts, has brought us to this imperial City, where if our
hopes be frustrated of their desires, we will return dispayring of future,
remedy for our greefes, wanting it here, where never any was denied.

Wherefore of thee, and of this glorious Princess, we must obtain a boon,
before we do explayne the cause of our coming. Require what you will (said the
Souldane) for my desire is so great to know this adventure, that not only
one, but twenty, I do grant you: and therefore make us partakers of your
greeuances. Whereupon they rose, and the Damozell returning to her former
purpose, thus said.

In yonder Tent (most dread Lord) is the valiant King Gorgiana, of Soria,
thief Lord of that Land, whom you well know, being your near Ally, that
being in his peaceful kingdom, ordering of certain Tryumphs, wherein
himself with most of his best knights should be in, thither came many
strangers, and forreiners, brought by the fame of his beauteous Daughter, then
thought the fairest Lady living. And among many that there arrived, she was
demanded of her father for wife, by the great Magician, Herodiano, king of the
I Will of pearls, one of the brauest Giants hitherto seen. But he being informed
what he was, returned him, that his daughter being too young, was not
determined yet to marry: therefore he craved his pardon. Which answer, highly
vexing Herodiano, that they being the nezt day in the ordained Joustes, there
appeared on the one side of the field, these four Knights that here you see,
who rushing within the Tourney, in short space overthrew above one hundred
Knights, with such deep wounds, that most of them could no more rise. And
they like furious Dragons ran up and down the field, that none durst abide
their fury. Which the King seeing, encountered them with ten knights, against
whom only three went, and the other embraced the King in such cruel manner,
that both fell down, and the rest left his Knights deadly wounded.

Then on the sudden, appeared the Tent you yonder see, in which the king was
set, with his Daughter, and these four knights remained as their keepers,
whom no human power is able to ouerrome, because they are inchannted: and
within the space of four days, they vanquished above four thousand knights
that came to liberate their king, which not a little grieved us. But in the
end, sending for the counsel of a wise man, a great friend unto our king,
we receined this answer: that the imprisonment of the king and his daughter
could not be remedied, but by a Lady, whose beauty should excel the
honorable Princess Meridianaes, and that finding her, she should prove the
adventure of the Tent, in which the Princess would give her a sword, which in
her hand she holds, with which those knights should be vanquished, and the
enchantment ended. Hnd for this effect, he would work, that the Tent should
be brought where we would wish to have it, wherein we four might very
safelye go, for only these same knights should be our chief defenders.

In this manner have we in short time travailed through most part of Paganism,
but never could find any that did surpass the beauty of our Princess
Meridiana. And by the way, hearing the fame propogated through this Eastern
world, of the rare, and soly excellent beauty of the Princess thy dear
Daughter, we are hither come to entreat thee to suffer this adventure tried in
thy court, which will no little enternize thy great glory, setting an end to
our many toiles, which we have, and else shall sustain. And this is the boon
which you and your excellent Daughter the princess Florisbella have granted us.

The Souldane rested highly astonished, at the Ladies tale, greatly pitying
the misaduenture happened to the King Gorriano, his kinesman, desiring to
undergo any perrill for his liberty, and answering the Lady, said. It greatly
greeueth me (gracious Ladies) that this mischance has befallen your King, and
his Daughter, and it would highly content me, that you may find remedy in my
Court. But tell me the Lady, that proouing it, and not ending it, does she
incur any danger? None (replied she) for she that does not excel the
Princess in beauty, may not enter therein, and from the door may you see
what is within.

I am contented (said the Souldane) that the adventure be t^ye^. But I will
first see the Combatting of the Knights, for I believe in my Court there are
such that think to save the Ladies that labor. Your will be done (repli^d the
damzel though it be better that your Knights do not so endanger themselves,
for their toil will be in vain. Yet for all this will I have it so, said the
Souldane. And thereuppon commanded all his knights, to try the adventure: and
the Damzels with their knights, returned to the sent, in the entering whereof,
it seemed to open in the midst, where straight was seen a throane with
thyrtie s^eppes, which seemed made of pure Crystal, in the middle thereof,
sat the King Gorgiano, armed with all his Armor, he leand his hand upon his
Chair, and on his hand, his head, seeming very mellancholy: at his right hand,
sat the beauteous and gallant Princess Meredian, in like manner as her Father.
On the top of all the Thro^ne, appeared Cupid the blind GOD of love, with
his bow and arrows, whose making was so artificial and natural, that every
one thought him alive. At his feet lay a Knight sore wounded, with an arrow in
his breast, who seemed with one hand to crave mercy, but with the other, he
held a scrowl^ very fair^ly written with plain Caldean letters, expressing for
what reason the King Gorgiano was imprisoned.

Here then arrived all the Souldanes Knights, in number above three thousand,
and were the valiantest in all his whole Empire.

The first that would prove the adventure, was a Cosen of his, called
Baltasano, of Nu(...)idia, who as it seemed, was chief over the rest: he was
armed in a rose color Armor, and taking with him two knights, would have
entered the tent, but the inchaunted knights that defended it, leaving one to
keep it, made against them, and at the first incounters ended the strife,
casting the Soldans knights on the ground. This done, the inchaunted knights
began to range about the field, that within a while they left none to withstand
them, and having no more to do, returned so quietly to their tent, as if they
had done nothing. The Sultan greatly amazed at this sudden exployte, had
far more desire then before to have the adventure ended, wherefore first
commanded the dead and wounded knights to be carried away, and then willed the
Ladies to try their Fortunes, highly praising the knights valor, thinking
them invincible. Many Ladies tried their chance, but none could enter the
Tent, who returned as shamefaste, as the Knights had been dishonored by
their falls. Which the Princess Florisbella seeing, took by the hand the
beauteous Mattarosa her Cosen, being one of the gallantest Ladies in all her
Fathers Empiers, and said to her. Shall we (fair Cosen) prove this
adventure, although for my part, I know where so many have failed, I shall do
but little. Even as please you (replied the fair Mattarosa though I perceive
you mock us all, but I will try it first, because I will not rest with
imagination, that you ended it by first proouing it, which then will be said
you did being the fairest, which I will not yield unto, the contrary being
so well known. It pleases you ^o^east (said the Princess^) but for the trying
of this adventure I would be glad that you might end it, to save me from that
danger and fear: and we shall after try the advantage you have in that
other. Th^n belike (replied the excellent Mattarosa) you will not grant me to
be the fa^r^st though I end the adventure: which seeing it is so, I promise
you to find out a Knight that shall defend it against all the world. You
promise much (replied the Princess) for I know not what knight will be so
hardy, as to attempt so haughty an interpryze, unless it be the knight of
the Images, of whom I believe you shall obtain nothing against me. All this
know, I (answered the Infant.) But I have a knight in these parts, that far
excells him, both in valiantcie and fairness. How know you that (said the
Princess) for I never heard any such thing. I Will tell you (replied the Infant.)
To my Fathers kingdom there came a messenger, that brought a letter from the
Sophy, father unto the Prince Perianeo, requiring his aid, to be revenged of
a subject of his, that with the help of a knight, called of the golden Image,
had slain his Son in law, the Prince Don Gallaneo, and had stolen his
daughter Persiana, and recounted such wonders of this knight, and of his rare
beauty, which hardly we believe, but that we were informed thereof by other
means. And this knight will I have to defend my beauty, which
netwithstanding, I fear he will not, for I have heard he bears your picture
graven on his shield. I am struck into a great amazement (answered the
Princess) with your discourse, and cannot comprehend that any Knight in the
world, would be so mad, to presume to beautify his armor with my
portrature. And I assure you, if he here arriueth, he shall do much to save
his head, in recompense of his presumption. Trouble not your self with any
such thought (said the Infant) for you would much more grieve, if you should
see all this place full of vanquished knights in my behalf. In this manner
chatted these two Mirors of rare beauty, till they approached the rich tent,
where there senses were ravished with the rare melodious Music that thence
sounded: and parting hands, the beauteous Mattarosa entered the tent, where one
of those Knights took her by the hand, and brought her to the steps:
whereon the infant courteously began to mount. All the beholders judged the
adventure ended: which not a little grieved the Princess, because she had not
first tried it. But she had not ascended the third step, when she felt her
self stayed, and striving to go up, she suddenly found her self without the
Tent, to her great grief, because she had not ended the adventure. The
Princess heereat laughing, said. I know not (fair Cosen why you sought a
sword, seeing you must not use any combatting with me. I know not what to
answer (said the pleasant Infant but that no trust is to be reposed in these
inchauntments, being only made according to their Authors mind: yet try you
it, that we may see your merits, for it may be, your company would lessen my
grief. The Princess going to try the adventure, she saw entered by the
farther side of the field, a Knight in a green Armor, very rich, with many
golden Bassiliskes thereon, whose gallant disposition more contented her, then
any the ever saw. In his shield was drawn her picture so natural, that it
seemed alive: by his side did ride an ancient Lady maskt, bringing in her
hands a naked sword, so bright, that it look like a transparant glass of fine
Crystal, set against the Sun: which she seeing, stayed herself. The Knight
and the Lady went straight to the tent. But Fristone seeing them at first
enter in the field, began to make his coniurations, not knwowing who they were,
nor to what end they came, nor never could know it, because Don Bellianis had
on the Emperor Broudezars armor: and the sage Bellona, which was she that
came with him, carried the same Emperors sword: yet he straight knew ^he
effect of their coming, and believing to have no let in his intent,
transformed himself into a most monstrous and ugly Gri(...)on, and went
straight to the Princess, and taking her by her arms, would have gone away
with her.

But the Knight of the Bassiliskes arrived se suddenly, that he had no time
to do it, and with his sword stryking at him, cut all his feathers, and
wounded him on his shoulder, and the good sword not only wrought this, but
also made the Sage Fristone, for to return to his natural form, falling
presently on the ground, bleeding apace: Whom the inchaunted Knights straight
took and conuayded within the Tent.

Don Bellianis stepping to the Princess, said. Faint not, Vsurpresse of
another heart, but animate your self, till you be freed from him that so
great harm would have done you. The Princess did so, with such amazement by
the fear, that she know not in what world she was. The like happened the
infant Mattaroso. But Don Bellianis being advertised of Bellona what he
should do, stepped to the Tent, where he was assaulted by the four
inchauntred Knights, with such hardiness, that they put him in great
extremity, for though by virtue of his sword, their inchauntment prevailed not
against him, yet were they very valiant and courageous. But the Prince seeing
himself before his Lady, and considering that to be the first battle in her
service, so handled his adversaries, cutting armor, flesh and all, himself
sustaining great labor, and the loss of blood. The Princess trembled for
very fear, thinking she should be put in like danger again. The infant
Mattarosa that was more hardy, said. What think you (fair Cosen) of yonder
knight? Surely I think it is he that I told you of, for by the devise of his
shield, and the report of him, I do not doubt it. We shall now know it
(replied the Princess:) But let us entreat our Gods to free him from the
danger he is in for our sakes. And therewith looked to the fight, wherein the
knight had brought his adversaries to such a pass, that they had almost
fallen, whereupon their isued forth of the Tent two mighty Giants, that
assaulted the Prince, giving him such blows, that they made his head kiss the
saddle pummell. But he with double force (increased with his rage) so behaved
him with them, that he threw two of the Knights dead to the ground. And
seeing the battle so long endured, resolved to enter within the tent in
dispight of them, knowing that if he did it, the fight would cease, and the
inchauntment end.

The Knights and Giants perceiving it, laid fast hold on him, but he being
of mighty and unmatched forces, maugre their power went in with them, and with
his sword he gave so hard a blow upon the steps, that he mad a dark
smoke, like a thick mist, ascend upwards, which so blinded the beholders
eyes, that they saw not one an other. But by means of the Sage Bellona, it
vanished, remaining no memory of Tent nor adventure, save the two dead knights
that lay on the earth. Who were able to set down the amazed admiration that
every one conceived, seeing those so strange things, and they were in such
case as if that had been the fearful day of doom: specially the Sultan
seeing all that had happened, who went to speak unto the knight that was
already mounted on his horse.

CHAP. XLIII.
What the Knight of the Basseliskes past, with the Souldane of Babylon, after
the battle, and with the Princess Florisbellaes departing unknown, promising
speedily to return and and serve her.

THe Prince Don Bellianis, seeing the adventure ended, according to his desire,
mounted a horseback to depart, for so Bellona would have him do, but
perceiving the Souldane coming toward him, he thought it discurtesie to part
without speaking, staid, and seeing he was come nigh him, setting his hand on
his saddle, alighted with admirable lightness, and prostrating himself,
demanded his hands to (...)sse them. The Sultan, against all entreaties, did
also dismount, showing the like courtesy that the knight did, (for he was a
prince absolute in all Courtly behavior) had not Don Bellianis stayed, to whom
the Souldan thus said. I cannot comprehend the cause excellent knight) that
having brought to end the greatest and no less strange adventure hitherio
seen, liberating us from such danger, you should depart, bereauing us of your
defined conversation by so sedain departure from our court, which I would
unwillingly have you do, though you were newly put in as great danger as the
last you undertook in our behalfes (which notwithstanding the Gods defend. And
farther I say, if at my request you deny to do it, withstanding my authority,
you shall be convicted by her, for whose remedy, our immortal Gods, I think
brought you hither. Where he embraced him with love, as the benefit received
bound him to. Don Bellianis was struck into such an amaze, that he knew not
how to be resolved, thinking if he did not obey the Souldan, the unkindness
would be greater, then the service he had done him. And on the other side, he
considered, that he might incur no less danger by discovering himself, not
knowing Bellonaes intent, in so concealing him. But to salve all, the best he
might, made this reply. It does not a little grieve me (most mighty Lord) that
I cannot do you the service my heart desires, because it lies not in my power,
being hither brought by yonder Lady that you see, without whose leave I may
dispose of nothing: but binding my duty to your service for ever, as the
person that most honor on the earth deserves. While they were thus talking,
the Sage Bellona came to them, and with her the two sole excellencies of
beauty, the Princesses Florisbella, and Matarosa, with such rare brightness
(that it would obscure the midday Sun in all his pride, shining in the middle
heaven where he dwelles. The above all fairest, the fair Princess
Florisbella, sole divine perfection of an earthly object, came with such a
gallant semblance, that no humane heart could have been so obdurate, but would
have melted at her sight: she was cladde in a white satti^ gown, with a
peticoate of the same, all cut upon most rich cleth of Gold, and every cut
tacked with a great Orient Pearl, which were so many and so well set, that
they made so strange a work, that the curiousness thereof could not be
discerned, the sleeves were long and large, hanging to the ground, closed with
wire of massiue gold, set with the same Pearls, and lyned with the same cloth
of gold, hung out with many invaluable Jewels, her Amber hair disheuelled
over her shoulders, hung backwards gathered together behind her ears, upon
which she had a Coronet garnished with Dyamonds, Rubies, Saffyres and pearls,
of more worth then that whole City before, on her Carkanet pended a
Carbunckle as big as two Walnuttes, that yielded so much light as four great
Torches burning in the dark. Her Gorget was so open, that plainly might be
discerned the rare excellency of the Creator of all things, in the pure wonder
of the Sunne-out clearing whiteness of her breast, adorned with in^stimable
Gemmes. And although she thus came attired, more beauty did glorify her
garments, from the divine natural of her face, then was her beauty graced by
the brightness of those stones, such sole supremacy did make her absolute,
for no artificial work could diminish nor augment her favor. The stately
passage of her feet, no more seemed to move, then the gentle blast of the
mild blowing wind. The Princess Matarosa was attired in that manner, whose
perfection had no equal, in the absence of her fair Cousin. In this manner
arrived they, where the Souldan was talking with the Princess don Bellianis,
who seeing the excellency of his Lady, that far excelled the portrayture of
his shield, rested so confounded with admiration, that his brave heart unable
to resist so fierce an assault, all covered with a cold sweat, as if that were
the last moment of his life, lost his senses, that had not the Souldane (who
thought some mortal wound had caused it) held him fast about the neck, he
had fallen to the ground: yet notwithstanding he was in such a trance, that he
felt nothing that was done unto him. Whereat the Princess Florisbella being
very sorrowful, stepped to him to unlace his helm. But the Sage Bellona
quickly running thither, cried out she should not do it: and embracing the
Prince, said that every one heard. What is the matter knight) that in time that
we most need your help, you show such weakness? The Prince at her words,
recovered himself, and greatly ashamed at the accident, replied. You know
(dear Lady) that I came no otherwise, seeing the hand of cruel death knocked
at my heart, unless I be succored with present remedy. Our immortal Gods
will not permit it (Sir Knight, said Florisbella) that we having received so
absolute remedy by the help of your vallourous arm, your life should be
bere^t you, to depart vngratified for your dear merits. Whereto he answered.

In all humble duty, lower then lowly earth, I kiss your beauteous hands,
(sole excellent Princess,) for the undeserved favor of your words, whose
power has only power to cure my decaying life, dispairing of ^ll remedy and
dear comfort in the whole universe, but by this.

While they were thus talking, the Sultan knew Bellona, whom with great joy he
embraced, she would have kissed his and the Empress hands, but the Sultan would
not suffer it, saying. Why have your (dear friend) kept your self away so
long time, not visiting us? for I know no cause you had for it, but now shall
you pay for all, not departing so easily as you think. And I pray you tell, who
is this valorous knight yt comes with you? for I am sure, you knew of our
distress, seeing you came in so great time of need. The wise woman made this
reply. You say true (dread Lord) for knowing your danger, and that surely you
had lost the princess your daughter, I undertook this iourny, imposing so
great a danger upon this knight, as he underwent by our coming. And believe
me, his equal lives not this day in the world, and without him, my coming had
been in vain: and hitherto I did not visit you, because you had no need of me.
I believe it (replied the Souldane) and now that our joy may be complete, I
pray you make this knight unlace his helm, and remain here some few days,
for it would greatly vex me, if such a knight should go from my Court unknown.
This must be pardoned (said she) for he must depart unknown: and therefore I
pray you do not importune him about it, for it cannot be otherwise. Hereupon
they went where the two Princesses Florisbella and Matarosa were chatting with
Don Bellianis, entreating him to put off his helm. Whereupon the Souldan said.
If you obtain no more then hitherto you have done of this knight, I believe he
will depart unknown. He will not so much wrong us, (said the Princess unless
he will have us make little account of his aid we received. And seeing he faith
he will do what this Lady does command him, I hope she will not leave us so
unsatisfied, in recompense of her long absence. I do beseech your excellency
(said Bellona) not to vex your self: for I assure you, if he now discover
himself, it will cost him no less then his life, in lieu of the pleasure he
should do you therein. And let this suffice, which according to our power we
have done. But yet in respect of this displeasure, I do certify you, that
your cousin the Princess Aurora is well (though sorrowful, wanting your
company,) she we left in Persia, with the Ladies you sent to seek her, and
thither must we go shortly. This has greatly comforted me (said she) yet rest
not altogether satisfied, wanting the effect of this my desire. I cannot
express the oppression of my grieved heart (most excellent and supreme Lady)
said Don Bellianis, to have so yoked the liberty of my condition to a stranger
power, that I cannot now, though it were with the certain danger of my life,
satisfy the dear obedience of your high command: for I have so tied my self
to another will, that I must not do more then what this Lady here shall
appoint me. But I do protest and promise you, by our high immortal Gods,
(having freed my liberty,) to return with all speed to serve you, and the
Souldan your father, whence I will not part, but by your command: in token
whereof, I do beseech you accept this King, which cost me no little labor, with
abundant loss of my blood, to obtain it. Wherewith you shall be safe and sure
of any such accident as this last. And taking off his Gaunlets, discovered the
Alablaster whiteness of his hands. The Princess heart was somewhat abashed,
adding more beauty, to her beauty, by the roseat tincture of a vermillion
blush, not knowing whether she should take the King which the knight presented
her, thinking she should thereby do him a greater favor then she would. Which
the Infant Matarosa perceiving, being greatly satisfied with the knights
behavior, said unto her. What does your highness doubt? why do you not accept
the precious gift of this valourous knight? would you see us every day in like
danger? which if you desire, I assure you we shall not every day have so good
help: for though I sustained some peril, yet was there none that succored
me. Receive this gift (daughter) said the Souldane, for it is no small thing to
keep the pledge of so valiant a knight. All this while the discreet
Princess, holding down her eyes, gazed on don Bellianis hand, thinking with
her self, that if his face, with the disposition of his body, did agree with
it, the whole world could not afford a gallanter not better knight, of whose
valor, she was sufficient witness. And seeing her Image on his shield,
imagined this was the knight whose praises her cousin had so inhoused.
Whereupon the subtle God of Love, on a sudden, took his tributary v^ties, by
the possession of her heart, and with such a violent stroke, penetrated it,
that having no defensive proof, nor the shield of reason to withstand it, but
unprovided, assaulted by his subtlety, yielded at the first encounter, resting
so vanquished, that she never had the power to recover the former liberty of
her heart. And the more she thought on him, the more she did ensnare her
self, as the disccurse of this present book mentions, for no small forments
this unseen sight of don Bellianis Cousin here, and with a sudden joy
conceived by her thoughts, dying her beauty to make it more fair, with the
color of an Orient Ruby. First, thinking that her Fathers command, and her
Cousins persuasions, were sufficient armor to shield her from after scandal:
with lowly courtesy on both parts, she took the King, saying. I do receive
(Sir Knight,) this present at your hands, lest it be said, I do deny the
gratesulnesse I owe, for the good turn you did, and taking possession of this
which is the least, you shall remain bound to that which is the most, I mean
your speedy return, to attend the Souldane my dread Sovereign: and because
you shall not forget it, I will keep this as a pledge, left me, by you, as
also in remembrance of her, that against my will does lead you away, before you
have received any sign of guerdon of my father. Yet before you go, I pray you
let us know the dangerous deceit we had like to fall in. I do most humbly
beseech you, (sole president of divine excellency) said (Don Bellianis) to let
me kiss the wonder of your hands, that I may thereby enjoy the fruition of so
high a favor as you have done, in the acceptance of the small gift of so mean
a Knight as I am, in respect of your highness. Again, promising my return
shall be so shortly, as the obedience of your command requires, unless my
hopes be frustrated by death: and turning to Bellona, entreated her, seeing she
knew the beginning and end of that adventure, she would fully satisfy the
Princess therein. Which she did, in manner already set down. And having done,
craved leave to depart. And so kissing the Souldans hands, and the Empress
Siluiana bad them and the Princesses farewell.

Don Bellianis did the like, with such grief (as any in his case may imagine)
leaving his heart with the Princess, and for it, carrying away hers. The
Princess Matarosa pleasantly said thus unto the Prince. I do believe sir
Knight, that the Sage Bellona has so maistered you, that you speak not but
when it pleases her, and if it be so, tell it me? for I presume to obtain
leave of her, for your tongue to play. Don Bellianis, that through his great
amazement had net seen her, but seeing her, replied. This has not been the
cause of my silent oversight, (courteous and pleasant Lady but the imaginations
of the sight there seen, which with my sudden departure has so increased my
admiration, and so intrapt me in my own thoughts, that they have suffered me
not to regard the deserved merits of your worthy person, robbing the power of
my speech, to consound me more in the deep consideration of my hearts
subjection. Then belike the fault is very little (answered she) by the speedy
redressing of our danger, wearing so good an armor as that. The present
blindness (dear Lady said he) is better to preserve my future sight. At your
return, you shall explain me this (said she) for now I do not understand it.
Whereupon the brave Prince don Bellianis mounted a horsbacke, not setting his
foot in the stirrope, as was his custom, and very gallantly managing him, he
made him bend his knees unto the earth: and bending down his own head in
sign of his duty, departed in manner as he came, with unspeakable joy, to have
so happily finished that adventure before his Lady, to his immortal glory,
which were it not tempered with grief of his departure, it had been enough to
kill him. But here we leave him, till farther accidents shall refresh his
remembrance.

CHAP. XLIIII.
What the Princess Florisbella did, after the Knight of the golden Image was
departed. Of her Laments and Conference with the Infant Maturosa, her Cousin.

THe Princess Florisbella, remained so amazed with the sudden departure of
the new Lover, that so quickly had made a pray of her tender heart, that all
her imaginations, were on naught but of Don Bellianis, and till he went clean
out of the field, she accompanied him with her sight, so steadfastly fixing her
eyes after him, that had not her cousin called her away to follow the Souldane
and Empress that were returning to the Court, there she had stayed, forgetful
of her self. The Infant Matarosa, said unto her by the way: What say you
(fair Cousin) to that great knight? did you ever see in all your life a man of
more valor? And trust me, I think it be he I told you of, a iltle before his
coming. I greatly desire to see the fairness of his complexion, whether it
accorded with the constitution of his body, and gallant behavior. I know not
what I should say (replied the Princess) for he has not seemed so well in my
eyes, and though his valor have freed me from the danger you saw, great is
his presumption notwithstanding, to bear my picture with him about the world,
and his discurtesie is no less, to depart unknown unto the Souldan my father,
and nothing respecting our entreaties, leaving me so discontented, and I had
not taken his ring, had not my father commanded, and you persuaded me unto it.
You have no reason to blame him for it (said her Cousiin) for he could do no
otherwise, being bound unto the contrary by the sage Bellona, and I know not
what Princess or greater Lady would have refused so dear a service as this
knight offered you so liberally, which you seemed to accept most unwillingly.
Speak not of it (answered the princess, for I had like to have showed my
self as unthankful, in taking it as he discourteous in not doing what I
entreated him. But if return he shall know the discontent he did me. Assure
you said her pleasant Cousiin, if he would be my knight, I would not hammer on
these doubts.

If he returns, he shall be (answered the Princess.) I will yield unto it
(said the Infant) if you obtain it without such cerc^^uie as you make. It may
be I shall at his return (the Princess made answer) and therefore rest
contented. I perceived no such intent in him (replied the Infant*) In such like
discourse went they with the Soldane, and Empress, till they arrived to the
Palace, where the Princess, saying she felt her self distempered, left her
Cosen, and her Ladies, withdrawing alone unto her Chamber, to consider at more
leisure of him that had so displeased her. And shutting the doo^e after her,
with a pensive heart unable to resist her passions, she cast her self upon
her bed, and with tears trickling down: her Cheeks, with sighs that
interrupted the clear passage of the speech, she said with a soft voice. Oh
unhappy Princess Florisbella, what vuluckie hour was that wherein thou
did go to see that cursed adventure? that has been the cause of these
thy torments and anguishe of heart, making thee hereafter bondslaue to grief,
and in the end gain thy freedom by death. Ah, deceytfull Ladies, fatal was
the moment wherein I granted you the boon you craved, to gain for my good
will, so many pains. Oh sage Bellona, if from one danger you have liberated
me in a greater, you have intrapped me. And I do beseech the Gods, to
terminate these woes with my untimely death. For what auayles it me to be
commaundresse over so many Kings, Princes, Lords, and Signiories, if the
fatal destinies of my unhappy chance have, tied the liberty of my heart
unto a Knight unknown, of whom I saw, but armor and his horse, neither know
I what he is, denying to discover his face. Oh immortal Gods, if this you
have ordered in the heavenly Synod of your decrees, why did you not also
summon me to appear before your celestial Thrones, to hear your cruel
sentence given against me? But what say I, disgraced that I am? For it may
be, that Knight is one of our Gods? For who could else have had the power
to do what he did in such a short time? And so inthrall the quiet peace of my
heart. Oh Prince, how have the Gods revenged thee, because I never regarded
thy high merits, punishing my contempt by that knight that would not show me
his face, whom peradventure you may be he, that would not diselose your self,
being displeased by my rather? But aye me thou art no^ he, for thy words never
so penet^ated my heart, nor the s^ge Bellona, (they great enemy by reason her
(...)e Princess Aurora) had not brought thee in her (...). But aye me,
distressed soul, be it as it will, only I(...) laug^^sh in perpetual
torments, and in the end, hope ^o (...) of (...).

While the Princess thus complained, her Cosen Matarosa, that by her (...)
withdrawing, did suspect what it might be, that came through a secret door
where she was, and staid to ouerheare her, but could understand nothing what
she said, and greatly wondering at this novelty, she went away, and came to her
Chamber door, and knocked, which awaked the Princess out of her lauient, who
brying her eyes, ordering her self she best she could, opened the door and
let her in. But her Cosen seeing her in that case, dissembled what she
thought, and said. How now Cosen) does the fear of the last adventure last so
long that i^ so troubles you? Or is it because you did no more good therein
th^n I? Or is it the discontent you conceived of the discourteous knight? If
the last, tell me it, and we will procure him to redress the wrong? The
Princess covering her face, with a blush, like the mo^^ings Sua^e rising in
the East, answered. Do not put me in more danger then there was the last,
(dear Cosen) for you make me think you know that Knight, making me imagine,
that by your means I am snared in the deceyte of yonder inchauntment. In this
manner past these Ladies many days, discoursing on nothing but the deeds of
the knight of the Bas^l^sks for so they called him, by reason of the armor
heed id wear, and the Princess Florisbella every day with longing desire,
expecting his return, still continued in her usual laments, wherein her
Cosen one day taking her, would needs know the cause of them, which she,
by great importunity declared, which was no small comfort to her after woes.
But here we leave them till their time, with the Soldane, greatly doubting
whether this was the Prince of Persia, which he confirmed to be, because he
would not discover himself. But his Lords persuaded him to the contrary,
saying. This Knight better became his armor then he. But now the story turns
unto the Prince don Brianell, whom we left in his journey toward Antioch.

CHAP. XLV.
What don Brianell did after he was gone from Bollera, and how he was informed
of the state of Antioch.

WIth great desire to procure the good success of his Ladies command,
deparded don Brianell to Antioche, thinking that to effect so weighty a matter
as that his foundation was weak. But continuing his voyage, meeting with no
adventure worthy the rehearsal, at length arrived at a City not above
twelve miles from Antioch, called Miriana, where he resolved to stay, and
learn the st^te of the kingdom. And alighting at a house of good credit, was
very well (...) by the owner of the house, that was one of the best Knights in
that Country. So supper ended, discoursing alone with him of diverse matters,
he demanded who was King of that Country, ^eeing then troubled with civil
mut^^e^? The hoas^ with tears in his eyes, thus answered. You shall know si^
Knight that after the King Pompeiano, ou^ sovereign was sia^^, by the men of
the Persian Sultan* a kinsman of his, called Don Gallaneo, became our King, who
governed us in peace, maintaining law and justice with all uprightness. But
since, we have understood he was ^lame at Persepolis, by so^^e of the same
Soldans subjects, and in whose absence there governed us as Viceroy, a noble
man named Damartyno, who with great wisdom and di^^^^tion, kept us in quiet
concord, till a brother of the King of P(...)a, by name the fearful
Tremolcano knowing yt in revenge of the death of don Callaneo of Antioch, the
king of Cyrus, with two more brethren of his, were slain in Persia, calling us
tra^tors and reb^^^, with a great power came upon us, and s^^u^^ng the Country,
Gariano which is a great Lord in his Country, took our Governor, saying he
would have rebelled with the land, and has imprisoned him in a castle, taking
possession of the whole kingdom, saying. Don Gallaneo has no nigher allie
then he, and so executes daily such tyrannies on the afflicted people, that we
desire rather to die, then live. This is sir, the truth of your demand. But
tell me (said Don Brianell) left your King Pompeiano no issue to inherit his
kingdom after him? He did replied his host) one daughter called the Princess
Aurora, whom we think to be dead: for we have never since heard of her. But
if she be not dead (said Don Brianell) and coming hither, will you not
receive her? We will all die in her b^hal^e, (replied he.) But these traitor
are so strongly fortifi^^, that we should hardly effect any good, unless
there were some to incourege the people of the Country, and for this none
better then she Governor Damartyno, but that his imprisonment forbiddes it for
ever. Is his guard so great (said Don Brianell) that you think he may not be
liberated? The guarde (replied he is not so great, but that the City is so
nigh unto the Castle, that upon the giving of the watch-worde, above thirty
thousand men would arm themselves. And within the Castle, there is a Mine
that reaches unto the King Tramolcanos Palace. How know you this, (said don
Brianell?) Because you seem a man on whom I may repose greater trust, I will
tell you (answered the host) I was Lieutenant of the castle, under Damartyno
three years, and then knew I it, and that way went I often to speak with him,
which makes me the more pity his imprisonment. Don Brionell liked well of his
hoasts words, and perceiving he wished well to the affairs of the Princess
Aurora said. Can you tell me how I might get unto that Mine to go into the
Castle? I do (replied he) but what does it concern you, that you will
undertake so dangerous an enterprise. I am his nigh A^^^^ (said don Brianell)
and would willingly put my self in hazard to set him at liberty. Although
it seems impossible to escape with life, in this enterprise (said the host)
because there is within, a Cosen of the Giantes, with ten Knights, I will
notwithstanding do it, and help herein while I live: and therefore will go
with you to Morrow to Antioche, being an honor to loose my life in company
of such a Knight. Don Brianell thanked him for it, promising that if their
enterprise had a good success, his pains should be well quitted. The deeds
do bring with them their recompense (said the host) and more then this, am I
bound to do for Damartyno. The next morning, saying that he must go about
certain affairs to Antioche, clad himself all in Armor. For though he were
poor, yet was he one of the valiantest Knights of that Country, all his life
trained up in chiualdrous designs. Which don Brianell seeing, wondered at it,
not knowing he was a Knight, and so departed toward Antioch.

CHAP. XLVI.
What don Brianell, and Palineo of the venture did, arriving at Antioch, and
the danger they were in.

WIth intention aforesaid, travailed these two Knights, till they came within
sight of the cities of Antioch, which was one of the best, and well peopled
City of the world, for there was within, above a hundred thousand great
households. Don Brianell highly admyred the Turrets and Towers of the same,
which were numberless, and the Sun reuerberating on them, made the City
seem of a burning flame. What think you (sir) of this noble City, demanded
the host? Well, replied don Brianell, for I have not seen a more fayrer, and
that better contented me. Not without reason do you say so, said his host)
for I assure you, there is but three fayrer at this present, which are Babylon,
Memphis, and Constantinople, which notwithstanding scant in fayrenesse equals
this. I pray you tell me your name said don Brianell) for I greatly desire to
know it, seeing we shall be better acquainted hereafter. My name is (said he)
Palineo of the Venture: and seeing this occasion requires it, I would gladly
know yours before we come to Antioche. I am called the aduenturous Knight
(answered don Brianell) and do believe you never heard me named, having never
traveled this way before. I have no doubt of it sir, replied Palineo* but you
must now change that name here, for it is said a knight so called, was present
at the King of Cyprus death. Thus went they till they met a Knight sore
wounded, going in great haste. Don Brianell staying him, demanded the cause of
his hasty journey in that manner? You shall know, sir, replied the knight,
that the County Gariano, to exercise his knights order yesterday, a tourney of
a thousand on each side, so many of his, against the like number of the fierce
king Tramolcanos: which on either part this day was begun very bloody: but
in the mean time, entering there in, two of the kings cousens, have made such a
massacre of the Counties knights, that none dare confront them, and my self
being wounded, as you see, am thus going to be cured, in a Castle not far from
hence, and so past away. What were we best to do, sir Palineo, demanded don
Brianell? That we go to the iousts (answered he) and there we shall see what we
have to do And thus resolved, arrived at the Tilt-yard, where but 500. of the
counties knights were left, and they so wounded, that they could no longer
withstand their adversaries, by reason of the cruel strokes of the kings
causes. Which don Brianell perceiving, and his valiant heart abhorring to be
idle, said to Palineo, Let us succor those almost vanquished. Be it so
replied he. Whereupon ^^wching their Lances, entered the listes, and at the
first encounters, overthrow two of the Giants knights: and don Brianell before
his Lance broke, unhorsed more then six. Palineo with a loud voice cried out
thus. Courage, courage, knights of Antioch, and show the valor of your minds,
least now you be reputed vanquished, which never hitherto has happened. Who
^^boldned with this speech, seeing the haughty deeds of don Brianell,
courageously renewed the bloody skirmish.

The two Giants seeing that novelty in the Cities knights, and how the Prince
don Brianell, like a bloody Dragon persecuted their men, did both together
assail him, to give him his death. But he that in greater perils had been in,
awaited them courageously, well covered with his sheeld, and they arriving both
at one time with their slycing semilers, discharged two mighty blows upon
him. But don Bryanell spurred his horse ^orward, within them, that the blows
lighted not full on him, notwithstanding his sheelde was cleft clean in two,
and he wounded one with a mighty thrust, that the sword appeared at his back,
(...)g dead on the ground. And seeing an other furious blow from the other
giant descend upon his head, and being destitute of a sheeld, c^^st the
s^^itor with his sword, which being of a better temper then the Giants, it cut
it in two, and straight thereupon struck the Giant on his arm, which from his
shoulder fell to the earth. Who seeing himself maimed of his lims, turned his
horse, and roaring fled away. Who were able to express the grief and rage of
Tramolcano, to see one Cousin slain, and the other wounded to death? Thereupon
calling out to his m^n to take that Knight, that had committed so great
treason: whereat, many encompassed Don Brianell: wherefore Palineo went to help
him, amazed at his haughty deeds.

The count Garianos men brauly defended him, yet had he remained prisoner,
(for the devilish Tramolcano descended with all his men had not Palineo that
foresawe the danger, plucked him by the arm, and said to him. Follow me sir
knight, if you will save your life, for it will be reputed no less valor to
save it thus, then s^aying to kill all this company. Don Bryanell allowing his
counsel, rained his horse backwards, and went away in despite of all that
looked after him. So soon as the king was come down from his window, the
tourney was parted, and he commanded of those and other knights above 4000. to
follow the murderers as he called them* of his Cousins, and dead or alive
they should bring the^ to him, and he taking with him, the dead bodies of his
slain Cousins, returned to his palace, to arm himself, minding in person to
follow the search: all which, was but in vain, for Palineo knowing all those
ways, nookes and lanes, that was thereabout, issued out of the City, in
sight of all the knights, spurring without ^^^gring, till they came into a
little Groaue, and turning on the right hand, entered into a garden, unseen of
any, and passed to the farther side thereof, unto a house, where shepherds in
stormy weather withdrew themselves, and there staying, don Brianell, said,
seeing they were not seen of any, Let us light here, if you please, that our
horses may rest, and from hence, may we well see if any follows us. Whereupon
looking from the high Mountain, and espying none, dismounted from their
horses, and put them in a stable that there was, giving them hay, and
prouender, they there found. And with great joy of their good success,
discoursed of their late adventure, greatly pleased with the death of these two
giants, who^ Palineo said, did great outrages in that land. I hope (said don
Brianell) we shall easily enter the castle. Hardly shall we do it (replied
Palineo) yet we will try it, seeing we are come to that effect. In the mean
time, were it good we had somewhat to supper. That were not amiss (replied don
Brianell) if our provision were better. Let me alone for that (said Palineo) so
soon as it is night, for I also greatly desire to see what is done in the
Palace, the better to order our affairs. And thereupon expected the approach
of the couerer of nightly actions.

CHAP. XLVII.
What don Brianell and Palineo did, going out of the City of Antioch, how
they entered the Mine, and of their fight withthe Castle, about the liberty of
Damartyno.

THe dark night being come, so obscure as they wished, Palineo unarmed
himself, and leaving don Brianell behind, put on a cloak he found in the
house, which the day before a shepherd had there left, and muffling his face,
went to the City, where, taken for a shepherd, he passed unknown, till he
came to the Kings Palace, where he found many armed knights that returned from
the search, among whom was the King himself, mad with anger, that he could
not hear of the two knights that slew his Cousens. Among this troop, had
Palineo occasion to go in, and so went unto the Mines mouth, whose door was
shut, and seeling whether it might be opened, he found the Lock very weak,
for the door used only to be shut, because that secret might not be
discovered.

And so returned to the City, and brought some victualles for himself and his
companion, wherewith, being almost ten a clock, he came to Don Bryanell,
where with a good stomach they supt, having eaten nothing since their coming
from Miriana, and having done, Palineo said. Let us be gone, for if longer we
stay, the King and the County may have supt, and so we be lock out of the
Palace. But what shall we do with our horses? (said Don Bryanell) for I would
not willingly loose mine, because this City contains none so good. If
(replied Palineo) we dye in this enterprise, we shall not need our Horses:
but if we escape, liberating according to our desire, our friend Damartyno, the
matter will be less, in loosing them. Don Bryanell replying never a word,
armed himself, and carrying his Helm in his hand, put on the shepherds
cloak, which Palineo had before woorne, who said unto him: You pass me, in
disguising your self, incurring no less danger, then I do: for if with the
many lights I be known by mine armor, in the Palace, you are like to suffer
with me. But what shall we do (said don Bryanel?) There can we do no otherwise
(replied he) but in the city we way better shift. And being come thither, by
the way they met two or three Pages, Palineo stepped to one, and taking him by
the cloak, made as he would draw his sword, the Page feared therewith, left
it him, and got away, crying out, they would murder him. But Palineo calling
don Bryanell, croste another way, because he would not be seen. Don Bryanell
could not stand for laughter, to see what devise Palineo had found to get the
others cloacke. What say you to this? (said Palineo:) he that has nothing,
must shift to get it with little labor. Now so the Gods help me (said Don
Bryanell) it was well done, and the quickness you performed it with, makes me
think you have not a feawe times used it. You say true (answered Palineo) for
some time through necessity, I have helped my self with like devises, which
is nothing: for in need, this cloak was as well mine, as his that woare it,
and perchance more too.

In this manner arrived they at last in the Palace (after the clock had
struck twelve) where the King was yet at Supper, and meeting with the Captain
of the kings guard, thinking they belonged to the County, demanded whence at
that time they came. They replied, we came from seeking those knights, the
King our Sovereign commanded to be brought unto him, and not finding them, we
returned to unarm our selves. So they paste, till they came to the Mine, and
seeing none was by, opened the lock, and went in, and chayning the door fast
on the inside with locks and chains, they found there, and feeling with their
hands, went along: And by the way Palineo said. It behooues us to conssder how
we shall behave our selves, and though you excel in valor, all those that
wear armor, yet in the end is it not amiss, to avoid all danger: therefore
let us go softly, for it may be, we shall free Damartyno without blow of
sword, or Lance. I would we were already within, (said don Bryanell) and as
for the rest, it would not be much, we should so do, through your good
policy. At length they came to the door on the farther side, that went into
the Castle: which passing, Palinco shut ^^^st, that none might that way
discrie the^, and giving one another a watchword, to know themselves in any
danger befalling them, groping with their hands, they came to the place where
Palineo knew the prisou was, which they found sure locked, which grieved don
Bryanell, thinking they should not do as they would. But Palineo said. Courage
(sir knight) and we will find means to open this door. And if not replied don
Brianell) our swords shall break it open You say well (answered Palineo) and
therefore let us softly go to the Castle Gate, and that none hear us, make it
sure, that neither by the one, nor by the other, if we prevail, any may bear
the news: and so going thither, Palineo took a handful of earth and cast in
the locks, through the keye holes, that it was impossible without breaking, to
open them.

I have learned more of you (said don Brianell in one day, then ever my Tutors
taught me in ten years. It might be (answered Palineo) they were never in
such dangers as I, and therefore could they not teach you, that which by
experience is learned. By this time were they hard by one of the servants of
the Castle, who perceiving they were not of the Court of guard, ran to the
Giants lodging, crying out, that strangers were within, which cries made the
Giant amazed, eappe out of his bed, and arm himself, while the man cried
about, arm, arm, the Castle is surprised. Whereupon, above ten Knights
that were within were feared out of their beds. Which the two knights seeing,
Palineo said. Follow me knight, before these unite themselves. Yet for all
their haste, their appeared many burning torches, at whose light, they saw the
fearful Giant coming, with a mighty Mace in his hands. Another way came
there six Knights already armed.

Don Bryanell required Palineo to assault the Knights, while he withstoode the
Giant, who if he had thought them to be but two alone, had not armed him: and
raising his heavy Mace, would have discharged it upon his adversary, but he
stepping aside, made him loose the blow, and wanting his shield, hoysted aloft
his sword, with both hands, and grounded it with mighty force, upon the
Giants head, whereon he wore a brazen Scull, which being cut, made him a
little wound. The Giant nothing regarding the blow, would have plucked him to
him, but don Bryanell seeing death before his eyes if once the Mace took him
full, straight cast himself upon him, and with muchado wrung the Mace out of
the Giants hands, but he took don Bryanel betwixt his arms, thinking to
stifle him, but he with a valiant heart, drew his dagger, and stabd it to the
hiltes, twice or thrice in the Giants breast, who feeling himself deadly
wounded, let him go, and drew forth a mighty Courtleaxe, that hung by his
side, and with it struck at don Bryanell, which he seeing come right to his
head, started aside, yet for all that, it cut his helm quite down on the one
side, and descending lower, it parted his armor, waunding him sorely on the
side, yet not dangerously. Don Bryanell with one blow struck at his leg, which
the Giant for haste, having not armed, was clean cut of, making him like a
tower fall to the ground: where roaring like a lion, within a little while, he
gave his soul to him, that through his evil works, had^o^g^ expected it.

Which ^one, don Bryanell went to help Palineo, that was in a ^ierce combatte,
with the Knights of the Castle, which were all there: among whom, he shew^d
the brave courage of his mind, and had slain already four, and with the
rest (though with danger) he behaved himself very bravely, which highly
contented Don Bryanell, that looked on, but thinking it no time to be idle,
valiantly assailed the knights, felling two dead at two blows, and not long
after, the rest not able to suffer his mortal blows, fled down toward the
Castle Gate, where the Porter trying to open it, to call for help, but all his
labor was in vain, which the knights seeing, returned again to their
adversaries, where quickly they fell breathless at their feet, with all the
rest of the Fortes, leaving none of the Giants company alive in the Castle

This dispacht, these two brave Warriors searched about the Castle, to see if
any were hid, but finding none, don Bryanell said. We have done ill, in not
saving one, to do what we would, and serve us at our need. Grieve not hereat
(replied Palineo) for we have no such buisinesse, nor need more service, then
I can do, being not so deeply wounded, that we should require any such help.

You say well (answered don Bryanell) but unless I be deceived, you are sore
wounded, and my self am in like case, and before we loose more blood, let us
set Damartyno at liberty. Be it so (replied Palineo:) and so took the keys
of the Prison from the Porters side, and opened it, where they found him
ouerladen with boultes and Irons, pale, megre, and weak, for want of
sustenance, tasting no food sometime in two, nor three days, whom the knights
seeing, could not stay the tears in their eyes, knawing him to be one of the
loyalest Knights living in those days. Damar^yno seeing those Knights enter
in that manner, said. What would you with me Knights? is your Lord now
contented to end my life, which would be no little comfort to my many
torments?

Palineo no longer able to conceal himself, unlacing his helm, with great
joy to see him alive, said thus. You have no cause to fear us (most loyal
Knight) being now at length set at liberty by the hands of this valiant
Knight, to whom you are no less bopnd, then for your life.

And by yours (said Don Brianel) for without you, mine had little auailed.
Wheruppon taking away his irons, with great gladness he embraced Palineo,
saying. I did assure my self, my mes^ dear friend, you would not fail me in
my necessity, for in such times true friends are known, more then in
prosperity, and humbling himself to Don Brianell, craved to kiss his hands*
seeing his person and that good deed required his duty. Don Brianel showed
him the like courtesy, and taking him up, saying. Tha^ for that little he had
don, he deserved no such thanks, being bound to more the^ that for him for her
sake, that sent him. Sir knights said Damartyno, I have certain servants in
prison some where about this Castle, for I know they were brought in with me,
them I pray you let us free* so they went to seek them, and Damartyno greatly
woondred to see so great slaughter by two Knights.

And after they had found the servants Don Brianel and Palineo, they were laid
in two beds, in the Castle, and were cured by one of Damartynos servants, that
were very skillful in that science, and there they continued certain days,
till they were well, giving order, that if any came from the king, they should
be admitted to them. But Don Bryanell the first day, required one of the
servants secretly to fetch their horses, where they had left them, which so
soon as it was dark, was done, that not a little contented Don Bryanel, for
he highly prysed his horse, being never a better in that whole kingdom, and
through the hurly burly in that City, none remembered they within the castle.
But after they were through well, Don Bryanell said to Damartyno, and Palineo,
being altotogither. Hitherto (sir knight) you have not known the occasion of
my coming, nor known what I am, having never seen me before, but to assure
you of both, read this letter, from the honorable Princess Aurora, by which
you shall know the beginning and the end of my travail. Damartyno taking it,
opened it, and read it, to this effect.

THe disinherited Queen of Antioch, Aurora, Princess of Miriana,
to thee, the most loyalest of all creatures, her loving Knight, Damartyno of
the Valley, governor of our Kingdom, by our will, though by a strangers hand,
health.
I know the unhappy chances, overthrows, and unfortunate misaduentures, have
not been unknown to thee, (as the man that has sustained the like) which
have by the provision of our immortal Gods, befallen the King Pompeiano thy
Lord, and my dear Father, as also the feared absence of my person, so
necessary to escape the fury of the Prince Perianeo, of Persia, and Dou
Gallaneo of Antioch. And now reposing my confidence on the high estate of thy
descent, in the great loyalty I have known in thee, and by the love my father
bare thee, (whose death partly on some of them is revenged, as this knight will
more at large tell thee I hope the like shall also be seen in thy presence,
through thy means) and order: either by my coming in person to these, or with
an host of men, sufficient to regaine our rights: for which cause I send thee,
this valourous knight, excellent not only in arms, but in all things else,
required in a noble man. With him shall thou determine the best, and the
speediest means, for these assaires we move, but the Gods protect thee, and
preserve thee in that state of loialtie, which thou ever gloriest in.


So soon as Damartino had read this letter, did again embrace Don Brianell,
saying. I could not have or desire better news, the^ these (sir knight) to
comfort my afflicted heart, ioying to know of the welfare of my soueragne. But
how shall we do, for this tyrant and usurping king Tramoscano, is so mighty and
strongly fortified in this land, that we may hardly oppose our selves against
his forces: I am of opinion (said Palineo seeing we are to begin so great an
enterprise, we make it known unto the Duke of Siluania, to whom, having Don
Gallanco granted all his livings, the usurper has now for some causes
disconsented, and he I am assured seeing you at liberty, will not deny all
his aid, assisting you, to reobtaine that which he has lost, or else loose
what he has new. I do very well like what you have said (replied Damartyno)
and therefore you and I will to morrow go to him, leaving this Knight in the
castle, to answer any that comes from the City.

It were better we all go together said Palineo and if any come, we will leave
order with these servants what they shall do. Be it so (said don Brianell) and
I think best we go ere it be day, that we be not seen putting on some of the
armor of the giants knights. So resolved on this, went to rest themselves, and
about midnight they rose and changed their armonr, Damartyno and Palineo taking
the best horses in the Castle, departed, commanding their servants, if any came
from the City, they should tell them the Giant had commanded none should
enter to speak with him, because he was not well. And that they should make
them answer, according to their demand, in the Giants behalf.

CHAP XLVIII.
What befell Don Brianell and his companions, with the Knights of the Lions,
and how knowing one another, they all returned to the Castle.

TWo parts of the night were ouerpast, when the dazeling light of pale shyning
Dyana, would give place unto the eastern rising of the mornings sun, whose
clear approach, excels from the heavens the obscure darkness of the gloomie
night: when these three knights issued forth of the castle, upon mighty
c^ursers, with strong and knotty lances in their hands, and only with two
pages to carry their sheelds, taking the right way to the city of Siluania,
where they thought to find the duke. Now says the hystory, they were not gone
six miles from the City, but they saw coming toward them, the way they went,
two knights, the brauest and gallantest that ever they saw, they brought with
them six pages, al upon fair horses. Did you ever see gallanter knights in
your life, said Don Brianell to Damartyne? No truly replied he. Assure your
self, said Palineo, they be not of this country, for none here can sit a
horse, nor manage him so bravely, yet by their armor they seem nouel knights.
What makes you think so, said don Brianel? Because they have on the^ no such
signs as you, (rep^^t he) whereby it seems they have not bin in many co^bats,
or at least with that armor, and if you think good, it would not be amiss to
try if their substance does agree with their show.

Do not so (said the prudent Damartyno) put not your self to such trial, for
oftentimes combats are iestingly begun, but in earnest ended, especially,
because me thinks, your knights will bravely defend themselves. With this talk
they came nigh one to the other, whereby they saw them armed, in a rose
colored armor, exceeding rich and curiously graven, with many Lions, crowned
with laurel wreathes, one of them stepped forward, and meeting the three
knights, in the Persian tongue saluted them, they did the like, with much
courtesy. Come you (sir knights, said he of the Lions) from the city of
Antioch? Yes replied they) we yesterday came thence. But why do you ask it?
Because (said he) I go in search of a Knight, whom I hope to find there: it
may be you know him. What devise wears he in his armor? Or what is is name,
demanded they? I know not how he may call himself this way. (replied he of
the Lions.) But he wears a tawney Armor, with a sea wave, and on his shield
engraven the Picture of a most fair Lady: and I know if he be in these parts,
he cannot but be named according to the courage and high valor of his mind.
Don Brianell hearing this, thought they demanded for Don Bellianis, and because
he spoke in the persian language, he imagined he was gone from Bollera where he
had left him, and that this might be some friend of his, that followed him: and
desirous to be better informed of this, said. This knight you ask for, is not
in this country. But if you will tell me what you would with him, I Will tell you
where you may find him: for though this knight is no less named then you say,
none can give you better instruction of him then I. That I feign would speak
with him, there is nothing I more desire: therefore you may greatly favor me,
to tell me the place of his abede without farther question. I will tell you
(said don Brianell) and let me know your name? I am called the knight of the
Lions (said he) I am never the wiser for that name (replied don Brianel) and
therefore unless you be more plain, you shall not know of me what you would.
You are a strange man (said the knight of the lions) to deny me my request,
having told you my name, for in that you know me not, I am not bound to tell
you, who my grandsi^r was. It is a marvel you are not known (answered
Palineo) having ended so many adventures, with that armor, which they so
testify, seeming wondrous battered, and it may be a wonder, you were not
without farther question known, since the Kingdom of Antioch is so full of
your prowesses. Whereunto the Knight of the Lions thus replied. By your words
I perceive, because I should not by you have said, what you did by me, you so
have mangled your armor, and not that with them, you have been in any fight:
And if you have in you, such deeds as words, proudly to breath unseemly
^easts, I gladly would break a lance with you, upon condition, that if I
vanquish you, this knight be bound to tell me what I demanded, and if I be
vanquished, yours shall be my armor, that you may imploye them in such
enterprises you speak of. Be it as you please (answered Palineo) if my
companion will agree to the condition. I am content (said Don Brynnell.)
Whereupon Palineo turned him abuot to take his carrere, so did the Knight of the
Lions, with great fury meeting in the midst of their course, and staying
themselves in their* saddles, their incounters were so strong, that the Knight
of the Lions lost his stirropes: But Palineo by the fierce shoute, was unhorsed
clean^ over his horse cropper: and his adversary paste away with most gallant
continent, toward don Bryanell, that much wondered at the brave encounter, to
him thus saying. Seeing (sir Knight) in you remains, to discharge the
condition of our controversy, I entreat you to satisfy my demand? Don
Bryanell being about to answer him, arrived Palineo, saying. Knight of the
Lions, let us end our battle, for though I have fallen, I am not euercome. I
am bound to no more (said he) having said I would but break one lance, and
since you are fallen, you have no reason to urge this any more, but that this
Knight do keep his promise. Let him be judged first overcome (said don
Bryanell) and the rest shall quickly be fulfilled. But the ethe^ Knight of the
Lions, feeing this, went to them, saying. There can no right judgment be given
on this controversy, for both you will say he is not vanquished, though he be.
But I will try it with you (said he) toward don Brianell, which of them is
vanquished, and therefore pass no sentence hereon, for our battle shall
arbitrate it, and what we else would Don Briaenll perceiving that the knight
threatened him, made no answer, but rained his horse about, cowching his Lance
to meet his adversary, who was nothing slack to do the like. And like two
furious lions incountred with mighty strength, making the earth tremble under
them.

The Prince don Bryanell encountered the knight of the Lions, in such sort, that
penetrating his sheelde and armor, he made him be^d his head backwards unto
his horse crooper. But the knight of the Lions, struck him on the vysor of his
helm, which being of a fine temper, resisted there the fury of the Lance,
which for all that, break his laces, making it fly from his head,
constraining him to save himself, by holding about his horses neck, almost
besides himself: thinking he had lost his eyes. In this manner stood he a
while, till he recovered his senses, and then seeing his adversary come
toward him, with his sword drawn, ashamed of his accident, and mad with rage,
did the like, covering his head with his sheelde, for want of a helm. But ^re
he could do so, he was suddenly known by the knight of the Lions, and he
that iousted with him, thinking he had done him some great harm, sheathed his
sword, and in the Greekish tongue, said. Stay Prince of Macedon, for you must
not combatte with me. Which don Bryanell seeing, did the like, and said. Who
are you, that knows me in a strange land? The Knight not replying, unlaced his
helm, whom straight Don Bryanell did so too, demanding for his dear Brother
Don Bellianis? He is very far from hence (replied Don Bryanell.) But what is
that valiant knight that comes with you? It is my Brother Don Clarineo of
Spain (answered he) and I do greatly joy to have met with you, for else we
kn^we not what to do.

By this Don Clarineo was thither come, and with great love embraced him, and
said. To the great wonder of Damartyno and Palineo, to see their good
agreement, it had almost cost us dear, to know of you against your will,
what we required, and I assure you, if you longer conceal your self, I will
no more seek you.

We are in a strange Land (replied Don Bryanell) therefore can I do no
otherwise, though more danger it should cost me. But what shall we do? for
thinking to find you in necessity, the Emperor and us, shipped our selves with
one hundred thousand men, which are not far from hence. For knowing you were
come to restore the Princess Aurora to her kingdom, we departed to aid you.

Where left you my Lord the Emperor, demanded Don Bryanell? He is not with
us? I assure you (answer Lucidamore) for he and Sauian of Trebento were
separated from us, by a certain adventure. All this talked they, that
Damartyno and Palineo did not understand, though they thought they knew one
another.

Wherefore don Brianell said to the Princes, it behooves you to say, that the
Souldan of Babylon has sent this army, to plant the Princess Aurora, in her
kingdom, that these knights may more willingly further us: for in these
affairs, they are very forward. Is my brother here, demanded Don Clarianeo,
and my Cousin, the Prince Arfileo? I left them in Persia (replied Don Brianell)
in a bloody controversy against the Souldane, about the death of Don Galfeo
of Antioch. Is it possible said (Don Clarianeo?) I assure you, you have greatly
gladded me with the death of that traitor: but tell me, did my brother Don
Bellianis kill him? He did (answered Don Brianell,) and hereafter I will
inform you all the manner how. And now advertise your Pages to say, you all now
come away from Babylon. So they shall, said Don Claryaneo.

Whereupon Don Brianell called to him Palineo, (that was much abashed at his
fall) and said to him and Damartyno. You are (sir knights) to give the immortal
gods great thanks, for directing our affairs better then we wished, for these
knights are my near kinsmen, and for whom I would undertake any danger in the
world. I speak this Sir Palineo, because you should not vex your self at your
chance, nor diminish your good will toward me, for what is past. And besides
all this, they are come about the same matter (we have in hand) landing a
strong army, sent to this end, from the Sultan of Babylon: which will not a
little help us, being here hard by: Wherefore consider what best we may do, for
in this nor in any thing else, none of us will in no manner contradict your
counsel. Whereunto Palineo somewhat comforted, made this answer.

I could not have received greater comfort for my overthrow then this, being
done by such a knight, and your Allye, for which cause, he only deserves to
gain the honor of all adventures in the world: and therefore do I remain no
less bound to his service, though I believe he little needs it, then
heretofore I was to yours. I do greatly thank you (Sir knight) said Don
Clarineo, thinking my self happy to have met you, and do rejoice we came not
to handy blows, being sure to have been vanquished by you, as your courteous
words, sufficiently do show. And therefore, I do surrender all the honor of
the victory to you, as your due, and resting yours for ever, as my future
deeds shall approve. And so embracing one another, expeld all envious rancor
from their valiant hearts. This done, Damartyno said: he thought good, they all
returned to the Castle, whence that morning they were returned, where they
might conclude what should be performed, and that in the mean while, one of
the Pages should go and charge the Army to stay where they had left it, till
they received farther order. This counsel being allowed, they sent two of
their pages with this command, and themselves returned to the Castle, where
having rested that day, they resolved that the prince Don Lucidamore and
Damartyno, should that night go unto the army, and before the morning light,
they should conduct close to the walls of Antioch, which they already knew to
be in arms, with above one hundred thousand fighting men, because by their
spies they were advertised of their power, and the usurping king accounting
them to be enemies, determined to meet them in field, yet commanding the
City gates to be fast shut, least unawares it should be surprised, leaving
within 40. thousand men to defend it. And he with the County Gariano, prepared
to set forth. Moreover, it was resolved, that don Clarianeo and don Brianel,
with his friend Palineo, should pass through the mine into the City, and
procure to open one of her gates that they might enter to them, and by that
means win it, which was so strongly fortified with munition and men, that they
within feared nothing, for the space of two years. So Damartyno and his
companion, departed to the army, where arriving, he greatly rejoiced to see
the good order thereof. Don Lucidamore, notwithstanding his pages had delivered
his message, did himself gave commandment, they should say they were sent by
the great Sultan of Babylon.

CHAP. XLIX.
The great danger the Princess don Clarianeo, and don Brianel, sustained in
the city of Antioch: how they were succo^ed by the knight of the sse Bal^^ks.
The winning of the City, and the death of the Tyrant Tramolcano.

THe appointed hour being come, which made every one think it a year, so much
they d^u^red to be within Antioch, and having seen the signal of the approach
of the Emperors arm, the valiant knights don Clarianeo, don Brianel, and the
politic Palineo, opening the door of the mine, went through it to the
Palace, but they were scarce at the palace side, when they heard a great
noise, and harkening what it might be, they understood it was, because the army
of strangers had so suddenly appeared before the walls, whither the king
Tramalcano, with the cou^ty Gariano, were going, with an infinite company, to
see if they would assault the City before the morn, whereto there lacked not
two hours. All which indeed was so: for Don Lucidamore and Damartyno, having
commanded all their me^ to hang scarses upon their armor to be known from their
enemies, did at that time conduct their troops, hard by the gate, which should
be opened for their entrance. Be in quiet said Palineo, and let me go forth
to see what we were (...) do. Do what you will (answered Don Brianell for
here wee^^ stay for you. And presently opening the door, softly he went
forth* How like you this Knight, said Don Bryanell? What should I say of
him? (answered Clarianeo) but that I never saw a more br^uer Knight, I mean
of more policy, in all my life before.

Hereuppon don Bryanel, recounted unto him, all that in his company he had
done, which greatly contented Don Clarineo: at which time, he returned, saying.
(Sir knight) the Giant is gone, with all his company, let us now follow him,
doing as the time shall minister occasion. They did so, thrusting themselves
among those that were going to the walls, where arriving, they saw the gate
fast shut, which they had determined to open, and that the Giant having
paste a Garrison there, was going to speak with the County Gariano.

I believe (said Palineo) we shall have more adoo to open the Gate, then we
had thought. I have (answered don Clarineo) considered, how we may do it:
which is, that your Cosen (meaning don Bryanell) shall keep the passage from
the Mine, letting no more pass hither: and that you (Sir Palineo) shall by
force take the keys from the Porter, and with them, procure to open the gate,
and I will defend you, from these that are already here: And this must be with
the speed, that the valor of our courageous hearts, and their charge we have
enterprised, does bind us to. Whereupon don Brianell settled himself in the
passage, which being narrow, he could scarce defend himself. Palineo with
great courage, by the light of many torches, that were kindled, stepped to the
Porter, and with his sword cleaning his head in two, at one blow, snatched the
keys from his side, but ere he did it, many knights assaulted him, to give
him his death. The valiant Prince don Clarineo, not forgetting what he had to
do, stepped before, to defend him, bestowing so mighty and mortal blows, on
every one which approached, that they fled from him, as from the presence of
death. By this time had Palineo, through his speedy diligence, opened the
gate, had not the fearful Tramoleano (hearing that sudden accident thrre)
with an infinite number of knights, returned with his heavy Mace, tamming with
such a fury, that if don Clarineo had not stepped behind the dead horses and
knights, that he had slain, he had wondrously escaped his life, at that first
fury of the horses incounters, but doing as is said, he wounded the mighty
Giants horse, thrusting his sword quite through his head, that the furious
beast, in such manner raised himself, that he ouerthrewe his Master. The
treachereus County Galliano, would have done the like by Palineo, but he
stepping aside, tumbled him from his horse, with one blow. And certainly,
they could not have given two better blows, then these, that more might help
them. For when the Giants knights, that were about a hundred, saw their
masters down, alighted also, because the narrowness of the place might not
be a cause to hurt them, with their horses. The fearful Giant being very
heavy, with great gain raised himself, and foming through his mouth,
blaspheming all his Gods, went against Clarineo, who being joined with Don
Brianell, were both in a fierce skermidge, giving, and receiving mighty
blows, whose eecho rezounded in ye camp without the city. And the giant
seeing him there, resht in, to hold him, while his men did kill him, but having
no advantage in strength over him, don Clarineo to escape from his hands,
bravely plucked him to him, that both fell down, where he was pittiously
wounded, and had not his strong armor defended him, he there had left his
life. And getting from the Giant, he began with them a most cruel fight (with
such danger as any may imagine.) Whom Palineo seeing so fore wounded, wo^dred
how he breathed. Don Bryanell was in no less peril, for so many laid on him,
with haste to pass by, that he bleeded as fast as any of them. In this danger
were they all three, looking for nothing but death, though the King and Trapter
County, were wounded no less then they. For Don Clarineo minding to leave his
life revenged, so laid on them, and others, that all were imbrues in their
own bloods. And whosoever then had seen them, would have rather judged them
so many raging Tigers, or hungry Lions, then knights, hoping of no succor of
the^ without: for though they procured to enter, could not approach the gates,
being defended by ye giants garrison. While this thus paste, at such time as the
giver of the bright light illuminated the dark night, there came down a
valley, not far from the city, a mighty pillar of fire, and after it,
followed a knight, with two of the vgliest giants, that ever were seen, who
with such furious speed (as does a thunderbolt break through the air)
approached to the Wall, and set a Ladder against it.

The knight that came with them, whose armor was all garnished with Basilisks,
alighted from his horse, and without let of any that were below, he mounted
thereon to the top of the wall, where he bestowed such deadly blows, that ere
they were aware of him, he had tumbled above fifty over it dead. Don
Lucidamore, that such haughty prowess saw in one Knight, leaving his army to
Damartynos charge, quickly climed the ladder, and scarcely was he on the top,
when the giants taking it, returned the way, and in the manner they did come,
leaving the beholders amazed with wonder. The knight of the Basiliske coming,
instructed in what he should do, descended certain steps of stone that were in
the wall, beating down on both sides many knights before him, clearing the way
for don Lucidamore, that followed him, making no less slaughter then he, on
that rebellious people. At length he arrived at the gate where don Brianell
was, weary and tired, who seeing the Knight of the Basiliskes, thinking him to
be one of his enemies, struck him a mighty blow, but he knowing him, defended
it with his sheeld, and rusht in where he was: there spied he Clarineo, that
had before him above thirty Kings slain, and then with one blow, threw the
County Gariano dead to the earth, but was in extreme danger, because he
looked to the trusty Palineo, who through the much blood he had lost, was in a
trance, that he was feign to bear him close to the wall, where he kept him
before, himself making stupendous deeds. And there arriving thr knight of
the Basilisks, in the Greekish tongue he said. Courage, brave knight: for you
are already succored. At the end of which words, with one mighty blow he
cut off the Giants leg, that he fell down, where he breathed his last, and
beating away all the knights about him, he quickly freed that Gate, stepping
both unto the Portall thereof, where Lucidamore, and don Brianell were. And the
troops that were without, seeing they could not enter in, had overthrown all
that side, making a great breach in the wall, through which ten knights might
easily pass together, with such fury pressing in, that they extremely were
oppressad. Defend you this entry (said don Clarineo,) to the knight of the
Basiliske) while I open yonder gate, which he did so bravely, that in despite
of them that first arrived, he first overthrew above five hundred dead, and
deadly wounded, making the rest give place unto his puissant strokes. Don
Clarineo went to Palineo for the Keys, which he by no means would let go cut
of his hands, and with them opened the gate. Which being seen of the camp,
with great clamours approached to enter into the City. The Knight of the
Basiliskes, and his companions, perceiving it, withdrewe themselves to give
that fury place, with whose arrival the battle in such manner was renewed,
that the place was filled with heaped Mountains of dead men: and this because
the King Tramolcanos multitudes were infinite, and expert, and knowing that if
they lost the City, they should all pay the tribute of their deaths by their
enemies swords, fought like mad men. But the Princes having recovered their
knights, together with the knight of the Basiliskes, and don Clarineo, having
assured the person of Palineo, whom he found with life, uniting themselves,
pressing in the thickest of the battle, with such courage, as they augmented
in themselves, with desire to see those affairs terminated with a good end.
The curreuts of blood began to run about so fast, like Rivers descending
from so many mountain tops. Damartyno considering that the City would
hardly be woonne by that means, by reason of the many people within to defend
it, commanded all his men to name aloude the Princess Aurora, which they so
did, saying, Antioch, Antioch, for the Princess Aurora. Which cry and name,
the people of the Country hearing, and thinking their Lady and Princess was
there, whom they so grealy desired, abandoned the men belonging as well unto
the traitor County, as the Giant, and withdrewe themselves, which they had
not don in the beginning, because they thought them enemies unto the City, and
land, themselves crying within as the others did without, trampling under their
horse hoofes, and massacring without pity those traitors, in such sort, to
revenge themselves, for theoutrages done by them, that ere it was woonne, they
left not one alive to bear the news of their desolation, having slain that
morning above fourscore thousand, wanting not above six thousand Christians.
And this happened through Damartynos policy, which if it had not been (though
their adversaries had also in the end all died by the sword) their losses had
bin infinite. This done, don Lucidamore caused to be proclaimed, that none upon
pain of death should stir any thing in the City, but quietly lodge therein,
without oppressing or molesting any way the meanest Citizen of the same. And
having taken all the fortresses, castles and holds of the City to their power,
calling don Clarineo, and don Brianell with him, went all together to the
knight of the (...)s, who being mounted, would depart. But don Clarineo,
remembering the danger he had freed him front, with greet love embraced him,
saying.

Oh most glorious and renowned knight, the excellentest that ever did draw
sword, I hope you will not so greatly wrong us, so to depart unknown, having
liberated all of us from so great danger. For which not only our lives, but
the whole glory of the lasting victory of this battle, is too little
recompense. For such aid, thinking our selves sufficiently honored, by solie
knowing what you are. This sp^ke he in the Greek language: for when he at
first did succor him, he encouraged him in the same tongue. I know not
excellent Prince) answered the knight of the basiliske, how I may cancel the
bands you tie me in, by the incomparable merits of your words, yet
notwithstanding unloose my helm Don Locidamore more amazed then at first, to
know his brother, did presently unbuckle it, whereby the excellency of his
complexion was seen. Whom don Clarineo knowing, rested so confused with
content, that the tears ran down his cheeks, and with a high voice, said. Oh
mighty Lord, that for us all did suffer, what great wonder do I see? having
before mine eyes my dear Lord and brother the Prince don Bellianis? Whereupon
he straight lept from his horse, to kiss his hand. The like did all the rest.
Don Bellianis seeing them do so, dismounted also from his horse to embrace all
those knights, with such content as may be imagined. Here wants nothing now
(said don Lucidamore to end our demand: but the presence of our Lord the
Emperor. That shall not need (rep^ted don Bellianis) for I have left him well
within the City of Bollera, and hard by Persepolis, whither we must go with
all speed.

How arrived he there demanded don Charineo) hauig lest himself far from
thence: That I know not (said don Bellianis but I left him where I tell you,
and there I believe we shall find him^ Here were they separated by the
multitude of the knights, yt came to do their duties to don Bellianis, not
able to express their joy with his sight: And he commanded them all, to keep
his, and all their names secret, for he would have none of the City know
what they were. Aod having done with their greetings, they went to the king
Tramolcanos Palace, where they lodged, and their men about the City were
entertained, having voyded it, of the dead carcases, offering no injury nor
wrong to any Citizen. They also carried the noble Palineo to the Palace,
which had recovered his senses, whom all those Knights visited, and highly
honored. With whose presence, he highly rejoiced, as also to see those
business ended. Don Clarineo and don Brianell were laid in two rich beds,
hard by Palinios, where their wounds, which were many, were dressed by very
skillful Chirurgions. Don Bellianis taking in his company Damartyno, whom he
greatly esteemed, for the Princess Auroraes report of him, and went about the
City, and assembling together all the States thereof, and chiefest Citizens
of the same. Don Bellianis made them a short discourse, thanking them for
their loyalty, they always observed, promising they should all have their
losses requited, with full and ample satisfaction and showed them the letter
written to Damartyno. They greatly consolated by his speech, promised to
procure the restitution of the whole Kingdom: upon which conclusion, don
Bellianis returned to the Palace, leaving Damartyno giving order, to recover
the rest of the Province, without more spilling of blood. To which effect he
sent messengers, to all Cities and places of importance in the kingdom.

CHAP. L.
How the whole kingdom of Antioch being recovered, the state of the County
Gariano was given unto the politic Palineo of the Venture, and leaving
Damartyno governor there, all those Princes departed toward Persia.

SO soon as it was known through all the Kingdom of Antioche, the total
ruin and utter destruction of the usurping King, and all his forces, they all
arose against the Tyr^u^ts garrisons, knowing those Knights came from their
lawful and right Princess, so that utterly subuerting those adverse
strengths, leaving no man with life, they sent Ambassadors to Antioche, to make
them know these events, so happily brought to end: which greatly gladded
them, sending thither Governors to order those vprores, till all things else
were otherwise concluded. By this time the wounded Knights were through well,
except Palineo, that being worse wounded, was longer in healing. But one day
being altogether in Council, it was determined, that Damartyno (as before)
should sway the government of the whole Kingdom, and did swear all the people
to obey him. And though he refused it, alleging he was far in years, and
therefore it better became him to withdraw unto a private life, leaving the
variable chances of the giddie world: yet in the ^^de he was forced to do
it, at the entreaties of all the Nobility of the land, that highly esteemed
them. And don Bellianis having understood of his cosen don Brianell, the great
toil and dangers that the pollitike Palineo had in those businesses
sustained, called him before all the greatest Peers, saying thus.

If the merits that your valor, and your worthy person do deserve, should
accordingly be recompensed (valiant and politic warrior) all this kingdom
were insufficient to counterpoise your high deserts, being by your only means
recovered: for it is manifest, that you were the cause of the restitution
thereof, as also of Damertynos liberty: the glory of all which things
deservedly should to your self be attributed. Which notwithstanding, I
entreat you, (not regarding the smalnesse of the gift, but she good will of the
giver, and as a token of your farther deseruings) to accept as your own, the
whole estate, and Lands belonging to the County Gariano: wishing it were in a
better time, that I might express my love toward you, with larger effects,
according to the vsance of my mind. Yet will I procure the Princess Aurora to
confirm you this, with promise of a greater recompense. All those Lords that
were there present, highly allowed and commended, what Don Bellianis had,
especially the Princes Don Bryanell and Clarianeo. To whom Palineo thus made
answer. Excellent Prince, and most heroyicke, for so may I with reason though
I do not know you) call you, having on me extended the magnificence, of your
royal mind, by the bounty of your liberal hand, which in no less a person
then I speak of can be seen, having ^one nothing that might deserve so much
as the company of such famous knights: but the greatness of your largeness
passing al compare, binds me to this: And so do I receive these favors,
only to employ the same, together with my life in your service: and the
Princess Aurora my sovereign Lady, beseeching the immortal gods, that when I
do forget this duty, that then I may be made an example of the like
ingratitude to all in the universal orb. And thereupon prostrating himself
upon his knees, desired to kiss his hand. But Don Bellianis refusing it,
embraced him with great aff^^^i^n. The like did all the other knights: calling
him thereafter Count Gariano, having deserved it by the virtue and valor of
his mind, possessing nothing of his ancestors, but a horse and armor, and
weapons. Don Bellianis having finished this action commanded, all his army
speedily to ship themselves, charging all the leaders and Captains to bend
their voyage to Persia, and attend his coming or order, from him at
Persepolis: making them kn^we the danger wherein he had left the Emperor there.
They with a good wind departed, leaving don Bellianis alone, with only his
brothers, and don Bryanell, that determined to meet them by land, After all
this, they continued eight days in Antioch, which being pacified and quieted,
they resolved the ensuing day to depart. The Count Gariano, a^^ the Governor
Damartyno, greatly sorrowing for their a(...)t before they went, they so much
entreated them to (...) themselves, that don Bellanis not able to deny it, ^^^d
them what ^he^ were, taking their words, they should not dis^l^se it to any who
rested amazed: yet very glad that these affairs were concludes by so great a
prince: and giving the^ guides to (...) their way to Persia, they at length
departed. In which journey (...) them, the History here ends this first
part: ^^^^ng h(...)ten bark, in the doubtful surges of (...), on the quiet
shore of (...)tie and patronag^^g favors.

FINIS.

