PRINCIPLES FOR YOUNG PRINCES. COLLECTED OVT OF SUNDRY AUTHORS, BY GRORGE MORE,
Esquire.

PROVE. 19. Hear counsel, and receive instruction, that thou may be wise in
the latter end.

printer's or publisher's device

Printed at London, 1629.

To the Reader.
Honorable and courteous Reader, though I had no intention to publish this
collection, yet now upon some consideration, and for that also I hold it as fit
for young Noblemen and Gentlemen to read, as for young Princes to understand, for
that they may reap some profit thereby, I thought it not inconvenient to commit
the same to the Press, commending it to your good acceptance, and favorable
Censure, my meaning to you being of more value then my labor. And so I rest,
denoted to do you better service.

GEORGE MORE.

The Table of the Chapters contained in this Book.
THe Regal and Politic government. 1 Who fittest to govern. 3 A Prince to
be just in his sentence. 4 A Prince to be true of his word. 8 A Prince to be
constant in his act. 12 A Prince to be secret. 16 A Prince to be liberal. 18 A
Prince not to be covetous. 19 A Prince to be learned. 21 A Prince to be
religious ibid A Prince not to shed innocent blood. 23 A Prince to be
circumspect in giving credit to reports. 25 A Prince to be merciful. 28 A
Prince not to be proud. 29 A Prince to be humble. 31 A Prince not to exceed in
anger. 33 A Prince to be moderate in his diet. 35 A Prince to be continent of
life. 37 A Prince to beware of Parasites. 39 Who to be of a Princes counsel.
43 Not to commit the Government of the Commonwealth to one Counselor only.
47 Not to place a Stranger in authority. 50 Dangerous to take aid of a
Stranger. 51 A Prince to get and keep the love of his Subjects. 52 Who to have
charge in war 56 A Prince to be well advised before he begin War, and
careful in his fight. 61
PRINCIPLES for young PRINCES.
CHAP. 1. The Regal and Politic Government:
AS in natural things the Head being cut off, the rest cannot be called a
Body: no more can in Politic things a Multitude or Communality without a head
be Incorporate. Whereupon the Philosopher, 1 Politicorum says, That whenever
of many is made one, one amongst them must govern, and the rest be governed.
Therefore a people desiring to live in society together, and willing to erect
either a Kingdom, or other Politic Body, must of necessity choose one to
govern that Body. Who in a Kingdom of Regendo, is called Rex. And so by the
people is established a Kingdom, which government is absolutely the best. And
as the Head of the Physical Body cannot change the veins and sinews thereof,
nor deny the Members of their proper strength and necessary nurriture: no more
can a King (who is head of the Polliticke Body) alter or change the laws of
that body, or take from the people their goods or substance against their wills.
For a King is chosen to mainetaine the Laws of his Subjects, and to defend
their bodies and goods. So Brute arriving in this Island with his Trojans,
erected here a Regal and Politic government, which has for the most part
continued ever since, for though we have had many changes, as first the Romans
subduing the Britains, then the Britains entering again: then the Saxons,
then the Danes, then the Saxons again, and lastly the Normans: yet in the time
of all these Nations, and during their reigns, the Kingdom was for the most
part governed in the same manner that it is now. Plutarke says, that at first
all that governed were called Tyrants, but afterward the good Gouernnours
called Kings, and the evil Governors Tyrants: for in the beginning, some men
covetous of honor and glory, did by their strength force the people to obey
them, and to subject themselves to their laws at their pleasure, and so
established only a Regal government, which done by force, and governed
against all right and reason by rigor, was accounted tyrannical. For though a
man by force do subdue Cities and Countries, yet he ought to rule according to
reason: and if he know God according to the Law of God. But when he is chosen,
or admitted King by the people, and has his power from them, he may not
subject the people to any other power, yet he has a great and large
prerogative, which he may use at his pleasure.

And here I thought not amiss to set down some few Laws and Customs of
other Commonwealths, whereby their good government and life may appear, they
not being Christians.

Ptolomeus, King of Egypt, feasting one day, seven Ambassadors, at his
request, every one of them showed unto him three of their principal Laws and
Customs. And first the Ambassador of Rome said, we have the Temples in great
reverence, we are very obedient to our Governors: and we do punish wicked
men, and evil Livers, severely. The Carthagenian Ambassador said, in the
Commonwealth of Carthage, the Nobility never cease fighting, nor the Common
People and Artificers laboring, nor the Pphilosophers teaching. The Cicilian
said, In our Commonwealth, Justice is exactly kept: Merchandise exercised with
truth, and all men account themselves equal. The Rhodians said: at Rhodes old
men are honest: young men shamefast: and women solitary, and of few words. The
Athenians said, In our Commonwealth, rich men are not suffered to be divided
in Factions: nor poor men to be idle, nor the Governors to be ignorant. The
Lacedaemonians said, In Sparta envy reigns not, for all men are equal, nor
covetousness, for all goods are common: nor sloth, for all do labor. In our
Commonwealth, said the Ambassador of the Sicyonians, voyages are not
permitted, because they should not bring home new Factions: Physicians are not
suffered lest they should kill the sound: nor Lawyers, to take upon them the
defense of Causes and Suits. And to these may be added, Anatharsis Letter to
Cressus, King of Lydia, concerning the Gretians. Know (says he) that in the
studies of Greece, we learn not to Command, but to obey: not to speak much,
much, but to keep silence: not to be contentious, but to be humble, not to get
much, but to content our selves with a little: not to revenge our harms, but
to pardon injuries: not to take from others, but to give our own: not to take
care to be honored, but to labor to be virtuous: Lastly, we learn to despise
that which others love, and to love that which others despise, which is poverty.

CHAP. 2. Who, fittest to govern.
NOw to show what manner of man is fittest to govern, I read in Liuie, that
men borne in Arms, great in deeeds, and rude in eloquence, ought to be chosen
Consuls: and that men of quick spirits, sharp wits, learned in the Law, and
eloquent, should be for the City. For a Prince (so the Consul was for his
time) ought to be a Martial man, stout and courageous as well to defend his
subjects, as to offend his enemies; great and worthy in his actions, as well to
be feared of his foes, as to be beloved of his friends: and not to be curious,
to speak eloquently, but to deliver his mind plainly and wisely: it being
more necessary for a Prince to do well, then to speak well. For wise words
are not commendable, if the deeds be not answerable, whereupon the Philosopher
Pacuinus says, those are to be hated, who in their acts are fools, and in
their words Philosophers. They that will therefore (says Plato) have glory in
this life, and attain to glory after death, and be beloved of many, and feared
of all, let them be virtuous in doing good works, and deceive no man with vain
words. And he counsels the Athenians to choose a Governor that is just in
his sentence, true of his word, constant in his act, secret and liberal. These
be the principal moral virtues most cecessary in a Prince.

CHAP. 3. A Prince to be just in his sentence.
FOr a Prince ought to be just in his sentence, according to the words of
Solomon, Sap. 1. saying, Love Justice you that Judge the Earth, For a just King
(says he) Pro. 29. does advance his Country: and the King that judges the
poor rightly, his throne shall be established for ever. Therefore he ought not
to be led, either by favor, passion, or gain: but according to equity and
justice: and to have care that all his Counselors and Magistrates do the
like. And to attain to this virtue of Justice; a Prince must call to God for
wisdom, which he cannot obtain, being of evil life. For wisdom will not
enter into a soul possessed with malice, nor dwell in a body subject to sin,
(says Solomon) Sap. 1. But if thou (says he) call for wisdom, and incline
thine heart to Prudence: then shall thou understand Justice, and judgment, and
equity, and every right way. Prou. 2. Therefore he prays, saying: Give me (O
Lord) that wisdom which assisteth thy seat, and cast me not off from the
number of thy servants, for that I am thy bond-slaue, and the son of thy
bondwoman, a weak man, and of short life, unable to understand aright, what
is Justice and Law: and whosoever is the most perfect and excellent amongst the
sons of men, he is to be accounted as no body, if thy wisdom does not
assist him. Sap. 9. All good and worthy Princes have labored to attain to
this wisdom, and to execute justice most exactly, insomuch that some have not
spared their own children: so sacred a thing they held Justice to be. As for
example, Brutus, who understanding that his two sons were of the conspiracy
for Tarquinus Superbus, caused them both to be put to death in his own
presence. Cassius likewise seeking to get the love of the people, and to make
himself King, was beaten to death by his father. Pausanias, General of the
Lacedaemonians, received 500 talents of gold to betray Sparta, but Agesilaus
his father understanding thereof pursued him into the Temple of Minerua
(whither he fled for Sanctuary) and caused the doors of the Temple to be
nailed up, and so there made him dye of famine, then his mother took his
corpse, and threw it to the dogs, not suffering it to be interred. Darius
likewise, King of Persia, understanding that his son Ariobrazanes meant to
betray him to Alexander Magnus, cut off his head. Titus Manlius, being
challenged by one of the Latins, to fight the Combat stepped forth of his
rank, and in Combat killed him, yet because it was done without license, his
own father, being then Consul and General presently put him to death
Posthumous likewise, did the same to his son. Fidericke, Earl of
Harlebecque, and Forrester of Flanders, having made very strait Laws, for the
reducing of his Country to lustice and good life, put his son to death for
breaking the Law, in taking a basket of Apples from a poor woman, and not
paying for them. Edward the first, put his son in prison, Prince Edward, for
breaking the Parkes of the Bishop of Chester. Henry the fourth, also commended
the Lord chief Justice of England, for committing the Prince to prison, for
transgressing the Law. And King Antiochus had that care to have Justice
ministered, as he writ to all the Cities of his Kingdom, that they should not
execute any thing he commanded if it were contrary to Law: but they should
first advertise him thereof: The Emperor Justinian likewise commanded the
Lawyers to be sworn that they should not plead in an evil and unjust cause.
The like Law was made in the ninth Parliament of James the first, King of
Scotland, that all Counselors and Advocates, before they plead any temporal
cause, should take oath and swear that they think the cause to be good they
plead. Lewis the ninth, King of France, was a just and virtuous Prince, loving
the good, and punishing the wicked, and was a Capital enemy to suits,
commanding the Judges to do speedy Justice, so that suits then were laid away.
Alexander Magnus was so far from being transported from Justice, as when any
made complaint to him of another, he slopped always one ear, saying, he must
keep that for the party accused. The Emperor Adrian was of that integrity in
Justice, as one Alexander accused another before him, called Aper, and bringing
his proofs only in writing, he said that his informations were but Paper and
Ink, and perhaps forged, and that a man ought not to be condemned but by
honest and substantial witnesses, and therefore he sent Aper to Rufus
Governor of Macedonia (from whence he was brought) commanding him, diligently
to examine the witnesses against him, and to see that they were honest, and of
good name. King Edgar of England had likewise that care to do Justice, as in
Winter time he would ride up and down the Country, and make enquiry of the
misdemeanors of his Officers and Governors, and punish them severely that
offended the Law. And as the followers of Justice shall not only be famous in
this world, but shall perpetually live, and receive a kingdom of glory in the
world to come, as says Solomon, Sap. 5. So the Princes that minister
injustice, and do not judge rightly, shall reap infamy, and incur the high
displeasure of Almighty God, as Solomon also witnesses, saying: Hearken (O
Kings) and understand: learn you who are Judges of the bounds of the earth, in
respect that power is given unto you from above, and strength from the Highest,
who will examine your works, and search your thoughts, and because when you
were Ministers in his Kingdom, you did not judge rightly, nor judge rightly,
nor keep the Law of Justice, nor walk in the way of God, he will appear unto
you quickly, and horribly: for most rigorous judgment is done unto those that
govern. With the poor and mean man mercy is used: but mighty men shall
suffer torments mightily, Sap. 6. And the royal Prophet says, that God is
terrible to the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 75. Which does very well appear by
the strange punishments he oftentimes inflicted upon them, as upon Pharaoh, who
was drowned in the red Sea, pursuing Moses, and the servants of God: upon
Nabuchadnezzer, who was cast down from his Throne, and made companion to
beasts: upon Ozias, who was stricken by God with a filthy leprie: upon Ioram by
an incurable flux: upon Antiochus the Tyrant, who rotted alive: upon Herod,
who for killing Saint James, and persecuring the rest of the Apostles was
stricken by an Angel, and consumed with worms whilst he lived: upon
M^mpricius King of Great Britain, who was devoured with Woldes: upon
Anastasius the Emperor, who was killed with thunder: upon Seldred a Saxon, King
of England, who waskilled by the Dinel, as he was banqueting with his
Nobility: upon Drahomira Duchess of Bohemia, who for procuring the death of
Ludiuille her mother in law, a very virtuous woman, and of many Priests also,
was, as she passed in her Coach, over the place where the Priests were
murdered, swallowed up by the earth: upon the wicked King of Navarre, Anno
1387 who fell into such an infirmity, that all his limbs were cold: for
remedy whereof he was sowed in a cloth wet in aqua vitae: and when the man
had done, for lack of a knife to cut the thread in his needle, he burned it
with the Candle he used, and so by chance set the cloth on fire, which could
not be quenched, but that the King lying three days in extremetorment, dyed
thereof. And many more for their injustice and wickedness, have been punished
very strangely, and oftentimes lost their Kingdoms: for a kingdom, as
appears; Eccle. chap. 11. is transferred from Nations to Nations, for
injustice and injuries. Therefore it behooves a Prince to have most special
care hereunto.

CHAP. 4. A Prince to be true of his word.
IT is requisite that a Prince should be true of his word, and faithful of his
promise, both toward God and man, for it is said, Deuteronomy. 23. When thou have
made a promise or vow to thy Lord God, be not slack to yield it, for he does
require it at thy hands. And Solomon says, Prou. 8. J detest a double tongue.
And again, Pro. 17. he says, that a lying lip does not become a Prince.
Cicero likewise De officijs, says, that fides, which we call fidelity,
(consisting in the verity and constant performance of words promises, and
covenants) is the foundation of Justice, which preserves a Commonwealth. One
of the laws of the Knights of the Band in Spain was, that if any of them
broke his promise, or falsified his word, he went alone by himself, and no
body spoke to him, nor he to any. And the Romans had great care always to
perform their word; insomuch, that the first Temple builded in Rome, was
dedicated to the goddess Fidelity. And upon a time, they wanting money to pay
their Soldiers, and to maintain their Armies, thought it better to spend the
goods of the Commonwealth, then not to pay the Soldiers their wages: saying
if the Commonwealth be not vpheld by faith and keeping of promise, it will not
be vpheld by riches. And at another time, because they could not aid the
Saguntines, according to promise in due time (they being besieged and for want
of aid, spoiled by Hanibal) did not only build up their City again, but
after this made war in Spain for revenge, by the space of 14 years. In
which time they subdued the Turditanes, (who brought Hanibal into Spain) and
made them pay tribute to the Saguntines, and chased out of all Spain, the
Carthagenians, and restored all the Saguntines that were either imprisoned or
fled. Scipio making war in Africa against the Carthagenians, granted them
Truce for a time that they might send Ambassadors to Rome, to treat of Peace,
but before the Ambassadors returned from Rome, Asdrubal spoiled 230 ships of
the Romans, whereupon Scipio sent to Carthage, to advertise them of the breach
of the Truce: but his Ambassadors could not be heard, but were threatened by
the people. Soon after, the Ambassadors of Carthage, returning home from
Rome, came through the Camp of Scipio, who sent for them, and told them, that
though Carthage had broken the Truce and law of Arms, yet would not he break
the custom of the Romans, which was to observe the public faith, and so let
them pass. Julius Caesar likewise kept faith and promise always with his
enemies, though they broke with him. The Emperor Nerua, (succeeding Domitian
in the Empire, who had put to death diverse of the Senators) did promise that
he would put to death any Senator: which greatly pleased all the Senate. Soon
after some of the Senators conspired against him: which discovered, he would
not put them to death, because of his promise.

The Emperor Augustus, having made Proclamation to give 25000 crowns to him
that should take Crocotas, Captain of the Thieves in Spain, called
Bandeleros: Crocotas offered himself to the Emperor, and demanded the money
promised by him. The Emperor, for performance of his word, did not only give
him the money, but his pardon also. Sextus Pompeyus, having wars with
Antonius the Triumuir, and meeting him upon a treaty of Peace, and thereupon
inuiting of him to supper (giving him his faith for his assurance and safty)
was moved by some to detain him prisoner: but he answered, that to be the
Emperor of the world, he would not falsify his faith. Licurgus, brother to
Poledectes, King of Lacedaemonia, having promised fidelity to the King, refused
the offer of the Queen, who being left great with child, offered to destroy
it, and to make him King, if he would marry her. But he, like a faithful
brother, proclaimed her son King so soon as he was borne, governing only
during his minority, chosen thereunto by the people. Ferdinando, brother to
Henry the third, King of Castile, being left Tutor to the Kings son, was
urged by the three Estates of Castile, to take the Crown himself, but he
refused it, saying: He would never be false, either to his brother dead, or his
brother living, to whom he had promised fidelity. And as these and many more,
are famous for their fidelity and performance of their word: so a number are
infamous by their perfidiousnesse and breach of their word. For Plutarch says,
that Alexander Magnus, causing certain Indian Soldiers to be killed, (after
they had yielded themselves to him upon his word) spotted and stained the
renown of all his glorious Conquests, and royal virtues. Hanniball never kept
his word nor faith with any, but to serve his own turn. Therefore Autiochus,
King of Syria, (to whom he fled, vanquished by Scipio) made no account of him.
And he going from thence to Prusias. King of Bithynea, one as perfidious as
himself, for that he meant to have delivered him to Quintius, General of the
Romans, whereof Hannibal understanding, poisoned himself. Siphax, King of
Numidia, by breaking his word with Scipio, lost his Kingdom and life in
captivity. Ptolomeus, King of Egypt, having promised safety to Pompey (who fled
unto him, overthrown by Caesar) notwithstanding put him to death, and sent his
head to Caesar, which he refused to see, and wept for sorrow, and commanded
them that brought it to be put to death. Shortly after, Caesar assisted
Cleopatra, killed Ptolomeus her brother, and made her Queen of Egypt.
Alfonsas, son to Ferdinando, King of Naples, under the promise and safeguard
of his father, got to come to him, four and twenty Princes and Barons, who
notwithstanding his promise, put them in prison, and upon the death of his
father (being four and twenty years after) put them all to death. Charles the
seventh, King of France, when he was Dolphin, made John Duke of Burgundy
believe that he would make a peace with him: whereupon they met at a place
appointed, where Charles caused the Duke to be presently killed. But Charles,
after this, wearied with the wars, Phillip, son to the Duke, made against
him: and of the subjection England brought France into, by this opportunity,
did reconcile himself to Phillip, and asked him forgiunesse openly by his
Ambassadors. Charles the last, Duke of Burgundy, having given safe conduct to
the Earl of Saint Paul, Constable of France, took him prisoner, and delivered
him to the French King, who put him to death. But Sultan Soliman, the great
Turk, did worthily punish his Bascha, for falsifying his word, who sent into
Valona, to pass into Jtaly, landed at the Haven of Castro, where the
Inhabitants being astonished, yielded unto him upon his word and fidelity, that
they should depart with bag and baggage: nevertheless, he slew them all,
except those that were fit to serve for slaves. But he returning to
Constantinople, Sultan caused him to be strangled for his disloyalty and
perfidiousnesse, and sent back all the prisoners with their goods into Italy.
Thus you may see how honorable it is for one to keep their word, and what they
deserve that falsify their faith: for a faithless Prince is beloved of none,
but hated of all, suspected of his friends, not trusted of his enemies, and
forsaken of all men in his greatest necessity.

CHAP. 5. A Prince to be constant in his Act.
IT is likewise very fitting that a Prince should be constant in his Act.
First, to advise well before he resolve, but after, resolution to be constant,
and not changeable: For Saint Ambrose, writing to Simplician, says: that a
fool is mooueable as the wind: but a wise man is not astonished by fear, nor
changed by force, nor sunk by sorrow, nor proud by prosperity. The Romans
besieged Casselin, Fabius would have given over the siege, but Marcellus
persuaded him to the contrary, saying: that as there are many things a good
Captain ought not to attempt, so ought he not to desist or give over an
enterprise once begun and taken in hand. Bertrand de Guesclin, a Frenchman,
serving Henry, against Peter, King of Spain, was by the Prince of Wales taken
prisoner, and Peter by this victory, restored to his Kingdom. The Prince
offered to give Bertrand his liberty without ransom, so he would serve Henry
no more, which he refused, because Peter had murdered the Queen his wife,
Blanch de Burbon, and married a Sarizen kings daughter, the better to
strengthen himself and had renounced the Catholic faith. Then the Prince
asked him whither he would go if he were at liberty: he said, where he would
soon recover his loss, and desired the Prince to ask him no further. Well,
said the Prince, consider what ransom you will give me, for I refer it to
your self. With thanks he said, he would give him 100000 doubles of gold. The
Prince thought he mocked him offering him so much, and said he would take the
fourth part. I thank you said Bertrand, and you shall have 60000 doubles
willingly. Of which the Prince accepted. Then said Bertrand, very constantly
and confidently, Henry may now say and brag, that he shall die King of Spain,
for I will Crown him, whatsoever it cost me. The Prince was astonished at his
so haughty speeches, yet used him very houourably, and gave him his liberty,
whereupon he paid his ransom, by the help of the King of France, and of
Henry of Spain. And after sieve battles, took Peter prisoner, put him to
death, and made Henry King. The Priuernates warring against the Romans, and not
able to resist their forces, sent their Ambassadors to Rome, to demand peace:
but because they had not observed the Treaties of Peace before time, some
thought it not fit to yield to their demand, and to conclude a Peace with those
that would not keep it. Whereupon the Ambassadors were asked, what punishment
they had (in their judgment) deserved for breaking the Peace before. To which
one of the Ambassadors answered, that the Priuernates had deserved the
punishment which those deserve, that think themselves worthy of freedom and
liberty, and hate slavery and bondage.

Some thought this answer too proud and peremptory for men overcome:
nevertheless they were asked again, if that they being pardoned for their
former breach of peace, would from thenceforth keep the Peace granted them: to
which the Ambassadors answered again very constantly, that if they gave them
a good peace, they would faithfully and perpetually keep it: but if they gave
them an evil peace, it should not long continue. Upon this answer, diverse of
the Senate were moved, but the greatest part did not condemn them for this
constant and resolute answer, considering that the Ambassador spoke as a free
man, and that every one in bondage will seek for liberty, therefore it was
concluded that the Priuernates should have such a peace, as they should be
admitted and received for Citizens of Rome, and enjoy the same liberty and
privilege as the City of Rome did.

Agiges, King of the Cretians, about to give battle to the Licaonians, his
Captains told him that his enemies were too great in number, but he not feared
therewith, nor any thing changed, said, that he that would reign over many,
must fight with many. Leouidas likewise, son to Anaxandridas, when his men
told him fighting in battle, that the Arrows of his enemies were so many as
they covered the Sun, was not dismayed thereby but constantly continuing his
fight said, then shall we fight under their shadow. And the great Prince Bias,
falling by chance in the danger of his enemies, the Athenians, and being asked
of his Captains, what they should do, he seeing their fear and inconstancy,
was not moved, but answered, that they should report to the living, that he
dyed figthing, and he would report to the dead, that they went away flying.
Scipio, though he got the victory against Antiochus: yet was he not changed,
but gave him the same condition of peace he had offered him before the victory.
Spurius Seruilius, Consul, being accused before the people for the same
matter, for which they had cond^mned Menemius, his fellow Consul, (who through
grief thereupon dyed) was of that constancy and courage, as he freed himself,
and condemned the people for their proceeding against Menemius. Perses, King of
Macedonia, who ouerthrone by Paulus Emilius, the Roman Captain, was brought
before him prisoner. Emilius did rise out of his seat, to receive and honor
him as a great Prince fallen into that misery by the hazard of Fortune. But
Perses, not constant in magnanimity, cast himself at his feet upon the ground,
using such base and abject requests, unseeming for a King, as Emilius said to
him. Alas poor man thou dischargest fortune, and chargest thy self, unworthy
of that honor thou have had before, being so base minded, which has made thee
an unworthy adversary of the Romans. But Cressus, King of the Lydians, being to
be put to death by Cyrus, showed such constancy and resolution, (remembering
Solon) as Cyrus forgave him: restored him, and made him one of his chiefest
Counselors. And Pelopidas, prisoner in the hands of Alexander, King of the
Phocians, sent him word that he marueiled why he put his Citizens to death, and
not him.

The Tyrant wondering at his great constancy, asked why he made such haste to
dye. To the end (said he) that thou being yet more hated of God and man, then
thou art, may the sooner be destroyed. Leaena, privy to the conspiracy of
Hermodius and Aristogiton, with others, against the Tyrant of Athens, would
never confess, nor accuse any, but bit of her tongue, and spit in the Tyrants
face. In memory of which constancy, and secrecy, they erected a Lioness of
brass without a tongue, at the entry of the Castle. Zeno likewise discovered
for conspiring the death of Diomedes the Tyrant, accused the Tyrants best
friends, to make him more afraid, and faining to tell him some thing of them in
his ear, he bit off his nose. Then being beaten in a mortar, to make him
confess, he bit off his own tongue (with a singular constancy) because he
should accuse no body. Anaxagoras the Philosoher did the like. A Prince
therefore should be constant, and prepared for all fortunes. For Seneca says,
that as a cunning workman can fashion an Image of any kind of matter: so a
wise man should be constant, and take in good part all kind of fortune: For
(says he) as fire tries gold, so does adversity and cross fortune, a man of
valor.

CHAP. 6 A Prince to be secret.
IT is necessary that a Prince should use great secrecy in all his actions:
for Valerius says, that secrecy is the best and surest bond, for by it great
matters may be wrought, and without it Princes designements easily crossed.
Therefore the Frenchman has a proverb, saying, Que ta chemisene sache ta
guyse. Let not thy shirt know thy secret. Peter, K. of Arragon, being asked
what he would do with a great Navy he had prepared, (with which afterward he
recovered Sicily from the French) said, that if he thought his shirt did know
it, he would burn it. Hanniball flying from Neron, Neron left his Army near
unto him, and went himself secretly with a reasonable force to join with
Liuius against Asdrubal, whose Army they overthrew, killed him, and 56000 of
his men, and took prisoners 5400. Which done, Neron was returned to his Camp
again, before he was known to be absent. At another time the Romans used
such secrecy, as King Eumenes demanding of them aid against King Perseus, it
was never known what was demanded, nor what was answered, before the war was
ended which the Romans made at his request. The Kings of Persia punished to
death those that discovered any thing determined upon in counsel. And in
Darian, a place in the Indies, they will never discover any secret, especialy
the spies, for what torment soever. Both Leaena and Zeno, before mentioned,
were greatly commended for their secrecy, as well as for their constancy.
Alexander Magnus, reading a letter of great secrecy, one Ephestion being in
principal favor with him, presumed to look on, and to read it also.
Alexander would not debar him, but the letter being read, took his Ring, and
with it sealed Ephestions mouth, saying, that he who would charge himself
with another man's secret, ought to have his mouth close, and sealed. King
Lysimachus greatly favoring Philipides, bid him ask what he would, and it
should be granted him. Philipides said, I will accept of any favor you will
bestow of me, so you commit not your secret to me: thinking it fittest for a
King to keep his secret to himself, and the safest for another not to know
it. So had it been happy for Fuluio, if he had never known the Emperors
secrets, for the Emperor Octauian committing a secret to him, he discovered it
to his wife, whereof the Emperor getting notice, was offended with him. Fuluio
understanding thereof, and in despair of the Emperors favor, told his wife
that he would kill himself. You have reason, said she, seeing in so many
years you have not known my imperfection, or if you did know it, to trust it:
but though the fault be yours, yet will I be first punished, and so killed her
self: then Fuluio did the like. The Poets fained Tantalus to be in hell,
having about him water, and the fruits he desired to eat, which as he offered
to take, fled from him always: and this was his punishment, for revealing that
which was by the gods determined in Counsel. They feigned likewise Sisiphus to
be in like sort punished in Hell, for the same offense, carrying a stone upon
his shoulders up a hill, and coming to the top, the stone always falls from
him down again, which he returns to fetch, and so never rests. Therefore
Seneca says, that a Counselor ought to speak much to himself, but little
to others, for fear of discovering any secret. So that secrecy is most
requisite, both in a Prince, and in his Counselors.

CHAP. 7. A Prince to be Liberal.
LIberality is also necessary and most commendable in a Prince, for it is the
bond to oblige all men to him, both friends and foes: for which virtue the
Emperor Titus was most commended, who labored by liberality to deface the
report against his father for his covetousness, and always said, that a man
ought not to go away sad from the face of a Prince. And remembering one night
that he had showed no liberality that day toward any, sighed, saying: my
friends I have lost this day. Nabuchodonosor kept books wherein he commanded to
be written, the service which every one did him, to the end he might reward
them. Alexander Magnus going to the Conquest of Asia, gave most of his living
and Kingdom to his Captains, reserving hope to himself. And he being in
Egypt, a poor man asked him something toward the marriage of his daughters.
Alexander gave him a City very populous and rich. Sir, said the poor man, you
mistake me, or understand me not. No, said Alexander, but know, though thou be
poor Biantius in asking, that I am Alexander in giving. Julius Caesar, before
the Civil war, was so liberal to get favor and love of the people, as he
grew thereby 750000 Crowns in debt. Cato, for all the Towns he won in
Spain, did never take any thing for himself, but gave all amongst his
Soldiers, saying: that a Captain ought not to seek any thing in his charge,
but honor and glory. Scipio Affricanus was so liberal, as he contemned
riches, for in fifty four years that he lived, he did never buy nor sell any
thing, nor made any building, neither was there found in his house after his
death, above thirty three pound weight of plate. Marcus Curious, Consul, who
had thrice triumphed, was of the like disposition, for all possessions he had
was but a little mean house in the Country where he lived for the most part,
when public affairs did permit him, laboring and tylling that little ground
he had himself. And when certain Ambassadors were sent to visit him, they
found him dressing a Raddish for his supper. And they presenting him a great
sum of money from the Commonalty, he refused it saying: he held it far more
honorable to command them that had gold, then to have it himself. Lutius
Quintius did the like for after he had been Dictator, and triumphed with
greater pomp then ever did any before him, yet returned he to his poor house
again, refusing all living and riches the Senate offered him. For riches and
treasure is but a clog, and a heavy burden to a wise man: which made all the
Philosophers to contemn wealth. For Plato says, he that honors riches,
despises wisdom. Policrates bestowed five Talents for a gift, upon one
Anacreon, who for two nights after, was so troubled with care how to keep
them, and how to bestow them, as he carried them back again to Policrates,
saying: they were not worth the pains which he had already taken for them.
Therefore a Prince should not care how to lay up, but how to lay out with
honor and wisdom. For the liberal person shall have plenty, says Solomon,
Prou. 11.

CHAP. 8. A Prince not to be covetous.
ANd as by liberality a Prince may attain to great honor: so by covetousness
he may bring himself to utter destruction. For the Emperor Pertinax was a
very good and virtuous Prince, saving that he was extreme covetous and
miserable: insomuch that whereas he should have rewarded the men of War, who did
advance him to the Empire, he took pensions from diverse of them, which Traian
his Predecessor, had given them, for which, and for his miserableness, he was
killed by his Soldiers. So was likewise Alexander Seuerus and his mother also,
for the same vice. As in like manner were the Emperor Galba, and the Emperor
Mauricius. And the Emperor Phocas by his misery was the ruin and dissipating
of the Roman Empire, for in his time there fell from the Empire, France,
Germany, Spain, the greatest part of Italy, Esclauonia, the greatest part of
Africa, Armenia, Arabia, Macedonia, Thracia, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Egypt, and
many other Countries. Lewis the 11, King of France, was so miserable, as he was
contemned of all Strangers, and caused rebellion in his own Country, for he
put away all the Gentlemen of his household, and used his Tailor for his Herald
of Arms, his Barber for his Ambassador, and his Physician for his
Chancellor, and in derision of other Kings, he wore a greasy hat of the
coursest Wool, and in his Chamber of accounts, in a bill was set down 20 Souz
for a pair of sleeves to his old doublet, and 15 Denieers for grease to his
Boots. He increased the charge upon his Subjects, three millions more then any
of his Predecessors had done: For which he was mightily hated. Calipha, King of
Persia, having filled a Tower with Silver, Gold, Jewels, and precious stones,
and being in War with Allanus, King of the Tartarians, was so evil succored
by his own peopeople, because he was so miserable, and would not give them
their pay, as he was taken in his own City, and by Allanus committed to
prison, in the foresaid Tower, who said unto him: if thou had not kept this
Treasure so couetously, but had distributed it amongst thy Soldiers, thou
might have preserved thy self, and thy City: now therefore enjoy it at
thine ease, and eat, and drink thy fill, seeing thou have loved it so well.
And so let him die in the midst of his riches.

CHAP. 9. A Prince to be learned.
THough it be not good that a Prince should be too great a Scholar, yet it is
necessary that he should have some learning: for Plato says, that neither can
ignorant men, nor those that spend all their life in study, govern a
Commonwealth. For great learned men are perplexed to resolve upon affairs,
making many doubts, full of respects and imaginations The City therefore of
Norenberg, did not admit any great learned man into their Counsel, but had
some notable learned men, with whom they did confer, upon any doubt that
might arise in the Counsel. The Vrsins likewise in Italy, would never permit
any learned man to govern their Commonwealth. Yet Socrates says, That wit
without learning, is like to a tree without fruit. It is requisite therefore,
that both the Prince, and his governors should be learned, as well the better
to understand their duties toward God, the Laws of the Realm, the government
of other Commonwealths, and their Ambassadors, and the Art of Stratagems of
War. And a Prince should nourish and cherish all learning, for the attaining
of all Arts and knowledge. And to that end Ptolemeus, King of Egypt, made a
most famous Library in Alexandria, of 200000 Volumnes.

CHAP. 10. A Prince to be religious.
But above all things, Religion is most requisite in a Prince, that he be
careful to serve daily the King of Kings, who will prosper him on his Kingdom
in earth, so he seeks the Kingdom of heaven, which he must first seek for,
as appears, Matthew. 6. And in Deuteronomy. 17. a King is commanded, after he be
placed in his Kingdom, to read the Deuteronomy, that he may learn to fear
God, and to keep his words and Ceremonies which are written in the Law, so
doing, a Prince shall prosper, for Solomon says: God preserves the state of
the righteous. and is a shield to them that walk uprightly, Prou. chap. 2.
Trust therefore (says he again, Proverbs, chapter 3.) in God with all thine
heart, and lean not to thine own wisdom. So Jacob, Moses, Hezekiah, and
Elizeus, did not trust in themselves, but only by their prayers and trust in
GOD prevailed against their enemies. And King David, though he labored by
humane diligence to defend himself against Absolon, yet especially sought to
move God to mercy, by prayer, 2 Reg. 15. The Emperor Marcus Antonius, being in
Almany with his Army, was enclosed in a dry Country, by his enemies, who
stopped all the passages, that he and his Army were like to perish for want of
water. The Emperors Lieutenant seeing him so distressed, told him, that he had
hard, that the Christians could obtain any thing of their God by their
Prayers. Whereupon the Emperor having a Legion of Christians in his Army,
desired them to pray to their God for his and the Armies delivery out of that
danger. Which they presently did, and incontinent, a great thunder fell amongst
the enemies, and abundance of water upon the Romans, whereby their thirst was
quenched, and the enemy overthrown without any fight. But prayer will not
avail every Christian, unless he walk uprightly, for God will not hear the
prayers of those that lie and wallow in sinue, as appears Joh. 9. And David
says, Psalm. 65. Jf J find iniquity in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.
And God says, when you shall extend and lift up your hands, I will turn mine
eyes from you, and when you shall multiply your prayers, I will not hear you,
for your hands are full of blood, I saias, chap. 1. Therefore if a man be in
wicked or bloody sin, his prayer is in vain.

CHAP. 11. A Prince not to shed innocent blood.
IT behooves therefore a Prince to be virtuous, and to have special care that
he put not his hand in innocent blood, neither by tyranny, malice, ambition,
policy, or upon false reports and informations. For, to be a Tyrant, is odious
to God and man, and to bring himself to an evil end. As the Emperor Nero,
who after he had put to death his mother Agrippina, his wife Octauia, his
brother Brittannicus, and his Master Seneca. Besides many others, being
proclaimed an enemy to the Commonwealth, could get no body to kill him, but
was glad to kill himself, saying, Turpiter vixi, and turpius morior. The
Emperor Caius Caligula, amongst other his tyrannies, caused at his dinner and
supper ordinarily, one to cut off before him the heads of poor prisoners,
wherein he took great pleasure: in the end he himself was killed by his men,
who conspired against him. Nabis the Tyrant, who usurped the government of the
Lacedaemonians, sent for eighty of their young Princes, and without any cause
put them all to death. And shortly after, Alexamenes, under pretense to serve
him, with some company, suddenly struck him off from his horse, and killed
him. And as these tyrants had their just rewards, so all others had the like
measure. And for their wicked instruments, the people oftentimes did Justice
upon them. For Plutarch writes, that the wicked Counselors, and Instruments
of Apollodus, of Phalaris, Dionysius, Nero, and other tyrants, were cruelly
tormented to death by the people, and justly, says he, because they, who
corrupt, or seduce a Prince, deserve as much to be abhorred of every one, as
those who should poison a public Spring, or Fountain, whereof all the people
do drink. But sometimes those Princes that do use instruments for their
murders will not auow their Commission, but do themselves many times put them
to death whom they employed therein, sometimes secretly, sometimes publicly,
either to rid themselves of the suspicion and infamy thereof, or for fear of
discovery. As Alexander Magnus at his fathers Funerals, commanded public
Justice to be done upon those, who himself had secretly employed to kill him:
The Emperor Tiberius, did not only dissauow his Commission, given to a
Soldier to kill Agrippa, but put to death Seianus, his special favorite, and
instrument of his mischief. Caesar Borgia, did the like by a favorite of his.
And let no Prince think that he can so contriue his matters, but in the end
truth will be discovered and known to the world: and through ambition, many
have showed themselves very barbarous and bloody, as Tullia, daughter to
Seruius, seeing her self married to Aruus, a man of mild disposition, and her
sister of a gentle spirit, married to Lucius Tarquinius, who was ambitious, and
she not enduring to be thus matched, killed her husband Aruus, and her sister,
and then married Tarquinius, whom she persuaded to kill her father Seruius, to
have the Kingdom, and she being in the streets when he was killed, went with
her Coach very inhumanely, over his body, that his blood besprinkled her
clothes. Soliman, King of the Turks, when he heard the great noise and shout
of joy his Army made for the return of his son Sultan Mustapha out of
Persia, caused him presently to be strangled in his outward Chamber, and his
dead body to be cast out before the whole Army and one to cry with a loud
voice, that there was but one God, and one Sultan upon the earth. He put to
death also Sultan Soba, because he wept for his brother, and Sultan Mahomet,
his third son, because he fled for fear, leaving one only alive to avoid
the inconvenience of many Lords. The Emperor Seuerus, having vanquished
Albinus and Niger, his Competitor in the Empire, embrued with blood, put a
great number to death, and told his son Geta, that he would not leave him an
enemy. Geta asked him, if those he put to death, had neither parents, friends,
nor kinsfolk, yes, said the Emperor, a great number. Then said Geta, you will
leave us many more enemies then you take from us. His son Bassianus, having
murdered his brother Geta, to have the Empire alone, and doubting that the
Senate would greatly mislike thereof, made a show that he was sorry for his
brothers death, and that he did it by the persuasion of Letus, his favorite,
whom therefore he put to death, and all those that did assist him in that
action, likewise all those that were friends to Geta, lest they should attempt
any thing against him, yet in the end he was killed. Alphonsus, King of Naples,
having unjustly murdered twenty four of his Barons, could never sleep
quietly for representation of their shapes, which always vexed him in his
dreams. And in the end he fell into that fear of the French, as leaving his
Kingdom to his son, he fled into Spain, to live a in a Monastery, making
such haste as he would take nothing with him. And his men persuading him to
stay two or three days, to make his provision: no, no, said he, let us be
gone, do you not hear how all the world cries France, France? He knew
himself to be so hated. King John of England, murdered his nephew, and in the
end was murdered himself. Richard, likewise, Duke of Gloucester, murdered his
two nephews, sons to Edward the fourth, to make himself King, and after was
slain in battle by Henry the seventh: for blood requires blood, and let a
bloody Prince never look for better end.

CHAP. 12. A Prince to be circumspect in giving credit to reports.
But many Princes have been mightily abused by false reports, and wrong
informations, yea, sometimes by the nearest and dearest unto them, and those
that should be most faithful. David therefore prayed God to deliver him from
wicked lips, and a lying tongue, Psalm. 119. And in Eccle. 31. we are warned to
take heed of our children, and of our household servants. And in the sixth
chapter, it is said, Separate thy self from thine enemies, and beware even of
thy friends: for where a man does trust the most, there he may soonest be
deceived. As was the Emperor Glaudius, a tymorous man, and governed most by
his wife Messaline, and by one Narcissus, who, of a slave he had made free, and
had familiar credit with Messaline. This Empress became enamoured of a young
Gentleman, a Roman of a Noble house, called Appius Sillanus, and seeing that by
no means she could draw him to satisfy her wanton defires, she practiced with
Narcissus, that they both early one morning should come to the Emperor, and
tell him that they dreamed that Sillanus went about to kill him, which they did
one after the other; and Messaline had given commandment, that Sillanus at
that instant should come to speak with the Emperor. Whereupon Sillanus
innocently came, and knocked at the Emperors chamber door: which the Emperor
understanding, and persuaded by them that their dreams were true, and that he
came then to kill him, commanded Sillanus presently to be put to death, which
was done. Salome, sister to Herod, King of Jury, persuaded him that the Queen
his wife sought to poison him, and brought certain false witnesses to confirm
her report, to which, the King giving credit put his Queen to death. But this
wicked sister, not satisfied with this fearing that the Kings two sons would
revenge their mothers death, persuaded the King, that they were practicing how
to kill him, for putting their mother to death. The King fearing the Authority
of the Emperor, if he should put them to death, brought them before Augustus
Caesar, who knowing their innocence by their weeping, and great lamentation,
exhorted the^ to be dutiful to their father, and their father to make much of
them, and so dismissed them; but the Kings sister invented new matter against
them, and persuaded her brother to send the Emperor word theref, which he did:
then the Emperor gave him authority to punish them as he thought good,
whereupon the King put them both to death. But after understanding the truth,
and that Antipater, his son by another wife, practiced all this with his
sister, he put him to death, and within few days after dyed himself, his
intrailes being inflamed, and thereby his bowels rotted, raging at these
accidents. Philip King of Macedonia, put to death his own son Demetrius,
upon the false report and accusation of Persius his base son, and after,
understanding how he was abused, dyed raging. Adelstan, first Monarch of
England, after the entry of the Saxons, through the false report of his
favorite, put his own brother to death. Francis, Duke of Britain, put his
brother Giles to death, upon the false report of those that were messengers
betwixt them, and after, he understanding the truth, put them to death also.
Therefore as in 1 John 4. it is said: Believe not every spirit, but prove the
spirits whether they be of God, or not: So a Prince should duly and thoroughly
examine report, whether it be true or not, before he give credit thereunto, and
especially if it concernelife: for innocent blood does cry to God for revenge,
as appears in the Apoc. 6. saying: How long, Lord holy, and just, iudgest
thou not, and reuengest thou not our blood on them that dwell upon the earth.
And Solomon says, that the hands which shed innocent blood, are most odious in
the sight of God, Prou. chapter 4. Likewise David affirms, Ps. 65. That God does
abhor abloody man. Therefore Junenal says, that every stay which is made to
give life to man, is good. And he that does use to examine a report, made unto
him, that touches a man's reputation, shall free himself from liars, for a lie
cannot abide examination.

CHAP. 13. A Prince to be merciful.
A Prince therefore should incline himself to mercy, and pardon injuries, and
avoid the vices which may draw him to blood, which chiefly are ambition, pride,
choler, and subjection to a woman. Seneca says, that forgiunesse is a valiant
kind of revenge. And the more powerful a man is, the more is his honor to
forgive. And Pittacus the Philosopher does affirm, that pardon is better then
revenge: the one (says he) being proper to the spirit, the other to a cruel
beast. Therefore Alexander Magnus said, that a man wronged, had need of a more
noble heart to forgive, then to revenge. And Cicero did more commend Caesar for
ouercomming his own courage, in pardoning Marcellus, then for the great
victories against his enemies. The Emperor Adrian, attaining to the Empire,
forgot and put away all the enemies he had before. Insomuch, that after he was
Emperor, meeting one of his enemies, would not touch him, but said to him,
thou art escaped. Augustus Caesar, having many enemies, by reason of the civil
war, did not only pardon them, but advanced them to dignities and offices:
and thereby won their love, and made them faithful. Hamilcar, having
overthrown Splendius, General of the Mutineers against Carthage, pardoned the
prisoners, and offered them service, or liberty to return to their country,
which got him great honor, and love of many of his enemies. Scipio Affircanus,
set at liberty all the Hostages he found in new Carthage, after he had won it
by assault saying, He had rather bind men to him by good deeds, then by fear.
And amongst the Hostages, there was a marvelous beautiful young Lady, who was
contract to Allucius, Prince of the Celtiberians: Scipio commanded them both to
be brought before him, and her parents came with great treasure to redeem her
by ransom. But Scipio said to Allucius: my friend, understanding of the love
betwixt this Lady and you, I have kept her for you, not touched in honor, and
for recompense of this favor, I pray you be a friend to the Romans. Her
parents then presented Scipio with great treasure, which through much
importunity he was content to take, but bestowed it presently upon Allucius,
who, not long after came to serve Scipio, with 1400 horse. Scipio likewise by
pardoning Massima, his uncle Massinissa became and continued a friend to the
Romans. So that mercy brings friendship, and cruelty hatred.

CHAP. 14. A Prince not to be proud.
PRide was the fall of Lucifer, the overthrow of Babylon, and the ruin of many
a Prince, for, nemo superbus amat superos, nec amatur ab illis. A proud man
loves not the gods, nor is beloved of them. Pride produces, sometimes
cruelty, but always shame; for Solomon says, when pride comes, then comes
shame, but with the humble is wisdom, Prou. 11. Therefore God resists the
proud, and gives grace to the humble, Iam. 3. Allades, King of the Latins,
contemning the gods, devised how to make a noise like thunder and lightning, to
make the people fear him as a god: but thunder and lightning falling upon his
house from heaven, and a Lake joining upon his house, ouerflowing
extraordinarily, he and his family were were all swallowed up. Julius Caesar,
after he was Emperor, grew so proud, as he was therefore killed by the
Senators in the Senate. And the Emperor Domitian was so proud, as that he
commanded in all his Proclamations and public speeches, these words to be
used. Be it known unto you from your god and master; for which he was hated of
all the world, and in the end killed The Emperor Caius set in his palace like
Jupitur, with a Scepter in one hand, and a thunderbolt in the other, and an
Eagle at his side, a Cobbler seeing him, fell on a great laughter. The Emperor
commanded him to be brought before him, and asked him at what he laughed; I
laugh, said he, to see thy pride and folly. The Emperor laughed also at his
answer, and punished him not, but delighted in his own pride. But Philip,
father to Alexander Magnus, to avoid that vice, caused a child to cry unto him
every day at his chamber door, before he went forth. Phllip, thou art a man
mortal. Hieronimus, King of Cicily, being very young, was wholly counseled by
his brother in law Andronodorus, who made him proud and arrogant and to
contemn every one, and to give audience to none, nor to suffer almost any to
have access unto him, but to give himself to all kind of voluptuousness,
and to be cruel and bloody. Andronodorus, having brought him to this,
conspired with others against him. The treason discovered, and one Theodorus
called in question, therefore confessed, that he was of the conspiracy, and
being upon the torture, knowing he must dye, accused (to be revenged of the
King) the Kings most faithful friends and servants. To which the King giving
credit, put them all to death, and immediately after, was killed by the
Conspirators. Andronodorus presently seized upon Siracusa, thinking to make
himself King. But he had such success therein, as he, his wife, and all his
family, and all the line of the King, were quite extirped, as well innocents,
as offenders. Timothae, a Captain of Athens, through his pride, did attribute
all his victories, only to his own policy and wisdom. Whereupon (says
Plutarch) the gods were angry at his foolish ambition, and did never prosper
him after, but all things went against him, and in the end he was so odiously
hated, that he was banished Athens, Cresus, being in the height of his pride,
most sumptuously set in his Throne, asked Solon, if ever he had seen a more
gorgeous and glorious sight, yea, said Solon, both Capons, Fesants, and
Peacocks, for their colors are natural. Menecrates, a Physician, because he
was excellent in his ^rt, grew so proud, as he caused himself to be called
Jupiter. But Philip, King of Macedonia, to make him know himself, invited him
to a banquet, and made a Table to be provided for him by himself, which
Menecrates seeing, was very joyful that it pleased the King to do him that
honor, but when he see that in stead of meat, they brought him nothing but
incense, he was ashamed, and departed with great anger. Yet this King grew a
little proud after his conquest, insomuch, that he writ a sharp letter to
Archidamus, son to Agesilaus, who answered him, saying: If thou measure thy
shadow, thou shall not find it to be grown greater since thou did overcome
Pride therefore cannot make a man great but odious.

CHAP. 15. A Prince to be humble.
CHrist did humble himself for us: therefore we ought to humble our selves
for Christ, who says, He that does humble himself shall be exalted, but he
that does exalt himself shall be humbled, Mat. 23. Humility therefore
(affirms Seneca) is the handmaiden of wisdom For a wiseman is humble, if not
humble, he is not wise. Caralus Magnus, to have ever before his eyes, the image
of poverty and humility, did cause certain very poor men to eat always in
his presence, their meat upon the ground. The Romans had a custom, that the
Emperor, after a victory, was drawn in a Chariot with four horses, to the
Capital and a Clown set besides him in the Chariot, who struck him every
foot in the neck, saying: Know thy self. And when the Emperor was crowned
one al ways came to him, and asked him, of what kind of metal or stone he
would have his Tomb made. And all this to the end the Emperor should be
humble. The Emperor Constantinus Magnus, was of that humility, as he excelled
all other Emperors and Princes whatsoever: Yet of that valor as he, subdued
Licinius his Competitor, and many Pagan Nations. The Emperor Theodosius, being
rebuked by S. Ambrose, for a great offense, did in such humility acknowledge
his fault, as he did open penance therefore, willingly in the Church, where
Saint Ambrose was ministering the Sacrament, and so was admitted to communicate.
The Emperors, Valentinian and Justinian, were Princes of great humility, yet
famous for their many victories. The Emperor Alexander Seuerus, was of that
humility, as he would not suffer any to use other salutations to him, then to
say, God save thee Alexander. Scipio, prevailing in Spain against A sdruball,
the Spaniards called him King, which Title he refused, saying: it was
sufficient for him to be called their General. Agathocles, King of Cicily,
because he was but a poor Potters sonue, caused himself to be served with
vessels of earth, amongst his vessels of gold and silver, to show his humility,
and what he was. Julius Caesar, Augustus Caesar, Claudius, Domitian, Galba,
Traian, Alexander, and many other Princes, were of that humility, as they gave
continual audience themselves unto the people, to the great content and
comfort of the people. And Octauius Caesar, did fit daily in judgment
himself, and did abhor the title of Lord, insomuch, that when said to him, O
good and gracious Lord he reproved him sharply therefore. And the more humble
that a man is, the more is he in the favor of God, who, as Saint James says,
chapter 3. does resist the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

CHAP. 16. A Prince not to exceed in anger.
ANd a Prince to be too passionate, and too chollericke, is dangerous, for
choler sometimes burns and dries up the veins, and takes life, sometimes
it blinds the understanding, and takes away sense and reason, whereby many a
time sudden mischief is done, that brings long and too late repentance, for
the mind does not easily see the truth (says Salust) where passion and
affection bears sway. Therefore a Prince especially, should learn to know
himself, and his imperfections: for Plato says, that the perfect duty of a
man, is first to know himself. And the first Precept that was written in the
Temple of Apollo at Delphos, was, Know thy self. And knowing himself, he must
then labor to command himself, and make reason rule nature. Agesilaus, did
more glory that he could command himself, then in that he was a King. For he
that is slow to anger (says Solomon) is better then the mighty man: and he
that rules his own mind, is better then he that wins a City, Prou. 16. Yet
moderate ire (says Plutarch) does second valor and fortitude. To avoid
choler, Athenodorus the Philosopher, counseled Augustus Caesar, never to do,
or say, any thing when he was angry, before he had repeated the twenty four
letters of the A, B, C; thinking by that time his choler would be appeased.
Virginius, being chosen General of the Roman Host, refused it, fearing to
exceed in choler against Appius Claudius, his enemy. Crotis, King of Thracia,
having a present brought unto him, of many fair vessels of glass most
curiously wrought, after he had well recompensed the gift, did break them all
himself of purpose; fearing lest through choler, (to which he was subject) he
should too severely punish any of his sernants, if they by chance should break
any of them. But the Emperor Valentinian was so ouercharged with choler, that
he fell into such a rage against certain Ambassadors, as he lost his voice
and speech, and so was carried to his bed and let ten blood, but bled not,
choler having burned and dried up the veins, and so dyed.

Patience therefore is a happy virtue, by which a man may preserve his body,
and possess his soul, says Christ, Luke 21. In your patience you shall
possess your souls. And to attain to this virtue, Diogenes asked alms of
the Images in Athens, to make him take denial patiently. Aristotle, being told
that one railed on him, was not moved, but said, when I am absent let him beat
me also. And Socrates, being abused, spurned, and kicked by an insolent fellow,
and seeing his friends offended therewith, said: How now my Masters, if an Ass
had kicked and given me a rap on the shinnes, would you have me to yerke out,
and to kick him again? Antigonus, hearing his Soldiers revile him behind his
pauillion, said to them, you knaves, could you not go a little further off,
when you meant to rail upon me? One Nicanor rayled upon Philip King of
Macedonia, for which his Counsel would have had him severely punished, but the
King very patiently answered, first let us see whether the fault be in him or
in us. And understanding that Nicanor had deserved well, and that he had never
given him any thing, sent him a rich gift. After which, Niconor spoke very much
good of the King: Whereupon the King said to his Counsel, I see well that I am
a better Physician for backebiting then you are: and that it is in my power to
cause either good or cuill to be spoken of me.

CHAP. 17. A Prince to be moderate in his diet.
NAture is content with a little, therefore if a man do either eat or drink,
more then suffices nature, it is superfluous, and ingendreth evil humors,
corrupts the body, and weakneth the spirits and understanding: for Diogenes
says, that the wit is made dull with gross and immoderate dealing. And Plato
affirms, that those who use to eat much, although they have a good wit, yet
cannot be wise. The reason is, says Plutarch, because the body being full of
meat, corrupts the judgment in such sort, as makes a man neither fit to
give counsel, nor to govern in a Commonwealth, nor to do any good work.
The Emperor, Octauius Caesar, had therefore ordinarily at supper, but three
dishes of meat, and when he fared best he had but six. And the Egyptians in
their feasts and banquets, had a dead body dried, brought in amongst them, that
the sight thereof might contain them in modesty, and make them temperate in
their feeding. Ada, Queen of Caria, sent Alexander Magnus certain skillful
Cooks, whom he refused, and sent her word, that he had better then they were;
namely, for his dinner, early rising, and walking a good while before day, and
for his supper, a little dinner, for in those days they did commonly eat but
one meal a day, as appears by Plato, who, being demanded if he had seen
any new or strange thing in Cicily, said, that he had found there a Monster of
nature, which did eat twice a day, meaning Diogenes the Tyrant. Agesilaus,
King of the Lacedaemonians, passing his Army through the Country of Thracia,
they presented with meal foul, baked meats, and all other sorts of delicate
meats and conserues. The meal he was willing to take, but not the rest, yet
through great entreaty, he accepted of all, and gave all and gave all (saving
the meal) to his slaves, and being asked why he did so, he said, It is not
convenient for men who make profession of manhood and prowess, to eat such
delicates; for by pleasure, delicate meats and drinks, the courage of man is
abated. Therefore Xerxes, after he had taken the great City of Babylon, would
not put the people to death, but to be revenged of them, commanded them not to
exercise any Arms, but to use and give themselves to all pleasure, feasting,
and drinking. So that by this means, they grew to be most vile and base
people, whereas before they were most valiant. And by the great feasting and
drunkenness in Siracuse in Cicily, the Romans took the town and spoiled it.
The Emperor Vitellius, was very riotous in his diet, insomuch, as at one
supper, he had 2000 several kind of fishes, and 7000 dishes of foul, but
what followed? Soon after he was openly put to death by Vespasian. Caligula
likewise, in riotous banquets, in making sweet bathes, and in other vain and
frivolous expenses, spent in one year, 67 millions of crowns, and in the end
was killed. Nero also was prodigal in the like charges and banquets, and
sumpuous attire, never wearing one garment twice. And Sabina, his wife had
daily the milk of 500 Asses to bathe her in, but their ends were pitiful.
The Emperor Adrianus, was riotous in his youth, and thereby diseased in his
age, which forced him to use many Physicians and medicines, but could not be
cured. Therefore good order and temperate diet, prolongeth the life, and
preferueth wisdom. Early rising also (says Plato) and much watching, are
profitable to keep a man in health, and to augment his wisdom. It does
withal increase devotion, for then a man shall find himself most apt to serve
God.

CHAP. 18. A Prince to be continent of life.
But if he serve his belly with immoderate, and too great delicates, and pamper
his flesh too much, it will (besides dulling of the wit) make the flesh rebel
against the spirit, and fall to incontinency, a vice whereof a Prince ought to
have a special care, that he give not himself to the lust of the flesh; for
it is a devouring fire till all be consumed, and rooting up the seed of good
works, says Job 31. And Luxuria eneruat vires, effeminat artus. It will make
him weak and effeminate, and destroys both body and soul, losing thereby
also sometimes, both life and kingdom: for by adultery, Roderico, last King of
the Goths in Spain, committed with the wife of Julian, Earl of Cewta, when
he was Ambassador in Afric, he, for revenge, brought the Moors into
Spain, who thereupon subdued the Country. Osibright, King of Northumberland,
ravished the wife of one Barn, who, to be revenged, brought in the Danes, slew
Osibright, and made great spoil in the land. The Emperor Claudius, married
his brothers daughter, and she her self poisoned him. Siphax, King of
Numidia, transported with the love of Sophonisba, falsified his faith, lost his
Kingdom, and life in prison. Locrine, King of Great Britain, put Guendoline
his wife away, and married Estreld, daughter to King Humber, but Guendoline
killed her husband in battle, and drowned Estreld and her daughter in Seuerne.
The Emperor Commodas, kept three hundred Courtizans, and in the end by one of
them, and one of his Parasites, was strangled. Childericke, the third King of
France, for his libidonous life, which made him careless in governing the
Commonwealth, was deposed. And Lewis the sixth, King of France, for his
adultery, was poisoned by Blanch his wife: Heliogabalus, for his libidonous
and vicious life, thought he might make an evil end, and therefore if in case
he should be pressed by his enemies, he had poison ready kept in precious
stones: he had also halters of silk to hang himself: and sharp knives of
precious metal to kill himself: and he built a high Tower, richly gilded, to
break his neck upon, if he listed: yet all these devises failed him, for he
was strangled by his Soldiers, and trailed up and down Rome. This is the end
a libidonous Prince may look for. But wise and virtuous Princes will avoid
that vice. As did Joseph, who having the wife of Putiphar in his power, would
not touch her. No more would Abimelech fair Sara. Nor David the Ebritian
Sunamite. Nor Scipio the Lady; who was Hostage in Carthage; Nor Dionysius, the
wife to Phocius: Nor Alexander, the daughter of King Darius: Nor Augustus,
Cleopatra.

And as it is hurtful for a Prince to be allured by a woman to folly, so it is
not good for him to be led by the counsel of a woman. For Aristotle says,
that part of a woman's understanding in which consists counsel, is imperfect.
Therefore neither the Romans, nor the Lacedaemonians, did ever admit a woman
into Council. Yet Theodora, after the death of her husband, the Emperor of
Constanstinople, was chosen Empress, and had the only government of the
Empire. Which without the help of any, she governed in great peace and
prosperity two years, and then dyed, to the great grief of all her subjects,
who repented them not to be governed by a woman.

The Empress likewise, Zenobia in Asia, was a most singular rare woman. For
Obdinato, her husband, chosen in Asia for their Emperor, and after killed by
his kinsman she took upon her the government, and governed very well. She was
constant in her enterprises, faithful of her word, liberal in her gift, just
in giving sentence, severe in punishment, discreet in her speech, grave in her
determination, and secret in that she did. She loved not to ride in a Litter,
but on horseback: she was of stature tall, slender bodyed, her eyes great, her
forehead large, her face somewhat pale, her mouth little, and her teeth small.
After she was conceived with child, she would not company with her husband,
saying: that a woman ought not to marry for pleasure, but only for
procreation. She did eat but once a day, and that at night: she drunk no
wine, but water compounded more costly then wine: when she went to Camp, or to
battle, or to skirmish, she was armed, and ever when there was any service,
she would be amongst them.

In the end, the Emperor Aurelianus besieged her, took her prisoner, and
carried her in his triumph to Rome, yet pardoned her for her virtue and valor,
and gave her certain possessions to live upon. She lived ten years after, as
greatly honored and beloved as Lucretia, of all the Roman Ladies. But this is
(as the Spaniard says) Vna golondrina que non haze verano. One Swallow which
makes no Summer. Yet I could not but set down here her perfection, she being
such a mirror for all Ladies.

CHAP. 19. A Prince to beware of Parasites.
But there is another creature about a Prince, more dangerous then a woman, and
that is a flatterer, who never sings other song then placebo, soothing a Prince
in whatsoever. Apelles drew the picture of a King (which he sent to Ptolomeus)
set in a chair of Estate, with great hands great ears, and besides him
Ignorance, Suspicion, a Tale-teller, and Flattery: these will labor to be
about a Prince, therefore a Prince must labor to avoid them. For an envious
and backebiting Tale-teller, and a Flatterer, are two most dangerous beasts:
for Diogenes says, that of wild beasts, a backbiter biteth the sorest, and of
tame beasts, a flatterer.

And Hermes, the Philosopher says, that as a Camelion can change himself into
all colors saving white: so has a Parasite all points saving honesty, for he
windeth himself into favor by any means, especially of pleasure, procuring
any kind of mirth and delight, and by humouring the party.

For Alexander Magnus, and Alphonsus, King of Arragon, having each of them
somewhat a wry neck; the one by nature, the other by custom, the flatterers
and Courtiers held their necks on the one side. And like as worms breed most
of all, and soonest in firm, tender, and sweet wood: even so for the most
part, the generous and gentle natures, and those minds that are more
ingenuous, honest, amiable and mild then others, are readiest to receive and
nourish the flatterer that hangs upon him. And Plato says, that he who
loves himself, and has a good conceit of himself, can be content to admit
another to flatter him. But when a Parasite sees nothing to be gotten, then he
is gone, being like to lice: For as these vermin never haunt the dead, but do
leave an^ forsake the corpse so soon as the blood is extinct and deprived of
vital spirit: so a man shall never see flatterers approach to those that are
in decay, whose state is cracked, and credit lost. But where there is power
and authority, and glory in the world: thither they flock, and there they grow
and show themselves most malicious, sometimes by speaking evil of others. For
Medeus, the chief Captain of the flatterers, about Alexander Magnus, teached
his Scholars to cast out slanders boldly, to bite others, for (said he) though
the soar may heal up, yet the skarre will remain and be ever seen. By these
skarres of false imputations, Alexander being corroded and eaten, put to death
Calisthenes, Parmenion, and Philocas, his true and faithful friends. The
Emperor Commodus, after the death of his father, was led by Parasites, and
upon their false reports, put to death most of those that were grave
Counselors to his father, and also many of the Senators, and committed the
government of all his affairs, to Perennis, and himself followed his
pleasure, which brought him to the end you heard before. The Emperor
Dioclesian, basely borne in Sclauonia, was in his youth very ambitious, and
desirous of honor, and from a poor Soldier, came to be Emperor, and then
made the people honor him as a god, and to kiss his foot, whereon he did
wear guilt shoes, set with pearl and precious stones after the manner of the
Persian Kings. But seeing in the end, himself wonderfully abused by the
flatterers of his Court, and that he could take no order for them, they had
him so besieged in their hands, he gave over the Empire, and retired himself
to his house in Slcauonia, where he lived ever after, a very private life,
delighting himself with Gardens and rural works. But the Emperor Caligula,
took a better course with his Parasites, for one Afrianius Potitus, and
Afranius Secundus, made a show of great sorrow for him when he was sick, and
swore by the gods that they would very willingly dye for his recovery. The
Emperor knowing they did but flatter, said then little, but being recovered,
called them before him, and said, my good friends, I have found that you are in
favor with the gods, for since your vow for me, I have recovered, but fearing
I should fall sick again, if you accomplish not your vow, I sent for you to
dye, desiring you both to take your deaths patiently, and so presently put them
to death. Plutarch writes, that Dionysius, the Tyrant of Cicily, delighting in
his own Poems, asked diverse Philosophers, how they liked them, they all
flatteringly, highly commended them, saving one, who said plainly, that it was
a shame to hear them, they were so bad. Whereat the Tyrant offended, commanded
him to the Mines, there to work amongst the condemned men: but being released
by means of his friends, and again in the Kings presence, when he demanded
the opinion of the Philosophers, in another of his Poems, and they all
extolling it above the Skies, he cried to the guard of the Tyrant, saying: Come
my masters, come carry me away to the Mines again, for I cannot endure this
foolish flattery. The King by chance, being then in a good humor, was not
offended, but turned it to a laughter. Curtius says, that the states of
Princes are oftener overthrown by flatterers, then by force. It is a happy
thing therefore for Princes to have those about them that will not flatter, but
tell them the truth. For what (says Seneca) wants he that has all? marry
one to tell the truth. Therefore the Emperor Gordian said, that that Prince is
very vnfor tunate who has not about him, those who may plainly tell him the
truth. For a King knows not what passes, but by relation of those that
converse with him. Theopompus, being asked how a Prince might preserve his
Kingdom, said, by giving his friends liberty to speak the truth, and in
keeping his subjects from oppression. Phocian dealt plainly and like a
faithful servant with King Antipater, telling him upon occasion, that he would
do him any service possible, but could not be to him both a friend and a
flatterer. Themistocles in like manner, seeing Euribiades taking up a staff to
strike him for his free speeches, said, strike me, so you will hear me after.

A Prince therefore must permit freedom of speech, if he mean to hear the
truth, and give no care to flattery. Pessenius Niger, a Roman Captain, hearing
one praise and flatter him in his Oration, said to him, go, go, write the
praises of Marius, and Hanniball, and other old and valiant Captains that are
dead, that we may immitate the^, for it is a mockry to praise the^ that are
alive: and as for me, I will do good whilst I live, and be praised when I am
dead. Yet Agesilaus king of Sparta said, that he liked to be praised of those
friends, who would not also spare to blame him, when occasion should serve.

CHAP. 20. What kind of persons to be of a Princes Counsel.
A Prince should be very careful in making choice of his Counselors. For
Plato faith, that many Princes are undone, because they want faithful friends
and servants to counsel them. Therefore Alfred king of England, sought out the
wis^st, and most learned men to be about him. Alexander Seuerus likewise made
choice of honest and vertnous Counselors, and dilplaced the vicious, and
sought to know the truth of all things that passed in all places and Provinces
of the Empire. Fredericus Furius opinion is, that Counselors to a Prince
ought not to be under thirty years of age, nor above sixty. For (says he)
before he be thirty his understanding is not settled, his experience llitle, his
presumption great, his heat much, his thoughts light, and not of sufficient
gravity. And that after sixty years his memory fails, his understanding
weak, his experience turned to obstinacy, his his heat little, lonsing
oacasion, his thoughts wearied, and able to take no pains nor travel. Howbeit
some have been able and sufficient enough after they pass^d that age, as
Camillus who though he were of very great years, yet was chosen Dictator: they
finding his memory good, and his senses perfect: So many others have been fince
his time. And Frederieus Furius says moreover, that a Counselor to a Prince
ought to be either of a chollericke, or of a fanguine complexion, for that
those of that temper (says he) are witty, have good memory, can discourse
well, are of good judgment, most loving, affable, loyal, liberal, and of
great courage: and that the melancholic are base minded, vain, enemies to
noble thoughts, malicious, superstitious, and fantastical. And Socrates
says, a Prince ought not to trust him that is covetous, nor him that is a
flatterer, nor to make a passionate, or a too choleric man of his counsel,
nor a drunkard, nor any that is subject to a woman. For it is not possible
(says he) that they should keep close his secrets. And Pythagoras says, it
is impossible for him to obtain wisdom and knowledge, that is in bondage to
a woman: therefore the Emperor Alexander Seuerus would never admit any
Counselor, or other officer, whether he were of Noble parentage, or had done
him great service, or were commended to him, unless he were of good
reputation, learned, of good experience, and of good life. And better to
inform himself hereof, he caused wrightings to be set up in common places of
the streets, desiring thereby the people to show some cause, if they could,
why such a man should not be admitted to such a place and office, and would not
suffer any office to be sold, because Justice should not be sold. Yet the
Emperor Vespasian at the beginning of his reign gave the chief offices and
dignities to the greatest thieves he could find, and being asked why he did so,
answered, that he used them as a sponge, for when they were full he would wring
them, and confiscate all they had, and hang them. Some Princes do place
thecues in authority, not knowing them, but being discovered, it were happy for
the common wealth, and good for the Prince, if they were used as Vespasian used
his. And Julian the Apostata placed a cruel and troublesome Judge at
Alexandria in Egypt, and being told he was unworthy to govern: it is true,
said he, and therefore I placed him there, that he may plague them as they
deserve, they being a troublesome and wicked people, but good men are always
to be placed in government, that the wicked by example may amend, or be
punished, and the good preserved. For Pictatus reputed that common wealth to be
well governed, in which wicked men might bear no authority. And a Prince is to
have some for Counsel, some for execution, for very seldom does it concur
in one man to have wit to disoourse well upon any matter in Counsel, and to
have judgment to execute that which by Counsel is determined. The Captain
Picinio was in consultation of a weak judgment, but in executing any thing
resolved upon by Counsel, very ready. Francis the first, King of France did
exceed all his Counsel in consultation: but in his execution was not
answerable to his advise. Pope Clement the 7. did exceed all other in Counsel;
but in executing was inferior to every one. And as it is necessary that a
Prince should have a grave and wise Counsel: so is it requisite he should
have some about him for his pleasure. So Alexander Magnus, when he went into
Asia against Darius, took with him two of his most special friends and
servants, Craterus and Hephestion, very different in complexion, and in
condition: for Craterus was grave, severe and stoike, and only cared for
matters of State and Counsel, being one of the Kings principal Counselors.
And Hiphestion was a young Gentleman of good complexion, gallant, active, and
full of sport, and only cared how to recreate the King. So that Craterus was
called a friend to the King: and Hephestion a friend to Alexander. But a Prince
had need to be very careful in choosing of his friend, to be inward and
familiar with him. For Augustus Caesar did not receive a man to his amity and
familiarity, but first did prove him, and sound his virtues, fidelity and
loyalty, and those who he knew to be virtuous, and that told him freely the
truth in all things, and that did not flatter, and that employed themselves
willingly and sincerely in his affairs, and after having had good proof
hereof, he received them for his friends. Alcibiades, to try his friends, made
them one after another believe, that he had killed a man, and they all refused
to endanger themselves for him, saving one Calias. The Emperor Constantius to
make proof of his friends, made show to abandon Christian Religion, and to
turn to Idolatry, he was instantly applauded by a great number, whom presently
he banished the Court. For a Prince shall never want followers in any thing.
The world counselling those that serve Princes to please them in whatsoever,
though it redound to the loss of their souls, and ruin of the commonwealth,
for so they shall obtain honor, riches pleasure, and quietness: but what is
their end? Ducunt in bonis dies suos, and in puncto ad ^nferna descenaunt,
says Job. 21. They lead their d^yes in pleasure, and in an instant descend
into hell. For when they shall say peace and security, then shall sudden
destruction come upon them, says Saint Paul, 1. These. 5. And David says,
Psalm. 36. Vidi impium superexaltatum, and eleuatum ficut Cedrum Libans, and
transiut eum. and non est inuentus loeu eius. I did see the impious mightily
exalted and raised on high as the Cedar tree, and I passed by, and presently he
was gone, I sought him, and his place was not to be found. Saint Augustine
therefore affimeth, that it is better to suffer torments for speaking the
truth, then to receive great rewards for flattery. And Saint Chrysostom says,
Fear not them that kill the body, least for fear of them, thou speak not the
truth freely. And as Counselors ought to have freedom of speech: So
Predericus Furius does wish a Prince, for trial of his Council, to ask
counsel sometimes in things contray to the good of the Common wealth, and to
his own intention.

And Demetrius Phelarius counseled Ptholomeus King of Egypt, to read books
which treated of Kings and Common wealths, for that in them be should find
many things which his Counsel and families durst not tell hid. But Aristeus
says, that the greatest and best guard a Prince can have, is to be accompanied
with a great number of just and expert Counselors, who through mere love,
setting their own particular commodity apart, regard only the profit and
welfare of the Prince and common wealth, speaking freely what they think. For
Counselors, says Julius Caesar in one of his orations to the Senate, should
not be led by malice, friendship, anger, nor mercy. And if they concur in one
lawful opinion, though the Prince be opposite, yet it is fitting he should
yield to them. For so did the Emperor Marcus Antonius, saying: It must be as
You will: for it is great reason, that I being but one, should follow your
opinion, then you being many, Wise and Learned, should yield to mine.

CHAP. 21. Not good to commit the charge of the Common wealth to one Counselor
only.
But it is very dangerous for a Prince to be led by the advice and counsel of
one only, or to commit the government of the Common wealth to one Counselor
only. And so Commines dath witness, saying: that A Prince ought to have many
Counselors, and not commit any cause of importance to one only, and that all
his Counselors should be equal in favor: otherwise, if he be led only by
one, and make no account of the rest, not giving them equal hearing, he may
endanger himself, as did Hieronimus King of Cicily, who was only counseled
by his brother in law Andronodorus, who made him odious to all the Kingdom,
and then killed him.

Stillico likewise governed all under the Emperor Honorius. And to get
entrance to make himself Emperor, took pay from the Goths, of purpose to make
them rebel which thereupon they did, and by the aid they got, spoiled Thracia,
Hungaria, Austria, Sclauonia, and Dalmatia: Stilico, though he might, yet
would not quite over throw them, whereof Honorius being informed, put to death
both Stilico and his son. Under the Emperor Commodus first Perennis ruled
all, and for displacing the Nobility, and preferring base persons, was killed
by the soldiers. After him Cleander managed all, and a great famine and plague
being in Rome, the people imputed the cause thereof to him, and thought to
kill him: He to appease this stir ran upon the people with the Emperors
horsemen, and killed a great number of them. The Emperor fearing himself,
sent for Cleander, presently cut off his head, and sent it to the people,
wherewith they were appeased, yet in the end Commodus himself was killed. The
Emperor Seuerus permitted Plautianus to govern all under him at his pleasure,
who in the end practiced to kill him, and his two sons. But Bassianus the
Emperors son understanding thereof, and that his Father meant to pardon him,
killed him in the Emperors presence. The Emperor Galba was a good Prince and
wise, yet suffered himself to be only governed by Titus Iunius, Cornelius
Lacus, and Icellus Martianus, who by their wicked government made the Emperor
to be hated of all estates, and therefore the people murdered him. This
Emperor was the more hated because he entertained Halotus and Tygenlinus, who
were principal servants to Nero, and instruments in all his wickedness. So
Otho likewise Emperor after Galba, though he thought by good words and
liberality to get the hearts of the people, yet did they hate him, for that he
had some about him, who had been instruments and Counselors to Nero. The
Kings of France for forty years, giving wholly to their pleasures, permitted
the Mayor of the Palace of Paris to govern all at his pleasure, which gave
opportunity to Pipin to make himself King: Who being wise, virtuous, and well
beloved, was thereby admitted their King. But the Emperor Tyberius giving
himself to pleasure, and committing the government to Seanus, who grew proud
thereof, and took upon him as he had been Emperor, and had statues made him,
before which they offered sacrifice, and happy were they that had his favor:
The Emperor hearing of his pride, and insolency, committed him to prison: then
those that did most honor him, contemned him, and spoke evil of him. And the
Emperor put both him, and all his children to death Zoticus had that credit
with Halingabalus, as he was held Lord over all the rest, his counsel as a
Law, and by his direction all Offices were sold: He made Consuls the sons
of slaves and base men. And King Attolus gave himself so to his pleasure, as
one Phylopaemen governed him as he listed. Insomuch that the Romans, when
they did see any ship of Asia come by, asked if the King was still in the good
grace and favor of Phylopaemen. But Charles the seventh King of France,
having diverse wise, and faithful Counselors of mean parentage, at the time
he had civil War with the Duke of Burgundy (whom the Duke of Brittany
secretly favored) moved the Dukes to peace, who answered, if the King would
remove his Counselors from him, and take others, that they would accord.
Whereupon the Kings Council persuaded him to accept thereof, and they most
willingly refused the Court, and retired themselves to their own houses, and
so the War was ended. Therefore a Prince should take care for the good
education of his Nobility, and honor the Noble and worthy families; whereby
they may continue in the Virtue and Valor of their Ancestors, and the Prince
thereby be the better served. In Rome there was a Law made, called Prosopina,
by which the offspring of Siluius, of Torquatus, and of Fabricius, were more
honored and privileged then any other, because they were ancient Families,
and more valiant then others: They had a Law also, that those who were
descended of wicked persons, as of Tarquinius Superbus, of the Consul
Escaurus, of Catelin, of the Censor Fabatus, and of the Traitor Bicinus, should
bear no Office in the Commonwealth, nor dwell within the circute of Rome. But
Nobility marrying basely, do oftentimes degenerate. For when nature (says
Plato) produced man, she gave unto him three properties of the metals, as to
those that were fit to govern the people, the property of Gold: To them of
force and valor, to defend the Commonwealth, the property of Silver; and the
property of Iron and Brass to handy-craftes men; and common people, to work
and labor. And he says, that marrying the Noble with the Ignoble, is to mix
good metal with base metal, which is the ouer-throw of Nobility, and
changing of government of the Commonwealth. Therefore he counsels every o^e
to marry with their equals, Nobles with Nobles, and ignobles among themselves.

CHAP. 22. A Prince not to place a Stanger in Authority.
A Prince is also to have special regard that he gives not a Stranger
authority in the Commonwealth, nor trust him too much. For the ancient Romans
would never give any charge or Office in the Commonwealth to a Stanger:
Insomuch that after the Battle of Cannas, for want of sufficient men to be
Senators in Rome, Spurius Curulius making a motion to have had some of the
Latis chosen for Senators, they would not agree thereunto, but all hated
Spurius for that motion. And William King of Cicily, descended of the house of
France, making a Frenchman his Chancellor, the Noblemen much grieved
thereat, conspired, and in one night killed all the Frenchmen in Cicily, in
Apulia, and in Calabria. Charles the 8. King of France expulsed the Spaniards
out of Naples by the help of the Neapolitanes, and placed Frenchmen in all
authority and government there. Whereupon the Neapolitans grieved, made a
general reuolte, and did drive out the Frenchmen again. The Duke of Britain
having married an English woman was so affected to the English, as his subjects
much disliked thereof, and he mistrusting them, sent for Englishmen to
govern under him, but before they came, his own subjects seized upon all the
Forts and Towns in Britany, and forced the Duke to fly into England. The
Prince of Wales placing Englishmen in all Offices and authority in Aquitaine,
made the Countrymen grudge thereat, and in the end reuolte, by which means
Aquitane was lost. Alexander King of the Epirots, giving entertainment to a
number of the Lucamans banished out of their Country, and after making War
against their Country, thought he should be well served by them, who promised
to yield their Country into his hands, but they made a secret compact with
their Countrymen to the contrary, for drawing the King into a convenient place
for their purpose, they showed themselves his enemies, and he swimming a river,
to escape, in landing was killed by one of them. The Emperor Gordian making an
Arabian his Lieutenant called Phillipus, a man of base parentage, he procured
the Emperors overthrow, and in the end killed him most barbarously. Charles
Duke of Burgundy was betrayed by an Italian the Earl of Campobach, and killed
before Nancy.

CHAP. 23. Dangerous for a Prince to take aid of a Stranger.
ANd if a Prince take aid or succors of a stranger stronger then himself, he
may thereby endanger his estate. For the Esterques called but to aid the City
of Vulture, subdued it. The Herules, Goths, and Lombards, called into Italy
for succors, became Lords thereof. So did they of Franconia with their King
Pharamond; by the Gauls, now France. And the Saxons did the like by England.
The Turks in like manner got the East Empire; and Hungaria, called first in by
the Emperor of Constantinople, and by the States of Hungaria. Cairaam a Pyrate
called by the Inhabitants of Alger, to expel the Spaniards, after he had
vanquished the Spaniards, slew Selin Prince of the Town, and made himself
King, leaving the estate to his brother, Aradin Barbarossa. Saladin a Tartarian
Captain called by the Calipha and Inhabitants of Cair, to drive the Christians
out of Soria, after the Victory against the Christians, slew the Calipha, and
became absolute Lord thereof. The Romans called into Cicily, by the Mamertins
or Campanois, to aid them, did subject both them, and all Cicily in the end.
Francis King of France, had a de of Soliman the great Turk, against Charles
the fifth, who fearing by continuing the War, that the Turk might get that
footing, as to overcome all Christendom, made peace with France. But then the
Turks Bascha being in Marcelles, the King of France could not get him out,
before he had succors from the Emperor: who was forced to aid him.
Therefore when Pope Julius the second, Maximilian the Emperor, Ferdinando King
of Spain, and Jews King of France, had entered league against the Venetians:
Selin the great Turk, offered to send the Venetians succors, which they
refused, fearing that accepting thereof, they should be in danger of the Turk.

CHAP. 24. A Prince to get and keep the love of his Subjects.
A Prince therefore, to the end he may be strong at home, and need no Foreign
force, should always respect his own subjects (especially men of worth and
service) as well in peace as in War, that he may win the love and hearrs
of his subjects, the meanest whereof may be able to do him some kind of
service, at one time or other. For Seneca says, that the only inexpugnable
force of a Prince, is the love of his subjects. Wherefore the Emperor Marcus
Aurelius, in his speeches to his Council, commending his son unto them,
said: It is not the abundance of money and Treasure, nor the multitude of
s^uldiers that maintayneth a Prince, and causes him to be b^yed, but the love
of his subjects. For those (says he) do only long and sarely Reign, who
do ingraue in the hearts of their subjects, not a fear by force and cruelty,
but a love by bounty and liberality. And those that willingly yield to
obedience, and are not contrayned by servitude, ought not to be suspected of
the Prince. And subjects (says he) never refuse to obey but when they are used
withviolence and contumely. Mesissa King of Numidia exhorting his sons at his
death to keep amity and concord amongst them, said: It is not the great
forces, nor Armies, nor great Treasure by which a Prince should preserve and
maintain his estate, but friends, who are not gorten by force of Arms, nor
with money, but by good usage and loyalty.

And Cornelius Tacitus says, that a Prince can have no greater, better, nor
fitter instruments to keep and conserve his estate, then good friends:
Wherefore a Prince should have care always of his subjects, and use them well.
For Antonius Pius would say, that he had rather preserve one of his subjects,
then kill a thousand of his enemies. And Pribagoras affirms, that subjects
are to the Prince, as the Wind to the fire, for the stronger the Wind is, the
greater is the fire: So the richer the Subjects be, the stronger the Prince.
But where Matcheuils principle takes effect, there the subjects must be made
poor by continual Subsidies, exactions, and impositions, that the people may
be always kept under as slaves, and fear the Prince, which course
extinguisheth the love of the people toward the Prince, and ingendreth hatred.
Therefore Pythagoras counsel is better: And a Prince to enrich his subjects,
the only way is to keep them in peace, without quarrels, and dissentions, and
too gricuous exactions. Therefore Philip Commines blames greatly such Princes
as do not seek to compound and end dissentions and quarrels amongst their
greatest subjects, but rather do nourish the one part, wherein they do but
set their own house on fire, as did the Wife to Henry the sixth, taking part
with the Duke of Somerset, against the Earl of Warwick, which caused the
War betwixt the House of York and Lancaster. Likewise Charles the seventh
King of France, being Dolphin, taking part with the Duke of Orleans, against
the Duke of Burgundy, was the cause that the Duke of Burgundy brought Henry the
fifth into France. And for exactions, the Emperor Augustus made a Law called
Augusta, that no payment should be exacted of the people, but for the profit
of the Commonwealth. And when Marcus Antonius laid a double tax upon the
people, they answered, That if he would have two taxes in one year, he must
give them two Summers, two Haruests, and two Vintages. For the people cannot
endure to be ouercharged: if they be, great inconvenience may grow thereby.
For Phillip Le Bell King of France, being received in Flanders as Lord thereof,
charged the people with excessive taxes, and suffered the French to commit all
insolency and injuries against the people, favoring the Nobility, and
exempting them from all taxes, impositions, and charges, whereupon they of
Bruges begun to reuolte, and killed all the French in the Town. After this
the Flemengs ouer-threw the forces of King Phillip, and freed themselves from
the French.

Therefore if the Princes Council, or Nobility, do yield to have any thing
imposed upon the people, it is fitting they should not be exempt, but begin
and lay it first upon themselves as the Romans did, for the people murmuring
against the Consuls for imposing a great charge upon them, Consul Leuinius
said: As the chief Magistrate is in honor above the Senate, and the Senate
above the people, so ought he to be a guide, and the first to submit himself
to endure all kind of pain and trouble: For if thou will impose a charge
upon thy inferior, first begin and lay it upon thy self, and the rest will
more easily follow: therefore let us begin with our selves, said he, and so
they did. The great impositions the Prince of Wales laid upon the Councrey of
Guienne, was a great cause of the loss thereof. The Duke of Orleans Gouenour
of France for Charles the sixth, was extremely hated of the Parisians for a
great imposition he laid upon them, for reformation whereof, the Duke of
Burgundy leuyed great forces, and in the end caused the Duke of Orleans to be
killed.

The Duke of Aniou regent of France, laying a great imposition upon the people,
a Collector thereuppon demanding a Denier of a poor Woman for a basket of
Herbs, which she refusing to pay, he forced to take her Herbs, but she
crying, was rescued by the people, and an vproare did arise, which did great
hurt before it could be appeased. The Earl of Flanders likewise, laying a
great imposition upon the people, made them rebel against him. And Jews the
twelfth King of France, making War against Lodowicke Sforce Duke of Milan,
who knowing himself to be very edious to his subjects, for his great exactions
and impositions, and fearing that they would abandon him, assembled the people
at Milane, and to gain their good wills, remitted diverse taxes which he had
imposed upon them, and gave them many reasons and excuses for his former
proceedings. But such hatred they had conceived against him, as all would not
serve, for within few days after, they took arms, called in the French,
killed his Treasurer, and made him flee. When the Battle of Cressy was fought,
the people of France were in extreme poverty, by reason of the evil
government of the public Treasure, of the false-hood of the Treasurers and
Magistrates (who enriched themselves by the p^uerty of the people) and of the
increase of Taxes, Subsidies and Impositions, which orew the people into
despair (oppressed also with Famine and Plagues) that when the King would have
leuyed an other Army, he could not get the French to it. A Prince therefore
should love and cherish his Subjects, but not oppress them. For Tyberius Nero,
when some persuaded him to take great Tributes of the Provinces, said, that a
good shepherd should sheare his sheep, but not devour them. And Jews the
ninth King of France, his chief care in sparing was to ease the people by
abating the Taxes and Subsidies laid upon them by his Predecessors. And that
State (says Thales) is best ordered which has it, neither too wealthy, nor
too poor Citizens.

CHAP. 25. Who to have the charge in War.
FOrce and Valor most properly should belong to the Nobility, and they thereby
defend the people, and be their Leaders in War. Therefore for a Prince to
take that charge from them, or to displace them, if they be sufficient, is not
convenient. For Perennis having the whole government under the Emperor
Commodus, displaced all the Noble Captains, and put other base persons in
their rooms, whereat the Army being grieved, pulled Perennis in pieces, as an
enemy to the Common wealth. Anno envying the glory of Mutines^ took his charge
from him, and gave it to his own son. Whereupon Mutines practiced with the
Confull and betrayed to him the Town of Agrigente in Cicily, whereby all
Cicily was brought in subjection to the Romans. Jews the eleventh King of
France, displacing the Noblemen and his good servants, and giving the Offices
to men or base quality; civil War did arise, but the King presently
acknowledging his error, restored them again. Yet it behooves a Prince to be
respective, and not to give a charge to a severe man. For sometimes a good
Prince shall be hated for his wicked Governor, as was Scipio, for the cruelty
of his Lieutenant Pleninius. And Lucullus, though he was wise and Valiant, and
did many exploits against Mythridates, and Tygranes, two of the greatest Kings
of Asia, yet was he so severe and discourteous, as his soldiers loved him not,
neither would obey him in the end. Whereupon the Romans set Pompey in his
place, who by his courtesy and clemency won the hearts of his soldiers, and
thereby brought all the East parts under the obedience of the Romans, and so
reaped the fruits of Lucullus labors, and had the honor thereof with
Triumph. Appius Claudius used in like manner great rigor and severity amongst
his soldiers, insomuch as they would do nothing for him, though he put some
of the Captains to death, but rejoiced to be ouer-throwne, to dishonor him.
And at another time the Roman soldiers, for despite they had against the
Ten-men, suffered themselves to be vanquished. And Marcus Popilius Confull
subduing the Lygurians (now Geneuois) rebelling against the Romans, raised
their Town walls, took their armor from them; and sold them, and their
goods: which the Senate thought to be a too severe and cruel part of Popilius,
and an evil example for others to stand upon extremity, rather then to
yield, or to trust to the clemency of the Romans. Therefore commanded all
that were sold to be redeemed, their goods to be restored, they suffered to
have armor, and Popilius to be called home, and his government given to
another. Therefore a Prince for his Wars had need to appoint not only a
wise, but a temperate and Valiant Commander. For ( Plato says) that a man
temperate not endued with fortitude, falls easily into cowardlinesse, and
baseness of mind; and that a strong and Valiant man without remperance, is
easily carried away with temerity and boldness. So was Flaminius ouer-throwne
and killed by Hanniball at Trasamene, for not staying to join his forces with
the other Consul. And Minutius in the absence of Fabius, having charge and
command over the Army, upon his rash attempt against Hanniball, had good
success. Whereupon he would needs have the Army divided betwixt them, and
have equal charge: to which Fabius condiscended: Hauniball perceiving his
rashness and insolence, gave him battle and ouer-threw him; but Fabius being
at hand, gave him succors, whereupon Minutius con^essed his error. And then
Hanniball said, that the Cloud which had wont to hang upon the mountains,
sturred with Wind and Temp^st, was ruined to Rain; for Fabius kept the heights
and would not fight but with good advantage; therefore Hanniball feared his
wisdom.

And when Fabius had gotten the Town of Tarent by Treason, Hanuiball said, I
perceive the Romans have also their Hanniball. But at Treue, Hanuiball
defeated the Romans, who came to battle fasting, which was a great ouer-fight
in the Confull. But Hanniball commanded all his men to eat some meat before.
Marcellus, through the default of his own soldiers, was overthrown by
Hanuiball; but his wisdom was such, as first rebuking his soldiers
therefore, and then encouraging of them, he gave battle the next day to
Hanniball, and deseated him. But the Confull Minutius was of a weaker spirit,
temperate without fortitude, for he being sent against the Eques, durst not
come near them, but fortified himself in his Camp, which they seeing,
besieged him in his Tents. Whereupon Lucius Quintiut was created Dictator, who
relieved him, and subdued the Eques, but would give no part of the spoil,
neither to Minutius, nor to his soldiers, but rebuked them. So that Wisdom,
Temperance, and Valor, are necessary in a General.

Dissension likewise in an Army is to be avoided, for by the diffention betwixt
the Consuls, Hanniball overthrew them at the battle of Cannas Therefore
Claudius Neron, and M. Lucins being enemies, and chosen Consuls, made
themselves friends, for the good of the Commonwealth. So Aristides and
Themistocles, sent Ambassadors by Athens, did reconcile themselves during that
employment. Cretes and Hermias not friends, and being in their City of
Magnetia besieged by Mythridates, Cretes offered Hermias the charge of Captain
General, and to depart the City himself: or if Hermias had rather depart,
then to leave that Office to him, least by their both being in Town, jealousy
might grow betwixt them, and breed hurt to their Country. Hermias seeing the
honest offer of his Companion, and knowing him to be the more sufficient,
yielded to him the charge, and left the Town.

And as dissension is hurtful, so envy is not fitting. For the French men
ayding John King of Castile, against Denis King of Portugal, had upon their
earnest request, the point of the battle, which did offend the Spaniards, who
were desirous thereof, insomuch that the Frenchmen giving the charge, the
Spaniard would not second them, but suffered them all to be slain or taken,
and then they set upon the Portugals, who having vanquished the French, and
seeing the Castilians come, killed all their prisoners, and then ouer-threw
them also: Pope Boniface the ninth, and the French King, sent great forces
against the Turk Bajazet: Their General was the Earl of Neuers, who against
the will of the King of Hungary, and of all the Camp gave the first charge,
and without order, and was ouer-throwne, whereupon the Army of the Christians
fled. Anno 1396. by reason whereof the Turk took al Greece, and the greatest
part of Bulgaria, and then besieged Constantinople.

And it is also very requisite that the General should keep his soldiers from
idleness, for Segnities robur frangit, longa otianeruos. Sloth weakneth the
sinews, and diminishes a man's force, and is the nurse of all vice, making a
man most base. Therefore Aeleas a King of Scythia said, that he thought
himself no better then his Horse-keeper, when he was idle. A vice to which
Gentlemen always have been too much given. Insomuch that in Athens (where
they did not suffer the people to be idle: a Citizen being iudicially condemned
for idleness, one Herondas requested one to show him the party that was
condemned for a Gentle-mans life. In Carthage, to avoid this vice, the
Noblemen did always exercise Arms; the common people labored; and the
Learned men were ever teaching and instructing others. And in the Commonwealth
of the Lacedaemonians none were idle, for all men labored; and they sending one
Chilon to Corinthe, to treat of a League, he found the Magistrates idly
exercised, playing at Dice: whereupon he returned home, and would not speak
of his Commission, saying: That he would not stayne the glory of Sparta with
so great an ignominy, as to join them in society with such kind of people.
Marius caused his soldiers to make Trenches when there was no cause, only to
keep them from idleness. Claudius having an assured peace, for the avoiding
of idleness, kept thirty thousand men, twelve years in working the Channel
Fucinus, that Rome might have good water. And when the Laws were well kept in
Rome, at the time they had Wars with the Celtiberians in Spain, and with
Alexander; the Senators went three days about Rome with the Censors, and could
not find one idle man for a messenger to carry their letters. But in Marcus
Aurelius time there were plenty, for he confesses that he banished, punished,
and put to death in his time 30000. idle Vagabonds, and 10000. idle women. And
France being troubled with a great number of idle vagabond soldiers: Bertrand
de Guesclin, (to free the Country of them) drew them all to go with him into
Spain against the Sarazins. Bruce King of Scotland exhorted his subjects to
exercise Arms always, for that idleness would corrupt them, and for want of
practice they would not be able to resist their enemies. A Prince therefore
being the Lantern to his subjects, should give good example herein. Alfred
King of England had that care to eschew idleness, and to spend his time well,
as he divided the day into three parts, by a Taper that burned continually in
his Chapel 24. hours: The first part he spent in Prayer and in study: The
second part he employed in the affairs of the Commonwealth; and the third
part he took for his recreation and rest. A good president for other Princes.

CHAP. 26. A Prince to be well advised before he begin War, and careful in
his fight.
IT is not for a Prince upon every quarrel to make War, but to be sure that
the cause be good and just, which then will bring honor to his Person, safety
to his soul, and great encouragement to all his soldiers. Yet (according to
the saying of Octauius Caesar) neither battle, nor War is to be undertaken,
unless there may be evidently seen more hope of gain, then fear of damage:
for such as sought after the smallest commodities not with a little danger, he
likened unto those that Angle with a golden hook, for the loss whereof, if it
happened to be suapped or broken off, no draught of Fish whatsoever was able to
make amends. And it is necessary that a Prince, or his General, should consult
and take counsel before he fight, for the advice of his Captains herein may
do great good. Therefore the Carthagintans commanded those Captains to be
hanged, that got Victory without any consultation before. And those that did
first consult, and then were ouer-throwne, they did never punish. And having
taken counsel and resolution, execution is to follow without delay, least
occasion be lost. For Aristotle says, that a wise man ought to counsel
slowly, and execu^e speedily; and if Victory be gotten, to follow it hotly is
the best, before the enemy (being discouraged) be able to make head again. For
if Hanniball had done so after the battle of Cannas, and not lingered to
refresh his men, he had taken Rome. Likewise Pompey in a skirmish, put Caesar
to the worse, which if he had pursued, he had quite ouer-throwne Caesar. Yet a
man must take heed he follow not the Victory too fiercely, nor out of order.
For so Phillip King of Macedonta, by following the Romans too fiercely was
defeated. So likewise Gaston de Foix, having won the battle at Rauenna,
pursuing too fiercely a squadron of Spaniards that fled, by them was
ouer-throwne, lost his life, and made all that a prey to the enemy, which
before he had Conquered in Italy. And an enemy is not to be contemned, though
his Forces be inferior, for oftentimes it is not the multitude of men that
gets the Victory, but the courageous and resolute minds of the fouldiers,
assisted by God. For King Alexander with 33000. foote-men, and 25000.
horsemen, ouer-threw the Persians: and Darius army of 400000. footmen, and
100000. horsemen. Robert le Frison, with a few, and without experience,
defeated Phillip King of Frances great Army and old Soldiers. The Earl of
Namure with the Flemings being but a few, ouer-thre the Earl of Artois, sent
by Phillip the fair King of France, with 40000. Frenchmen into Flanders,
whereof 300. efcaped not. At the battle of Peitiers the Prince of Wales with
8000. English, overthrow 40000. French, took King John and his Son
prisoners, and also a number of Princes and Noblemen. Henry the fifth at the
battle of Agincourt with 7000 ouer-threw 80000. French. Simon Earl of Monford
besieged in the Castle of Mirebeau in France by the King of Arragon and others
and having with him but 2. Knights, 60. horsemen, and 700. footmen, having
commended themselves to God, sallied and charged the King so valiently, that he
overthrew his Army, killed him and 17000. of his men, and lost not above eight
footmen of all his. Therefore a Prince should not presume too much of his own
strength, nor be careless of his enemy, nor charge him but in good order. For,
fighting without order, the Carpentines, Olcades, and Vaceos in Spain, having
an Army of 100000. were ouer-throwne by Hanniball, for they trusted in the
number of their Soldiers, and kept no order. Both the Scipioes being slain in
Spain, Lucius Martius being a man of mean calling, yet a good Soldier and of
great courage, gathered the dispersed soldiers together, and was chosen for
their General. Asdrubals making no account of him, set upon him d^^orderly,
and was ouer-throwne, by which the Romans encouraged Martius in the night
following to set upon Asdrubals Camp upon a suddayne, and killed of the
Carthaginians 37000. and took prisoners 1830. And the Carthaginians seeing the
Romans wearied with the service upon the Sea, were persuaded that they would
fight no more by Sea, and therefore grew very careless, whereby they were
ouer-throwne by the Consul Catulus. And the Romans held it not so good to
defend, as to invade. For they having first War with the Carthag^nians in
Cicily, thought it better to fight against them in their own Country, then in
Cicily. Therefore sent the Conful with forces into Afric, which forced the
Carthaginians after 14. years war to seek for Peace, and to leave to the
Romans al Cicily, and the Islands betwixt it and Italy, and to give them 2200.
Talents of silver, and all their prisoners without ransom. In the second War
Punicke the Romans having lost many battles, spent their men, and consumed
their Treasure, Scipio being chosen Consul, desired notwithstanding to go with
an Army into Affricke, holding that the best course to end the War in Italy.
But Fabius misliked thereof, as did also the most of the Senate, wishing him to
go against Hanniball, and to drive him out of Italy, and so to quiet his own
Country, before he invaded an other, alleging also that they were not able
to maintain two so great Armies, as one in Affricke; and another in Italy
against Hanniball, who if he should besiege Rome, Scipio could not so easily be
called from Affricke, as Fabius was from Capua, to succor Rome. They alleged
also the Death of his Father and Vocle in Spain, after their many great
Victories, and the ouer-throw of Athens, by sending a young man to invade
Cicily: The uncertainty of the favor of Syphax and Masinissa, and the
certainty of all those Countries to be their enemies. To which Scipio answered,
that he was Consul, not to continue War, but to make an end of Wa^^^ and
that (...) greater courage a man does assault his enemy, then (...) fend his
own, and that Agathocles King of Syracus* seeing Cicily troubled with War,
turned it into Affricke from whence it came; and that a Captain ought to
follow his good fortune and occasion; and that strangers should well know we
have courage as well to invade Affricke, as to defend Italy; and that there is
a Roman Captain dare undertake as much as Hanniball, and will force him to
return to defend Carthage. In the end, after long arguing of the matter, it
was granted that Scipio should pass into Affricke: which he did, and forced
Hanniball (after he had continued War in Italy sixteen years) to return
home, then ouer-threw him, and made Carthage glad to accept of any conditions
of peace. Which was, that Carthage should live in liberty, and use their Laws,
and possess the Towns and Countries they had before the Wars; and that they
should yield all Rebels, Fugitives, and Prisoners, and all their Galleys saving
ten, and all their Elephants tamed, and should tame no more; that they should
not make War, neither with Affricke nor without, but by permission of the
Romans; and that they should deliver 100. Ostages, the youngest not under 14.
years of age, nor the eldest above sixty years, with diverse other conditions.
The Oracle of Apollo answered those of Cyrtha, that if they would have peace at
home, they should make continual Watres abroad. But a good peace is always to
be embraced by a Prince, and also to be offered to his enemy. For as the
Frenchman says, La roue de la fortune, n'est pas tousours vne. The wheel of
Fortune is not always one. In the first War Punike Appius Claudius offered the
Carthaginians peace, in respect of the alliance betwixt the Romans and them,
which they refused; but after, they fearing the Romans, sent to the Consul
Attilius for peace, who denied them thereof, because they had refused it before
of Claudius: which made them desperate, and caused so long and grievous War.
And after the Battle of Cannas, Hanniball sending to Carthage for more aid:
Hannon a grave Counselor, would have had them to have made peace with the
Romans, whose counsel they refused, which brought ruin upon themselves. Yet
Scipio (after he had overthrown Syphax and Asdruball) being sent to by
Carthage for a peace, denied them not, but said, though he had the Victory
almost in his hands, yet would he not refuse to treat of peace; that all
Nations may understand that the Romans do both begin, and finish their War
most justly, and the reupon set them down conditions of peace, which they
seemed to like in retaining the time only til Hannibals coming home, who was
sent for: and upon his arrival, he himself moved Scipio to peace, who told
Hanibal, that Carthage had but dissembled with him, till his return, and
broken the truce. Therefore he demanded amends, besides the conditions first
offered, which if he thought too hard, then to prepare himself to Battle. The
next day Scipio ouer-threw Hanniball, killed 20000. and took as many
prisoners. Then Hanniball confessed himself to be vanquished, and told
Carthage, they had no way but accept of any conditions of Peace. Antiochus
seeking to the Romans for peace, had conditions offered, which he refused; and
was ouer-throwne, then glad to accept of any conditions.

The Commonwealth of Tyrus sent to Alexander Magnus, offering him what
obedience and subjection he would require of them, so neither he nor his men
would enter their City: Alexander refused it, disdayning that one City should
shut their Gates against him, to whom the whole world was open; but after four
months siege, be would have accepted of that offer, and they then would not,
being grown bold and proud. Whereupon Alexander with a furious assault took
the Town, spoiled it, and put all the Inhabitants to the sword, or to be
slaves. But King Clotaire of France refusing the submission of the Turingians,
who had rebelled against him, m^^e them desperate, and by desperate fight they
ouer-threw the King, who hardly escaped. The Earl of Flanders likewise
refusing the submission of his Subjects, was by them ouer-throwne, and in the
end they submitted themselves to Edward the third, King of England. By this it
does appear what hurt may grow by not giving peace demanded, and not
accepting of peace offered. Therefore Appius Claudius of Sabine, because the
Sabines would not yield to Peace, did forsake his Country, and went to Rome,
where he was made a Citizen of Rome.

FINIS.

