New England. OR A BRIEF ENARRATION OF THE AIR, Earth, Water, Fish and Fowls
of that Country. WITH A DESCRIPTION of the Natures, Orders, Habits, and
Religion of the Natives; IN Latin and English Verse.

Sat breve, si sat been.

LONDON, Imprinted by I. D. 1625.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE LORDS, AND THE Right Worshipful Knights and
Gentlemen; Adventurers for NEW ENGLAND.
WHat your favorable employments have taught me to observe, I presume here
briefly to relate I hope it will be acceptable, because innocent, though
nothing excellent. Vera, non mira came, assured that with your more acurate
judgments. Plus valebit vera oration quam carminis candida and maxim compta in
singulos pedes commensuratio. Censure at the least would be my best sentence,
if I should answer such service with a NIHIL DICIT. When in contempt of Envy,
I may present your Council with an OMNE BEEN, at least, Certa spe boni, if the
three noble Mistresses of Monarchies, Pietas, Pecunia, and Potentia, royally
undertake and resolutely continue constant favorers to their well ordered and
sweetly s^ituated Colonies. Without these, at least the two latter (I suppose
under favor) the Spanyard and Hollander had ^d Graecas callendas raised to
such sweet tones their western and eastern flourishing Plantations. But
illorum postpono mea ser^a ludo. The keys of Kingdoms, judicious Statesmen are
best able to open and explicate these closets and secrets of state. I may
admire, but scarce without offense observe such princely attempts and royal
secrets. Yet give me leave to you worthy favorers of Colonies, as in arms and
architecture to be your remembrancer, first to account, and then to accomplish:
so power and ability shall crown your proceedings with happy perfections.
Beyond these I presume nothing, only wishing every person in his several
sphere such happy motion as may crown him with immortal perfection.

Your Honors and Worships servant, late Preacher with the Right Worcester: Cap: Rob:
Gorge late Governor of New England. WILLIAM MORRELL.
UNDERSTANDING READER;
When my melancholy leasures first conceived these rude heroiks, my consciou^
Muse censured them (...) tender-sighted to be admitted the common lig^^ Induced
by some ki^de friends, who are truly studious of the publiqu^ good, I was
vnwilli^gly willing to adve^^ure them the public censure, desirous, I
ingeniously confess: (and so I profess my self ever) in my best endeavors,
to further such royal and religious employments: if my po^re judgment can
ass^redly observe p^tie to be one prime end of plantation, and the vnder-taking
probable to prosper. If (Gentle Reader) these lyne^ please the^, pervse and use
us gently: if not, Parce vati. You know that Ex quo-libet ligno non fit
M^^curius. Besides, error in Poefi^ is less blemish than in History,
Experienc^ cannot (...) ignorant, much less innocent, have gsee^e and
suffered. I should delude others vana spe, or fal^o gaudio. What can be
expected from false Relations, but unhappy proceedings, to the best intended,
and most hopeful Colonies. So that want of provisions, and right information,
begets in the distract^^ planter n^thing but mutinies, fearful execrations,
and sometimes miserable interitures. But of all such perchance hereafter. These
were at this time beyond my intent. I only non and ever desire that my ^est
incense may for ever wait upon all truly zealous and religious planters and
adventurers, who seri^^sly endeavor the dilat^ug of Christ's kingdo^^, in the
propagating of the Go^pell, and so advise^ly undertake so weighty and so
worthy a Work, as that they and theirs may parallel these worthies of the
world in all external, internal, and eternal abundances. Farewell with this
(...) Mem^^^ (...) without an equiv^lent ability, produce nothing but loss,
(...), oppro^ries, and imperfectio^s.

Thine if thy own, W. M.

Lectori.
Candide si placidum dederis Philomuse Camoenae
Intuitum: trifti dulce levamen erit.
Optima mellifluis modulari carmina nervis
Illud Apollineis cantibus euge melos.
Mellea coeleste est effundere carmina munus,
Frustra de sicco pumice quaeris aquam,
Dicito musa probe, breviter, simul, ordine, perge:
Gloria summa ^ibi dicere vera: Vale.
Gul: M. Perlege: pars vltima, prima.

NOVA ANGLIA.
HActenus ignotam populis ego carmine primus,
Te Nova, de veteri cui contigit Anglia nomen,
Aggredior trepidus pingui celebrare Minerva,
Fer mihi numen opem, cupienti singula plectro
Pandere veridico, quae nuper vidimus ipsi:
Vt breviter vereque, sonent modulamina nostra,
Temperiem coeli, vim terrae, munera ponti,
Et varios gentis mores, velamina, cultus.
Anglia faelici merito Nova nomine gaudens,
Saevos nativi mores pertaesa Coloni,
Indigni penitus populi tellure feraci,
Maesta superfusis attollit fletibus ora,
Antiquos precibus flectens ardentibu^ Angl^s,
Numinis aeterni faelicem lumine gentem
Efficere: aeternis quae nunc peritura tenebris.
Gratum opus hoc Indis, dignumque pijs oput Anglis,
Angelicae quibus est naturae nomen in vmbra:
Caelica vt extremis dispergant semina terris.
Est locus occiduo procul hinc spatiosus in orb,
Plurima regna tenens, populisque incognitus ipsis:
Faelix frugiferis sulcis, simul aequore faelix:
Praedis perdives varijs, and flumine lives,
Axe satis calidus, rigidoque a frigore tutus.
Proximus aethereo socius volitabilis igni
Aer, natali saliens levitate; calore
Temperieque satis faelicibus, humidus ante
Omnia principia, innata virtute coactus
Sistere diffi^ile in propri^ regione, volenti
Alterius motu penetrans loca, inania complens
Vi tenuj: foeae regio quae proximae terrae
Solis ab igne, poli motu, terraeque vaporum,
Vndeque attractu calet hinc, hinc humida restat,
Hinc fit temperies: fit and hac Nova terra beata:
Est aliquando tamen rapidis subiecta procellis,
Quae sceleri subitoque solumque salumque minantur,
Flamine corripere, and terras diffundere caelis:
Mox tamen Aeolio compressis carcere ventis
Omnia continuo remanent sub sidere tuta.
Inde suis vicibus luctantes murmr venti
Qua data porta ruunt, quatientes turbine terras.
Magna pare^s tellus, reram communis a^umna,
Frigida sicca gravis subsidens vallibus imis,
Montibus extendens nemerosa cacumina celsis
Longius intuitu nautis pergrata: feraci
Irriguoque solo l^tanti messibus aequis
Optima frugiferis mandantes semina suleis.
Agricolis quam terra ferax, quae grata ministrat
Assiduis alimenta viris: nulloque serenti
Dulcia d^t variae naturae mora nucesque
Dissimi^les, placidas tumidasque in vitibus vuas
Innumeris, mixtas redolentes floribus herbas
Multigenis, morbo loesos medicare potentes
Artus, radices similis virtutis amaenas.
Dimine gramineo nux subterranea suavis
Serpit humi, tenui^ flavo sub cortice, pingui
Et placido nucleo nivei candoris ab intra,
Melliflua parcos hilarans dulcedine g^ustus,
Donec in aestivum Phoebus conscenderit axem.
His nupeis laute versutus vescitur Indus:
His exempta fames segnis nostratibus omnis
Dulcibus his vires revocantur victibus almae.
Arboribus dives vernantibus, est quoque tellus
Cedris, and fagis, Iuglandibus and Iovis alta
Arbore, fraxinea, gummosis pinibus, alnis,
Iuniperis, multisque alijs tum gramine and herbis,
Pascua quae prebent animalibus, vnde fugaces
Pinguescunt cervi, vulpes vrsique lupique
Linces, and fibri, musci, lutraque politae
Pellibus eximij pretij, volucresque saporis
Perplacidi variae, pellique gruesque palumbes,
Megulus and Phasianus, anas, cignus Iovis ales,
Penelopesque, columbae, perdix, accipitresque,
Et capitolij aves variae tum carne sapora,
Tum pennis placide decorantibu^ art canautas:
Equibus ornatu capitis, fit plumula digna
Vertice sublimi, quibus ad renovanda levanda,
Languida perplacidum completur membra cubile.
Intima frugiferae vix cognita viscera terrae
Praetereo: artifices gremium serutentur opimum.
Dulce solum caelumque vides en terra serenis,
Perspicuis, placidis, levibus, liquidisque beata
Fontibus, and fluvijs facili quaerentibus Eurum*
Motu, praecipiti cursu post flumina nimbos*
In mare decurrunt stagnisque paludibus Indis,
Aucupio placidis been, piscatuque colonis.
Grata solum, caelumque viris alimonia praebent.
Devia quam dives regio haec? benedicta sereno
Aere, faecundis glebis, faelicibus vndis.
Prospera tranquillus contingit littora portus
Altus, apertus, vbi valiant se condere naves*
I^vitis. ventis, securae, rupe and arena*
Aequora multiplices proebent tranquilla marina^
Temporibus solitis praedas utentibus hamis:
Ha^ices, fagros, scombros cancrosque locustas,
Ostrea curvatis conchis, conchasque trigones
Cete eti^^ rhombos, sargos, cum squatina asellos.
His n^ves vastas o^erat piscator honestus:
His mercator opes cumulat venerabilis almas,
His pius ampla satis faciat sibi lucra colonus:
Denique divitibus quibus intima cura suorum
Divitie and pietas, licet hisce bear colonos.
Digna viris patria endignis, vbi maenia digna.
Principibus claris facile est fabricare columnis
Exce^^^s, cheu nunc tota cupidinis antrum.
Sunt etenim populi minimi sermonis, and oris
(...), risusque parum savique saperbi,
Constricto nodis hirsuto crine sinistro,
Imparibus formis tondentes ordine villos,
Mollia magnanimae peragentes otia gentes,
Art sagittifera pollentes, cursibus, armis
Astutae, recto, robusto corpore and alto,
Pellibus indu^tae cervinis, frigora contra
Aspera, cum placeant conversis flamina pelles
Obvia ut impellant, c^lefacto pelle lacerto
Dextro, quo facilis sit flexile sumere ^ornu,
Omnia ut extinguant subito in surgentia, and ipsos
Salvos desendant, inducto tergore corpus
Villoso, leviter miris se singula formis
Texta ligant, molles cingunt genitalia pelles,
Grande femur caligae cervinae curaque longa^
Exornant, plantas conservat calceus aptus,
Hos taemen exutos curant aliunde reversi
Depositosque suosealamos, arcu^que sonantes,
Fessaque constrato sua stramine membra soluti^
Tectis instar harae, dextre loca verna petentes,
Adveniente hiemis g^aciali tempore saev^,
Inque suam patriam redeuntes sole benign^
Calfaciente leves artus fervore, revisa
Vt pereant inimica, soloque nocentia, frugem
Detque solum solitam, rutilis dant ignibus arva.
Horum non^ulli regali nomine gaudent,
Et consorte tori prognata sanguine tali,
Regibus unde pari fuerit virtute propago,
Rectores faciens regali prole parents:
Inferiore sibi capientes stirpe maritas,
Progeniem timidam credunt, cordisque socordis
Nec solij, sceptrive sui fore posse capacem.
Rex tenet imperium, p^nas and pramia cunctis
Constituit, dat iura; senes, viduasque pupillos
Et miseros curat, peregrinos moliter omnes
Excipit hospitio semper, tamen inde (tributi
N^mine) primitias rerum partemque priorem,
Ven^tu captae praedae capit, atque requirit.
Cingitur obsequio regis plebs omnis, and ultro
Arma capit, fortique facit sua pralia dextra
Pallida lethiferis, faciens praecordia telis
Hostium, and expugnans sceleratis fata sagittis.
Insuper ^rnavit quorum Bellona cor^lla
Tempera, praesidio, vita, virtute virili,
Regibus incedunt comites tutamine certo.
His reges capiunt consultis cautius arma;
C^utius exactis faciunt his fadera bellis:
Eloquijs horum concedere regibus omnis
Subsidium, quodcunque valet, plebs alma movetur,
Mundi acie tantum semel vnde profecta reversa.
Nec prius excerce^ crudelia paruulus arma,
Qu^^ patiens armorum vt sit sibi pectus, amaram
Herbis compositam ^eramaris sorbiat vndam,
Vsque in sanguineum vertatur lympha colorem,
Vndique sanguinea ex vomitu rebibenda tenellis.
Vsque va^ent m^ribus: sic fit natura parata
Omnia dura pati: puer haec cui potio grata*
^^ctore fit valido cuncta expugnare pericl^.
Magnanimis medici comites virtute periti
Artibus ^^mpericis, diro contamine, tactu,
Fi^tu, sudore, and percusso pectore palmis
Duriter expassis proprio, pallentia eorum
Corpora resti^unt facili medicamine sana:
Vu^ner^ sanandi si nulla potentia verbis,
Artibus out herbis, confestim spiritus illi^,
Impius humana specie respondet iniquis
Reddidit iratus Deus artus morte solutos
Moribus: unde dolor nullis medicabilis herbis.
Denique sunt populi fungentes munere iusso,
Instar servorum, quacunque subire parati
Ardua, consilijs subiecti, foemina, fumus,
Indicus ad certos inhibetur, and omnibus annos.
Poste^ liberior concessa potentia cunctis,
Connubio multas sibi coniunxisse maritas:
Ditior est plures nuptas qui duxerit omnis,
Viribus, and natis: nati quia summa parentum
Gaudia, descessus quorum (nam mortis hiatu
Compressos lachrimis decorant) longoque gravique
Commemorant luctu, tumulisque cadivera mandant.
A genibus subrecta cavis pallentia cuncta;
(...) opibus tumulis, Titanis ad ortus,
Attollunt facies, ad quem post tempora longa
Venturos credunt omnes, vbi praemia digna
Imposita accipient, fuerintque salutis ad hortos
Elysios vecti, mirandaque gaudia, summis
Exornata bonis: haec spes post funera gentis.
Est alia vtilitas, multis vxoribus arva,
Valde onerata tenent Cerea^ibus, omnis eorum
Nocte dieque cib^ gaudet quasi natus vt omnes
Illico consumat fruges, su^ granaque (Mart
Aripiente man^ penetrantia tela) minutis,
Abdita speluncis tutis, and ab hostibus, host
Decedente suo subito repetenda reponit.
Artibus Hybernus pr^duxit temporis olim.
Multum Mart, levis, virsutus, durus, inermis,
Difficile edomitus done^ secreta latebant
Iudicia, atque doli taciti: fit and art supers^^s.
Saepius hac Indus, victoris victor and ingens,
Faemina praeterea vultu plerumque ven^sto,
Multos irridens risus, linguamque loquacem;
Iudicioque gravi, genio placidoque virili
Pectore, perrecta corpus per and omne statur^
Nervis conexa validis, manibusque tenellis,
Pollice pergracili, digitis faeliciter altis.
Inclita diversis faciendo est gramine corbes
Contextos formis, varioque color tapetum.
Stramine compositum tenui, mirisque figuris.
His decor eximius color est contrarius albo:
Ortibus vnde suis per totum candidus artus
Et piceo facies est ^bfucata color.
Consuetudo tamen populis his faemina vt omnis,
Omnia perficiat duri mandata laboris:
Arva fodit manibus, committit semina terris,
Vtque seges crescit levibus fulcitur ab illa,
Continuo terris, segitem sarritque resarit,
Tergore portat onus, victumque labor paratum,
Et breviter peragit mulier conamine prompto,
Omnia ad humanam spectantia munera vitam.
Hinc Anglos Indi stolidos dixere maritos,
Cum videant operis ferventes omnibus illos,
Attamen uxores omnem deducere vitam
Molli, vel nullo fungendi munere dextra.
Quamlibet ob noxam manet alta mente reposta
Invidia and dirum gelido sub pectore vulnus.
Vnde fugit sceleri pede fortia fortis in arma
Hostis, and inde sui laetans fit sponsa cubilis.
Praeda satis faelix; hinc victa iniuria mentis,
Denique cuiusdam cultores numinis omnes
Sunt, cui primitias reddunt, quotiesque necesse*
Fortia discruciat miserabile pectora, luctu
Acrique horrendis clamoribus aethera complent.
Omnia principio fecisse agnoscitur illis,
Vnum principium, primos crevisse parents,
Vnum terrarum dominum, consorte; duobus
His mortale genus divam sumpsisse figuram:
Quorum progenies illi, quoque stirpe racemi.
Insuper hunc dominum dominis posuisse creatis,
Optima iustitiae sacrae praecepta docenda,
Sacro perpetuis aetatibus omnia iussu.
Hactenus est omnis longaevae litera genti
Vix audita, viris penitusque incognita cunctis.
Fas, non quid fasti: falsum non, faedera curant:
Lumine naturae summi sunt iuris amantes
Promissique dati; tanti sunt faedera genti.
Nulla fides populis tamen est capiente sagittas*
Mart feras, fueris ^isi saevis fortior armis.
Litera cuncta licet latet hos, modulamina quaedam
Fistulae disparibus cala^^s facit, est and agrestis
Musica vocis ijs, minime iucundi, sonoris
Obtusisque sonis ob^ectans pectora, sensus,
Atque suas aures, artis sublimis inanes.
Omnes, praesertim multos provectus in annos,
Indus, quid coeli, cursus, quid sidera, vires
Sunt, been concipiunt animis, coelumque futurum:
Qua mihi notitia latet, aut quo numine certo.
Festa tamen gens nulla nisi Cerealia servat:
Genti nulla dies sancto discrimine nota:
Annus and ignotus, notus tamen est been mensis,
Nam sua lunari distinguunt tempora motu,
Non quot Phoebus habet cursus, sed quot sua coniux
Expletos vicibus convertat Cinthia cursus:
Noctibus enumerant sua tempora, nulla diebus,
Mosque dijs Indis est inservire duobus,
Quorum mollis, amans, bona dans, inimica repellens.
Vnus, amore bonum venerantur: at invidus alter
Dires effundens cum turbine, fulgura, nimbos,
Afficiensque malis varijs, morbisque nefandis,
Et violentis: hunc gelida formidine adorant.
Naturae gens luce suae sublimia tentat,
Agnoscens praecepta dei pia singula summi,
Excepto de ducendis vxoribus vno,
Affectis etenim morbis vxoribus ^llis,
Vel gravidis, alijs opus est vxoribus illis.
Heu quam dissimilis naturae, gratia vera,
Humina and ratio. Sublimia gratia vitae
Aspicit aeternae fidei bonitate potita:
Enervata suis ratio at virtutibus aequis.
Illi nulla manet verae scintilla salutis,
Talia quis fando lachrimas non fundit amaras,
Divinae lucis, virtutis visque capacem
Gentem* coelestis, verae pietatis inanem.
Flebilis ardentes mitti Phlegetontis in undas.
Aspicis effigiem terrae, levis aetheris, vndae:
Aspicis antiquae mores, v^lamina, gentis:
Aspicis optatos, hilarantia littora, portus:
Aspicis his modicum faeliciter (Ente faventi
Caelesti caeptis) laetantia singula votum.
Si mea Barbaricae prosint conamina genti:
Si valet Angli^nis inco^pta placere poesis:
Et sibi perfaciles hac reddere gente potentes,
Assiduosque pios sibi persuadere Colonos:
Si doceat primi vitam victumque parentis^
Angli si fuerint Indis exempla beat
Vivendi, capiant quibus ardua limina coeli:
Omnia succedunt votis: modulamina spero
Haec mea sublimis fuerint praesagia regni.
New England so named by your Princely Grace,
Dread Sovereign, now, most humbly sues to see
Your Royal Highness in your Regal place,
Wishing your Grace all peace, bliss, sovereignty,
Trusting your Goodness will her state and fame
Support, which goodness once vouchsafed her name.
If thou Apollo holdst thy Scepter ^orth,
To these (...) numbers that is thy Royal worth.
Vain is all search in these to search that vain,
Whose stately style is great Apolloes strain.
Minerva never distilled into my Muse
He^ sacred drops, my pume^se wants all iuce.
My Muse is plain con cise her fam's to tell
In truth, and method. Love, or leave: Farewell.
NEVV-ENGLNAD.
F'Eare not poor Muse, 'cause first to sing her fame,
That Is yet scarce known, unless by Map or name;
A Grandchild to earths Paradize is borne,
Well lim'd, well nerv'd, ^aire, rich, sweet, yet forlorn.
Thou blessed director so direct my V^rse,
That it may win her people, friends commerce;
Whils^ her sweet air, rich soil, blessed Seas, my pen
Shall blaze, and tell the natures of her men.
New England, happy in her new true style,
Weary of her cause she is to sad exile
Exposed by here is unworthy of her Land,
Intreates with teare^ Great Britain to command
Her Empire, and to make her know the time,
Whose act and knowledge only makes divine.
A Royal work well worthy Englands King,
These Natives to true truth and grace to bring.
A Noble work for all these Noble Pears
Which guide this State in their superior spheres.
You holy Aarons let your Sensors nere
Cease burning, till these men Jehovah fear.
Westward a thousand leagues a spacious land,
Is made unknown to them that it command.
Of fruit^ull mould, and no less fruitless maine
Enrich with springs and prey high-land and plain.
The light well tempred, humid air, whose breath
Fills full all concaues betwixt heaven and earth,
So that the Region of the air is blessed
With what Earths mortals wish to be possessed.
Great Titan darts on her his heavenly rays,
Whereby extremes he quells, and overswaye^.
Bl^st is this air with what the air can bless;
Yet frequent ghusts do much this place distress*
Here unseen ghusts do instant onset give,
As heaven and earth they would together drive.
An instant power does surprise their rage,
In their vast prison, and their force assuage.
Thus in exchange a day or two is spent,
In smiles and frowns: in great yet no content.
The earth grand-parent to all things on earth,
Cold, dry, and heavy, and the next beneath
The air by Natures arm with low discents,
Is as it were intrencht; again ascents
Mount up to heaven by Jove's omnipotence,
Whose looming greenesse joys the Sea-mans sense.
Invites him to a land if he can see,
Worthy the Thrones of stately soveraigntie.
The fruitful and well watered earth does glad
All hearts; when Flora's with her spangles clad,
And yields an hundred fold for one,
To feed the Be and to invite the drone.
O happy Planter if you knew the height
Of Planters honors where there is such delight;
There Natures bounties though not planted are,
Great store and sorts of berries great and fair:
The Filberd, Cherry, and the fruitful Vine,
Which cheares the heart and makes it more divine.
Earths spangled beauties pleasing smell and sight;
Objects for gallant choice and chief delight.
A ground-Nut there runs on a grassie thread,
Along the shallow earth, as in a bed,
Yealow without, thin, filmd, sweet, lilly white,
Of strength to feed and cheer the appetite.
From these our natures may have great content,
And good subsistence when our means is spent.
With these the Natives do their strength maintain
The Winter season, which time they retain
Their pleasant virtue, but if once the Spring
Return, they are not worth the gathering.
All ore that Maine the Vernant trees abound,
Where Cedar, Cypres, Spruce, and Beech are found.
Ash, Oak, and Wal-nut, Pines and Iunipere;
The Hasel, Palm, and hundred more are there.
There Is grass and herbs contenting man and beast,
On which both Dear, and Bears, and Wolnes do feast.
Foxes both gray and black, (though black I never
Beheld,) with Museats, Lynces, Otter, Bever;
With many other which I here omit,
Fit for to warm us, and to feed us fit.
The Fowls that in those Bays and Harbors ^eede,
Though in their seasons they do els-where breed,
Are Swans and Geese, Herne, Phesants, Duck and Crane,
Culvers and Diverse all along the Maine:
The Turtle, Eagle, Partridge, and the Quail,
Knot, Plover, Pigeons, which do never fail,
Till Summers heat commands them to retire,
And Winters cold begets their old desire.
With these sweet dainties man is sweetly fed,
With these rich feathers Ladies plume their head;
Here Is flesh and feathers both for use and ease,
To feed, adorn, and rest thee if thou please.
The treasures got, on earth, by Titans beams,
They best may search that have best art and means.
The air and earth if good, are blessings rare,
But when with these the waters blessed are,
The place is complete, here each pleasant spring,
Is like those fountains where the Muses sing.
The easy channels gliding to the East,
Unless oreflowed, then post to be releast,
The Ponds and places where the waters stay,
Content the Fowler with all pleasant prey.
Thus air and earth and water give content,
And highly honor this rich Continent.
As Nature has this Soil blessed, so each port
Abounds with bliss, abounding all report.
The careful Naucleare may a-farre discry
The land by smell, ast loomes below the sky.
The prudent Master there his Ship may more,
Past wind and weather, then his God adore,
Man forth each Shalop with three men to Sea,
Which often return with wondrous store of prey;
As Oysters, Cra-fish, Crab, and Lobsters great,
In great abundance when the Seaes retreat:
Tort^ise, and Herring, Turbut, Hacke and Base,
With other small fish, and fresh bleeding Place;
The mighty Whale does in these Harbors lie,
Whose Oil the careful Merchant dear will buy.
Besides all these and others in this Maine:
The costly Codd does march with his rich train:
With which the Seaman fraughts his merry Ship:
With which the Merchant does much riches get:
With which Plantations richly may subsist,
And pay their Merchants debt and interest*
Thus air and earth, both land and Sea yields store
Of Natures dainties both to rich and poor;
To whom if heavens a holy Viceroy give,
The state and people may most richly live:
And there erect a Pyramy of estate,
Which only sin and Heaven can ruinate.
Let deep discretion this great work attend,
What Is well begun forth' most part well does end:
So may our people peace and plenty find,
And kill the Dragon that would kill mankind.
Those well seen Natives in gra^e Natures hests,
All close designs conceal in their deep breasts:
What strange attempts so ere they do intend,
Are fairly vsherd in, till their last end.
Their well advised talk evenly conveyes
Their acts to their intents, and nere displayes
Their secret proiects, by high words or light,
Till they conclude their end by fraud or might.
No former friendship they in mind retain,
If you offend once, or your love detain:
They Are wondrous cruel, strangely base and vile,
Quickly displeasd, and hardly reconcild;
Stately and great, as read in Rules of state:
Incensd, not caring what they perpetrate.
Whose hair is cut with greeces, yet a lock
Is left; the left side bound up in a knott:
Their males small labor but great pleasure know,
Who nimbly and expertly draw the bow;
Traind up to suffer cruel heat and cold,
Or what attempt so ere may make them bold;
Of body straight, tall, strong, mantled in skin
Of Dear or Bever, with the hayre-side in:
An Otter skin their right arms does keep warm,
To keep them fit for use, and free from harm*
A Girdle set with forms of birds or beasts,
Begirts their waste, which gently gives them'ease.
Each one does modestly bind up his shame,
And Deare-skin Start-vps reach up to the same;
A kind of Pinsen keeps their feet from cold,
Which after travels they put off, vp-fold,
Themselves they warm, their ungirt limbs they rest
In straw, and houses, like to sties: distressed
With Winters cruel blasts, a hotter clime
They quickly march to, when that extreme time
Is over, then contented they retire
To their old homes, burning up all with fire.
Thus they their ground from all things quickly clear,
And make it apt great store of Corn to bear.
Each people has his orders, state, and head,
By which they are ruled, taught, ordered, and lead.
The first is by descent their Lord and King,
Pleased in his name likewise and governing:
The consort of his bed must be of blood
Coequall, when an offspring comes as good,
And highly bred in all high parts of state,
As their Commanders of whom they'rs prognate.
If they unequal loves at hymen's hand
Should take, that vulgar seed would nere command
In such high dread, great state and deep decrees
Their Kingdoms, as their Kings of high degrees:
Their Kings give laws, rewards to those they give,
That in good order, and high service live.
The aged Widow and the Orphans all,
Their Kings maintain, and strangers when they call,
They entertain with kind salute for which,
In homage, they have part of what is most rich.
These heads are guarded with their stoutest men,
By whose advice and skill, how, where, and when,
They enterprise all acts of consequence,
Whether offensive or for safe defense.
These Potents do invite all once a year,
To give a kind of tribute to their peer.
And here observe thou how each child is traind,
To make him fit for Arms he is constraind
To drink a potion made of herbs most bitter,
Till turned to blood with casting, whence he is fitter,
Enduring that to undergo the worst
Of hard attempts, or what may hurt him most.
The next in order are their well seen men
In herbs* and roots, and plants, for medicen,
With which by touch, with clamors, tears, and sweat,
With their cursed Magic, as themselves they beat,
They quickly ease: but when they cannot save,
But are by death surprizd, then with the grave
The devil tells them he could not dispense;
For God has killed them for some great offense.
The lowest people are as servants are,
Which do themselves for each command prepare:
They may not marry nor Tobacco use,
Tell certain years, least they themselves abuse.
At which years to each one is granted leave,
A wife, or two, or more, for to receive;
By having many wives, two things they have,
First, children, which before all things to save
They covet, 'cause by them their Kingdoms filled,
When as by fate or Arms their lives are spild.
Whose death as all that dye they sore lament,
And fill the skies with cries: impatient
Of nothing more then pale and fearful death,
Which old and young bereaues of vital breath;
Their dead wrapped up in Mats to the grave they give,
Upright from th knees, with goods whilst they did live,
Which they best loved: their eyes turned to the East,
To which after much time, to be releast
They all must March, where all shall all things have
That heart can wish, or they themselves can crave.
A second profit which by many wives
They have, is Corn, the staff of all their lives.
All are great eaters, he is most rich whose bed
Affords him children, profit, pleasure, bread.
But if fierce Mars, begins his bow to bend,
Each King stands on his guard, seeks to defend
Himself, and his, and therefore hides his grain
In earths close concaues, to be fetched again
If he survives: thus saving of himself,
He acts much mischief, and retains his wealth.
By this deep wyle, the Irish long withstood
The English power, whilst they kept their food,
Their strength of life their Corn; that lost, they long
Could not withstand this Nation, wise, stout, strong.
By this one Art, these Natives ost surviue
Their great'st opponents, and in honor thrive.
Besides, their women, which for th'most part are
Of comely forms, not black, nor very fair:
Whose beauty is a beauteous black laid on
Their paler cheek, which they most dote upon.
For they by Nature are both fair and white,
Inricht with graceful presence, and delight;
Deriding laughter, and all prattling, and
Of sober aspect, grast with gra^e command:
Of man-like courage, statu^e tall and straight,
Well neru'd, with hands and fingers small and right.
Their slender finger^ on a grassie twyne,
Make well formed Baskets wrought with art and line;
A kind of Arras, or Straw-hangings, wrought
With diverse forms, and colors, all about.
These gentle pleasures, their fine fingers fit,
Which Nature seemed to frame rather to sit.
Rare Stories, Princes, people, Kingdoms, Towers,
In curious finger-worke, or Parchment flowers:
Yet are these hands to labors all intent,
And what so ere without doors, give content.
These hands do dig the earth, and in it lay
Their fair choice Corn, and take the weeds away
As they do grow, raising with earth each hill,
As Ceres prospers to support it still.
Thus all worke-women do, whilst men in play,
In hunting, Arms, and pleasures, end the day.
The Indians whilst our Englishmen they see
In all things servile exercisd to be:
And all our women freed, from labor all
Unless what is easy: us much fools they call,
'Cause men do all things; but our women live
In that content which God to man did give:
Each female likewise long reteines deep wrath,
And s nere appeased till wrongs revenged she has:
For they when foreign Princes Arms up take
Against their Liege, quickly themselves betake
To th'adverse Army, where they are entertaind
With kind salutes, and presently are daign'de
Worthy fair Hymen's favors: thus offense
Obtaines by them an equal recompense.
Lastly, though they no lines, nor Altars know,
Yet to an unknown God these people bow;
All fear some God, some God they worship all,
On whom in trouble and distress they call;
To whom of all things they give sacrifice,
Filling the air with her shrill shrikes and cries.
The knowledge of this God they say they have
From their forefathers, wondrous wise and grave;
Who told them of one God, which did create
All things at first, himself though increate:
He our first parents made, yet made but two,
One man one woman, from which stock did grow
Royal mankind, of whom they also came
And took beginning, being, form and frame:
Who gave them holy laws, for aye to last,
Which each must teach his child till time be past:
Their gross fed bodies yet no Letters know,
No bonds nor bills they value, but their vow.
Thus without Arts bright lamp, by Natures eye,
They keep just promise, and love equity.
But if once discord his fierce ensign wear,
Expect no promise vnle'st be for fear:
And, though these men no Letters know, yet their
Pans harsher numbers we may some where hear:
And vocal odes which us affect with grief;
Though to their minds perchance they give relief.
Besides these rude insights in Natures breast,
Each man by some means is with sense possessed
Of heavens great lights, bright stars and influence,
But chiefly those of great experince:
Yet they no feasts (that I can learn) observe,
Besides their Ceres, which do'th them preserve.
No days by them descernd from other days,
For holy certain service kept always.
Yet they when extreme heat does kill their Corn,
Afflict themselves some days, as men forelorne.
Their times they count not by the year as we,
But by the Moon their times distingui'sht be.
Not by bright Phoebus, or his glorious light,
But by his Phoebe and her shadowed night.
They now accustomed are two Gods to serve,
One good, which gives all good, and does preserve;
This they for love adore: the other bad,
Which hurts and wounds, yet they for fear are glad
To worship him: see here a people who
Are full of knowledge, yet do nothing know
Of God aright; yet say his Laws are good
All, except one, whereby their will's withstood.
In having many wives, if they but one
Must have, what must they do when they have none.
O how far short comes Nature of true grace,
Grace sees God here; hereafter face to face:
But Nature quite en^ru'd of all such right,
Reteines not one poor sparcle of true light.
And now what soul dissolues not into tears,
That hell must have ten thousand thousand heirs,
Which have no true light of that truth divine,
Or sacred wisdom of the Eternal Trine.
O blessed England far beyond all sense,
That knows and loves this Trines omnipotence.
In brief survey here water, earth, and air,
A^ people proud and what their orders are.
The fragrant flowers, and the Vernant Groves,
The merry Shores, and Storme-a^^ranting Coues.
In brief, a brief of what may make man blessed,
If man's content abroad can be possessed.
If these poor lines may win this Country love,
Or kind compassion in the English move;
Persuade our mighty and renowned State,
This pore-blinde people to comiserate;
Or painful men to this good Land invite,
Whose holy works these Natives may inlight:
If Heavens grant these, to see here built I trust;
An English Kingdom from this Indian dust.
FINIS.
EXcuse this Postscript, perchance more profitable than the Prescript. It may
be a necessary Caveat for many who too familiarly do Sero sapere. The discreet
artificer is not only happy to understand what may f^yrely and infallibly
further his duly considered designs and determinations: but to discover and
remove what obstacle soever may oppose his well-advised purposes, and probable
conclusions. I therefore, desiring that every man may be a Promethius, not an
Epimethius, have here underwritten such im^ediments as I have observed
wonderfully offensive to all Plantations; Quae prodesse qu^ant and delectare
legentem.

First therefore I conceive that far distance of plantations produce many
inconveniences and disabilities of planters, when as several Colonies consist
but of (...), or thirty, or about that number, which in a vast uncommanded
Continent, makes them liable to many and miserable exigents, which weakens all
union, and leaves them difficultly to be assisted against a potent or daily
enemy, and dangerously to be commanded; when as some one Bay well fortified
would maintain and enrich some thousands of persons, if it be planted with
men, able, ingenious, and laborious, being well furnished with all provisions
and necessaries for plantations. Besides, ^f one Bay be well peopled, its
easily defended, surveyed, disciplined, and commanded, be the seasons never so
unseasonable, and all their Forces in few hours ready in Arms, either
offensiuely to pursue, or defensiuely to subsist convenient numbers ever at
sea, and sufficient ever at home for all service, intelligence and discovery.

Secondly, Ignorance of seasons, servants, situation, want of people,
provisions, supplies, with (...) courage and patience, in and against all
opposition, (...) and affliction. Vincit patientia durum. Fishermen, manual
artificers, e^geners, and good fowlers are excellent servants, and only fit
for plantations. Let not Gentlemen or Citizens once imagine that I preiudize
their reputations, for I speak no word beyond truth, for they are too high, or
not patient of such service: though they may be very necessary for Martial
discipline, or excellent, (if pious) for example to the seditious and
inconsiderate multitude.

Boats with all their furniture, as sails, hooks, and lines, and other
appendences, afford the painful planter both variety of comfort, and a
sufficient competent, and an happy estate. Good mastiues are singular defenses
to plantations, in the terrifying or pursuing of the light-footed Natives. Hogs
and Goats are easy, present, and abundant profit, living and feeding on the
Ile-lands almost without any care or cost.

Plantations cannot possibly, profitably subsist without chattels and boats,
which are the only means for surveying and conveying both our persons and
provisions to the well advised situation. Without these, plantations may with
much patience, and well fortified resolution endure but difficultly, though
with much time flourish and contentedly subsist. For when men are landed upon
an unknown shore, per adventure weak in number and natural powers, for want
of boats' and carriages; are compelled to stay where they are first landed,
having no means to remove themselves or their goods, be the place never so
fruitless or inconvenient for planting, building houses, boats, or stages, or
the harbors never so unfit for fishing, fowling, or mooring their boats. Of
all which, and many other things necessary for plantation, I purpose to inform
thee hereafter. Wishing thee in the interim all furtherance, all fortunatenesse.

Farewell.

