A letter of sir Tho. More knight impugnynge the erronyouse writing of John^
Fryth against the blessed sacrament of the aultare.

IN my most hearty wise I reco^med me to you, and send you by this brynger the
writing again which I received from you / whereof I have been offered synnys a
couple of copyes mo in the mean while, as late as ye wot well it was. whereby
men may se how gredyly yt these new named brethren write it out, and
secretly sprede it abroad. So that where as the kings gracious hyghnes like
a most faithful catholyke prince, for the avoiding of such pestylente books
as sow such poysened heresies among his people, has by his open
proclamacyons utterly forboden all english prented books to be brought into
this land from beyond the sea, lest our english heretykes that are lurkynge
there might there enprent their heresies among other matters, and so send them
hither unsuspected, and therefore vnperceyued till more harm were felt tha^
after were well remedyable: the devil has now taught his dysciples the
dyuysers of these heresies, to make many short treatyses, whereof their
scolers may shortly write out copyes / but in their treatyses to put as much
poison in one wryte^ lefe, as they prented before in fyftene / as it well
appears in this one writing of this young man's making, which has I here
say lately made diverse other things, yt yet run in huker moker so close
among the brethern, yt there comes no copyes abroad.

And would god for his mercy that sith there can nothing refrain their study
from the deuyse and compassyng of evil and ungracious writing, yt they
could and would keep it so secret, yt never man should se it, but such as
are all ready so far corrupted, as never would be cured of their ca^ker. For
less harm were it if only they that are all ready by myred, Apoca. 22.
were as the scripture says myred on more and more, thanne that they should
cast their dyrt abroad upon other folks clean clothys. But alak this will not
be. For as saint Poule says, ^. Timo. 2
the co^tagyon of heresye crepeth on like a canker. For as the canker
corrupts the body ferther and ferher, and turns the hole parts into the
same dedely sykenesse: so do these heretykes crepe forth among good simple
soulys / and under a vayn hope of some high secret learning, which other men
abroad either wyllyngly did keep from them, or else could not teache them /
they daily with such abomynable books corrupt and destroy in corners very
many before those wrytynges comme unto light, till at the last ye smoke of
that secret fire begins to reke out at some corner / and sometime the whole
fire so flameth out at onys, that it burns up whole towns, and wastes
whole countries, ere ever it can be maystred / and yet never after so well and
clearly quenched, but yt it lies lurkynge still in some old roten timber
under cellers and celynges, that if it be not well waited on and marked, will
not fail at length to fall on an open fire again / as it has fared in late
years at mo places then one, both the tone fire and the the other, And therefore I
am both sure and sorry to, that those other books as well as this is now of this
young man's, will ones come unto light / and tha^ shall it appear wherefore
they be kept so close. How be it a wors than this is though the words be smoth
and fair / the devil I trow can not make. For herein he ronneth a great way
beyond Luther / and techeth in few leuys shortly, all the poison that
wyclyffe, Huyskyn, Tyndale, and zuinglius have taught in all their long books
before, concerning the blessed sacrament of the aultare / affermyng it to be
not only very bread still as Luther does, but also as those other bestes do,
says it is nothing else, and that there is neither the blessed body of Christ,
nor his blood, but for a remembrance of Crystes passyo^ only bare bread and
wine. And therein goth he so far in conclusyo^, yt he says it is all one unto
us i^ a manner whyther it be consecrated or vnco^secrated And so that blessed
sacrament that is and ever has in all christendom ben holden of all
sacraments the chyef, and not only a sacrament but the very self thing also
which other sacramente^s bytoken, and where of all other sacraments take their
effect and strength: he makes in manner (taking the consecracyon so sleyghte
and so light) no manner sacrament at all wherein he runs yet beyond Tyndale
and all the heretykes that ever I remember before.

And now the matter being of such a meruelouse wayght it is a great wonder to se
upon how light and sleyghte occasyons he is fallen unto these abominable
heyghnouse heresies.

For he denies not nor can not say nay, but that our sauy our said him self.
John. ^^
My flesh is verily mete, and my blood is verily drink.

He denies not also that Christ him self at his last sowper taking the bred
into his blessed hands, (...). 14.
after that he had blessed hit said unto his visciples, Luce. 22.
Take you this and eat it, this is my body that shall be given for you. And in
likewise gave them the chalyce after his blessing and consecracyon, and said
unto them, This is the chalyce of my blood of the new testamente, which
shall be shed out for many / do you this in remembrance of me.

The young man denies not nor can deny, but that our savior here him self
said yt hit was his own body, and said that hit was his own blood / and
there ordained yt it should be in remembrance of him contynually consecrated.
So that he must needs confess, that all they which believe that it is his very
body and his very blood in deed, have ye plain words of our savior him
self upon their side, for the ground and fundacyon of their faith.

But now says this young man against all this, that our sauyoure in other
places of scripture, Ioha^, 15.
called him self a very vine, and his dyscyples very braunchys. And he calls
him self a door also / not for that he was any of these things in deed,
Ioha^. 10.
but for certain proprietes for which he lykened him self to those things.
As a man for some propretees says of his neighbors horse, this horse is mine
up and down / meni^g that it is in every thing so like. And like as Jacob
byelded an aultare and called it ye god of Israel, Gene. 35.
and as Jacob called the place where he wresteled with the angel the face of
god, and that the pascall lamb was called the passing by of the lord, with
infinite such other phrases as he says natte for that they were so in deed,
but for certain similitudes in the propretees: so says this young man, that
Christ though he said by his plain words, This is my body, and this is my
blood / yet for all that he meant not yt it was his body and his blood in deed,
no more than that he meant that him self was a very door or a very vine, in
deed / though for certain, propertees he called him self both. And he says
yt Christ meant in like wise here / not that it was or should be his own body and
his blood in deed, but yt it should be to them and us as a remembrance of him
in his absence, as verily as though it were his very body and his very blood in
deed / as ye pascall lamb was a token and a remembrance of the passing by of
the lord / and as a brydegrome gives his bryde a ring if he hap to go into
a far country from her, for a remembrance of him in his absence, and as a
sure sign yt he will keep her his faith and not break her his promise.

In good faith it greueth me very sore, to se this young man so cyrcumuented
and begyled by certain old lymmes of the devil, as we now se yt he is / when
he is feign for the defense of this error, to flyt in conclusyon fro the faith
of plain and open scripture and so far fall to the new fangled fantasyes
of folysshe heretykes, that he will for the allegorye dystroye ye true sense
of the letter, in mayntenaunce of a new false sect, against the hole true
catholyke faith so fully confyrmed and continued in Crystes whole catholyke
church this.xv.C. year together. For these dregs has he dronken of wyclyfe
and Ecolampadius, Tindale and zuinglius / and so has he all that he argues
here beside. which.iiii. what manner folk they be, is metely well perceived
and known / and god has in part with his open vengeance declared. And ever
has god and ever will, by some way declare his wrath and indygnacyo^ against
as many as fall into such damnable opynyons against the blessed body and blood
of his only begotten son. From which perylous opinyon and all his other
errors / ye great mercy of our swet savior call home again, and save this
young man in time.

As for his allegoryes I am not offended with, nor with symylytudes neither
where they may have place, though he take one of his neighbors horse as he
does, and another if he list of his own cow. Provided always for a thing
which he list to call like, he mysco^strue not the scripture, and take away
the very thing in deed as he does here.

Now his ensample also of his brydegromys ryng, I very well allow. For I take
the blessed sacrament to be left with us for a very token and a memoryall of
Christ in deed. But I say that whole substance of the same token and
memoreall, is his own blessed body / where as this man would make it only
bread. And so I say that Christ has left us a better token tha^ this man would
have us take it fore / and therein fares like a man to whom a brydegrome had
delivered a goodly gold ring with a rich ruby there in, to deliver over to his
bryde for a token / and than he would like a false shrew, keep away that gold
ring, and give the bryde in the stead thereof a proper ring of a rysshe, and
tell her that the brydegrome would send her no better / or else like one that
when ye brydegrome had given such a gold ring to his bryde for a token, would
tell her plain and make her believe that the ryng were but coper or brass, to
mynysshe ye brydegromys thank.

If he said that the words of Christ might beside the lytterall sense be
vnderstande^ in an allegorye / I would well agree with him. For so may every
word almost through the whole scripture / calling an allegorye every sense,
whereby the words be translated unto some other spyrytuall understanding,
bysyde the true plain open sense yt the letter first intended. But on the
other side because that in some words of scripture is there none other thing
ente^ded but an allegorye, to go therefore and in another place of scripture to
take a way with an allegorye, the very true lytterall sense as he does here /
this is the fault that we find in him. which if it may be suffered, must
needs make all the scripture as towchyng any point of our faith, of none
effect or force at all. I marvel me therefore much yt he is not aferde to
afferme yt these words of Christ, of his body and his blood, must needs be
understood only by way of a symylytude or an allegorye as the words be of
the vine and the door.

Now this he woteth well, that though some words spoken by the mouth of Christ
written in scripture, be to be understood only by way of a similitude or an
allegory: it follows not thereupon that of necessite every like word of Christ
in other places was none other but an allegory. For such kind of
sophisticacion in arguyng, was ye very cauillacio^ and shyfte that the wykked
Arrians used. which like as this young man takes away now fro the blessed
sacrament ye very body and blood of Christ, by expounynge his plain words
with an allegory under color of some other places where such allegoryes must
needs have place, and were none otherwese meant: so did they take from Christ's
blessed person his omnipote^t godhed, and would not grant him to be equale
with almighty god his father / but ye plain textes of scripture which proved
his godhed, they expouned wrong and frowardly / not only by some other textes
that semede to say otherwise, but also as this young man does here by some
allegories / affermyng that he was called god and the son of god in holy
scripture, by such manner of speking, or as this young man calls it, by such
a manner of phrase as the scripture for some property calls certain other
persons gods and gods sons in other places. As where god says to
Moses, Exodi. 7.
I shall make the the god of Pharao. And where he says, Exodi. 22
thou shall not bakbyte the gods. And where he says, Psalm. 81.
I say you be gods and ye sons of the high god be you all.

And thus against that ye Christ was god and the son of god / such
cauyllacio^s these Arrians laid in expownyng the plain places with false
allegoryes / resemblyng them to other places in which like allegorye^ must
needs have place / as this young man by the necessary allegoryes of Crystes
words, used in the vine and in the door, would in like wise with like
cauyllacyons as the Arryans used against Crystes godhed, pull away the true
lytterall sense of Crystes words, concerning the troth of his very body and
blood in the blessed sacrament.

And surely if this manner of handelynge of scripture may be received and
brought in ure, that because of allegoryes used in some places every man may
at his pleasure draw every place to an allegorye, and say the letter meneth no
thing else / there is not any text in all the scripture, but a wylfull
person may find other textes against it, that may serve him to tryfle out the
troth of gods words, with cauillacyons grounded upon gods other words,
in some other place. wherein if he may be herd as long as he list to talk be
it but a woman: yet shall she find chatte Enough for all an hole year. And so
did those old Arria^s / of whom god forbede yt this young man should follow
that evil ensample.

If every man that ca^ find out a new fond fantasye upon a text of holy
scripture, may have his own mind taken, and his own exposition byleued,
against the exposicions of the old holy cunnyng doctors and saints: than may
ye surely se that none article of the christen faith can stand and endure long.
Hierony. aduersus Luciferianos.
For as holy saint Hierom says of him self, if the exposition of other
interpretours and the co^sente of the commune catholyque church, were of no
more stre^ghte, but that every new man might be byleued that could bring some
textes of scripture for him expouned as it pleased him self / than could I
says this holy man bring up a new sect also, and say by scripture that no
man were a true christian man nor a membre of the church that keeps two cotes.
And in good faith if that way were allowed / I were able my self to find out
fyften new sects in one fore none, yt should have as much probable hold of
scripture as this heresy has. Against which, beside the common faith of all
catholyque christen regyons, the expositions of the old holy doctors and
sai^tes be clear against this young man's mind in this matter, as whole as
against any heresy that ever was hitherto herd of. For as for the words of
Christ of which we speak touching ye blessed sacrament / though he may find
some old holy men that byside the lytterall sense does expoune them in an
allegory, yet shall he never find any of the^ that did as he does now after
wicliffe, Ecolampadius, Tyndale, and zuynglius, deny the lytterall sense / and
say that Christ me^t not that it was his very body and his very blood in deed
/ but the old holy doctors and exposytours byside all such allegories, do
plainly declare and expoune, that in those words our savior as he expressly
spoke, so did also well and plainly mean, that the thing which he there gave
to his dysciples in the sacrament, were in very deed his very flesh and blood.
And so did never any of the old exposytours of scripture expowne any of those
other places in which Christ is called a vine or a door. And therefore it
appears well, that ye manner of spekyng was not like. For if it had / than
would not the old exposytours have used such so far unlike fashyon in ye
expounyng of them.

And over this, the very circumstances of the places in ye gospel, in which
our savior speaks of that sacrament, may well make open the difference of his
speech in this matter and of all those other / and that as he spoke all those
but i^ an allegory, so spoke he this plainly menyng that he spoke of his very
body and his very blood beside all allegories. For neither when our lord
said he was a very vine, nor when he said he was the door / there was none
that herd him that any thing merueyled thereof. And why? for because they
perceived well that he meant not that he was a materyall vine i^ deed, nor a
materyall door neither. But when he said that his flesh was very mete, and
his blood was very drink, and that they should not be saved but if they did
eat his flesh and drink his blood / than were they all in such a wonder
thereof, that they could not abide. And wherefore? but because they perceived
well by his words and his manner of cyrcu^stances used in ye speaking of them,
yt Christ spoke of his very flesh and his very blood in deed. For else the
strangeness of the words would have made the^ to have taken it as well for an
allegorye, as either his words of the vine or of the door. And than would they
have no more merueyled at ye tone than they did at the the other. But now where
as at the vine and the door they merueiled nothing / yet at the eating of his
flesh and drinking of his blood, they so sore merueyled, and were so sore
moved, and thought the matter so hard, and the wonder so great, that they
asked how could that be, and went almost all their way. whereby we may well
se, that he spoke these words in such wise, as the herers perceived that he
meant it not in a parable nor an allegory / but spoke of his very flesh and
his very blood in deed.

Many other plain proves might a man gather upon the cyrcumstances of the
very textes, where this thing is spoken of in the scripture / but that it is
not my purpose now to stycke in argument of this matter, that is of it self so
clear out of all questyon / but only a little to towche it, that ye may se how
little pyth and substance for his matter is in all those ensamples of allegorye,
which wyclyffe, Ecolampadius, Tyndale, and Suinglius have brought out against
the blessed sacrament / and wherewith those old shrewes have with their false
symylytudes pytuously deceived, either the symplycyte or the lyghtnesse of this
sely young man / which might if he had not either of lyghtnesse over run him
self, or of symplenes ben deceived, or of pride and high mind in putting
forth heresies wyllyngly begyled and blinded / easily have perceived him self,
that the mo such allegoryes that he found in the scripture in like manner of
phrases or speech, ye wurse is his part / and the more clear is it that these
places spekyng of the blessed sacrament, were plainly meant as they were spoken
beside all such allegoryes. For else had never both the herers at the
time, and ye exposytours sins and all chryste^ people beside this.xv. C.
year, taken only in this one matter the plain literal sense being so strange
and meruelouse that it might seem impossyble, and declyne from the letter for
allegoryes in all such other things, being as he says and as in deed they
be, so many far in number moo.

How be it as for this point that an allegory used in some place, is not a
cause suffycye^t to make men leave the proper sygnyfycacyons of gods word in
every other place, and seek an allegorye and forsake the plain common sense and
understanding of the letter / this perceived ye young man well enough him
self. For he confesses that he would not so do save for necessyte, because he
sees as he says that the common lyterall sense is impossyble. For the thing
he says that is meant thereby, can not be true / that is to wit that the very
body of Christ can not be in the sacrament, because the sacrament is in many
diverse places at onys / and was at the maundy, that is to wit in the hands
of Christ and in every of his apostels mouths / and at that time it was not
glorified. And than he says that Christ's body not being gloryfyed, could no
more be in two places at onys, than his own can. And yet he goth after forther,
and says that no more it can neither when it is gloryfyed to. And that he
proves by ye saying of saint Austayn / whose words be as he says, that the
body with which Christ rose, must be in one place, and that it contynueth in
heaven, and shall do till he shall come to judge both quycke and deed. And yet
at the last he proves that the body of Christ can not be in many places at
onys. For if it might be in many places at onys, tha^ it might he says be in
all places at onys. But in all places at onys he says it can not be / and
thereof he concludes that it can not be in many places at onys. And thus for
this impossybylyte of the thing that ryseth upon the common lytterall sense of
Christ's words, he is he says of necessyte dreuen to fall from it unto some
allegorye / which he confesses that he would not do, if the plain lyterall
sense were possible. But alas for the dear mercy of god, if we should leave the
letter and seek an allegorye with the destruccyon of the lytterall sense, in
every place where we find a thing that ^eason can not reche unto, nor s^
which way it were possible and therefore would take it for impossyble: feign
would I wit what one article of all our farth this young man could assygne
me spoken of in the scripture from which his reason shall not dreue away the
strength of his proof in making him leave the lytterall sense / wherein his
proof should stand and send him to seek an allegory that may stand with
reason and dreue away ye faith, where he should believe the leter and make his
reason obedyent unto faith.

I marvel me very much why the consyderacyo^ of this impossybylyte, should of
necessyte dreue this young man from the plain open lytterall sense of Christ's
words spoken of the blessed sacrament / sith so many good and holy men so
long to gyther this.xv. C. year, have byleued the lyterall sense well and
fermely, and could not be dreuen from it for any such consyderacyon of such
impossybylyte / and yet being as natural men, as wise me, as well learned men,
as studyouse in the matter, and men of more age, and more sure, sad and
substancyall judgment, than this young man is yet, and men at the least as
lykely to se what were possible and what were impossyble as this good young man
is. And therefore as for all his reasons gro^ded upon impossybylyte, sith I may
be bold to think as all those old holy men have thought, and as all wise men
I wene yet think, that no thing is impossyble to god: I esteem all those
reasons very little worth.

How be it one thing he brings in by the way, that I would he had showed
in what place we might find it, that is to wit the saying of saint Austayn.
For why to seek out one line in all his books, were to go look a nedle in a
medew. But surely if we may se the place where the young man found it / we
shall I dowte not make a clear answer to it. And yet even as him self has
rehearsed it / yt saying makes nothing for the proof of his purpose. For
saint Austayne says no more but that the body in which Christ arose, must
be in one place, and that it contynueth in heaven, and shall do till the day of
dome. As help me god except this young man in these words of saint Austayn
se forther with his yo^ge syghte, than I can see with mine old eyes and my
spectacles / I merueyle me myche yt ever he would for his purpose onys bring
the^ in. For when saint Austayne says that the body in which Christ arose,
must needs be in one place / he might mean by those words for any thing
that here appears to the contrary, not that his body might not be in two
diverse places at onys / but that it must be in one place, that is to say in
some place one or other / or that he must have one place for his special
place, and that place must be heaven / as we say god must be in heaven, and
angels must be in heaven. He speaks no thing of the sacrament, nor says not
his body with which he rose must needs be so in one place, that it can by no
possibilite in any mo.

Also this word (must) which is in the laten tongue called oportet, which
word saint Austayne here uses as this young man reherseth him / does not always
sygnyfye such a necessyte, as excludes all possybylyte of the contrary. For
our saviors said him self to the two discyples, Nonne haec oportuit pati
Christum, et ita intrare in gloriam suam? Luce. 24.
was it not so that Christ must dye, and so enter into his glory? And yet
him self said also, that he might for all that have chosen whyther he would
have dyed or no. Iho^.^^.
For him self says that to depart with his soul and to take his soul again,
both twain were things put in his own power. And the prophet Esaias says
of him, Esai^. ^^.
He was offered up because he so would him self. And therefore this latin
word oportet, which saint Austayn has in that place / is many ty times in the
latin tongue taken not for full and precyse necessyte, but for expedyent and
co^uenye^t. And therefore it is translated also into english, not only by
this word (must) which yet sygnyfyeth not al way an impossybylyte of the
contrary / but often times by this word (it behooves) which word sygnyfyeth
that it is to be done for our behofe and commodyte, and not that it can in no
wise be avoided but yt it must needs be. And therefore sith all ye dreueth this
young man from the lytterall sense, is as he says the impossybylyte of
Christ's body to be at onys in diverse places, and proves that thing
impossyble by ye words of saint Austayne / that says no more but that it
must be in one place, and says not yt it may be in no mo but one, nor
speaks not of any such necessyte whereof he puts the contrary for
impossyble, nor speaks no word at all there of the sacrament: sith saint
Austayne I say says no forther than this / I marvel much in mine heart, what
thing this young man sees in his words, worthy yt bringing in for any proof
of his purpose.

And that ye may the more clearly se that saint Austayne speaks here of no
necessyte / he not only says that ye body of Christ with which he rose must
be in one place / but also he determines that one place in which he must be
if this young man rehearse him right, that is to say in heuyn, there to
continue still vyto the day of dome.

But now I trow this young man thinks not, that saint Austayne for all his
determining that Christ's body in which he rose must be still in yt one
place, yt is to wit in heuyn until the day of dome / he meneth for all that
that it is so fast bounden to abide only there, but that he may when it
pleases him in the self same body, be byneth here in earth an hundredth times
before the day of dome. And good stories are there testyfyenge that he so has
been diverse times ere this, synnys the time of his ascensyon. And therefore
this young man may perceive plainly, that saint Austayne in those words,
thowgh he say that Christ's body with which he rose must be in one place, that
is to wit in heuyn, yet he mente no such precyse necessyte as should dreue
this young man from the lytterall sense of Crystes words unto ye allegory. He
meant not by this word, it must be in one place, that is to say in heaven,
that it must so be in that one place till domes day, that it might in ye
mean while be in none other beside, and that it must be so of an immutable
necessyte by no power chau^geable, whereof the contrary were by no power
possible. And therefore as for these words of saint Austayne to this purpose
here / I marvel much in good faith / but if he show more hereafter, yt ever
this young man would speak of them.

Now as for his natural reasons be not worth the reasonynge. For first that
the body of Christ vngloryfyed could no more be in two places at onys thanne
his own can / because he is a natural body as Christ's was, and Christ's body
a natural body as his is: I will not examyne any co^paryso^s between their two
bodies. But if Christ would tell me that he would make each of both their
bodies too be in fyftene places at ones, I would believe him I, that he were
able to make his word true in the bodies of both twain / and never would I
so myche as ask him whyther he would gloryfye them both first or not. But I
am sure gloryfyed or vngloryfyed, if the said it he is able to do it. when our
savior said, that it was as possible for a camel or a great cable rope to
enter through a nedles eye, as for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of
heaven, and after told his apostles that though those two things were both
impossyble to men, yet all thing was possible to god: I think that he meant
that neither the sample nor the matter was to god impossyble. Now sith than at
the lest wise yt it is not impossyble for him to conuaye the camel or ye cable
rope through the nedels eye / what shall me need to study now whyther he can
bring them through such as they be, or else must of fine force be feign to
gloryfye the camel or the cable first / as this young man says of his body, yt
it were impossyble for god to bring about to have it in two places at onys
such as it is now, because it is yet somewhat groce and vngloryfyed / and than
by the comparyson of his own, he argues the like of the blessed body of
Christ, being like his at his maundye no more gloryfyed that he. But I say yet
again of their bodies both twain, if he said that he would do it / I would not
dowt but he could do it. And if he could not do it but if he glorified the^
first / than were I sure that he would gloryfye them both. And there fore if it
were true, that he could not make his own body to be in two places at ones
at maundy, but if it were than gloryfyed / than sith I am sure that he there
did it, I am thereby sure also that he than for the time glorified it. For that
thing was in his own power to do as often as he would, as well before his death
as at his resurreccyon / and yet to keep his gloryfycacion from perceiving,
Marci. 1^
as he did from his two dyscyples, which for all his gloryfyed body took him
but for a pilgrim. And therefore as I say, if Christ said unto me that he
would make both his body and this young man's to, each of them to be in a
thousand places at ones / I would put no dowte therein, but that by some
manner means he were able enough to do it.

But here would this young man peradventure say, ye say very well if god so
said, and by his so saying so mente in deed. But ye wot well I deny that he
so mente though he so said. For I say that in so saying he meant but by an
allegorye, as he did when he called him self a vine and adore. But now
must this young man consider again, that him self confesses yt the cause for
which him self says that Christ in so saying did not so mean, is because that
if he should have meant so, it was impossyble for god to bring his menynge
about / that is to say yt Crystes body might be in two places at onys. And
therefore but if he prove that thing impossyble for god to do, else he
confesses that god not only said it, but also me^t it in deed.

And yet over this, if Christ had never said it / yet dowte I no thing but that
he is able to do it / or else were there somewhat that he could not do, and than
were god not almighty.

Now if this young man will say that to make one body to be in two places,
does imply repugnaunce, and that god can do no such thing: I dare be bold
to tell him again, that many things may seem repugnant both to him and me,
which things god sees how to make them stand to gyther well enough.

Such blind reasons of repugnaunce induces many men in to great error,
some ascribing all thing to destyny without any power of mannys free will at
all / and some gyuynge all to man's own will, and no forsyghte at all unto
the prouydence of god / and all because the pore blind reason of man can not
se so far, as to perceive how gods prescyence and man's free will can
stand and agree together, but seem to the^ clearly repugnant.

And surely if the semyng of our own feeble reason, may dreue us onys to think
that one man to be at onys in two places, is a thing so hard and so
repugnau^t, and therefore so impossyble that god him self can never bring it
about / ye devil will within a while set us upon such a trust unto our
own reason, that he will make us take it for a thing repugnaunt and
impossyble, that ever one god should be three persons.

I wot well yt many good folk have used in this matter many good fruitful
examples of gods other workys, not only miracles wryte^ in scripture, but
also done by ye common course of nature here in earth, and some things made
also by man's hand / as one face beholden in diverse glassys, and in every
pyece of one glass broken in to twenty, and the marvel of the making of the
glass it self such matter as it is made of, and of one word coming whole to
an hundred ears at onys, and the syghte of one little eye present and beholding
an whole great country at onys, with a thousand such other meruayles mo,
such as those that se them daily done and therefore marvel not at the^, shall
yet never be able, no not this young man him self, to give such reason by
what mean they may be done, but that he may have such repugnau^ce laid
against it, that he shall be feign in conclusyon for the chyefe and the most
euydent reason to say, that ye cause of all those things is because god that
has caused them so to be done is almighty of him self and can do what him
list. And also I can not se why it should be more repugnaunt that one body
may be by ye power of god in two places at onys, than that two bodies may be
to gether in one place at onys. And that point I think this young man denies
not. And I verily think there is unto man's reason neither more seblau^ce of
difficulty nor of repugnau^ce, neither in the being of one body be it never so
groce and unglorified in twenty diverse places at onys, than in ye making of all
that whole world, in which all the bodies both gloryfyed and vngloryfyed have
all their romys and places, to make I say all that hole world of right naught.
which article of our faith we shall find folk within a while not greatly
force to deny, if men fall to this point, that for impossibylytees of nature,
they think the things impossyble also to god that is the master and the
maker of nature / and that they will upon that ymagynacyon do as this young man
does, flee fro the lytterall sense of the scripture, and seek some allegorye in
the stead, and say they be dreuen thereto by necessyte, because of the
impossybylyte of ye matter. For thus shall as ye may well se, by this means
none article of our faith stand.

Now his last argument with which he proves it impossyble for one body of
Christ to be in two places at onys is this. you can says he show no reason,
why he should be in many places at onys and not in all. But i^ all places he
can not be / wherefore we must conclude that he can not be in many places at
onys. This is a marvelous concluded argument. I am sure a very child may sone
se that this consequent can never follow upon those two premysses of his
antecedent. For he can no forther conclude upon them, but that we can show no
reason why he should be in many places at onys. Now if I should grant him yt
no man could show a reason why he should be in many places at onys / what had
he won by that? might he then conclude there upon yt he could not be in many
places at onys / as though that it were not possible for god to make his body
in two places at onys, but if we were able to tell how, and why, and whereby,
and show the reason? Now in this argument he begins with (should) in the
mayor / and than in the minor and the conclusyon turns in to (can) and so
varyeth his extremytes, that the argument can never be good if it were but for
that. If he would enduce the conclusyon which he concludes here / he must have
rather have argued thus. If it might be in many places at ones, than might it
be in all places at onys. But in all places at onys it can not be / and
therefore it can not be in many places at ones. Thus or in some such manner must
he argue, if he will awghte prove. But here now both the partys of his
antecedent be very weke. The first is this, that if the body of our sauyoure
may be in many places at onys, it may be i^ all places at onys. Though I would
grant this causale proposycyon for the troth of the second part / yet would I
deny it him for ye form. For though I grant it to be true / yet ye first
part is not the proof of the second / but rather contrary wise the second
infers well ye first. For ye reason is good: he may be in all places, ergo
he may be in many. But argue the contrary wise as this young man argues, and
than is ye form very faint. For this has little strength: he may be in many
places, ergo he may be in all, many men ro^ne, ergo all men run, men ro^ne in
many places, ergo men run in all places / but if the matter maynteyne the
argument, either by the possybylyte of the antecedent or by the necessyte of
the consequent / as one man is a stone, ergo all men be stones, one man is a
living creature, ergo all men be living creaturs. But let this first
proposycyon pass and come now to the second, upon which all his argument
hangs / that is, that the body of Christ can not be at onys in all places.
This he says / but how does he prove it. If he will bid me prove ye
affyrmatyue / I may answer that I need not, for it is not the thing yt we
have in hand. For we do not say that he is in all places / for the sacrament
is not at onys in all places. And we be not bound for this matter to go any
forther / and ye point for so far I prove by the gospel that says it is so.
And therefore this young man that says it can not be / let him prove that it
may not be. For if it may be / he than confesses that the words of Christ do
prove that it must be. But because it can not be says he / therefore he is
dreuen to construe these words by any allegorye. And now that ^t can not be in
many places / he proves by yt that he can not be in all places / and therefore
must he prove that, or else give over thargement.

How be it as for me though I be not bounden to it / I am content yet to prove
that god may make the body of Christ to be in all places at onys. And because
this young man coupleth yt proposycyon with ye the other / so will I do to. And I
prove therefore that god can make his body be both in many places at onys, and
in all places at onys / by that yt he is almighty, and therefore can do all
thing. And now must this young man tell us either that this is nothing, or
else deny that god can do all thing. And than must he lymyte gods power
how far he will give god leave to stretch it. But wha^ this young man shall
come to that point / every wise man will I wene suppose and think in the^ self
that this young man has yet in his youth gone to little while to scole, to
know all ye god can do / but if he bring good witness yt he has learned up
the vttermoste of all gods co^nyng / which thing the apostle Poule for all
that he was rauysshed up into the third heuyn, rekened yet so far above his
reche, that he cried out, Roma. 10
Oh the altytude of the richesse of the wisdom and the conning of god.

But yet this young man goes about to prove y^ point by scripture. For except
we grant him that point to be true / he says that else we make the angel
a liar, that said he is not here / and also yt else we make as though Cristes
body in his ascencyo^ did not go up in the cloud in to heaven from the earth,
but only hyd him self in the cloud, and played bo pepe and tarried byneth
still.

I am in good faith sorry to se this young man presume so far upon his wit,
so soon ere it be full ripe. For surely such liking of them self makes
many wits wax roten ere they wax ripe. And verily if it do decreace and go
bakwarde in this fasshyon, it may not last long. For even here in the end he
forgets him self so foul, that when he was a young sophyster he would I
dare say have been full sore ashamed so to have ouersene him self at Oxforde
at a peruise. For ye wot well that thing which he says and which he must
therefore prove / is that ye body of Christ can not be in every place at onys,
by no mean yt god could make. And the textes that he brings in for the
proof, say no ferther but that he was not in all places at onys / and say not
that by no possible power of his god head it could not be in every place at
onys. And therefore this point is as ye se well of this young man very yongely
handeled. And therefore ought every man abhor as a plain pestylence, all
such unreasonable reasons made for nature by more then natural folys, against
ye possybylyte of gods almighty power. For we may know it verily, that
against these folyes has specially a place y^ good gostely counsel of saint
Poule / where he warns us and says, Collo. 2.
Beware that no man begyle you by vain philosophy.

God forbede that any man should be the more prone and ready to believe this young
man in this great matter, because he says in the beginning yt he will bring
all men to a co^corde and a quyetenesse of conscience. For he brings men to
the wurste kind of quietness that can be devised, wha^ he tells us as he
does, that every man may in this matter without parell believe which way he
list. Every man may in every matter without any counsel of his, soon set him
self at rest, if he list to take that way to believe as he list him self
and care not how. Cor. 11.
But and yt that way had been sure / saint Poule would never have showed that
many were in parell of sykenes and death to, for lack of dyscernyng reverently
the body of our lord in that sacrament, when they came to receive him.

And against this doctrine of this young brother, is the plain doctrine of the
old holy fathers interpretours of the scripture. And what fasshyon is this to
say that we may believe if we list that there is the very body of our lord
in deed / and than to tell us for a troth that such a faith is impossible to
be true / for god him self can never bring it about to make his body be
there.

I am very sure that ye old holy doctors which byleued Crystes body and his
blood to be there, and so taught other to believe, as by their books plainly
does appear / if they had thought either that it could not be there, or
that it was not there in deed / they would not for all the good in this world
have written as they have done. For would those holy me^ wene you have taught
that men be bounden to believe that the very body and blood of Christ is there,
if them self thought they were not bounden thereto? Or would they make men
honor and worship that thing as the very body and blood of Christ, which
them self thought were not it? This gere is to chyldysh to speak of.

yet one great pleasure he does us, in that he puts us all at lybertye,
that we may without perell of dampnacyo^ believe as we byleued before / that is
to wit that in ye blessed sacrament the whole substance of the bread and the
wine is transmuted and changed into the very body and blood of Christ. For
if we may without perell of da^pnacyon believe thus as him self grants that
we may / than grants he yt we may also without any perell of da^nacyon
believe that him self lies / where he says ye troth of that belyefe is
impossyble.

And therefore I shall therein conclude with him, as our sovereign lord the
kings hyghnes in his most famous book of assercyon of the sacrament
concludes in one place against Luther / which in his Babilonica confessed yt
though men in the sacrament of the altar byleued after the common faith as they
did before, there was no perell therein. well than said the kings grace, ye do
your self grant that in our bylief is no perell. But all the church
byleueth that in your way is undoubted da^pnacyon. And therefore if ye will as
wisdom would ye should, dele surely for your self / ye should rather leave your
unsure way which ye believe, and come your self and counsel all other whom ye
would did well, to believe as we do. Lo this reason of the kings grace clearly
concludes this young man upon his own confession / and plainly proves that
except he leave his bylyefe which all good christen folk hold for dampnable,
and come home again to his old faith ye common faith of all the church / in
which as him self agrees there is no perell: I will not for courtesye say he
is stark mad / but surely I will say that for his own soul, the young man
plays a very young wanton pageaunt.

Now where as for an other quyetenes of every man's conscience, this young man
byddeth every man be bold, and whyther the blessed sacrament be consecrate or
vnconsecrate (For though he most specially speaks for the wine yet he speaks
it of both) and byddeth care not but take it for all that unblessed as it is,
because the priest he says can not deceive us nor take from us the profit of
gods institucyon, whyther he altre the words or leave them all vnsayd / is
not this a wonderful doctrine of this young man. we wot well all that ye
priest can not hurt us by his ouersyghte or malice, if there be no fault upon
our own part. For that perfeccyon that lacks upon the prestes, part the
great mercy of god does as we trust of his own goodness supply. And therefore
as holy saint Chrysostom says, no man can take harm but of him self. But
now if we se the thing dysordered our own self by the priest, and Crystes
instytucion broken / if we than wyttyngly receive it unblessed and
unconsecrated, and care not whyther Crystes instytucyon be kept and observed
or no, but reken it is as good without it as with it / than make we our self
parteners of the fault, and lose the profit of the sacrament, and receive it
with dampnacyon / not for the prestes fault but for our own. How be it as for
his bylyefe that takes it no better but for bare bread and wine, it makes him
little matter consecrated or not / saving yt the better it is consecrate ye more
is it ever noyous unto him that receives it, having his conscience combred
with such an execrable heresye / by which well appears that he puts no
dyfference between the body of our lord in the blessed sacrament, and the common
bread that he eats at his diner / but rather he estemeth it less / for ye
tone yet I think ere he begin if he lack a priest he will bless it him
self, the the other he cares not as he says whyther it be blessed or no. From
which abomynable heresye and all his other, our lord for his great mercy
deliver him, and help to stop every good man's ears from such ungracious
incantacyons as this man's reasons be / which are unto such simple people as
will be with ye wind of every new doctrine blown about like a wethercok,
myche more contagyous a great deal, than was that evil doctrine which
saint Poule so sore reproves, Gala. 3.
with which the false prophets had bywiched the Galathyes. But as for those
that are good and fast faithful folk, and have any grace or any spark of
any reason in their heddes / will (I verily think) never be so far ouersene
as in this article (ye troth whereof god has him self testified by as many
open miracles as ever he testyfyed any one) to believe this one young man upon
his barayne reasons, against the faith and reason both of all old holy
writers, and all good christen people this.xv.C. years. All which without any
dowt or question, byleued against his doctrine in this blessed sacrament,
until Berengarius began to fall first unto this error. which when he better
considered he fell from it again and forsook it utterly / and for because he
had ones holde^ it, the good man did of his own good mind vnco^pelled great
penance wyllyngly all his life after, as ye may read in Cronica cronicaru^
ye.cxc. lefe. And also friar Barns, albe it that as ye wot well he is in many
other things a brother of this young man's sect / yet in this heresye he
sore abhors his heresye / or else he lies him self. For at his last
being here, he wrote a letter to me of his own hand / wherein he writes that I
lay that heresye wrongfully to his charge / and therein he takes witness of
god and his conscience / and shows him self so sore grieved therwyth, that any
man should so repute him by my writing, that he says he will in my reproach
make a book against me, wherein he will profess and proteste his faith
concerning this blessed sacrament. By which book it shall he says appear, yt I
have said untruely of him, and that he abhors this abomynable heresy. which
letter of his I forbere to answer till ye book come. By which we may se sith
he forsakes this heresy, what faith he will profess, whyther ye true faith or
some other kind of heresy. For if he will profess the very catholyke faith /
he and I shall in that point be very soon agreed / and I shall than make him
such answer therein, as he shall have cause to be well contented with.

But in the mean time, it well contenteth me that friar Barns being a man of
more age, and more ripe dyscressyo^ and a doctor of diuinyte, and in these
things better learned than this young man is / abhors this young man's
heresy i^ this point, as well as he lyketh him in many other.

And so I trust will every wise man / and not be so enchaunted with such
chyldysh reasons as his be, that they would thereby do as the herers of Christ
did / that for marvel of this matter as this young man does now, Joha^. 6.
refused our savior and went their way from him / but will rather let them
go that will go, and abide them self with our savior stylle / as with him that
has in the stead of this young man's vain childysh folosophy, not false
apparau^t sophystrye, but the very words of eternal life. which words I
beseech our lord give this young man the gxace, against his own froward
fantasyes to believe / and to ye same life bring him and us both / where we
shall without the veil or coueryng of any manner sacrament, behold our blessed
savior face to face / and in ye bright myrrour of troth the very one godhed
of ye three like mighty and each almighty persons, clearly behold and perceive
both that it may and in deed is, and also how it may be, that Cristes one body
may be in many places at onys. which thing many that will not come there of
folysshe frowardnes afferme to be plain impossyble.

Lo instead of a letter have you almost a book, longer than I trust good
christen folk shall need in so clear an article of the faith, and to all fast
faithful people so far out of all dowt / saving that in sendyng you your
copy again, me thought I must needs write you somewhat what I my self
thought of his writing. In which wha^ I onys began, all be it not very well at
ease / ye abomynacio^ yet of ye pestylent heresye and the parell of his
colorable handelynge, drew me forth ferther and ferther / and scant could
suffer me now to make an end, but that I was half in mind to have towched also
the scisme of the Bohemys, which he sets forth here in his writing /
saving that it requires some length, and that I am in mind to make answer
onys in that matter unto friar Barns, which has made therein ye wot well an
hole treatyce / wherein I wonder if him self wene he have said well. And as
for that holy prayour yt this devout young man as a new Christ, techeth to make
at the receyuynge of the blessed sacrament all his co^gregacio^ / I would not
give ye paryng of a pere for his prayour though it were better than its is,
pulling a way the true faith therefore as he does. How be it his prayour
there is such devised, and penned, and painted with laysour and study / that I
trust every good christen woman makes a much better prayour at the time of
her howsell, by faithful affeccyo^ and gods good inspyracyo^ suddenly. For
she beside gods other goodness, thanketh him I think for his high s^ngulare
benefyte there presentely given her, in that it lyketh him to accept and
receive her so simple and so far unworthy of her self, to sit at his own
blessed board / and there for a remembrance of his bitter passion suffered for
her sin, to suffer her receive and eat not bread though it seem bread, but
his own very precyouse body in form of bread, both his very flesh blood and
bonys, the self same with which he dyed and with which he rose again, and
appeared again to his apostles, and ete among his dyscyples, and with which
he ascended into heuyn, and with which he shall descend again to judgment, and
with which he shall reygne in heuyn with his father and their holy spyryte in
eternal glory, and all his true faithful byleuyng and loving people with him
/ whom as the mystycall members of his glorious body he shall than, and from
thens forth for ever pleasauntly nurysh and feed and sacyate their insacyable
hunger with the beholdynge of his glorious godhed. whose hunger to heuynward he
comfort and fedeth here by hope, and by the sure token and sign of
saluacyo^, the gyuyng of his own very blessed body under the sign and
likeness of bread to be eat and received into our bodies / yt our soulys by
the faith there of, and our bodies by the receyuynge thereof, may be
spyrytually and bodily joined and knyt unto his here in earth / and with his
holy soul and his blessed body, and his godhed both with his father and their
holy spyryt, gloryously live after in heaven.

This lo in effect though not in words, can chryste^ women pray, and some of
them peradventure express it much better to. For god can as the prophet
says, make not only women yt have age, faith, and wit, but the mouths also
of infau^tes and young soukyng children, Psalm. 8.
to pronu^ce his laud and praise / so yt we need not this young man now to come
teache us how and what we shall pray, as Christ taught his disciples the pater
noster. Fryth is an unmeet master to teache us what we should pray at the
receyuynge of the blesed sacrament, when he will not knowledge it as it is, but
take Crystes blessed body for nothing but bare bred / and so little esteem the
receyuynge of the blessed sacrament, that he forces little whyther it be
blessed or not. I pray god bless these poysened errors out of his blind
heart, and make him his faithful servant / and send you heartily well to fare.

At Chelchith the.vii. day of December by the hand of more than all your own
Tho. More knight.

Prentyd at London by. W. Rastell. 1533

CVM PRIVILEGIO


