NINE SONGS

Collected out of the holy SCRIPTURES of Old and New Testament: drawn forth
of the pure fountains of HEBREW and GREEK.

Translated, Paraphrased in prose, Summed, Analyzed, notted upon, grounds for
use and doctrine observed in every one of them, and finally paraphrased in
English meeter.

By Mr. WILLIAM MORAY, Minister of GODS word in Crail.

Colloss. 1.3. Verse 16. Let the word of CHRIST dwell in you plenteously in all
wisdom, teaching and admonishing one another, in Psalms and Hymns, and
spiritual songs, singing with spiritual grace in your hearts to the LORD.
Iam. 5.13. Is any among you afflicted? let him pray. Is any merry? le^ him
sing Psalms. EDINBVRGH, (...)

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE VICOVNT OF STORMONT, LORD OF SCONE, and of
BALWHIDDER, Stewart of FYFE, etc. One of the Kings most excellent Majesty's
privy counselors.
My Lord,
WHen I look back upon the course of your L. life, whom I have known about
forty eight years ago: I cannot but wonder of the goodness and gracious
providence of GOD toward your L. For so soon as your L. went to the Court of
that Prince of worthy memory in all ages so long as the world shall last, King
James the sixth of that name in Scotland, and first of that name in England,
France, and Ireland; God gave your L. such favor in the sight of that Prince
and bestowed upon you such gifts of mind and body as did indeed merit at that
princes hand, all the degrees of honor and great estate, which that royal and
magnifick Prince rewarded your L. service withal. For I may say truly: your
L. was faithful to his Majesty and when his Hyenes did honor your L to be
Captain of a guard for the peace of the country and for execution of justice,
to the well of his Majesty's subjects, against Rebels, bangsters, contemners of
his Heines laws and authority. Your L. did with such courage and conscience
administrat that charge that you spared not great nor small until that they
were brought under obedience (...) gave your L. grace in your old age, to
retire your self from Court, with as great honor, wealth and favor of your
Prince, and more, then any other did, as I could mark in my time. Moreover,
God has given to your L. ability and will to honor your country, in building
of fair Palaces, and planting fair Ortchards and gardens in the places of
your L. residences: In being magnifick in Hospitality, both to honorable
strangers coming to see this country, and to our own country men, noble,
ignoble, friends and acquaintance. Like as God has made your L. the man to set
up again that house whereof your L. came, and to raise the ruynes thereof to
as good estate as ever it was; Notwithstanding of your L. liberality in
advancing your friends to great honors and heritages, to be enjoyed by them
as your L. successors, when you shall depart from this life. I know not what
more is required to make your L. both here and eternally happy: but that your
L. remember and consider this good and gracious providence of God toward you,
and be thankful, saying with David, What shall I render to GOD for all his
benefits to me, etc. Ps. 116. And confess to God your sins with sorrow for
them, and to believe his promises of mercy to penitent sinners through the
merit of his beloved Son Jesus Christ: that with old Jacob, Genesis 49 and Simeon,
Luke 2. waiting for the salvation of the Lord, your L. may depart in peace in
Gods appointed time. To you my Lord I dedicat this little Treatise, as having
no kinsman now so near unto me by blood, or so honorable in estate: which I
recommend unto your L. gracious acceptance and your L. self, to the grace of
GOD. And rests,

Your L coosin to honor and serve you in the LORD to my power*

To the loving Christian Reader.
LOving Christian Reader, wit: when long sickness brought upon me so great
inability and weakness, that I was not able to go without doors, far less
to prosecute the dispensation of my ministry in public: I set my self at the
intervals of any little respiration from pain, to the reading and meditating
of holy Scripture, that the light of knowledge and faith might more and more
shine in my mind, and abide in my memory, and the sense of holy joy and peace,
might possess my heart and conscience: For certainly: As water if it stand
long and run not, want good air or lyvelie spring, will rotte and stink: So
the soul of man if it be not mooving about good, and moved by the breath of
the holy Spirit, that it may be a well of water of life: Ioh. 7.38. It will
soon die in corruption and sin, and stink in the nost^i^les of GOD Deuteronomy.
32.19. Amongst other Scriptures I read these Songs contained in this little
Treatise, and did meditate upon them: I wrote my meditations, which when I show
them to some godly learned Brethren, they thought if they were published they
might do good to others. I think my self that they may serve for good use, to
two sorts of people: First to good Christian men and women, who delight to
meditate in the Law of GOD both day and night. Ps. 1. Next to young students of
Theology, aspyring to be Preachers and Ministers of Gods word: The particulars
set down in order in this Treatise serves to help such. For 1. a young Divyne
should be acquaint in some good measure, with the original languages wherein
the holy Scriptures were first written, namely the Hebrew and Greek that he may
understand Id est and Hoc est of every word of his Text, and not to be
addicted to any one man's interpretation; so in a manner living by another man's
faith, but labor to have in himself, a full plerophory of faith. 2. He
should labor to make plain the Hebraismes and Hellenismes in holy Scripture
by proper paraphrase to the purpose. 3. He should take good heed to his method
in preaching. Loving (...)

There be chiefly one of two methods that the best preachers observe in
preaching The one cryptick, the other open, or by the practice of Logical
analysis. The 2 I prefer to the 1. for these reasons. 1. The Cryptik method
requires long practice, a great wit and memory: which yongue scollers
cannot suddenly attain unto. 2. The Cryptick method does more move the
affections, then inform the mind, so that after such Sermons are well
delyvered, if ye will ask the auditors judgment thereof* they will say to
you, that the man preached very well, but they have forgote what he said: but
the open method used by a good man and of good understanding, serves to teach,
delight, move, both himself and his hearers, and to help their memories. 3.
The Cryptick method being in continual discourse makes not the uses of the
word mentioned by the Apostle: 2. Tim. 3.16. But the open method, may very
well use the word accordingly, when grounds for the uses are found in the Text.
And this purpose my analysis respects. The 4. use a yongue Divyne may make of
this book, is: he may learn in taking up the sum of his text, to see that
it be it indeed, and not a sum of purposes, flying first to his fantasy
which he makes the sum of the text. The 5. use is to teach him to draw out
his doctrines properly out of the words or purpose of the text either as
Apodeictik conclusions or by way of necessary consequence, flowing therefrom:
and not make quid libet ex quolibet. Seeing the whole word of God is full of
principals which should not be denied. For if (...), ipse dixit, was eneugh to
Pithagoras scholars: How much more should Thus says the LORD: be eneugh to
all men, fearing God and loving him. The 6* use is to teach him to put a
difference, betwixt Methodum textus, and Methodum doctrinae: that is to say,
that this method be, by the natural logic analysis of the text: whither in
simple enunciations, propositions, Enthememes, or Syllogismes, considering well
subjects and attributs, whether they be proper, or figurat, examining the
force of the words in the original, comparing Scripture with Scripture: so
shall he have many doors open to him for variety of doctrine, and shall be
saved from confusion and idle repetition of purposes. A practical glance of
these uses I give in this Treatise: How well or ill, I submit my self to thy
charitable judgment. Now commending me to thy prayers to God for me; that I
may fight out the good sight of faith, and finish my course with joy. I commend
thee to the grace of GOD.

AD ORNATISSIMVM VIRVM, D. GVLIELMVM MORAVIVM hujus libelli and alterius, non
ita pridem de morte editi, Authorem.
AEGro fallebat curas de morte libellus:
Nunc hymnis laeto cor tibi rite salit.
Dum Musas sacro deducis font novenas,
Illustrasque tuo liberiore stylo.
Verum doctrinae Methodum, juvenique senique
Indigitas, Moravi, simplicitate pia.
Olim voce gregem pascebas sedulus; at jam
Pagina, qua liceat, pascit amoena tua.
Eia age, ne pigeat saeclis prodesse futuris;
Hic animos recreat moestaque corda labor.
Dignus luce cluet, meruit virtute superstes
Qui been de cunctis, post obitumque meret.
ROBERTUS CRAFORDUS alias Lunnaeus.

The names and number of Songs contained in this Book.
I. THE song of Moses at the red Sea. Exodus 15 II. The song of Moses before his
death. Deuteronomy. 32. III. The song of Deborah. Judge. 5. IIII. The song of Channa.
I. Sam. 2. V. The song of Hezechiah King of Judah. Esaias 38. VI. The song of the
blessed Virgin Marie. Luke I. VII. The song of Zachary. Luke 1. VIII. The song
of Angels at the birth of CHRIST. Luke 2. IX. The song of Simeon. Luke 2.
The song of Moses, Miriam and all Israel when they had passed through the red
Sea. Exodus 15.
The Text.
I Will sing to Jehovah for he has excelled wonderfully: The horse and his
ryder he has thrown in the Sea.

Iah is my strength and song: and he was my salvation. This is my strong GOD,
and I will make him a tabernacle; the GOD of my fathers I shall exalt him.

JEHOVAH is a man of war, JEHOVAH is his name.

Pharoahs charets and his host has he cast into the Sea: And his chosen
captains are drowned in the red Sea.

The deepths has covered them, they descended to the bottom as a stone.

Thy right hand Jehovah is magnified in strength thy right hand Jehovah; has
broken in pieces the enemy

And in the greatness of thy excellency, thou has everthrowne those that
rose up against thee; thou sent forth thy wrath which consumed them as stuble.

And with the blast of thy nosthirles the waters were gathered together, the
floods stood as a heap, the deepths were congealed in the heart of the sea.

The enemy had said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will devyde the spoil,
I shall have my heart sith of them, I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy
them.

Thou did blow with thy wind, the sea covered them, they sanke as lead in
mighty waters.

Who is like unto thee IE-HOVAH amongst the gods: Who is like unto thee,
glorious in holiness, fearful with praises, working wonders?

Thou streatched out thy right hand, the earth swallowed them.

Thou leads in thy mercy this people whom thou has redeemed: Thou guydeth in
thy strength to the tabernacle of thy holiness.

The people shall hear: they shall be astonished: Sorrow shall take hold upon
the inhabitants of Palestina.

The Dukes of Edome shall be amazed, fear shall take hold upon the strong men
of Moab, all the inhabitants of Canaan shall melt away.

Fear and dread shall fall upon them by the greatness of thy arm, they shall
be still as a stone, until the people pass by, JEHOVAH: until the people
pass by, which thou have purchesed.

Thou shall bring them to it, and plant them in the mountain of thy
inheritance: Jehovah, which thou made for a dwelling place, in the sanctuary
which thy hands have established.

JEHOVAH shall reign for ever and ever.

The paraphrase.
1. WHO can but admire the power goodness, and justice of our GOD: how can I
the leader of this people, or they, cease to sing and rejoice, seeing JEHOVAH
the only true God, our God, has drowned in the Sea Phoroahs charets and
horses with all his army which persewed us.

2. He has ever been my strong defender whose name is IAH: but now he has
wonderfully delivered us from a mighty and cruel tyranne, therefore he is the
subject of my song, he is our strong GOD, and the GOD of our fathers, we will
exalt him and honor him, and publicly worship him,

3. JEHOVAH is a Lord mighty in battle as his Name shows signifying one that
has being in himself, and has given being to all creatures; and is well
called the LORD of Hoasts.

4. A document hereof is this overthrow of Pharaoh with his strong charets,
the drovning of him: of them, of his choice captains and whole army in the
red sea.

5. High was their pride but their persons lies low in the sea: Their swimming
serves them to no more use than the stones, which cast in the water plump
down to the ground.

6. O LORD thou alone art strong, thou alone O Lord art able to dash in pieces
all thy enemies.

7. And so great is thy excellency that thou overthrowest all those that rise
up against thy people: for thou accounts such to rise up against thy self: Thy
wrath breaks forth upon the^ as fire, and before it they are as stuble before
the fire.

8. Thou being moved with the distres of thy people, and rage of the enemy,
and with the prayer of Moses sent forth a mighty east wind which divided the
sea in two and made dry land in the mids thereof for thy people to pass through.

9. And this thou did o Lord in the midst of the pride and rage of the enemy,
in the hight of their confidence and hope to bring us back to be their
perpetual slaves.

10. But thou disapointed the^ with a wind, which made a dry way for thy
people, and with the sea which turned and drowned them all,

11. Let all the mighty that ever were so accounted be rehearsed, which of
them may be compared with thee O LORD, in holiness or goodness, in acts praise
worthy and wonderful.

12. By thy mighty power the sea which drowned them was made the place of
their burial.

13. Now have thou begun to lead thy people whom of thy free mercy thou have
redeemed: now thou have begun to guide the^ to the place, where thy holiness
promised to dwell in the mids of the^.

14. This thy work O Lord shall not rest here, but thou shall strik with fear
other nations, and with sorrow the Palestins, whom thou have appointed a prey
for thy people

15. The Princes of Edom, the strong men of Moab, and all the heathen who know
not and serve not thee, shall fear, chiefly the Canaanits cursed of old and
destinate to be rooted out by thy people Israel.

16. Thou shall work with them so powerfully, that they shall be as stones,
neither speaking nor moving, until all thy people pass by the^, whom thou
have set at liberty, to place them in the land appointed for them,

17. To holy Canaan shall thou bring them, which thou keeps as an inheritance
for them, where thou will dwell amongst them, and by thy presence sanctify and
establish both it and them.

18. JEHOVAH who now has kythed to be our King, of his Kingdom there shall
be no end.

The argument and analysis of this Song.
THis Song Moses and all Israel sung to the praise of God, the day after the
Lord led them through the red Sea on dry land, and after the Lord caused the
waters return upon Pharaohs chariots and horsemen, who persued and followed
his people, and therewith drowned them all.

The parts of this Song are three: 1. a preface, verse 1. next the purpose of
the song from the 1. verse to the 18. Thirdly the conclusion, verse 18. The
preface contains three things. 1. the maker and vptaker of the Song, to wit
Moses in these words, I will sing. 2. the person in whose praise this Song was
made and sung in these words; to Jehovah. 3. a reason of the making and
vptaking of this song and praising of the Lord thereby, and it has two parts:
the 1 taken from Gods excellency generally in these words, for he has
excelled wonderfully. the 2. taken from a present particular document of his
excellency in these words the horse and his rider has he thrown in the Sea.

The purpose of this Song contains two things. 1. the praise of God, from the
beginning of the 2. ver. to the 14 Secondly, a Prophecy of the consequents of
this great work in bringing his people through the red Sea on dry land, and
drowning Pharaoh and his whole army who pursued his people. The praise of God
is expressed, 1. by the causes presently moving to praise him. 2. by a vow,
hereafter by word and deed to be thankful to him verse 2. Next they praise
God by enumeration of arguments of his praise from the 2. ver. to the 14. Those
arguments are eight in number, the 1, is taken from his valor, in these
words: the Lord is a mighty Warrior. the 2. proving the 1. is taken from his
Name, in these words, Jehovah is his Name. This name imports his eternity, his
truth in performing his promises, his being to be of himself and no other,
and that he gives being to all creatures: and therefore able to destroy them
again when he pleases, ver. 3. The third argument of his praise is taken from
the work presently done upon Pharaoh and his host, verse 4.5. The fourth
argument of his praise is taken from his power conjunct with his justice in
destroying his enemies, and such as rose up against him, verse 6.7. The fifth
argument of his praise is taken from his power conjunct with his goodness to
his people, verse 8. The sixth argument of his praise is taken from the
comparison of this work of God, with the presumption and pride of the enemy,
who thought and said all was in his power, but God blew with his wind, and
caused the waters drown him and his army, verse, 9.10.

The 7. argument of his praise is taken from the supereminencie* of GOD above
all men in the world who seem mighty; and this supereminencie is set down in
three particulars: Holiness, fearefullnesse, wonderfulnesse, all kything in
this work: His holiness in delivering his people from a mighty and cruel
Tyranne: his fearfulness in destroying the tyran and his whole army together;
his wonderfulnesse in divyding the Sea, making his people to go through the
midst of it upon dry ground, and making their enemies by wind and water
therein to drown, verse 11.12. The 8. argument of his praise is taken from his
mercy and truth to his people, beginning with this work to manifest the same,
and to confirm their faith and hope of performing his promise made to their
fathers, verse 13. The prophecy of the consequents of this work of God
contains three things. 1. concerning the nations by whose land the people of
Israel should pass to the land of promise, namely the Edomites and Moabites,
that fear and astonishment should fall upon them, and force them to let his
people pass by. The 2. concerns the inhabitants of Palestina, and chiefly the
Canaanits, that their hearts should melt away for fear, verse 14.15.16. The 3.
thing in the prophecy concerns GODS people, That God should bring them unto,
possess them in, as their inheritance, the land promised to their fathers, and
dwell amongst them by the means of his public visible worship, verse 17. The
conclusion of the song is that the Kingdom of God is everlasting.

Annotations upon this Song.
Verse 1. I will sing: not only for to witness our thankfulnese to God for
our deliverance: but also for confirmation of the truth of this History; for
six hundredth thousand men, with their wives and children bore witness in
signing this Song.

Unto Jehovah; that is unto his praise: so Psalm. 106. ver. 12. compare this
song, with the song, Apoc. 15. ver. 2.3.4. both sung at the Sea: Harpes of
timbrels in the singers hands: The songs are of Moses and of the Lamb, the one
delivered from the bondage and persecution of Pharaoh: the other from the beast
Antichrist, or the Pope.

Verse 2. IAH, a proper name of God first mentioned on in holy Scripture, next
Psalm. 68.5. In Greek in the new Testament it is joined to Halelu to make
Haleluiah, that is, Praise ye the Lord; the whole compond word is originally
Hebrew, see Apoc. 19.1.3.4.6.

Strength: so signifies the Hebrew word properly: yet seeing it is joined here
with these words, and sung: it signifies the strength of song and praise, that
is, most vehement praise: So Christ, Math. 21.16. exponeth this word, used
Psalm. 8.2.

My GOD: this oppones the true GOD to Idols, the religion of his people to the
error and idolatry of other nations, as in the next words Abraham's religion
opposite to the superstition of the nations, see Esaias 25.9.

Verse 3. A man of War, that is, a notable Warrior: for the word Man added
to other things in the Hebrew phrase often signifies excellency, see Exodus
4.10. Job 22.8.

JEHOVAH, this name imports: 1. Gods eternity, and is in Greek expressed by a
and o Apoc. 1.8.2. it signifies his power above all creatures, and over them,
as having being of himself only, and giving being to all creatures, Act. 17.
Thirdly, it signifies his truth in performing his promise, Exodus 6. 3.
Fourthly, his power in executing judgment on the enemies of his Church, and
He therefore called Jehovah of Hosts. Psalm. 83.14.19. and 46.7.8.12.

Verse 5. As a stone: that is to say, their skill in swimming did serve them
to no use.

Verse 6. Thy right hand, thy right hand: this doubling imports that this
miraculous work can neither be ascribed to fortoun, nor to the industry of
men, but to GOD only.

Verse 6. Against thee the Chaldaick paraphrase has against thy people: see
Zach. 2.8. Mat. 25.45. Act 9.4.

Verse 8. Blast: he means that East wind spoken of before Chap. 14.2.

Verse 11. GODS: that is, Princes or Potentates, see Psalm. 82. and 89.7.

Purchased: in Hebrew Canah, which signifies getting by generation. Genesis 41.
or buying. Genesis 25.10.

Observations of grounds for use and doctrine.
Obs. 1. HOly songs have been in use in the true Church in all ages, and are
recommended to the Christian Church. Ephesians. 5.19. Col. 3.16. Iam. 5.13. But the
use of Musical instruments not so: as being ceremonial types in the old
Testament prefiguring the joy of the holy Ghost aboundantlye to be powered out
upon Christians under the New Testament. Romans 14.17. Ephesians. 5.19.

Obs. 2. This song proves the verity of the whole history preceding in the
book of Ex. seeing not only Moses sung it, but with him six hundredth thousand
men beside women and bairnes, whereof any two or three might have been
witnesses against Moses, if this had been fabulous: Here I might take
occasion to dispute that the holy Scripture is true and the very true word of
GOD: but my purpose is not in this treatise to dispute contraversies.

Obs. 3. We have here an example to teach us to be thankful to GOD for his
benefits and of solemn thanksgiving, if common to one Church or to the
universal.

Obs. 4. upon. verse. 1. Moses is first and formest in this thanksgiving, by
reason of his place: by his example teaching al such as God has raised up too
hy prehemine^ce in church or commonwealth to do the like

Obs. 5. There is no work of GOD in creation or providence, wherein some one
or more of his attributs does not show themself, thought some more clearly
then other, upon which we should chiefly meditat: So worshipping GOD by this
mids of his worship; as Moses and the people does here meditat upon his
excellency, supereminence, power, justice, mercy, goodness, holiness,
ttueth: which all kythed in the work of their deliverance.

Obs. 6. All delyverance from danger, all good success in affairs, all
salvation temporary or eternal: flows to us from GOD of his mercy without
our merits, therefore to him only belongs the praise,

Obs. 7. We should study by all means, to put a difference betwixt the true
GOD and Idols, that we may know him, serve him, and worship him aright. Io. 4.

Obs. 8. upon verse. 2. They praise GOD upon these three grounds. 1. Upon the
sense of their own conscience and experience. 2. Upon the duty which they
profess and promise of their thankfulness in worshipping him publicly. Upon
their obligation of all sort of homage to him: So should we meditat upon
grounds of reasons to praise GOD that we may show our selves thankful for his
benefits.

Obs. 9. GOD is compared to a most mighty man of war, to teach us both to
fear him and trust in him, because he is able to destroy all such as rise
against him, see thee history of Senacherib with Hezekiah, and of the nations
with Iehosophat.

Obs. 10. GOD accounts the wrong done to his servants to be done to himself.
Act, 9.4. And the good done to them to be done to him. Mat. 25, 40. This
should comfort the godly and affray wicked persecuters.

Obs. 11. upon verse. 9. The wicked sing the triumph before the victory, and
when their pride is at the hight then comes suddenly their destruction. Psalm.
73.18.

Obs. 12. verse. 10.11.12. All the creatures are obedient to GOD except the
devils and mankind: and serve him in saving his servants, and destroying their
enemies whenever GOD bids them.

Obs. 13. upon verse. 13. The work of grace and salvation once begun by GOD in
his children, he will never leave till he perfyte it. Psalm. 138. 8. Phil. 1.8.
Therefore we should not dispare under the sense of desertion: Neither is the
doctrine of the final and total apostasy of the sancts true but heretical.

Obs. 14. GOD is able to defend his people from their enemies, were they never
so many and mighty.

Obs. 15. upon verse. 18. The times, places, and persons, of GODS Church, when,
where, and by whom he will be worshipped he himself ordaines.

Obs. 16. upon verse. 18. The continuance of the Church of GOD is grounded upon
his everlasting Kingdom. Psalm. 102 29.

This song in meeter follows to be sung with the tune of the 25. Psalm.
Verse. 1.
FOR joy now will I sing,
to JEHOVAH a song,
For wonderfully has he now,
excelled in the throng
Of horsemen: whom he has
thrown down unto the sea,
Pharaoh the king I mean,
and all his great army.
Verse. 2.
The subject of my song,
I see that IAH must be
My strength and my salvation,
still is and so was he:
This is my, GOD most strong,
to him I Will make a tent:
My Fathers GOD he is also*
Verse. 3.
A mighty man of war,
JEHOVAH is I say,
No marvel, for JEHOVAH is
his name and shall be ay.
Verse. 4.
Pharoahs charets and host,
He cast into the sea,
Chosen captains were drowned there
in mids of the red sea.
Verse. 5.
The deep them covered all,
down to the ground they sanke,
Even like as does a stone,
that is cast in a stanke.
Verse. 6.
JEHOVAH thy right hand,
in strength is excellent:
For thy right hand JEHOVAH has,
thy foes in pieces rent.
Verse. 7.
And in the greatness of
thy power now thou have,
Subdued those, against thee that rose,
for down thou have them cast.
Thy wrath thou did send forth,
consuming them as fire
Consumes stuble where it comes.
so hot was then thine ire.
Verse. 8
And with the blast of thy
nostriles the water stood,
Gathr'd together on a heap,
and so did stay the flood
In midst of the sea,
The deep congealed then,
So mighty was thy easter wind,
dry way it made to men.
Verse. 9.
The enemy had said,
I will oretake, I will
Divyde the spoil, I shall have my
heart sytht on them with ill.
My sword I will draw out,
and then my hand shall make,
This people my inheritance,
my yoke they shall not shake,
Verse 10
Then with thy wind thou blew
the sea them all did hyde,
They sanke as lead in waters deep,
so cruel was the tide,
Verse 11
Who is like unto thee,
the mighty all among?
IEHOVE I say who is the like?
I say that there is none.
Thy glory is so great,
and thou so holy art,
With praises to be reverenced,
thy wonders make us start
12.
When thou did streatch out
thy right hand suddenly:
The lowest earth did then thy foes,
up swallow by and by.
Verse. 13.
Thou leads in thy mercy,
thus thy redeemed people,
Thou guyds them also in thy strength
unto thy holy staple.
Verse. 14.
So soon as nations
shall hear, then shall they shake,
Palestina's inhabitants,
shall doole and sorrow make.
Verse. 15.
The Dukes of Edom then,
amazed all shall be:
Moabs strong men shall melt away,
And Canaans posterity.
Verse. 16.
Such fear and dread shall fall
on them of thy right hand,
That as a stone they shall ly still,
till Israel pass their land.
Verse. 17.
JEHOVAH, thou shall bring,
and plant them in the hill,
Of thy holy inheritance,
a place where thou'le dwell still,
Thy sanctuary there,
thy hands have made to bide,
Verse. 18.
Jehovah alone shall reign,
The Song of MOSES before his death. Deuteronomy. 32.
Text.
GIve ear ye Heavens, and I will speak: and hear O earth the words of my
mouth.

My doctrine shall drop as the rain, my speech shall distill as the dew, as
the small rain upon the tender herb, and as showers upon the grass.

Because I will publish the name of JEHOVAH, Ascribe ye greatness to our GOD.

The rock, his work is perfect, for all his ways are judgment: a strong God
faithful and without iniquity, just and right is he.

He has corrupted himself; their spot is not his childrens, a perverse, and
crooked generation.

Do ye so requyte JEHOVAH! O ye foolish people and unwise: Is not he thy
Father? Thy Redeemer? Has he not made thee, and established thee?

Remember the days of old the years of generation and generation, ask thy
father and he will show thee, thy elders and they will tell thee.

The hie one in distributing heritage to the Nations, in separating the sons of
Adam, he set the bounds of the people, to the number of the children of Israel.

For the portion of JEHOVAH is his people, JACOB the line of his heritage.

He found him in the land of Wilderness, and in a waste and howling
Wilderness: he caused him go about: he taught him: he kept him as the apple
of his eye.

As the Eagle stirs up her nest, flightereth over her birds, spreads out her
wings, takes it, bears it upon her wing.

Jehovah alone led him, and there was no strange god with him.

He made him ride upon the hie places of the earth; and he ate the increase
of the field: and he made him to suck honey out of the rock, and oil out of
the flint of the rock.

Butter of Kyne, and milk of Sheep, with fat of lambs and Rams sons of
Bashan, with the fat of the neares of wheat, and the red blood of the wine
berry thou did drink.

And I eschurun grew fat and flang, thou have grown fat, thou have grown
gross, thou covered thee: and he left GOD that made him the rock of his
salvation.

They provoked him to jelosie with strange gods: they provoked him to anger
with abominations.

They sacrificed to Devils, not unto GOD, to gods whom they knew not, to new
gods near hand whom your fathers feared not.

Of the rock that begatte thee: thou art forgetful: and has forgot the GOD
that brought thee forth of the womb.

And JEHOVAH saw it and he abdicat through indignation his sons and his
daughters.

And he said, I will hide my face from them, I shall see what will be their
end: for they are a froward generation, children in whom is no fidelity.

They have provoked me to jealousy with that which was not God, they have
provoked me to anger with their vanities, and I shall provoke them to
jealousy with those that are not a people: I shall provoke them to anger with a
foolish nation.

For a fire is kindled in my anger, and shall burn to hell, and shall consume
the earth, with the increase thereof, and shall set on fire the foundation of the
mountains. I will join evils togother upon them, I will spend my arrows upon
them,

Burnt with hunger, eaten up with burning coal, and bitter destruction, and
teeth of beasts will I send against them, with the poison of serpents of the
dust.

Without, the sword shall make fatherless in the secret chambers, fear shall
overtake the choice young man, and the Virgin, the suckling child, with the
gray-haird man.

I said, I shall scatter them in corners I shall make the memory of them to
cease from men.

Were not I feared the wrath of the enemy least their adversaries should behave
themselves strangely, least they should say, our hie hand, and IEHOVAHS has
not wrought all this. For they are a nation void of counsel, and has no
understanding in them.

Oh that they were wise, that they understood this: that they understood their
latter end.

How should one chase a thousand, or two put ten thousand to flight, if not
because their Rock had sold them, and JEHOVAH caused them yield them self.

For their rock is not as our ROCK, even our enemies being judges.

For their vine is of the vine of Sodom, and of the fields of Gomorah, their
graps, are grapes of venom, they have bitter clusters.

Their wine is the venom of Dragons, and the cruel head of Aspes.

Is not this laid up beside me: sealed among my treasures.

Vengeance is mine and recompense: in time their foot shall stagger, for the
day of their destruction is near, and hastneth things to come to them.

For JEHOVAH shall judge his people and shall repent himself for his servants,
when he shall see the hand is gone and nothing shut up or left.

And he shall say where are their gods, the rock wherein they trusted?

Who did eat the fat of their sacrifices, drank the wine of their brunt
offerings, let them rise and help you: let them be your hyding.

See now that I, I my self and no gods with me: I cause to die, and I cause
to live, I wound, and I heal, and there is none can pluck out of my hand.

For I lift up my hand to the Heavens and say: I live for ever.

If I sharp my glittering sword, and my hand take hold on judgment, I will
render vengeance to my enemies and recompense the^ that hate me.

I will make my arrows drunk with blood (and my sword shall eat flesh) of the
blood of the slain, and captivity, from the beginning of revenges upon the
enemy.

Ye nations praise his people: for he will avenge the blood of his servants,
and render vengeance to his adversaries: and will be merciful to his land and
to his people.

Paraphrase.
1. IF you people will not hearken to my words, the Heavens and Earth, and all
creatures other shall be witnesses against you.

2. If my people be a soft soil, and good ground, my doctrine shall be fruit
full in young and old, in weak and strong.

3. Glorify God in hearkening to his word, for I will make him manifest to
you, who howbeit he be always infinite, yet he abases him to be our God and
his will I will declare.

4. To whom will ye go from this God? who is so strong, so righteous in all
his actions, so true in all his words, and in whom no defect can be found?

5. Yet Israel has corrupted his own ways, which proves they are not the
children of GOD, but a wicked and perverse generation.

6. Is this the reward where with ye recompense God? who has adopted you to be
his children, when ye were his enemies, passing by the rest of mankind who
were as sib to him by creation as you, who has redeemed you from the bondage
of Egypt, and has magnified you above other people, when you were worse than
nothing.

7. The history of Abraham Isaak and sacob and of the rest of your
predecessors, shows your small be ginning, and Gods great mercy and goodness
toward you

8. When God in his providence allotted to everi nation a dwelling place he had
mind of Israel and appointed for their number a place most convenient and most
excellent.

9. For he had freely chosen the posterity of Jacob to be his peculiar
people beside all the World.

10. When they were in a Wilderness where there was neither bread, nor water,
nor other thing to sustain their life, GOD fed them, and clad them, and
because of their infidelity he caused them go about the Wilderness forty
years: during the which time, he taught them by his benefits and
chastisments: yet he had exceeding great care of them to keep them from all
hurt.

11. And look wha^ care the Eagle or any other foul have of their young ones
in hatching them, covering them until they can come forth or flee, and
guiding them from the nest: such care had God of his people*

12. He needed not the help of any other beside himself, and would have
none: for he would have the guyding of his people to himself alone.

13. He placed him in Canaan an hilly country, and full of fertile valleys:
whose craigie places were no^ barren, but there was to be found honnie, there
olyves grew: and it was a land flowing with milk and honny.

14. Nothing was wanting for delicate meat and drink: as butter, milk fat
lambs, rams, choice wheat, most excellent claret wine, all these the LORD gave
liberally to Israel.

15. For all this Israel who should have been upright became unthankful to
GOD in their prosperity like bruit beasts mis^enning their masters, they
rebelled against their maker and redeemer.

16. Like vile harlots they made the LORD their husband angry, committing
sprituall whooredome, with strange gods abominable Idols.

17. They came to the hiest degree of idolatry: to give the worship propper to
GOD to devils: yea they were so foolish, that leaving the God whom they knew,
or rather who knew them: they worshipped unknown gods, and did not follow
their holy fathers footsteps.

18. All this thou did not of simple but of wilful ignorance after so great
experience of Gods love to thee and care for thee.

19. After that the Lord considered this their apostasy he cast off these
that before by outward cal^ing appeared to be his children.

20. Then he said, I will misken them, I am weary of them, there is no good
to be looked for, from them, they will in end perish miserably.

21. As they have done to me so shall I do to them, they forsook me and
followed idols, I shall forsake them and set other nations above them: yea, the
Gentiles whom they despise, I will take in their place to be my people, and
cast them off.

22 I shall be to them a consuming fire, hie nor low shall not escape my wrath,
their land and all the increase thereof will I destroy.

23 I will multiply my plagues upon them, as arrows out of my quiver shot at
them.

24. Namely famine, pestilence, wyld beasts and Serpents, so openly and
secretly, without and within, they shall be plagued.

25 No sort of person, no sex: neither young nor old without or within, shall
be free from the fear and stroke of the sword of the enemy.

26. Whereas I had made the^ as the stars in number and glory, I purpose to
put them in obscure places, and root them out.

27. If I had no respect to my glory that it should not be the subject of
blasphemy of the Gentiles, I should utterly have destroyed them.

28. Their madness is incurable why should I spaire them: no counsel will they
follow, neither have they any wit.

29. It is a pity to see the hardness of their heart, that after so long
experience of punishment, they cannot consider their case nor what will be
their end

30. So long as I fought for them and was with them, no multituds could resist
them, now while as man of them are overcome by few, it is evident they want my
protection.

31. I take to witness the infidels who by experience of my power find, that
I am not like their idols.

32. Moreover, they and their works are wicked, as if they had been the seed
of Sodom and Gomorah; venomous and bitter fruit bring they forth.

33. No nation so wicked as they, being lyker to Dragons and Aspes nor men.

34. This their wickedness is laid up in store with me, and treasured up in
the treasure of my wrath, against the day thereof, and revelation of my
righteous judgment.

35. I am judge of all the world, it is my office to punish, howbeit I seem to
delay, you shall fall in due time, your destruction be the evil that shall
come upon you at hand.

36. Albeit the LORD shall judge his people: yet at last he shall be appeased,
and moved with repentance, to mitigate the rigor of his wrath, when he shall
see all their strength gone, and all almost destroyed at home and abroad.

37. Then shall they say to their enemies, where are your gods, where are your
rocks, your particular patrons in whom ye trusted

38. Before who^ the Priests did eat the fat of the sacrifice, and drank the
wine of their drink offering, let those idols help you now and take your
protection.

39. Let them who have eyes to see behold me, and make no gods my companion:
for I have power to kill, and to keep alive, to wound, and make heal: let
them in all changes trust in me, and fear to offend me, whose hand none can
escape.

40. For I hold up my hand to Heaven and swear, saying, As I am the everliving
GOD.

41. My enemies think my sword will always be hid in the scabard, and because
I am patient, that I cease to be a just judge: but they shall feel the
contrare, when my wrath shall break out against them.

42. There shall be no end of my vengeance, until the earth be filled with
blood and dead bodies, and my enemies be made captives, upon whom I will have
no mercy.

43. Seeing GOD will manifest his goodness to his people I sraell, and his
mercy: it is the part of all nations to acknowledge the same, and to praise
him in the communion of Sancts both of Jews and Gentiles

The argument and analysis of this song.
GOD caused and commanded Moses to write this Song, and preach it to Israel,
and to testify Gods goodness and grace to them, and to convince them of
unthankfulness toward God, and to prepare the catholic kirk of the Jews,
who were to be dispersed through the world: Therefore he commanded this song
to be put in the mouth of the Israelites, and to be preserved in written
monuments. Deuteronomy 31.19. The sum of this Song is this: GOD the Father of his
Church and Judge of all the world, contests with the people of Israel by this
solemn Song, of his goodness toward them, of their ingratitude and
contumacie seen already in Moses days: and now forseene by him that it would
be greater hereafter, and therefore prophesies by Moses of the rejection of
the Jews, and calling of the Gentiles.

The parts of this song are three: 1. the preface, verse 1.2.3. The 2. a
narration from the 4. verse to the 43. The 3. the conclusion of the Song. verse
43. The 1. part which is the preface or beginning of the song, con taineth an
exhortation to the Heavens and earth to attend to this Song, verse 1. a reason
of this exhortation verse 2. a precept to the people to be attentive and
docile with the reason thereof, verse 3.

The 2. part of the Song contains in it, first, a narration of things bygone
before the penning of this song from the 4. verse to the 19. Secondly, a
narration of things that were to come, from the 19. to the 43. The sum of the
narration of things bygone is set down verse 4.5. The enarration or exposition
thereof from the 5. verse to the 19. and the sum contains in it 2. things:
The 1. concerns God, verse 4: The 2. concerns the people of Israel, verse 5.
which is aggredged, and they taxed with foul ingratitude, verse 6. The
enarration and exposition of these things keeps this order. 1. the part of
God is set down from the 6. verse to the 15. Next the part of the people is set
down: from the 15. verse to the 19. Gods part, verse 6, proved by antiquity
and testimony of their fore-beears, verse 7. and from his providence for them
from the beginning of the world, verse 8. with the reason thereof, verse 9.
Thirdly from his care of them when they were in the Wilderness, verse 10.
illustrated by similitude, verse 11.12. Fourthly, from his placing of them in
the land of CANAAN, verse 13.14. The enarration of the part of the people, and
the exposition thereof, verse 16.17.18. The 2. part of the narration concerning
things to come; contains 2. things, 1. Gods justice against the unthankful
and rebellious Jews, from the 19. to the 35. Secondly, the work of Gods mercy
to a remnant of them from the 35 verse to the 43. The work of Gods justice is
set down in this order. 1. that he abhorred them, and the reason, verse 19.2.
that he resolved to leave them to themselves, with the reason thereof, verse
20.3. That he will pay them home with like, for like; lege talionis, verse 21.
with the reason thereof, verse 22. 4. That he will multiply plagues upon them,
verse 23.24.25. 5. That he purposed to have put away their memorial amongst
men, were not the respect he had to his own glory, and the pride of their
enemies, verse 26, 27. 6. He wishes they had a mind and heart to consider,
and be sensible of his dealings with them, and of their end, together with the
reason of all, verse 28.29.30. which he proves by the testimony of Gentiles
their enemies, verse 31. and subjoyneth reasons of his severitie against them,
verse 32.33.34.35. The work of his mercy to the remnant of them is set down
verse 36. Amplified with the triumph and iusulting of his people over their
enemies, verse 37.38. Which he confirms by the demonstration of his power,
verse 39. and by his oath, verse 40.41.42. The conclusion of the Song, verse
43. contains an exhortation to the Church catholic of Jews and Gentiles to
praise God with the reason thereof.

Annotations upon this Song.
Verse. 2. My doctrine: the Hebrew word signifies received learning, a good
description of the doctrine of true religion, because it is received from GOD,
not devysed by men. 1. Cor. 11.23. Ioh. 8.28. and should be received by the
hearers with this respect. 1 Thessalonians. 2.13. and this imports that the teacher
receaues it from God, and the hearers also from him by his ministers.

Shall drop: so Micah. 5.7. Esaias. 55.10. The doctrine of false teachers not so,
Iud: 6.12. Pro. 25.15. and this is a wish rather then a promise.

Rain. dew; figures of heavenly graces. Genesis 27.28

Grass: here unto people compared for their frailty Es. 40.6. or admonition
to be fruitful. Heb. 6.

Verse 3. The name: that is his majesty, his works of mercy and justice.

Verse 4. ROCK: The septuagints translate this word: GOD who is a Rock to his
Church. Mat. 16.18. 1. Cor. 10.4 and this word imports GODS constancy, wherein
his servants trust.

His work: The Greek translats works. Heb. 3.9.

Verse 5. Not of his sons: for they sin of infirmity: and this shows the
effect of the law differing from the effect of the Ghospelf. Romans 7.9. Phil.
2.5.

Verse 6. Requyt: see the contrare spoken to God by David, Psalm. 103.10.

Father that bought thee: this aggredges their unthankfulness, forgetting the
benefits of their redemption, adoption, regeneration.

Made thee: that is, not only created thee, but also redeemed and called thee,
and put thee in a high estate when thou was nothing 1. Sam. 12 6. Es. 43.7.
Mark 3.14

Verse 7. The days of old: That is, look not so much what thou art now, as
what thy forbears were once. Ios. 24. this argument also is used for
consolation. Ps. 77.67. Psalm. 119.52. Psalm. 14.3.5.

Verse 9. Thy Elders: who are yet living among you.

Portion: that is, the Church and members thereof are the heirs of God and
coheirs with Christ. To. 8.17.

Verse 10. Wilderness: that is, I fand them needy unworthy flying from the
enemy, enemies to me, but I graciously and mercifully received and entertained
them though most unworthy. Ezec. 16. Romans 5.10.

Aple of his eye: that is, with all greatest care, alluding to man's practice,
who will cast up any part of his body to receive a stroke and save the eye.

Verse. 11. Eagle: The same similitude is in Exodus 19 which shows his fathealy
care to his people, which is exponed by these parts, sturring up, to wit, by a
noise about her bird mooving her wings to give them wind, streatching her
wings for example to them to fly, taking them out of their nest, putting them
upon her wings, that being taken from their nest they might be compelled to
flee further: All these may be seen in GODS dealing with his people, when he
brought them out of Egypt, stirring them up by his word of promise mooving them
with the wind of his wrath upon Egypt, taken under his protection and as
carried upon wings brought them through the red sea.

Verse 13. Ride upon hie places: so that no strength could withstand them.
Numb. 20. Deuteronomy. 2.

Verse 14. Neares of wheat: That is the best, so called because of kirnels of
nuts the grain is within: and for some resemblance that good grains of wheat
have to neares.

The red blood: Because the claret wine in Judea is both best and most
abundant as witness Strabo and Pliny

Verse 15. leschurun: from Iesher righteousness, or Schor, seeing Schor a
bullok, because Israel were by calling righteous, had a righteous law, or
because they saw the glory of GOD in Sinai, or because afterward they became a
flinging bullok.

Fat: The Chaldea interprets rich so this maxim has ever holden true:
Ecclesia peperit divitias and filia devoravit matrem.

Verse 17. Devils: in Hebrew Schedim, that is, destroyers of mankind.

Verse 19. Saw it: That is, as a righteous judge, he took cognition of their
wickedness, and decreed to abdicat them:

Verse. 20. I will hyde: That is, I will abdicat them and not look upon them.

I shall see: I will give them over to a reprobate sense that they may perish.

Verse 21. Vanities: The Septuagints calls them Idols Ier. 18.19. Jonah. 2.8.

Not a people: that is, the Gentiles whom I will call by the preaching of the
Gospel. Romans 10.19. Es. 65.2

Verse 23. Arrows: All sort of plagues as after is exponed of famine (the
Hebrew word not in any part of Scripture but here) pestilence. Hab, 3.5. wild
beasts, serpents, sword.

Verse 36. Judge his people: That is, take their cause in hand and defend them
from their enemies.

Shall repent: So speaks the Scripture of GOD after the manner of man: but in
simple truth repentance is not in GOD: Numb. 23. 1. Sam. 15.

The hand gone: that is, their strength and they nothing.

Verse 37. He shall say: that is GOD to his people Jeremy. 2.28.

Verse 39. I, I: The pronoune doubled to stir up the people to hold fast
their faith.

Observations of grounds for use and doctrine.
Obs. 1. BEcause GOD as a judge was to pronounce sentence against his people in
the song: Moses begins with a majesticall preface, like unto the sound of a
trumpet before Princes proclamations.

Obs. 2. This majesticall preface serves to keep the people in due reverence
of this song, that neither pride move them to dispyse it, nor the sharp
threatenings contained therein, make them loath.

Obs. 3. verse. 1. He directs his speech to Heaven and earth, taking and making
them witnesses of the peoples stupiditie, if they condemn this doctrine: Also
to show that such is the force of GODS word that all creatures should be
attentive there unto. Es. 1.2. Ier. 23. and so the living are sent to the
school of the dead to learn at them.

Obs. 4. The word of GOD is as dew and rain upon graffe and herbs when it
meets with good ground: but hearts hard like stones get no good thereby. Heb. 6.

Obs. 5. The Hebrew word which is exponed doctrine, signifies properly
perception or discipline, and teaches that the ministers of the word should
deliver nothing to the people but that which have been taught, and received of
the Lord.

Obs. 6. verse. 2. The word of GOD is compared to dew and rain, which
similitude, teaches that the Church is Gods land or lizzure, and the word of
God the food thereof making his people grow in grace.

Obs. 7. Moses professes himself to be Gods Herald, proclaiming his praise,
and so teaches the people their duty to do so.

Obs. 8. By the name of God he means Gods majesty's works, of goodness and
grace, his severe judgments all which he sets down after.

Obs. 9. verse 3. The words JEHOVAH, and our GOD imply reasons to persuade the
practice of the duty craved: these arguments in Scripture are often fund
together: the 1. taken from Gods nature; the 2. from his covenant of grace.

Obs. 10. The consideration of the perfection of God and of his works, as done
in judgment, truth, justice and righteousness; should keep us from running
from God to Idols. Ier. 2.13.

Obs. 11. The perfection of Gods works in creation or providence, is not to be
sought in every particular so much as in the general, seeing amongst beasts
there be some we call vnbeasts, and amongst men some crooked, some blind, some
deaf, some maimed and mutilat of one member or other, and all corn comes
not to perfection: yet in these defects God is glorified.

Obs. 12. verse 4. The truth of God and his fidelity should teach us to
believe him and his word: yet his fidelity prejudgeth not his justice against
unbelievers for he is just and right.

Obs. 13. It may be mervailed that the people bore with Moses liberty in
rebuking them: yet it behoved to bridle them, that they knew this worthy
servant of God was shortly to depart from this life.

Obs. 14. Hypocrites are sometimes called Gods children, Esaias 1.2. sometimes
they are denied to be the children of God, when Adoption by general vocation
is restrained to particulare Election.

Obs. 15. Moses describing the peoples ingratitude to God begins first at
their action, in these words: They corrupted themselves, that is: by their own
deed lost the estate of grace offered to them by outward calling: and cast
themself in course of perdition. 2. he sets down the blot remaining after
their action: in these words: their spot, not the spot of his children: 3. he
sets down the habit contracted of both, calling them: a perverse and crooked
generation. These 3 may be observed in all actual and outward sins.

Obs. 16. As Adam and Evah by their first sin, fell from the integrity of
nature: so such as seemed by out ward vocation and adoption to be in the state
of grace, by turning from GOD, falls from that which they appeared to have.

Obs. 17. verse 5. Sin leaves behind it a spot: as diseases in the lever and
leprosy send forth spots in the skin and flesh: This spot of sin, is a
disposition of the heart to be apt and prone to the sin once committed, or
to any other. This spot in the reprobat differs from the spot of Gods
children, because upon the one it draws on total and final apostasy: upon
the other not so, God giving grace to repent.

Obs. 18. The more liberal God is to us, the more thankful should we be:
the taste of his goodness should force us to love him.

Obs. 19. God is good to all his creatures, but in special manner to his
Church. Psalm. 147.

Obs. 20. The benefits of adoption and regeneration are attributed to
hypocrites, because externally they are called thereto. But they are proper to
the Elect, whom Paul calls, the work of GOD created to good works. Ephesians. 2.
or Moses here by the word made, as in the 15. verse means, Gods providence in
making his people great and renowned.

Obs. 21. verse 6. This aggredgeth the peoples un, thankfulness, that God was
so good to them, and they wicked against God.

Obs. 22. If we will look back to our beginning natural, spiritual, or
civil: we shall see we have no reason to be proud.

Obs. 23. verse 7. The best and surest witnesses of Gods benefits, are these,
who being indeed godly have had long experience of them.

Obs. 24. God so loved his Church that in the creation of the world, and in the
midst of his providence, he had a special regard to it: not for their merit,
but because of his gracious election, and adoption: where by he has made them
his heirs, and coheirs with CHRIST. Romans 2.8. verse. 8.9.

Obs. 25.10.11.12. David Ps. 105. repeats GODs benefits to this people,
farther of nor Moses does in this song: for Moses laboring to be short,
begins at their coming to the wilderness.

Obs. 26. verse 13.14. Variety of creatures for man's necessity, utility, and
pleasure, flows from GODS liberality to man, for the which man should be
thankful. See Psalm. 104.

Obs. 27. verse 15. Ieschurun: or he who should have been righteous is put
for Israel, by Ironicall illusion because they prooved unrighteous and
unthankful: so GOD to Adam. Genesis 3.22.

Obs. 28. He concluds all the faults of this people with their sin of
Idolatry: the haynousnesse whereof he sets forth by the similitude of an
impudent harlot prostituting her self to other men, of purpose to provoke her
husband to anger: for idolatry is the highest sin against GODS Law.

Obs. 29. Men and women are called GODs children by nature, because of
creation, or by grace by regeneration, generally, or in a special respect:
Moses calls this people so here, because of their general and outward calling,
which divynes calls, voluntatem signi: and distinguish it: a voluntate been
placiti.

Obs. 30. GOD punishes not rashly, but takes first due inquisition of the
fault, howbeit he needs not who knows all things: by his example to teach
judges their duty. See Genes. 11.5. and 18.21.

Obs. 31. verse 19. If GOD lie aback from us and leave us to our self; we
shall run to perdition, and if he return to us we shall be saved. Psalm.
30, 39. and Psalm. 80.3.7.19.

Obs. 32, GOD raisde up the Egyptians, Syrians, Assyrians, Babilonians,
Grecians, Romans, against his people: All those he calls foolish, how beit
they were politic, honorable, wealthy: vet unlike to the people of GOD while
they served GOD. See Deuteronomy. 4.6.7.8. and Psalm. 147.19.20.

Obs. 33. It is a fearful thing to fall in the hands of GOD being angry
with us, for even our GOD is a consuming fire. Heb. 12.29.

Obs. 34. verse 20.21. All plagues and punishments comes from God Amos. 3.6.
yet to the godly they are made fatherly chastisments for their good. Heb. 12

Obs. 35. verse 27.28. GOD magnifies his mercy in making grace to superabound,
where sin abounded Romans 5.20. and his own glory is the end of all his
working.

Obs. 36.29.30. etc. GOD requyres three things of his people which he missed
in them. 1. The habit of wisdom. 2. The understanding of things concerning
his glory and their own salvation. 3. providence to foresee things to come.

Obs. 37, verse 34.35. GODS judgments sleep not, (as wicked men think) but
ly at the door Genesis 4. and 7. Ier. 17.1. 2. Pet. 3.9.

Obs. 38. When GOD has chastised his people eneugh, he will cast the rod in
the fire, and in wrath remember mercy, Hab. 3.^3. Psalm. 89. Psalm. 30. Esaias.
54.8. that we may have experience hereof, true repentance is required at our
hands. Zach. 2.3.

Obs. 39. When our estate is most desperate GODS help is nearest, that he
only may have the praise. 2. King. 14.26.

Obs 40. GOD is the supreme ruler of al things ordinar^ or extraordinar, of
punishments and delivera^ces therefro^

Obs. 41. verse 36.37 etc. We defraud GOD of his right, if we set him not
above all, and according to our place* gifts, callings, trample not under
foot, al Idolatry, superstition, will worship, inventions and traditions of
men, which cannot be demonstrat by the word of GOD: whether it be in matters
of faith, manners. Church government, or ceremonies joined to the worship of GOD.

Obs 42 verse 40.41.42. In holy Scripture, we find many oaths which GOD makes,
joined sometime to promises, and he does both promise and swear that by two
immutable things he may confirm our faith, Hebr. 6.18, and when he swears
he swears by himself as having none greater. ibid. 13.

Obs. 43. The whole Catholic Church of Jews and Gentiles and exhorted to sing
and praise the LORD, for his works both of justice and mercy which he would
manifest to them. Romans 15.10.

Obs. 44. The word expiation alludes to the legal ceremonies, and imports that
salvation that was to be perfyted by JESUS CHRIST.

Obs, 45. verse 43 With this prophecy of the calling of the Gentiles, and
conversion of the Jews, as with a blast of a trumpet after a Kings
proclamation he concluds this song.

This song in meeter follows to be sung with the tune of the 78. Psalm.
Verse. 1.
Hear O ye Heavens what I do speak,
O Earth my words attend.
Verse. 2.
My doctrine shall drop down as rain,
my speech like deaw I Will spend.
And as small rain on tender herbs,
and showers upon the grass
So shall my word much fruit bring forth,
not being heard amiss.
Verse. 3.
Since I the name of God the Lord,
will publish and proclaim:
Ascribe ye people all to him
the greatness of the same:
Verse. 4.
God is a rock, his work's perfect,
for all his ways are just.
A strong God, faithful, without sin,
he must be right and just.
Verse. 5.
His people are become corrupt,
and filthy now they are,
Perverse and crooked is their kind,
unlike his children dear.
Verse. 6.
O foolish people and unwise,
who so the Lord reward:
Thy Father, Maker, Savior,
will thou not him regard?
Verse. 7.
The days of old, the ages past,
fathers, fore-beears all:
Will tell and teach thee this for treuth,
if for them thou will call.
Verse. 8.
When the most High to Nations,
did heritage divide:
A pleasant bounds for Israel
he did even then provide.
Verse. 9.
For they his chosen people were,
the portion of the Lord,
The line on them laid for himself
Verse. 10.
He found him in a Wilderness,
was roaring, waste, and void:
About the which he causde them go,
for he them sore annoyde.
He schooled him there, and taught him too
by long experience:
He kept him as the apple of
his eye with patience.
Verse. 11.
As Eagles flighter over their young,
and stirs up all their nest:
Spreads out their wings to bear their birds,
where they themselves think best.
Verse. 12.
Even so the Lord his people led,
and with him their was none,
No strange strong God made any help,
IEHOVE did all alone.
Verse 13.
Above the monts he causde them ride
and feed in fruitful field.
Honey from rocks, and oil from flint,
to suck gave God their shield.
Verse. 14.
Butter of kyne, and milk of sheep,
with fat of lambs, rams sweet,
Well fed on Bashan hill they eat:
such meat for them was meet.
The choicest wheat, the finest flower
was also to them food:
The berrie of the wine they drink,
Verse. 15.
But Israel grew fat and flang,
both fat and gross grew thou:
Ieschurun upright should have been,
though fat him covered through.
His God who made him he forsakes,
and so Salvation.
Him he despised who did him good,
so vngrate's this Nation.
Verse. 16.
To jealousy with their strange gods,
then did they him provoke:
To anger with things he abhorred,
casting from them his yoke.
Verse. 17.
To Devils they did sacrifice
in place of God their Lord:
The gods both new and near they serv'de,
their fathers such abhorred.
Verse. 18.
The Rock begat thee thou forgate
the God that brought thee out
Of mothers womb: is out of mind,
he will punish thee but doubt.
Verse. 19.
For when the Lord saw all their sins,
he abdicat with grief
His sons, and eeke his daughters all,
and made them no relief.
Verse. 20.
And then he said. my face from them
hereafter I will hyde:
And I will see what end will be,
A froward generation,
unfaithful children they
Are now become: and will no more
My holy Law obey.
Verse 21.
To jealousy with their none gods,
since they do me provoke,
And with their vanities trouble me.
how beit they be my flock.
With those that now no people are
provoked shall they be,
And with a foolish nation,
To rage and jealousy.
Verse 22.
For in my wrath there kindled is.
a hot consuming fire:
Which shall burn down unto the deep,
Through earth, through dub, through mire,
There shall be left no fruit on earth,
increase there shall be none,
The grounds of mountains great also,
this fire shall burn upon.
Verse 23.
My plagues on them I Will multiply,
And spend my arrows all.
Verse 24.
Brunt up with hunger shall they be,
with pest like burning coal:
Bitter destruction will I send,
by beasts devoruing lust,
And serpents poison shall them hurt.
Verse 25.
Without the sword shall orphans make
within all full of fear:
The chosen youth, the virgin close,
the infant and gray hair.
Verse 26.
I said that I should scatter them,
in corners: and should make
Of them no more memorial,
that one might notice take.
Verse 27.
Were not I fear the wrath of those
that enemies were to me,
Least they should say through ignorance,
God did not this but we.
Verse 28.
A nation void of counsel they,
yet counsel will not take:
In them no understanding is,
I sorrow for their sake.
Verse 29.
Oh that they so much wisdom had
as this to understand,
Their latter end what it will be,
who such things take in hand.
Verse. 30.
How should it come to pass that one
a thousand men should chase,
Or two ten thousand should compel,
To flee before their face?
If not because their rock so strong,
had sold them for no price,
And GOD had causd them yield themself,
^
Verse 31.
Your enemies judges if ye make,
their god is not like yours:
So strong a Rock to trust unto,
all years, and days, and howrs.
Verse 32.
Of Sodoms ground and Gomors field
their vine with venmous graps,
And bitter are their clusters all,
when they are laid on heaps.
Verse 33.
And so the wine that thereof comes,
like Dragons venom kills,
Or like the cruel head of Aspes,
whom poison fully fills.
Verse 34.
Do I not keep this sure in store,
My treasures sealed among,
Verse 35.
Vengeance is mine I will repay,
For I am GOD the strong.
Their foot shall slide betyme, For why?
the day'f perdition,
Is near: and bring with it in haste,
to them confusion.
Verse 36.
The Lord shall judge his people so,
and yet he shall repent
When he shall see his servants cease,
that all their strength is spent,
And few or none left to remain.
in city or in field,
Verse 37,
Then shall they say their foes to scorn
where is (...)
Verse. 38.
Where are your gods who eat the fat,
Of offerings, and drank wine,
Let those rvse up and help you now,
or flee from me and mine.
Verse 39.
See now that I, even I alone,
no other gods with me:
I kill, and I give life also,
I wound and I heal thee.
Verse 40.
And none can put out of my hand.
which up to heaven I lift,
And say, As I for ever live,
the enemy shall not shift.
Verse 41.
When I my glistring sword shall sharp,
to judgment lay my hand:
Then on my foes I Will be avengd,
my haters shall not stand.
Verse 42.
My arrows shall be drunk with blud
My sword shall flesh devour,
The blood shall be, of men are slain,
and captives more and more.
Verse. 43.
Praise ye his people, nations all
whose blood he will revenge
Upon their foes: but from his land,
and chosen will not change.
The Song of DEBORAH. Iugdes. 5.
Text.
BEcause he has taken revenge by Israel, when the people offered themself
willingly: Bless ye JEHOVAH.

Hear O ye Kings, give ear O Princes: I even I will sing to JEHOVAH the God
of Israel.

JEHOVAH when thou went out of Seir, when thou marched out of the land of Edom:
the earth was moved, also the Heavens dropped, also the clouds dropped water.

The mountains flowed before the face of IEHOVA: This Sinai before the face of
the GOD of Israel.

In the days of Sangar the son of Anach: In the days of Iahel the hy way
ceased: and they that walked, went by byrods and boutgates.

The villages ceased in Israel; they ceased: until I Deborah arose, that I
arose a mother in Israel.

When he choosed new gods, war was in the gates: no sword nor spear was seen
among forty thousand in Israel.

My heart is to the law givers in Israel: The wel-willing among the people;
Bless ye JEHOVAH. Ye that ride upon whyt asses, ye that sit in judgment, ye
that walk in the ways, Speak.

The delivered from the voice of the archers, in the places where water is
drawn: there they shall teach the righteousness of JEHOVAH: his
righteousness upon his villages: then the people of Jehovah went down to the
gates.

Rise up, rise up Deborah, rise up, rise up, utter thy song: Arise Barak and
lead captive thy captivity, thou son of Abinoam.

Then he that remained, ruled over the nobles of the people: JEHOVAH shall
bear rule to me among the strong.

Out of Ephraim whose root streatches to Amalek, after Benjamin among thy
people: out of Machir they came down, and out of Zebulon, they that draw with
the rod of the writer.

And the Princes of Isachar with Deborah: and Isachar with Barak, sent down to
the valley upon his feet. for the divisions of Reuben great thoughts of heart.

Why sat thou betwixt two folds to hear the bleeting of the flocks? for the
division of Reuben great searching of heart,

Gilead dwelt still in the other side Jordan: and why dwelt Dan in ships: Asher
sat at the sea shore and dwelt upon his Creeks.

Zebulon and Naphtali were the people, who did hazard their soul to die upon
the places of the field.

The Kings came then they fought, the Kings of Canaan fought in Taanah at the
waters of Megiddo, their desire of silver they got not.

The stars faught from the Heavens out of their degrees fought they with
Sisera.

The river Kison swept the^ away: that ancient river Kison. My soul shall
trample upon the strong. Then were the horsehoofes bruised, by the strokes of
the strong.

Curse ye Meroz said the Angel of JEHOVAH: Cursing curse ye the inhabitants
thereof: because they came not to help! JEHOVAH, to help JEHOVAH among the
strong.

Iahel the wife of Cheber the Kenite shall be blessed above women, above women
in tent she shall be blessed.

He asked water and she gave him milk, she brought him butter in a dish for
nobles.

Her hand sent themselves to the nail: and her right hand to the hammer of
work men: and she hammered Sisera, she cut off his head: she pricked
through, and pearsed the temple of his head.

Betwixt her feet he was bowed together, he fell, he sleept betwixt her
feet: he bowed himself, he fell where he bowed himself, there he fell
spoiled.

The mother of Sisera looked through the window, and cried out at the open of
the window, Why tarryes his charet from coming? why are the turning of his
four wheels made slow.

Her wise ladies answered unto her, also she her self turned her speeches to
her self.

Have they not found? shall they not divyde the spoil? one damsel, two
damsels, for every man: The spoil of colors for Sisera himself, the spoil
of party colors of needle work, two of spoil for the neck.

So let thy enemies all perish JEHOVAH: and let those that love him, be as the
sun going forth in his strength.

Paraphrase.
PRaise ye the LORD who both has made you able to revenge your self upon
your enemies, and given you courage to fight, and power to overcome them.

2. O ye Kings who trust in your might, and rulers who lift up your self in
pride: hear and hearken unto the words of this song; wherein the LORD, the GOD
of Israel is praised: for it serves to teach you.

3 O LORD when thou led thy people from mount Seir, and the land of Edom toward
the land of Canaan: all creatures in Heaven and earth were moved with thy
presence among thy people.

4 Yea the mountains that seemd so solid melted before the face of the LORD,
even mount Sinai where thou gave thy law.

5. A long time before this our last deliverance our estate was so hard, that
from the death of Ehud unto this time: none durst go abroad, for fear of the
enemy.

6. And as the people durst not travel in hie ways: So might they not abide
in villages: until the time that GOD raised me up, to foretell and confirm
the deliverance of his people.

7. Because Israel chosed new gods, God raised up new enemies to sight against
them and oppress them: so that no weapon was found among them.

8. I rejoice of the Princes of Israel and of the people who came willingly to
battle. Bless ye the Lord.

9 Let al sort of people speak of this work of God: but namely merchants,
judges, wayfaring folk, where before hid them selves for fear of the enemy.

10. Before for fear of the enemy they durst not come forth to draw water,
nor inhabit villages, nor minister justice: now the case is altered, by the
righteous acts of the LORD: which we should proclaim.

11. Thou Deborah a prophetess rise up and sing thy song of praise to GOD. and
thou Barak captain of the Lords army, triumph over the Cananite.

12. When we were left few in number and dispysed: our enemi^s were many and
mighty: yet the Lord has made us rule over the^

13. To this battle came some of the tribe of Ephraim, and of Benjamin, and of
the family of Machir of the tribe of Manasseh, and of the tribe of Zebulon,
men more wise and learned then valourous warriors.

14. The Princes of Isachar were also with Deborah: And Isachars soldiers
being footmen; attended Barak in the valley: It greived us much that the
Reubenites concurred not to help us.

15. Why had thou greater pleasure in the care of thy flocks, nor in the care
of the commonwealth? more care of thy beasts then of GODS people, we marveled
much when we saw Reuben absent.

16. Gilead came not: Dan for fear keept the boats of Jordan to flee away.
Asher also did stay at home in his surest places for refuge.

17 Such courage and zeal was in the tribs of Zebulon and Naphtali, who being
few in number in comparison with their enemies, did venture.

18 Many Kings of Canaan sent their forces with Sisera, who fought in the
plain betwixt Taanah and Megiddo: They looked for greater spoil and riches,
but brought none away

19. GOD show himself party against the enemies of his people: and caused the
stars in their stations fight against them.

20. He also caused the river Kison to swell and drown them: and made his
people stout to slay them.

21. So sore were the horse put at in fighting and fleeing, that they being
strong and beating the ground. with their feet, brake all their hoofes.

22. Barak the Lords messenger, had good cause to curse, and bide curse the
inhabitants of Meroz, who would not come forth to help GODS people, being so
near them.

23. Iahel the wife of Cheber the Kenite shall be much praised above other
women who dwell in tents.

24. When Sisera fled and came to her tent to hyde himself, he called for
water to quench his thirst: she gave him milk and butter in precious vessels
like a friend or servant.

25. But when she saw him fast a sleep she took one of the nails of the
tent, with a hammer in her right hand, wherewith she drove the nail, through
the temples of his head fast in the ground.

26. So that he lay first sleeping, next dead among her feet: notwithstanding
all his struggling in the agony of death: So ended this great Captain oppressor
of others.

27. Sisera his mother looking for his return with victory, being impatient,
whiles looked out at the window, whiles cried out, why stays he so long what
can be his stay.

28. Her ladies essayed al their wits to comfort her, yea even she comforted
her self with his own words saying.

29. They have found their prey, they are parting the spoil, even damsels to
every man: and the colloured and party colored garments sowed with nedle
work made to be ornaments for their necks.

30. This may be a document to all ages, that all the enemies of GOD shall
perish: and those that love him shall shine as the sun at noone day.

The argument and analysis of this song.
AFter the death of Ehud who slew Eglon king of Moab, and delyvered Israel out
of the hands of Moabits: whom they had served eighteen years before, Israel
had rest from enemies for the space of four score years: But again Israel
wrought wickedness in the sight of the LORD: therefore he delivered them over
into the hands of Iabin king of the Canaanits: the general of whose army was
called Sisera, who oppressed Israel the space of twenty years: Then Israel
repented them of their sins, humbled themself and cried to the Lord and he
heard them: And Deborah* Barak, and Iabel, he made instruments to deliver them.
This deliverance is the argument of this Song sung by Deborah a Prophetess.

There be three chief and principal parts of this song. 1 The exordium or
beginning of this song. verse. 1. 2. Next the purpose, from the 3. verse to the
30. Thirdly, the conclusion of the song. verse 30.

The exordium contains in it 2. exhortations with their reasons. The 1.
exhortation is to Gods people to praise God, the reason thereof is taken from
their present deliverie. verse 1. The 2 exhortation is to al kings and princes
to be attentive to the words of this Song. The reason thereof is taken from
the purpose of the Prophetess in this song, to wit, to praise and make
manifest the only true God: v. 2. see the like Ps. 2. The purpose of the song
contains in it chiefly 5. things: 1. a narration of things bygone, from the 3
verse to the 8. Next an exhortation to praise God, from the 8. verse to the 13.
Thirdly, a narration of the battle betwixt the Israelites and Cananits. from
the 13. to the 22. Fourthly a curse and blessing, from the 22. verse to the 27.
Fifthly, a pretty prosopopeia, from the 27. verse to the 30. The narration of
things bygone, contains 2. things, 1. Gods wonderful power in bringing his
people through the wilderness, to the land of promise ver. 3.4. Next the great
misery wherein Israel was of late: with the reason thereof, verse 13. that
they had served new gods, idols. 5.6.7. The exhortation to praise God has in
it 4. things. 1. the governors of this people verse 8. Next to merchants,
verse 9. Third to the commons, verse 10. the reason thereof, is their liberty:
The fourth part is to her self and Barak. verse 11. with the reason thereof,
verse 12. The narration of the battle contains in it: 1. the praise of the
tribes of Israel who came to fight, and the dispraise of such as lay abacke,
from the 13. verse to the 18. Secondly is set down the part of the Canaanites.
verse 18. Thirdly the part of God and his people. verse 19.20.21. The curse is
upon Meroz and his inhabitants, with the reason thereof, verse 22. The blessing
is upon Iahel, with a narration on of her part and the event thereof, from the
22. ver. to the 27 the prosopopeia is of Sisera his mother and her ladies
talking to gether, from the 27. verse to the 30. The conclusion which is the
last part of the song: contains a prayer for the confusion of the enemies of
God and of his Church: and for the prosperity of all those who truly love
GOD: verse 30.

Annotations upon this song.
IT was the custom of Lyrick Poets in giving of thanks to GOD, to use solemn
verses: as we may read in Orpheus, Linus, Pindarus, Horace: so the priests of
Mars among the Romans called Salij: All these did so by the light of nature:
but holy men and women did the like by the inspiration of the holy spirit.

Verse 1. Revenge: In Hebrew in revenging revenges

Willing: That is, not all Israel but such only as followed Barak who at the
time had no authority in Israel.

Verse 2. The earth etc. Hyperbolicall speeches signifying the power of Gods
presence working in all his creatures.

Verse 4. Sinai: That is to say, not only creatures which were as it were
before GOD in his presence: but also such as it were behind him were moved.

Verse 6. Mother: so called because being endued with the spirit of prophecy
as a mother to her children: so prophets were called fathers, their disciples
their sons.

Verse 7. Gates: or ports, signifying that the enemy was master of all, for in
the ports of cities judges sat: and the munition of the city lay there.

Verse 9. White asses: This may be exponed either of merchants or great men:
as after chap. 10.4, and 12.14 Verse. 13. EPHRAIM: It may be meant of Deborah,
for chap. 4.5. it is said she dwelt in mount Ephraim.

Verse 14. A dish: that is to say, abundantly, for the Hebrew word signifies
a veshell cup like, appointed to be used at great sacrifices, as chap. 6.38.

Butter; That is to say, new milk new severed from the butter.

Observations of grounds for use and doctrine.
Obs. 1. DEBORAH conceived and sung this Song by a prophetic spirit the very
day when the benefit was gotten: teaching us hereby to give thanks to God
for his benefits without delay: not lingering with Jacob to go to Bethel and
perform his vows: neither being unthankful altogether, as the nine lepers
were to Christ. The Ethnicks sung their Paeans immediately after victory over
their enemies.

Obs. 2. It is God who revengeth the wrongs done to his servants: for it is his
office, Deuteronomy. 32. which when we find we should praise him: Psalm. 18.47. neither
should we avenge our self. Pro. 25.21. To. 12.10. Obs. 3. v. 1. All true
fortitude comes of God, and is his gift, as the right use of it, and good
event: Psalm. 18 for our actions are not in our power: Ier. 10.23. This doctrine
refuteth the error of man's free will.

Obs. 4. Whatsoever is written in holy Scripture serves not only for the age
when it was written, but also for the posterity: Romans 15.4. 1. Cor. 10.11.

Obs. 5. Kings, Princes and potentates have need to be exhorted to mark the
judgments of God upon their Peers, for pride so blinds their minds, that
they mis-ken both God and man. Ps. 2.10. Ps. 70.12 Ps. 82.6.

Obs. 6. We should remember Gods works of old, that we may praise him, trust
in him, and be comforted in the day of trouble. Psalm. 77.11.

Obs. 7. verse. 3.4 All creatures in heaven and earth serve God: only the Devils
and mankind are rebellious.

Obs. 8. Peace is a great benefit of God to Church and commonwealth: and
War a great plague, therefore we should pray for it. Psalm. 122.6. 1. Tim.
2.2. and praise God for it.

Obs. 9. verse. 5.6. Princes and Princesses should be nourishers of the Church
of God. Esaias. 49.23. parents to their subjects, therefore even the Ethnickes by
the the light of nature called them Patres patriae: and their kins-fold
patritios.

Obs. 10. verse. 7. God is a jealous God, and will not suffer his honor to be
given to another, but punishes Idolaters with new punishments, whatsoever the
Idolatry be, and howsoever man's ingine labors to color or defend it.

Obs. 11. verse. 8 9.10. We should be feeling members of the Church, rejoysing
when they rejoice, murning when they mourn. Romans 12.15. provoking others to
serve God. Psalm. 51.13.

Obs. 12. There are none so eminent in the Church who have not need to be
stirred up to their duties. Heb. 10 24. 2. Tim. 1.6.

Obs. 13. To triumph over enemies, overcoming in lawful war is lawful: all
triumphs amongst Gods people before Christ's death were but praeludes and types
of Christ's triumph upon the Cross over principalities and powers. Col. 2.15.
and of his members at the latter day. 1. Cor. 2.3.

Obs. 14 verse. 11. Deborah has the Song named after her, Barak the triumph
after him: she was the Prophetess, he the leader of the Army. Justice
gives to every one his own.

Obs. 15. verse 13.14. By sin Gods people are made the tail, by repentance
and obedience they become the head again. Deuteronomy. 28.12.

Obs. 16. As their names who have been zealous for the cause of God, and of
their country are registrated for their everlasting good memory: so such, as
by infidelity or fear have lain aback are noted with shame. Prove. 10.7.

Obs. 17. verse. 15.16.17. Reuben the father of that tribe regarded more his
pleasure than his honor, and so was degraduat by his father Jacob. Genesis 49.3.
This sticks to his posterity now, so some sins are hereditary

Obs. 18. verse. 18 Man proponeth and God disponeth: yea, Princes have no power
to perform all their intentions. Psalm. 146.4. Prove. 21.1.

Obs. 19. verse 19.20. All creatures as at GODS command to fight against his
enemies, and the enemies of his servants, therefore he is called the LORD of
Hosts: Devils and wicked men disobey, the one he holds in chains. Iud. 6.
and he can put his hook in the nosthirles of the other. Es. 37.29.

Obs. 20. verse 21. Man should put his trust in GOD only, and in none other.
Psalm. 20.7. Psalm. 146.3.

Obs. 21. verse 22. Whatsoever is done to Gods servants be it good or evil,
God thinks it done to himself. Mat. 25.25. Acts. 9.4.

Obs. 22 Before we curse or use imprecations, we should try by what spirit
we are led, as Christ said to his Disciples John and James.

God can overthrow mighty champions by weak mean and instruments, as Pharaoh
his overthrow, Sisera's* and many more prove.

Obs. 23. Deborah a true Prophetess, as the event declared: the best trial of
prophesies are by event.

Obs. 24. verse 23.24 25.26. Through faith the Fathers were renowned: Barak
because his faith was weak had little honor in his victory, so Zachariah
chastised for infiidelitie, Christ's disciples often rebuked.

Obs. 25. verse 27.28.29. When the wicked cry peace, peace, then suddenly
comes their destruction. 1 Thessalonians. 3.3. The hope of the wicked shall perish,
and the thing they fear shall come upon them.

Obs. 26. verse 30. The petitions of Gods servants moved by his holy Spirit
registrated in holy Scripture are equivalent to promises: and being turned in
propositions comfort the godly, and may affray the wicked: howbeit the Lord
hold his Church under the cross for a while, yet their outgate shall be
comfortable, and their end peace. Ps. 37.

This song paraphrased in English meeter to the tune of the 76. Psalm.
Verse. 1.
THE LORD our quarrel has revengd,
And made our people willing fight:
Now our estate is meekle changd,
To bless his Name we have good right.
Verse. 2.
Hear O ye Kings and Princes all,
For to JEHOVAH sing I shall,
To Iaakobs GOD, the GOD of might.
Verse. 3.
When thou O Lord from Seir went out
And marched forth from Edoms land,
The earth, the clouds the Spears about,
Were moved all at thy command,
Verse. 4.
The mountains fled before thy face,
The mount Sinai shook for a space,
Of Isreal's GOD they felt the hand.
Verse. 5.
When Sangar yet was in this life,
Whose father Anach was by name,
And Iahel also Chebers wife*
Israel did sustain great shame.
Verse. 6.
For all their ways were stopped about,
Till I Deborah did step out,
Israel thraldom from to clame.
Verse 7.
Israel to them new gods did choose,
And wars were made within their ports,
When they their GOD did then refuse,
No spear nor shield had their cohorts.
Verse. 8.
I loved then the nobles all,
That helped Israel in this thrall.
Bless ye the LORD who us comforts.
Verse. 9.
Merchants white asses on, who ride,
And ye in judgment who do sit,
You who do travel time and tide,
Keep not silence: but speak of it.
Verse 10.
For fear such as no water drew,
GODS justice forth now they do show,
No justice now will judge omit.
Verse. 11.
Rise up rise up again up rise,
Thou Deborah thy song to sing,
And thou Barak also arise,
With thy triumph make earth to ring.
Verse. 12.
Lately vile slaves our nobles served,
Now we do reign and they are starved,
Should we not then praise GOD our King?
Verse 13.
Ephram that pleasant mighty tree,
Whose root to Amalek does reach,
Did then send forth strong boughs with me,
Which Benjamin did also teach.
And Machir then, for to come down,
With the strong men of Zebulon:
Fair writers all and good in speech.
Verse. 14.
With Deborah the princes were,
Of Isachar as Barak chief:
With whom were many foote-men there,
Reuben, Alas made no relief.
Verse. 15.
Then did ye sit as still as stocks,
To hear the bleating of your flocks,
And came not forth to chase the thief.
Verse 16.
Gilead beyond the river bode,
Then Dan with boats did still remain,
Ascher like to a wily Tod,
Sat at the sea next to the plain.
Verse 17.
But Zebulon and Napthali,
Hazard their souls though they should die,
Upon the mountains of the maine.
Verse 18.
The kings came forth to fight that day
Even Canaans kings in Tanah field,
Megiddo's waters near I say,
No profit did their labor yield.
Verse 19.
For stars from Heaven against them fought
Verse. 20.
And Kisons flud against them wroght
Ver. 21.
I tramp the strong horsehoofes in field
Verse 22.
Gods Angel said Meroz be cursed,
Curse bitterly her people all.
To help the LORD that day, who durst
Not come among men strong and tall.
Verse. 23.
Blessed be Iahel Chebers wife,
Above the women all her life,
Dwelling in tents which we do call.
Verse 24.
Water he asked, she gave him milk,
And butter in a lordly plate.
Betwixt her hands as soft as silk,
Verse 25.
Unto a hammer made by art,
She put her right hand, and a nail
In her left hand, least she should fail,
And through his temples causd it start,
Verse 26.
Betwixt her feet he bowed sore,
He fell, he sleept betwixt her feet,
Until in him was life no more,
And so to die for him was meet.
Verse 27.
When his mother did then look out
To spy the fields round about,
She said, my son stays long in street.
Verse 28.
Her ladies wise did answer make,
And she her self affirmed to.
Ver. 29.
Now of the spoil their parts they take,
And so they have now much ado,
So many damesels to divyde,
And colored garments right well died,
Right meet their shoulders all unto.
Verse 30.
O LORD let all those perish so,
That enemies are to thee and thine:
And such as love thee more and more,
As clear as sun above to shine;
As clear as sun in his great strength,
So that thy Church may at the length,
Sing forth thy praises with me and mine.
The Song of CHANNAH. 1. Samuel. 2.
Text.
MY heart rejoices in JEHOVAH, my horn is exalted in JEHOVAH: my mouth is
enlarged against my enemies for I rejoice in thy salvation.

None holy like JEHOVAH: for there is none but thou; and no rock like to our
GOD.

Multiply not speeches highly, highly let not the old come out of your mouth:
for JEHOVAH is a GOD of sciences, and actions are not directed without him.

The bow of the strong is broken, the weak is girded with strength.

They that were full of bread, has hired themself: and the hungry has
ceased: while the barren has borne seven: she with many sons is weakened.

JEHOVAH kills and gives life, casts down to hell, and makes to ascend.

JEHOVAH makes poor and rich, he causes to fall, also he exalts.

He raises the poor out of the dust* he lifts up the beggar from the dung
hill; to make them sit with princes, and makes them to inherit the throne of
glory, for to JEHOVAH the pillars of the earth do appertain, and he has put
upon them the habitable world.

He will preserve the feet of his godly ones, and the wicked shall be silent
in darkness: for a man shall not be made strong by his own strength.

JEHOVAH let their contentions be trampled under foot: he shall thunder from
Heaven upon him: JEHOVAH shall judge the ends of the earth: and shall give
strength to his King: and shall lift up the horn of his CHRIST.

Paraphrase.
1. OF this late, and great benefit O LORD which thou have bestowed upon me:
I have conceaved so great joy: that my heart which before was heavy, now is
light: and my weakness made strong: my mouth closed before is now opned,
against my enemies. Pe^inna and others who reproached me.

2. In thee O LORD I rejoice justly, who art most holy, has no companion:
neither is there any so able to save.

3. Speak not proudly, as thou was wont to do, O my enemies: for the LORD
knows all things, and without him we can do nothing.

4 O Peninna thy strength is gone, who insulted upon my barrenness: and I who
was weak am made strong.

5. The case now is far changed: thou was full of prosperity: now thou must
content thy self. I was in great affliction when I had no child: God has now
given to me one child better nor seven, more worth then all thine

6. The LORD is author of all changes, and can bring contrares out of
contrares, life out of death, prosperity out of adversity, light out of
darkness. Genesis 1.

7. Poverty and riches are from the Lord: low estate and honor comes from him.

8. None so poor who^ God if he will can not make rich, none so vile but he
can make them honorable: even companions to princes: setting them in glorious
thrones: for the Lord has set the pillars of the earth to it to stand upon
with the inhabitants there of, which pillar is his word and power.

9. All the ways of the godly he will direct: and wicked men shall perish in
darkness: for no man stands in his own strength.

10. All who contend against GOD shall be trod under foot: he shall thunder
from Heaven against every one of them: the LORD shall judge the whole
inhabitants of the world giving glory to his Son JESUS CHRIST the King of
Kings.

The argument and analysis of this song.
CHANNAH the wife of Elkanah (who also had another wife called Peninna) being
a long time barren, which grieved her much: (for the Hebrew women knowing the
promise of the seed of the woman to tread down the head of the serpent, Genesis
3. and that that seed should of the posterity of Abraham their father,
esteemed barrenness a great cross) And her companion Peninna having children
to Elkanah insulting upon her added affliction to the afflicted.

Therefore Channah prayed to God earnestly to comfort her, to take away her
reproach, and give her a son: The Lord heard her prayer, and gave her a son,
whom therefore she called Samuel, that is to say: The strong God heard: And
she being moved by the Spirit of GOD made and sung this song. The parts of
the song are 3. The 1: a proposition with the reason thereof. verse 1.2. The 2.
a dehortation with the reasons thereof, from the 3. verse to the 9. The 3. the
conclusion of the song. verse 10.

The proposition is of Channas joy in the LORD, set forth by the motives of
her joy. viz. the present benefit recaued, and effect thereof, her ability to
answer Peninna and all other that vpbraided her before. The reasons of the
proposition are 2. the 1. taken from the efficient joy, to wit: her deliverance
from her grief and reproach which she ascribs to GOD, and calls it,
hersalvation. verse 1. The 2. reason is taken from the unchangeable nature of
GOD, that he is most holy, most strong, most true. verse 2. The dehortation
is proponed in the beginning of the 3. verse. The sum of the proposition is:
That none, specially Peninna, be any more proud or utter lofty language
which is the effect of pride: the reason of her dehortation are two, The 1. is
taken from Gods omniscience: The 2. from his powerful providence. verse 3. The
2. reason is illustrat by the effects thereof. 4.5.6.7.8. verse. of which
effects she shows the cause in the end of the 8. verse. The conclusion of
the song contains a pophecie of the salvation of the godly, the destruction of
the wicked: with a reason. 9. Next a petition conform to the prophecy: with a
repetition more clear of the prophecy, verse 10.

Annotations upon this song.
AS this song begins so it co^tinues full of metaphors purposes flowing from
great feeling, and therefore wanting conjunctions: In it also there be diverse
apostrophees: of al these the judicious reader may make use.

Verse 1. Thy salvation: so said Simeon in his song Luke 3. for the saints of
old by temporal benefits as this was to Channa, were stirred up to think of
the great salvation by CHRIST, which Simeon looked for, and saw more clearly
and nearelie then his forbeares.

Verse. 2. None holy, no rock: This most true for holiness and power are in
GOD essentially and perfyte: in the creature by communication only and in
part, being compared with GOD. Job. 4.18.

Verse 5. Has ceased: To wit, to be hungry and are filled.

Seven: that is, many. Ruth. 4.11.

Set out themself: to wit, for hired servants for want of food.

Verse 8. The pillars: See Job. 48. v. 4. Psalm. 124. v. 8. Psalm. 112.26. and
104. verse 5.

Verse 10. To his KING: that is to say; to CHRIST IE SUS, to whom he was to
give all power in Heaven and earth as his appointed King. Psalm. 2.

Observations of grounds for use and doctrine.
Obs. 1. THis song is called a prayer because it is spoken to GOD, and in end
has a prayer: but the purpose of it is a thanksgiving: and so these well
joined according to the precept of the Apostle. Phi. 4.6.

Obs. 2. It is easy to GOD when he will to make a heavy heart light and
joyful: a dispysed person honorable: one silenced to speak boldly. These
things and other benefits are obtained, by humiliation and prayer.

Obs. 3. verse 1. Whatsoever benefit GOD bestows upon us, we should not so
much think of it or use it, as look to GOD the giver of it and praise him,
not being as the swyoe, who feed upon fallen fruit: but look not up to the
tree.

Obs. 4. We should labor to know Gods attributes by his word and works, we
should meditate thereupon: that we may love, fear, trust him and obey his
will always.

Obs. 5. verse 2. It is easier to tell what God is not. or to deny any creature
to be like him: then to tell what he is, for God being always infinite
cannot be defyned affirmatiuelie so well as negatiuelie.

Obs. 6. Pride is a hereditarie sickness in men and women: yet GOD resists
the proud and gives grace to the humble. Iam. 4.6.

Obs. 7. verse 3. to the 8. The providence of GOD rules all things: maks all
mutations among men Ps. 107.

Obs. 8. We should not look upon things, and judge of them by present
apperance: for the earth is as a stage: we are players there upon, every one
is not that he seems to be in the play: for a beggar there may represent a
King: a wise man a fool: a wicked man a good: but we should abide patiently
the catastrophe of the play, staying till the morning, when every man puts
on his own coat: that is the morning of the resurrection. Psalm. 49.14. 1. John
3.1.

Obs. 9. verse 9.10. The godly of old took their deliverances particular, and
of the Kirk in general, as types of their great salvation by Christ, which
they looked for: 1. Pet. 1.10.

This song paraphrased in English meeter to the tune of the 103. Psalm.
Verse. 1.
MY heart rejoices in the Lord,
in him my horn is hie:
My mouth is open wide and large
against my enemy.
In thy salvation I joye,
2.
none holy like to thee:
For there is none but thou, O Lord,
a God, a rock to me.
3.
Speak thou no more words arrogant
as thou was wont before:
For God knows all things very well,
and does both less and more.
4.
The strong man's Bow is broken quyte,
the weak has put on strength:
5.
The full begin to beg their bread,
the hungry eat at length.
The barren has her seven borne,
the mother of sons is weak:
6.
The Lord he kills, and gives life,
casts down and up does take:
7.
He makes men poor: and he makes rich,
he humbles, and raises hie
8.
Even poor men from the dung and dust,
Princes equals to be.
For to the Lord the pillars of
the earth do appertain:
And thereupon has he set fast
the world and all therein.
9.
The feet he will keep of his Saints,
that they may never swerve:
The wicked shall in darkness dwell,
as they do well deserve.
No man shall by his own strength stand,
10.
O Lord stop all their strife:
The Lord will shoot his thunderbolts
at him from heaven right rife.
The ends of earth the Lord shall judge,
his King he shall make strong:
And he shall his Anoynteds horn
lift up ere it be long.
The Song of Hezechiah King of Judah. Esaias. 38.
Text.
I Said in the cutting of my days, I shall go to the ports of the grave: I am
deprived of the rest of my years.

I said, I shall not see IAH, Iah in the land of the living: I shall not behold
man more, with the inhabitants of the world.

My habitation is gone and flitted from me, as a sheep-heards tent: I have cut
off as a weaver my life: he will cut me off from the thrum: from the day to the
night thou will destroy me.

I resolved unto the morning as a Lion he so bruised all my bones, from the
day to the night thou consumes me

As a crane, a swallow, I chettered: I sighed like a dove; mine eyes were
lifted up to the hight: JEHOVAH, I am weak give me rest.

What shall I say? both he said to me, and he himself has done it: I shall
go on all my years with the bitterness of my soul.

Lord upon these they shall live, in all wherein the life of my spirit is, and
thou will heal me and give me life.

Behold, for peace I had bitterness, and thou have loved my soul from the pit
of rottenness: because thou have cast all my sins behind thy back.

For the grave shall not confess unto thee, death praise thee neither shall
they hope who go down to the pit to thy truth.

The living, the living he shall confess unto thee: as I this day: the father
to the sons, shall make known thy truth.

JEHOVAH to save me: Therefore my songs shall we play: all the days of our
life in the House of JEHOVAH.

Paraphrase.
1. When I thought God was cutting the thread of my life, by deaths knife: I
thought, and said within my self: I shall now die young and child-lesse.

2. Then my greatest grief was, that my bodily eyes should not see God for a
long time: and presently to be deprived of the sight of him, in the mirror of
his works, word and Sacraments.

3. My dwelling place leaves me, and I it: as a sheep-herd leaves his tent:
the web of my life is cut out: as the weaver cutteth out a web out of his
loome: for I made it short by sins God has made it short in his justice: and
gives to me no rest day or night.

4. After the nights unrest I looked for no better in the morning: but that he
cruelly would destroy me.

5. The cranes and swallows cannot speak in their pain; yet they chatter, and
the dove cheeps: so, under so great grief and pain, I could do nothing, but
mourn, sigh, lift up my eyes and heart to God.

6. It is the Lord, I can neither say good nor evil: he has spoken to me by
his servant Esaias, and is doing accordingly: I will never forget this heavy
hand of God upon me.

7. Upon such meditations the godly shall be comforted: in time of sickness
and death: as I now, hoping yet for life and health, from thee O Lord.

8 In place of peace and health which I had, God laid upon me sore sickness
and trouble of Spirit: yet he loves me: because, howbeit he has afflicted
me sore: yet has he not delivered me to death. Psalm. 118. but has forgiven
my sins, and set me away with peace.

9. And this thou have done that yet I might worship thee in the land of the
living, which bodies dead, and buried cannot do.

10. But man living as I am yet, shall praise thee: and one generation shall
deliver thy truth, unto another.

11. The Lord was ready to save me. Therefore my song shall be sung, even
this song tuned and played, upon musical instruments, in witness of me and
my peoples thankfulness to God for this my deliverance.

The argument and analysis of this song.
HEzechiah king of Judah being sick of a desperate disease, which the learned
think to have been a pestilentious fever, because mention is made of Byle. It
was Gods will that the Prophet Esaias should say to him he should die be that
disease: This messenger did much commoue Hezechiah: partly because he was then
a young man, and had no child: partly because he being tormented both in body
and spirit seared death: But chiefly because he having long before resolved
to serve God, and do good to his Church, this good intention would fail.
Being in this estate he prayed, and weeped sore, and the Lord heard and
pitied him: Therefore he sent again to him the Prophet Esaias: with another more
comportable commission then the first: namely, that he should not die at this
time: but have fifteen years added to his years he had lived already: he
being thus comforted, began to recognosce his thoughts in time of his
sickness, and to consider Gods great mercy toward him: for the which he
promised to be thankful all the days of his life. These things after he had
convalesced he put in write, and makes the argument of this song. The parts of
the song are three: The 1. is a recognoscing of his thoghts and words, in time
of his sickness: from the 1. verse to the 6. The 2. is the consolation
wherewith he comforted himself, from the 6. verse to the 11. The 3. is the
conclusion of the song verse 11. As to the 1. part he says his thoughts and
words were these. 1. he thought and said he would die of this disease. verse
1. Next he thought and said he would have no more time place or occasion to
serve GOD among men living upon the earth, verse 2. Thirdly he repeats his
thoughts of death, in similitude taken from sheepe-heards, and weavers: verse 3
4. Fourthly by the similitude of Crane, swallows, doves: he expresses his
pain and prayer, verse 5. As for the 2. part, to wit, his conclusion: the
grounds thereof are these. 1. that GOD declared to him his will by the Prophet
that he should die: and it was GODS hand upon him. 2. his resolution to pass
the rest of his time in humility and repentance verse 6. Thirdly, he comforts
himfelf with Gods promise, verse 7. Fourthly, he comfort himself with Gods
mercy, set down with the motive thereof, that God may be honored by his
servants living upon earth, verse 8.9.10. The conclusion is, that he will
praise God while he lives, verse 11.

Annotations upon this Song.
Verse 1. I said: through impatience I thought with my self.

I shall go: a description of death.

Rest of my years: which by the course of nature I might have looked for.

Verse 2. I shall not see: I shall be deprived of Gods visible presence in his
Church.

I AH, I AH: This doubling shows his great love to God, and his worship.

Verse 3. My habitation: he compares the life of man to a tent and web.

Verse 4. I resolved: That is, I laid my count.

A Lion: the like Job, David, Christ felt.

Verse 5. Chattered: being weak in body and wounded in Spirit I could not
utter many words in prayer.

Verse 6. What shall I say: to wit, to my Maker: see the like, chap. 39.8. Job,
1.21. Heli, 1. Sam. 3.18, David, Psalm. 39 9 murmuring the contrare condemned.

Verse 7. These: he means Gods word and works.

Verse 8. For the grave: so David Psalm. 6.

Observations of grounds for use and doctrine.
Obs. 1. HEZECHIAH left behind him this song as a monument of Gods mercy
toward him: so did David many Psalms: and God honored both with place in
holy Scripture: which shall not be forgot or lost, so long as the world shall
last: I will honor those that honor me, says the LORD 1. Sam. 2.30.

Obs. 2. verse. 1.2.3.4. He complains not for fear of death; as loving this
life so well, that he had no knowledge, faith, or hope, of a better life after
this: but hereby he shows what pains he had in his body, what agony in his
souse: being sensible of his sins and of Gods anger: yet there betwo things
that make men willing to die: some earthly thing whereunto their heart is
teathered: or want of knowledge of the joys of Heaven.

Obs. 3. verse. 5. He could utter few words in prayer, for grief and pain:
yet God saw his tears, heard his pitiful sighs and groans: This should
teach us in greatest troubles, yea in the midst of the shadow of death to hold
fast our confidence in God. Ps. 23.4. Heb. 10.35.

Obs. 4. verse. 6. The grounds that Hezeckiah laid for his comfort, we should
use to the like end: see the analysis.

Obs. 5. The LORD wounds and heales again; kills and gives life: therefore we
should always fear, serve, and trust in him. 1. Sam. 2.6.

Obs. 6. The chief end of man's life is to know God and serve him: therefore
this should be the principal cause of our desire to live.

Obs. 7. Death is a web of our own spinning: because by sin we brought it
on us; yet God is said to cut out the web of our life: because he begins it,
promoves it, ends it when he pleases. This may be the morality of the Poets
fable of the three weirdsisters.

Obs. 8. When God forgiueth a man his sin he takes away the punishment also,
as Hezechiah testifies by his experience: and this refuteth the doctrine of
Romanists: of remission of sin: and reservation of punishment where upon they
build purgatory.

Obs. 9.7.8 9.10.11. verse. When God has afflicted us and delivered us again,
we should be humble, thankful, penitent, praying for perseverence least we
fall again with Hezechiah. Es. 3.9.

This song paraphrased in English meeter to the tune of the 102. Psalm.
Verse. 1.
WHen that I thought my days were cut,
I said, unto the grave I Am put,
My years are spent no more remain.
2.
GOD in this life to see again,
No longer men I say behold,
Here upon earth although I would.
3.
My tabernacle now is rent,
I flit as sheepheards do from tent.
My web like weaver I cut out,
My like I mean: for thou but doubt,
Will me cut off O LORD with noy,
And me from day to night destroy,
No rest I get into the night.
4.
And in the morning by his might,
Like to a lion he me breaks,
Both day and night so sore he shakes.
5.
As Crane or Swallow, or like Dove,
I murne, I sigh, I chatter now:
I lift my eyes, I say this best,
LORD I am weak, give thou me rest.
6.
I hold my peace because that he,
Both said and did all this to me:
With sorrow humble will I go,
Spending my life hereafter so.
7.
Upon thy promise we depend,
And on thy mercy without end:
These are the life of this my spirit,
To make me heal thou thinks it meet.
8.
In place of peace I had great pain,
Thou loved my soul brought it again
From pit: for all my sins past,
Behind thy back now thou have cast.
9.
Man gone to grave, cannot confess,
Nor praise thy name, there more or less,
Nor can they trust more in thy treuth:
10
But such on earth, whom thou have reuth;
As I this day now living do,
Thy truth their seed will tell unto.
11.
The LORD was ready me to save,
^
The song of the blessed Virgin Marie. Luke chap. 1.
MY soul magnifieth the LORD.

And my spirit leaps for joy: in GOD my Savior.

Because he has looked unto the humility of his handmaid: for behold from
this time, all nations shall call me blessed.

For he who is mighty has done unto me great things: and holy is his Name.

And his mercy to generations of generations, to them that fear him.

He has done a powerful work: with his arm he has scattered the proud
with the discourse of their heart.

He has pulled the mighty out of thrones: and has exalted the humble.

He filled the hungry with good things, and has sent the rich away empty.

He has taken up Israel his child to remember his mercy.

As he spoke to our fathers Abraham and his seed for ever.

1. I Am so ravished with admiration of the mercy, goodness, and power of GOD
toward me: that all the powers of my soul concur with my tongue to praise
him.

2. And this is the cause of the exceeding great joy of my spirit: even to
think upon GOD my Savior.

3. Who has looked upon me his handmaid of low degree: and has honored me
so: that now in all tims to come all people shall proclaim me a blessed woman,
the mother of that blessed seed.

4 For the strong and holy GOD has done great and wonderful things by me.

5. And he is not only good to me, but also to all that love him and serve him
in all ages.

6. By his mighty power he has wroght a great work he has dissipat the
proud, and all their devyces.

7. God resists the proud: and gives grace to the humble: exalting them
which will be seen shortly upon my Son and me: and Herod.

8. Such as were poor and in hard estate: as my husband and I, he has made
abundantly content: And upon rich men as Herod he is bringing great misery
and male-contentment.

9. With his own hand he has lifted up Israel his servant: and exalted him:
who before was despised, remembering his covenant of grace, made with Abraham
Isaac and Jacob our fathers.

10 Even that everlasting covenant concerning the seed of Abraham.

The argument and analysis of this song.
MARIE having harkned to the message of the Angel Gabriel: hasted to Hebron a
town of the trybe of Judah, pertaining to the Levits, situat among the
mountains: where Zachariah and Elisabeth her coosin dwelt: to show her this
mervelous work of God with her, that she a virgin not knowing man had
conceived by the holy Ghost: that child who should be the Messiah promised to
the fathers: Now so soon as Mary came to Elisabeth, and saluted her: At the
voice of Mary's salutation: John the Baptist who was to be the forerunner of
CHRIST, leapt within the womb of Elisabeth: And Elisabeth being filled with
the holy Ghost, told Marie the tidings, she came to tell her: before Marie
uttered a word more then the salutation: and she proclaimed Marie to be a
blessed woman, the mother of her LORD, and the fruit of her womb blessed; and
show her that so soon as she heard the voice of her salutation: her own
child leapt for joy within her belly. Even John (says Augustine) moving,
saluteth Christ, whom as yet he could, not salute with words. And Elisabeth
assured Marie, that that should come to pass, which was told her from the Lord
by his Angel: Then Marie moved by the holy Spirit uttered the words of this
song containing the praise of GOD: for his great mercy and goodness toward
her: and toward all his servants in all ages: and for his wise, just,
powerful providence, for his Church and against the enemies thereof: according
to his covenant with Abraham and his seed for ever.

The parts of the song are 2. the 1. contains a proposition of her praising
of GOD and rejoicing in him. verse 1.2. The 2. contains reasons of the
proposition: which are 7. in number. The 1. is taken from GODS goodness
toward her and the consequent thereof, that hence forth all ages shall call
her blessed, verse 3. The 2 is taken from GODS wonderful power, in working
with her, and his holiness. verse 4. The 3. is taken from the continuing of
Gods mercy to his servants and their posterity. verse 5. The 4. is taken from
Gods power over the enemies of his Church. verse 6. The 5. is taken from GODS
power and justice over wicked men be they never so mighty: and his power,
goodness, and grace to such as in humility serve him. verse 7. The 6. is
taken from Gods compassion upon poor ones: and his dispysing of the rich, who
trust in their riches. The 7. is taken from Gods goodness to his people
Israel and the efficient cause thereof, to wit, his covenant with their
fathers. verse 9.10.

Annotations upon this Song.
Verse 1. MAgnifieth: that is, inlarges it self to think of his greatness and
goodness: for no creature can comprehend GOD fully, far less add to his
perfection.

Verse 2. In: or for: and this shows the efficient cause and very object of
her joy.

My Savior: The Syriak interpretation is, quickening me.

Verse 3. Looked: that is, favourablie accepted: Genesis 4. chap. v. 4.5.

Humility: The word imports a low and despised estate: and not the merit of
virtue in her: as they allege who mantaine that divine worship is due to Marie
in a hy degree: But Theophylactus exponing these words says better: I shall
be called blessed not for my virtue but because GOD has done great things for
me.

Verse. 5. To generations: according to the promise Exodus 20.6. Psalm. 103.17.

Fear him: fear in holy Scripture often signifies all duty we owe to GOD:
and is to be understood of the filial not servile fear. Romans 5.15.

Verse 6. A powerful thing: the Syriak interprets this, victory.

Scattered: as the whirle wind does chafe. Psalm. 1.

Verse 8. Hungry: she alluds to the words of Channa in her song.

Taken up: with his hand to deliver: which the Greek word properly signifies,
as Galen witnesses, and so is to be exponed Heb. 3.16. and the consideration
hereof gives another meaning to that Scripture, then commonly interpreters
do.

Child: Syriak his servant, as Esaias. 41, 8.9.

Observations of grounds for use and doctrine.
Obs. 1. THis the first song in the new Testament sung by the blessed Virgin
Marie: as the first song in the old Testament was sung by Marie Moses sister,
both about one time of the year, both by women, both by Mary's: and in many
things the purposes of both agrees.

Obs. 2. verse. I. 2. The spirit of GOD in lightneth the eyes of the minds of
his servants to see clearly his benefits, and their greatness: he fills their
hearts with spiritual joy: and opens their mouth to praise: while as the
wicked are like to swyne who eat fruit falling from the tree: but never look
where from it came.

Obs. 3. verse. 3. God is said in holy Scripture to respect or look upon men or
women when he shows any token of his favor to them: and by the contrare not
to respect or look upon them, when he is angry: and the similitude is
borrowed from parents or masters to their children or servants.

Obs. 4 Marie here and in the verses following seems to allude to the 98.
Psalm, teaching us to be well acquaint with holy Scripture, that we may make
use thereof in due time.

Obs. 5. verse. 4. 5. Gods promises to the godly, import everlasting good
things: And therefore the per formance of his promise by temporal benefits,
should be to us pledges of his eternal love.

Obs. 6. Compare the verses following with Psalm. 1. Psalm. 63. Esaias 29.

Obs. 7. GOD takes the wicked in their own crafts, making evil counsel worse
to the giver.

Obs. 8. When God will put forth his hand to help, he comforts his Church,
confounds his enemies Es. 41.10

Obs. 9. verse 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. God is faithful and fails not his servants.
Ios. 1.5. Heb. 13.6.

This song paraphrased in English meeter to the tune of the 19. Psalm.
Verse. 1.
MY soul the Lord does magnify,
2.
and sprit in him rejoice:
He is my GOD and Savior,
To him I sing with noise.
3.
For he the poor estate of me,
his handmaid did respect:
And now from hence no people shall,
to call me blessed neglect.
4.
The mighty LORD to me has done,
things marvelous and great.
5.
His Name is holy and his grace,
sits in eternal seat.
To such as fear his holy Name,
and worship him in treuth:
6.
A mighty work his arm has wrought,
the Proud destroyed but reuth.
7.
The mighty men out of their thrones,
he pulled has with strength:
And such as were of low degree,
exalted at the length.
8.
With good things he the hungry fills,
the rich sends poor away.
9,
His servant Israel has he taken,
for to protect always.
For why, he has remembered,
his covenant of grace.
10.
Which with our fathers he did make.
and seed to come in place:
Of Abraham I chiefly mean,
and his posterity,
That they should find to them and theirs,
The Song of ZACHARY. Luke. 1.
Text.
BLessed be the LORD the God of Israel: because he has visited and made
redemption to his people.

And has raised up the horn of salvation to us in the house of David his
child.

As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets: which have been since the
world began.

Salvation from our enemies and from the hand of all that hate us.

To make mercy with our fathers, and to remember his holy testament.

The oath which he swore to Abraham our father.

To give unto us delivered from the hand of our enemies, to serve him without
fear.

In holiness and righteousness before him; all the days of our life.

And thou, babe; shall be called the Prophet of the most High, for thou shall
go before: before the face of the LORD to prepare his ways.

To give the knowledge of salvation to his people, in the remission of their
sins

By the bowels of mercy of our GOD, by the which he has visited us who comes
from above.

To shine to them that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death, to direct
our feet in the way of peace.

Paraphrase.
1. Let God be praised and preached most worthy of praise: because that now
he has declared, that he was mindful of his people, in sending his Son to
visit and redeem them

2. And now while as the strength of Israel seemed to be gone, and the promise
made to David to have failed: he has raised up his CHRIST: who by his strength
shall overthrow our enemies: and establish the kingdom in the house of David.

3. According to his promises by his servants: continued in all ages since the
beginning.

4. Who prophesied that we should be delivered from our enemies and from the
power of all who hate us.

5. And to perform his mercy promised. to our fathers: and show he did
remember his covenant made, sealed to Abraham.

6. By oath, vision, and circumcision.

7. That we being delivered from the power of our enemies, might serve him
willingly and boldly.

8. In holiness and true righteousness in his sight continually (who searches
the hearts and raines) so long as we live.

9. But now thou my young son: though thou seem little worth: yet thou shall
be a great one: even furriour of the great King: and his forerunner to prepare
his peoples hearts to receive him.

10. Opning to them the way of salvation, in repentance and faith in the blood
of Christ the Lamb of God who takes away the sins of the world.

12. Which is the greatest mercy given us by GOD: manifesting his Son in the
flesh: who comes from Heaven.

13. Who also shall be a light to the Gentiles, who now sit in darkness and
deadly ignorance: and lead both us and them to true happiness.

The argument and analysis of this song.
ZACHARY the father of John the Baptist, a priest of the order of Abiah: when
he was doing his office according to the order of his course, in the temple of
the LORD. Gabriel the Angel appeared unto him and told him that his wife
Elisabeth should bear him a son: and commanded him to call his name John:
Also he show him that he should be that Elias of whom Malachi prophesied
chap 4. v. 5. Which message Zachary doubted of: considering that both he and
Elisabeth were old: and she had been all her days till then barren. Therefore
he was stricken with dumbness until the day John was borne: so that upon the
eight day after, when they were about the circumcision of the child, they
speared at him how the child should be called: and he asking writting tables,
because he could not speak, wrote, his name shall be JOHN: and immediately his
tongue was loosed: and he opned his mouth, and praised GOD. And being filled
with the Spirit of GOD he spoke the words of this song: The sum of it is: he
praised GOD for performing of his promise concerning Messiah: made to their
father Abraham and to David, and foretold by the holy Prophets since the world
began: and in the end he prophecieth that his son John should be the
forerunner and furriour of CHRIST.

The parts of the song are three; The 1. contains the praise of GOD or an
exhortation to praise him ver. 1. at the beginning: The 2. part contains the
reasons of the exhortation: from the 1. to the 9. And they are in number 3. The
1. is the visitation of his people. The 2. is the redemption of them: verse 1.
The 3. reason is the raising up of the horn of salvation in the house of
David. verse 2. All these 3. reasons are illustrate, by comparing the promises
of God and prophecies with these things, the event and accomplishment of them
verse 3.4.5.6.7.8. The 3. part of the song, contains a prophecy concerning
his son John: that he should be called a Prophet, be the furriour and
sorerunner of CHRIST. verse 9. Next the ministry and doctrine of John, viz. to
point out Messiah: prepare the people to receive him: teach the doctrine of
repentance and faith, for receaving by the mercy of GOD remission of sins
verse 10.11. Thirdly he sets down the final cause of CHRIST'S first coming,
to wit, to give light, comfort, life eternal to all those that should believe
in him verse 12.13.

Annotations upon this song.
Verse 1. BLessed: The verb, be, is to be understood Visited: This word in holy
Scripture signifies, whiles to punish, Exodus 20. whiles to do good, as here,
where it imports the personal presence of GOD in his Son JESUS CHRIST
coming in the flesh, to see the estate of GODS Church on earth: and to redeem
them. See Exodus 3.8.

Redemption: This word is diversely taken. 1. for delivering by force and power
out of the hand of the enemy, as GOD redeemed his people out of Egypt. 2. For
going free with the enemies good will: as the redemption from the Babylonian
Captivity. 3. For ransoming, that is, paying the just price, as here and else
where.

Verse 2 The Horn: That is, the strength, a metaphor from horned beasts.

Verse 7. Without fear: That is, with confidence: Ephesians. 3.12. for fear here
does not signify religious reverence, but grief for evil to come.

Verse. 10. In the remission: or by the remission of sins, which is the
manner by the which GOD saves us. Romans 4.7.

Verse 11. Who comes from above: The Greek word properly signifies the
sun rising: And Messiah is so called in Hebrew. Ier. 23.5. Zach. 3.8.

Peace: In the old Testament often signifies prosperity, and in the New: but
here it imports happiness everlasting: In this way CHRIST by his word leads
us: for he is the way, the verity and life.

Observations of grounds for use and doctrine.
Obs. 1 ALbeit these words of Zachary be called a prophecy: yet the learned
calls this the second song in the New Testament: There is indeed a prophecy
in the four last verses: but the former containerh the praise of GOD.

Obs. 2. verse 1. It has always been the practice of the godly after sight
or sense of Gods benefits temporal or spiritual, to praise GOD: so should
we.

Obs. 3. GOD makes his promises to his Church good, when there is least
appearance: hence the proverb: when man is weakest GOD is strongest.

Obs. 4. verse 2. The raising up of the horn of salvation in the house of
David, is the continuing of David's kingdom, to be an everlasting kingdom in
the person of CHRIST.

Obs 5. The comparison of prophecies with their event argue the Scripture to be
the word of GOD.

Obs. 6 verse 3. All the Patriarchs and Prophets believed and looked for the
coming of Christ. 1. Pet. 1.

Obs. 7. verse 4 5.6. The Covenant of grace is: that God would forgive us our
sins: save us from enemies, chiefly spiritual, sin, Satan, death, put us
in the estate of grace, and bring us to glory: which benefits Christ meriteth
to us by his death.

Obs. 8. verse 8. The end of our redemption is, that we serve God and Christ
his Son in true holiness and righteousness before him: beware of hypocrisy,
Ps. 50.

Obs. 9. John newborn is installed in his office by the holy Ghost.

Obs. 10. verse 10. The only way to salvation by remission of sins through
the merit of the blood of Christ, was showed in the bloody sacrifices from the
beginning, types hereof.

Obs. 11. Gods mercy is over all his works. Psalm. 145.9. but the bowels of
his mercy, that is, his superaboundant love toward his chosen in redeeming of
them by Christ his Son.

Obs. 12. verse 11. CHRIST is compared to the morning star, the sun, the
light, an orient from above: all which have good use to comfort us.

This song paraphrased in English meeter to the tune of the 18. Psalm.
1.
THE LORD, the GOD of Israel,
be blessed and praisde always:
For he with great redemption,
has visit us this day.
2.
The horn now of salvation,
to us is raised hie,
Unto the house of David, his
beloved: as we see.
3.
As did foretell our fathers all,
who prophets were by name:
Since that the world did first begin,
by them he spoke the same.
4.
That we should be delivered,
out of our enemies hand:
From every one that did us hate,
or that should us withstand:
5.
According to the Covenant,
once with our fathers made
Of mercy, now remembered,
though they long since be dead.
6.
The oath which unto Abraham,
our father he did swear:
7,
To give to us deliverance,
to serve him without fear.
8.
In righteousness and holiness,
sincere before his face:
So long as life should in us dure,
and that from race to race.
9.
And thou my little babe shall be,
prophet of the most Hie,
And so be called, because that thou,
the LORD himself shall see.
And thou before him first shall go,
his way for to prepare:
10.
Instructing to salvation,
his people less and maire.
11.
That unto them remission,
of all their sins is given.
12.
By GODS most tender mercy now,
set forth before our eyne:
For now the Sun of righteousness,
has shyned from above.
13.
To them that sit in darkness, and
in shadow of the grave.
Our paths for to direct into,
the way that leads to peace:
And everlasting glory next,
The Song of the Angels at the birth of CHRIST. Luke 2.
Text.
GLORY to GOD in the most High: and in the earth peace: to men good will.

Paraphrase.
GLORY is giving to GOD in the most hy Heavens: peace is now upon earth: and
good news to men.

The argument and analysis of this song.
ONE Angel makes manifest the birth of Christ, to shepherds watching their
flocks in the night: and there appeared to them with the Angel a multitude of
heavenly soldiers, that is to say: other Angels: congratulating, the nativitie
of Christ, and singing this song: The parts of it are 3. The 1. concerns God,
that the Angels in HEAVEN were praising him for manifesting his Son in the
flesh. The 2. concerns mankind upon earth to whom peace is wished. The 3.
makes mention of a greater benefit to them, even GODS loving kindness.

Annotations upon this song.
GOod will: The Syriak exponeth a good message: Peace: For so it was then
through all the world: Men: The Syriak exponeth the sons of man.

Observations for use and doctrine.
IT is customable to earthly Princes to congratulate by their Ambassadors one
another, when children are procreated to them: but the like of this was never
heard before nor shall be hereafter: That the eternal, infinite, everlasting
GOD, should send from Heaven a multitude of Angels, his Ambassadors to
congratulate the birth of a bairne: teaching us in what estimation GOD has his
son new manifested in the flesh: how willing he sent him in the world to
redeem us.

Obs. 2. Outward peace is little worth where peace of conscience is away,
therefore to peace is well joined Gods good will: the sense whereof gives
peace inward.

This song paraphrased in English meeter to the tune of the 117. Psalm.
IN highest Heaven to GOD is glore,
Let men on earth yet praise him more:
For he to us his peace has send,
In praising him our life to spend:
To men has showed his great good will,
To laud his name should we be still?
The song of Simeon, Luke. 2.
Text.
NOW LORD thou let go thy servant in peace, according to thy word,

For my eyes have seen thy salvation.

Which thou have prepared before the face of all people.

A light to the revelation of the Gentiles, and the glory of thy people
Israel.

Paraphrase
1. LORD thou said I should not depart from this life until I had seen
Messiah: now I have seen him: and am ready to die with peace and joy.

2. Even with the eyes of body, I have seen him, who shall save us.

3. Even Christ Jesus upon whom both Jews and Gentiles should look: and
believe in him their savior.

4. That light that was promised to be revealed to the Gentiles: and the
glory of the Jews, being flesh of their flesh, and bone of their bones.

The argument and analysis of this song.
SIMEON a just and godly man, living in the days when JESUS CHRIST was borne:
had a revelation from the holy Ghost, that he should not see death before,
with his bodily eyes he had seen the LORDS CHRIST, And when Joseph and Mary
brought Jesus to Jerusalem, to present him to the LORD, and offer according to
the law of purification of women. Simeon being moved by the Spirit of GOD;
came to the Temple and took the babe JESUS in his arms: and blessed GOD, and
uttered the words of this song: showing therewithal what child this was, and
what he should be. The parts of the song are 2. The 1. in substance a
thanksgiving: in form an affirmative proposition: containing beside the
subject and attribute: the circumstance of time in the word, now: and of manner
in the words, according to thy word: verse 1. The 2 part is a reason of the
thanksgiving or proposition: because he had seen with his bodily eyes the
Messiah, whom he describs, calling him the Gentiles light, Isreal's glory.

Annotations upon this song.
Verse. 1. Let go: The Greek word is a metaphor from ships lowsing from
one place to another port, the Syriak has: Now let me go.

In peace: That is, happily, with inward peace and joy Verse 2. My eyes: that
is, the eyes of my body; for otherwise Abraham long before Simeon saw Christ
with the eye of says John 8. and is that sight which the Prophets desired to
see, beside the sight of faith. 1. Pet 1

My salvation: That is, JESUS the Savior, thy Son: The Syriak has, thy
gracious.

Verse 3. Before the face: as a work to look unto, and a light to follow.

Glory: because, come of them according to the flesh.

Observations for use and doctrine.
Obs. 1. SImeon Swan-lyke for white hairs, sang this sweet song before his
death: As Moses did another. Deuteronomy. 32.

Obs. 2. The days were very evil wherein Simeon lived, which did appearantly
make him weary of his life: So Elias, Jeremiah, and other holy men have been
tempted with this tentation.

Obs. 3. The metaphor from Mariners having a cable cast fast where they mind
not to stay, and casting it lowse when they will go home: teaches us that the
life of the godly is a voyage through many storms: their death a go^^^ home to
their. Heaven their port, their rest.

Obs. 4. The hour of our death is appointed by God: therefore we should
neither too much love life not hasten or fear to die.

Obs. 5. verse. 1. The end of the godly is peace Ps. 37. Es. 57. but no peace to
the wicked, ibid.

Obs. 6. verse. 3. Christ is set forth by the preaching of the Gospel before
all people: yet some look upon him and offend: others look upon him and
believe. 1. Cor. 1.13. 1. Pet. 2.8, 7.

This song in meeter: to the tune of the 25. Ps.
1.
NOW let thou, O LORD,
thy servant part in peace:
According to thy promise made,
to me of thy good grace:
2.
For why? my eyes have seen,
my LORD and Savior.
3.
Whom thou have set before our face,
to look on every hour:
And als before the face,
of other people all:
4.
For here is the light revealed now,
to Gentiles whom we call,
In whom Israel may glore,
as being Abraham's feed.
And sent to them now in due time,
in time of their great need.
FINIS.

