THE COMMONWEALTH OF VTOPIA: Containing a Learned and pleasant Discourse of
the best state of a Public Weal, as it is found in the Government of the new
I Will called Vtopia. WRITTEN By the right Honorable, Sir THOMAS MOORE, Lord
Chancellor of England.

LONDON, Printed by B. Alsop and T. Fawcet, and are to be sold by Will: Sheares,
at his shop in Bedford-street in Coven-garden near the New Exchange. 1639.

TO THE HONble. descended Gentleman, CRESACRE MOORE, of More place in
North-Mi^es, in the County of Hertford ^sq^^^^* Next in Blood to S. THOMAS
MOORE, L. Chancellor of England, and Heir to the ancient Family of the
CRESACRES, sometime Lord of he Manor of B^^borough, in the County of York, in
the time of Edward the first.
SIR,
Have found you so Noble in the first Dedication, that I should much derogate
from your true Worth, and wrong my self to make choice of a new Patron for the
second (exactly done with applause) wherein though I presume, yet persume,
it will be no sin to multiply my obligation. Your name, and nature, claims,
and deserves it, it is your due and my duty, and were I able to express more
MOORE should have it, for I must always acknowledge your goodness in
whatsoever quality for tune shall bestow me. SIR, I know you are wise. In a
word I am, really what I am.

Your worships ever to be commanded. Ber. Alsop.

THE FIRST BOOK of the Communication of RAPHAEL HYTHLODAY, concerning the best
State of a COMMONWEALTH.
THE most victorious King of England, HENRY the eight of that name, in all
royal virtues, a Prince most peerless, had of late in Controversy with
CHARLES, the right high and mighty King of Castile, weighty matters, and of
great importance. For the debatement and final determination whereof, the
Kings Majesty sent me Ambassador into Flanders, joined in Commission with
CVTHBERT Cuthbert Tunstall.
TVNSTALL, a man doubtless out of comparison, and whom the Kings Majesty of
late, to the great rejoicing of all men, did prefer to the Office of Master
of the Rolls.

But of this man's praises I will say nothing, not because I do fear that
small credence shall be given to the testimony that comes out of a friends
mouth: but because his virtue and learning be greater, and of more excellency,
then that I am able to praise them: and also in all places so famous and so
perfectly well known, that they need not, nor ought not of me to be praised,
unless I would seem to show and set forth the brightness of the Sun with a
Candle, as the Proverb says. There met us at Bruges (for thus it was before
agreed) they whom their Prince had for that matter appointed Commissioners:
excellent men all. The chief and head of them was the Margrave (as they call
him) of Bruges, a right honorable man: but the wisest and the best spoken of
them was GEORGE TEMSISE, Provost of Casselses, a man, not only by learning, but
also by nature of singular eloquence, and in the laws profoundly learned: but
in reasoning and debating of matters, what by his natural wit, and what by
daily exercise, surely he had few fellows. After that we had once or twice
met, and upon certain points or articles could not fully and thoroughly agree,
they for a certain space took their leave of us, and departed to Bruxells,
there to know their Princes pleasure. I in the mean time (for so my business
lay) went straight thence to Antwerpe. While I was there abiding, oftentimes
among other, but which (...) I judged to be a Mariner. But the said PETER
seeing me, came unto me and saluted me. And as I was about to answer him: see
you this man, says he (and therewith he pointed to the man, that I saw him
talking with before) I was minded (quoth he) to bring him straight home to you.
He should have been very welcome to me, said I, for your sake. Nay (quoth he)
for his own sake, if you knew him: for there is no man this day living, that
can tell you of so many strange and unknown peoples, and Countries, as this
man can. And I know well that you be very desirous to hear of such news. Then
I conjectured not far amiss (quoth I) for even at the first sight, I judged
him to be a Mariner. Nay (quoth he) there ye were greatly deceived: he has
sailed indeed, not as the Mariner Palinure, but as the expert and prudent
Prince ULYSSES: Yea, rather as the ancient and Sage Philosopher Rophael
Hithloday.
PLATO. For this same Raphael Hythloday (for this is his name) he is very well
learned in the Latin tongue: but profound and excellent in the Greek
language. Wherein he ever bestowed more study then in the Latin, because he
had given himself wholly to the study of Philosophy. Whereof he knew that
there is nothing certain in Latin, that is to any purpose, saving a few of
Senecaes, and Ciceroes doings. His patrimony that he was borne unto, he left
to his brethren (for he is a Portugal borne) and for the desire he had to see*
and know the far Countries of the world, he joy ned himself in company with
Americke Vespuce; and in the three last voyages of those four that be now in
prinr, and abroad in every man's hands, he continued still in his company,
saving that in the last voyage he came not home again with him. For he made
such means and shift, what by intreatance, and what by importune suite, that
he got license of Master Americke (though it were sore against his will) to be
one of the twenty four, which in the end of the last voyage were left in the
Country of Gulicke. He was therefore left behind for his mind-sake, as one that
took more thought and care for traveling, then dying; having customably in
his mouth these sayings: He that bath no grave, is covered with the sky; and,
The way to heaven, out of all places, is of like length and distance. Which
fantasy of his, (if God had not been his better friend) he had surely bought
full dear. But after the departure of master Vespuce, when he had traveled
through and about many Countries with five of his companions Gulikians; at the
last by mervailous chance he arrived in Taprobane, from whence he went to
C^liquit, where he chanced to find certain of his Country Ships, wherein he
returned again into his Country, nothing less then looked for. All this when
PETER had told me, I thanked him for his gentle kindness: that he had
vouchsafed to bring me to the speech of that man, whose communication, he
thought should be to me pleasant, and acceptable. And therewith I turned me to
Raphael: And when we had halsed each other, and had spoke these commune words,
that he customably spoke at the first meeting, and acquaintance of strangers,
we went thence to my house, and there in my Garden, upon a bench covered with
green turves, we sat down talking together. There he told us, how that after
the departing of Vespuce, he and his fellows that tarried behind in Gulicke,
began by little and little, through far and gentle speech, to win the love
and favor of the people of that Country; insomuch, that within short space,
they did dwell among them, not only harmless, but also occupying with them
familiarly. He told us also, that they were in high reputation and favor with
a certain great man (whose name and Country is now quite out of my
remembrance) which of his mere liberality, did bear the costs and charges of
him and his five companions. And besides that, gave them a trusty guide to
conduct them in their journey (which by water was in Boats, and by land in
Wagons) and to bring them to other Princes with very friendly commendations.

Thus after many days journies, he said, they found Towns, and Cities, and
Weal publiques, full of people, governed by good and wholesome Laws: for under
the line Equinoctial, and on both sides of the same, as far as the Sun
does extend his course, lies (quoth he) great and wide Deserts, and
Wildernesses, parched, burned, and dried up with continual and intolerable
heat. All things be hideous, terrible, loathsome, and unpleasant to behold:
All things out of fashion and comeliness, inhabited with wild Beasts, and
Serpents; or at the leastwise, with people, that be no less savage, wild, and
noisome, then the very Beasts themselves be. But a little farther beyond that,
all things begin by little and little to wax pleasant. The Air soft,
temperate, and gentle: the ground covered with green gras^^: less wildness
in the Beasts. At the last shall ye come to people, Cities and Towns, wherein
is continual intercourse and occupying of merchandise and chaffare, not only
among themselves, and with their Borderers; but also with Merchant, of far
Countries, both by land and water. There I had occasion (said he) to go to
many Countries on every side. For there was no ship ready to any voyage or
journey, but I and my fellows were into it very Ships of strange fa^^i^^s.
gladly received. The ships that they found first, were made plain, flat, and
broad in the bottom trough-wise. The sails were made of great rushes, or of
wickers, and in some places of leather. Afterward they found Ships with ridged
kyles, and sails of Canvasse: yea, and shortly after, having all things like
ours. The ship-men also were expert and cunning, both in the Sea, and in the
weather. But he said, that he found great favor and friendship among them, for
teaching them The Loadstone.
the feate and use of the Loadstone. Which to them before that time was
unknown. And therefore they were wont to be very timorous and fearful upon
the Sea: Nor to venture upon it, but only in the Summer time. But now they
have such a confidence in that Stone, that they fear not stormy Winter: in so
doing, farther from care then danger. In so much, that it is greatly to be
doubted, least that thing, through their own foolish hardiness, shall turn
them to evil and harm, which at the first was supposed should be to them good
and commodious. But, what he told us that he saw in every Country where he
came, it were very long to declare. Neither is it my purpose at this time to
make rehearsal thereof. But per adventure in another place will I speak of it:
chiefly such things as shall be profitable to be known: as in special be
those decrees and ordinances, that he marked to be well and wittily provided
and enacted among such peoples, as do live together in a civil policy, and
good order. For of such things did we busily enquire, and demand of him, and he
likewise very willingly told us of the same. But as for Monsters, because they
be no news, of them we were nothing inquisitiue: For nothing is more easy to
be found, then be barking Scillaes, ravening C^l^^es, and Lestrigones,
devourers of people, and such like great and incredible monsters. But to find
Citizens ruled by good and wholesome Laws, that is an exceeding rare, and hard
thing. But as he marked many fond and foolish Laws in those newfound Lands;
so he rehearsed diverse acts and constitutions, whereby these our Cities,
Nations, Countries, and Kingdoms, may take example to amend their faults,
enormities and errors. Whereof in another place (as I said) I will entreat.
Now at this time I am determined to rehearse only that he told us of the
Manners, Customs, Laws, and Ordinances of the Utopians. But first I will
respect our former communication by the occasion, and (as I might say) the
drift whereof he was brought into the mention of the Weal Public: For when
Raphael had very prudently touched diverse things that be amiss, some here, and
some there; Yea, very many on both parts; and again had spoken of such wise
Laws, and prudent Decrees, as be established and used, both here among us, and
also among them; as a man so perfect, and expert in the Laws, and Customs of
every several Country, as though into what place soever he came ghestwise,
there he had led all his life: then PETER much marvailing at the man; Surely
Master Raphael (quoth he) I wonder greatly, why you get you not into some Kings
Court: For I am sure, there is no Prince living, that would not be very glad of
you, as a man not only able highly to delight him with your profound learning,
and this your knowledge of Countries, and peoples, but also meet to instruct
him with examples, and help him with counsel. And thus doing, you shall bring
your self in a very good case, and also be of ability to help all your
friends and kinsfolk. As concerning my friends and kinsfolk (quoth he) I
pass not greatly for them: For I think I have sufficiently done my part
toward them already. For these things, that other men do not depart from,
until they be old and sick; yea, which they be then very loath to leave, when
they can no longer keep, those very same things did I being not only lusty,
and in good health, but also in the flower of my youth, devide among my friends
and kinsfolks. Which I think with this my liberality ought to hold them
contented, and not to require not to look that besides this, I should for
their sakes give my self in bondage unto Kings. Nay, God forbid that (quoth
Peter) it is not my mind that you should be in bondage to Kings, but as a
retainer to them at your pleasure. Which surely I think is the nighest way
that you can devise how to bestow your time fruitfully, not only for the
private commodity of your friends, and for the general profit of all sorts of
people, but also for the advancement of your self to a much wealthier state
and condition, then you be now in. To a wealthier condition (quoth Raphael) by
that means, that my mind stands clean against? Now I live at liberty after
mine own mind and pleasure, which I think very few of these great States, and
Peers of Realms can say. Yea, and there be enough of them that sue for great
men's friendships: and therefore think it no great hurt, if they have not me,
nor third or fourth such other as I am. Well, I perceive plainly friend Raphael
(quoth I) that you be desirous neither of riches, nor of power. And truly I
have in no less reverence and estimation a man of your mind, then any of them
all that be so high in power and authority: But you shall do as it becomes
you; yea, and according to this wisdom, to this high and free courage of
yours, if you can find in your heart, so to appoint and dispose your self,
that you may apply your wit and diligence to the profit of the Weal public,
though it be somewhat to your own pain and hinderance. And this shall you
never so well do, nor with so great profit perform, as if you be of some
great Princes counsel, and put into his head (as I doubt not but you will)
honest opinions, and virtuous persuasions: For from the Prince, as from a
perpetual wellspring, comes among the people the flood of all that is good
or evil. But in you is so perfect learning, that without any experience, and
again, so great experience that without any learning you may well be any Kings
Counselor. You be twice deceived Master More (quoth he) first in me, and
again in the thing it self: For neither is in me the ability that you force
upon me, and if it were never so much, yet in disquieting mine own quietness
I should nothing further the Weal public. For first of all, the most part of
all Princes have more delight in warlike matters, and feats of Chivalry (the
knowledge whereof I neither have nor desire) then in the good feats of peace:
and employ much more study, how by right or by wrong to enlarge their
Dominions, then how well and peaceable to rule, and govern that they have
already. Moreover, they that be Counselors to Kings, every one of them either
is of himself so wise indeed that he needs not, or else he thinks himself
so wise, that he will not allow another man's counsel, saving that they do
shamefully, and flatteringly, give assent to the fond and foolish sayings of
certain great men: whose favors, because they be in high authority with their
Prince, by assentation and flattery they labor to obtain. And verily it is
naturally given to all men to esteem their own inventions best: So both the
Raven and the Ape think their own young ones fairest. Then if a man in such a
company, where some disdain and have despite at other men's inve^tions, and
some count their own best, if among such men (I say) a man should bring forth
any thing, that he has read done in times past, or that he has seen done in
other places; there the hearers, fare as though the whole existimation of their
wisdom were in jeopardy to be overthrown, and that ever after they should be
counted for very deserts, unless they could in other men's inventions pick out
matter to reprehend, and find a fault at. If all other poor helps fail: then
this is their extreme refuge. These things (say they) pleased our forefathers
and ancestors: would God we could be so wise as they were: and as though they
had wittily concluded the matter, and with this answer stopped every man's
mouth, they sit down again. As who should say, it were a very dangerous
matter, if a man in any point should be found wiser then his forefathers
were. And yet be we content to suffer the best and wittiest of their Decrees to
lie unexecuted: but if in any thing a better order might have been taken, then
by them was, there we take fast hold, finding there many faults. Many times
have I Partial judgment.
chanced upon such proud, lewd, over-thwart, and way-ward judgments; yea (and
once in England: I pray you Sir (quoth I) have you been in our Country? Yea
forsooth (quoth he) and there I tarried for the space of four or five months
together, not long after the Insurrection, the Western English men made
against their King, which by their own miserable and pitiful saughter, was
suppressed and ended. In the mean season, I was much bound and beholding to
the right reverend Father, JOHN Cardinal MORTON
MORTON, Archbishop and Cardinal of Canterbury, and at that time also Lord
Chancellor of England; a man, Master Peter (for Master Moore knows already
that I will say) not more honorable for his authority, then for his prudence
and virtue. He was of a mean stature, and though stricken in age, yet bare he
his body upright.

In his face did shine such an amiable reverence, as was pleasant to behold.
Gentle in communication, yet earnest, and sage. He had great delight many times
with rough speech to his suitors, to prove, but without harm, what prompt wit,
and what bold spirit were in every man. In the which as in a virtue much
agreeing with his nature, so that therewith were not joined impudency, he took
great delectation. And the same person as apt and meet to have an
administration in the Weal public, he did lovingly embrace. In his speech he
was fine, eloquent and pithie. In the Law, he had profound knowledge; in wit,
he was incomparable; and in memory, wonderful excellent. These qualities,
which in him were by nature singular, he by learning and use (...) perfect. The
King (...) hi^ counsel, (...) in a manner learned (...), when I was there ^
For even in the chief of his youth he was taken from School into the Court,
and there passed all his time in much trouble and business, being continually
tumbled and tossed in the waves of diverse misfortunes and adversities. And so
by many and great dangers, he learned the experience of the world, which so
being learned, cannot easily be forgotten. It chanced on a certain day, when I
sat at his Table, there was also a certain lay man, cunning in the Laws of
your Realm: Who, I cannot tell, whereof taking occasion, began diligently and
earnestly to praise that strait and rigorous justice, which at that time was
there executed upon Felonies; who as he said, were for the most part twenty
hanged together upon one gallows. And, seeing so few escaped punishment, he
said he could not choose, but greatly wonder and marvel, how and by what
evil luck it should so come to pass, that Thieves nevertheless were in every
place so rife and so rank. Nay, ^ir quoth ^ (for I durst boldly speak my Of
Laws not made according to equity.
mind, before the Cardinal) mervaile nothing hereat: for this punishment of
Thieves passes the limits of Justice, and is also very hurtful to the Weal
public: For it is too extreme and cruel a punishment for theft, and yet not
sufficient to refrain and withold men from theft: for simple theft is not so
great an offense, that it ought to be punished with death; neither there is any
punishment so horrible, that it can keep them from stealing, which have none
other craft, whereby to get their living. Therefore in this point, not you
only, but also the most part of the world be like evil Schoolemasters, which
be readier to beat, then to teach their scholars. For By what means thee
might be sower thieves and robbers.
great and horrible punishments be appointed for Thieves, whereas much rather,
provision should have bin made, that there were some means, whereby they might
get their living, so that no man should be driven to this extreme necessity;
first to steal, and then to dye. Yes (quoth he) this matter is well enough
provided for already. There be Handy-crafts, there is Husbandry to get their
living, if they would not willingly be naught. Nay, quoth I, you shall not
escape so: for first of all, I will speak nothing of them, that come home out
of the wars maimed and lame, as not long ago out of Black ^eath field, and a
little before that, out of the wars in France: such I say, as put their lives
in jeopardy for the Weal publiques, or the Kings sake, and by reason of
weakness and lamenesse be not able to occupy their old crafts, and be too
aged to learn new: of them I will speak nothing, for as much as Wars have
their ordinary recourse.

But let us consider those things that chance daily before our eyes. First,
there is a great number of Gentlemen, which cannot be Idleness, the m^t^e^ of
thieves.
content to live idle themselves, like Dorrers, of that which other have
labored for: their Tenants I mean, whom they poll and shave to the quick, by
raising Landlords by the way checked for Rent raising.
their Rents (for this only point of frugalitie do they use, men else through
their lavish and prodigal spending, able to bring themselves to very beggary)
these Gentlemen, I say, do not only live in idleness themselves, but also
carry about with them at their tails, a great flock or train Of idle
Servingmen co^^ thieves.
of idle and loytering Servingmen, which never learned any craft, whereby to get
their livings. These men as soon as their Master is dead, or be sick
themselves, be incontinent thrust out of doors: For Gentlemen had rather keep
idle persons, then sick men, and many times the dead man's He^re is not able to
maintain so great a Horse, and keep so many Serving-men is his Father did.
Th^^ in the mean season, they that be th^^ destitute of service, either starve
for hunger, or manfully play the Thieves: For what would you have them to do?
When they have wandered abroad so long, until they have worn threed-bare their
apparel, and also appaired their health; then Gentlemen, because of their pale
and sickly faces, and patched coats, will not take them into service. And
Husbandmen dare not set them a work: knowing well enough, that he is nothing
meet to do true and faithful service to a Poor man with a Spade and Mattocke
for small wages and hard fare, which being dain^ily and tenderly pampered up in
idleness and pleasure, was wont with a Sword and a Buckler by his side, to jet
through the street with a bragging look, and to think himself too good to
be any man's mate. Nay by Saint Mary sir (quoth the Lawyer) not so: For this
kind of men must we make most of; for in them as men of stouter stomachs,
bolder spirits, and manlier courages, then Handicrafts-men and Plough-men be,
does consist the whole power, strength, and puissance of our army, when we
must fight in battle. Forsooth sir, as well yo might say (quoth I) that for
Wars sake you must cherish Thieves: For surely you shall never lack thieves,
whiles you have them. No nor Thieves be Between soldiers and theeus small
diversity.
not the most false and faint-hearted Soldiers, nor soldiers be not the
cowardliest thieves: so well these two Crafts agree together. But this fault,
though it be much used among you, yet is it not peculiar to you only, but
common also almost to all Nations. Yet France besides this is troubled and
infected with a much sorer plague. The whole Realm is filled and besieged with
hi^ed Soldiers in peace time (if that be peace) which be brought in under the
same color and pretense, that has persuaded you to keep these idle Serving
men. For these wise-fooles, and very arch-dolts, thought the wealth of the
whole Country herein to consist, if there were ever in a readiness a strong
and a sure Garrison, specially of old practiced Soldiers; for they put no trust
at all in men unexercised. And therefore they must be forced to seek for
war, to the end they may ever have practiced Soldiers, and cunning
man-slayers, least that (as it is pretily said of Salust) their hands and their
minds through idleness or lack of exercise, should wax dull.

But how pernicious and pestilent What inconve^^e ^ces comes by continual
Garrisons of soldiers.
a thing it is, to maintain such Beast^, the Frenchmen, by their own harms
have learned, and the examples of the Romans, Carth^ginians, Syrians, and of
many other Countries do manifestly declare: For not only the Empire, but also
the field, and Cities of all these, by diverse occasions have been o^^r^u^ned
and destroyed of their ow^e armies, beforehand had in a readiness. Now how
unnecessary a thing this is, hereby it may appear: that the French soldiers,
which from their youth have been practiced and inured in feats of arms, do
not crack or advance themselves to have very often got the upper hand and
mastry of your new-made and unpractised soldiers. But in this point I will
not use many words, least perchance I may seem (...) grow the finest, and
therefore dearest Wool, there noble men, and gentlemen, yea, and certain
Abbots, holy men no doubt, not contenting themselves with the yearly revenues,
and profits, that were wont to grow to their forefathers and predecessors of
their lands, nor being content that they live in rest and pleasure, nothing
profiting; yea, much noying the Weal public, leave no ground for tillage:
they enclose all into pastures; they throw down houses; they pluck down
towns, and leave nothing standing, but only the Church to be madea
sheephouse. And as though you lost no small quantity of ground by forests,
chases, lands, and parkes, those good holy men turn all dwelling places and
all glebe land into desolation, and wilderness.

Therefore, that one covetous and unsatiable Cormorant, and very plague of his
native Country, Sheep-masters decayers of husband^^.
may compass about and enclose many thousands Akers of ground together within
one pale or hedge, the husbandmen be thrust out of their own, or else either
by covine and fraud, or violent oppression they be put besides it, or by wrongs
and injuries they be so wearied, that they be compelled to sell all: by one
means therefore or by other either by hook or by crook they must needs
depart away, poor, silly, wretched souls, men, women, husbands, wives,
fatherless children, widows, woeful mothers with their young babes, and the
whole household small in substance, and much in number, as husbandry requires
many hands.

Away they trudge, I say, out of their known and accustomed houses, finding no
place to rest in. All their household stuff, which is very little worth, though
it might well abide the sale: yet being suddenly thrust out, they be
constrained to sell it for a thing of naught. And The decay of husbandry
causes beggary, which is the mother of usg^^^^ds and thieves.
when they have wandered abroad till that be spent, what can they then do but
steal, and then justly pardy be hanged, or el^e go about a begging. And yet
then also they be cast into Prison as Vagabonds, because they go about and
work not: whom no man will set a work, though they never so willingly proffer
themselves thereto. For one Shepherd or Heardman is enough to eat up that
ground with cattle, to the occupying whereof, about husbandry, many hands were
requisite. And this is also the The cause of dearth of victuals
cause why victuals be now in many places dearer. Yea besides this the price of
wool is so risen, Woat inconvenience comes of dearth of Wool.
that poor folks, which were wont to work it, and make cloth thereof, be
now able to buy none at all. And by this means very many be forced to forsake
work, and to give themselves to idleness.

For after that so much ground was enclosed for pasture, an infinite multitude
of sheep died of the rot, such vengeance God took of their inordinate and
unsatiable covetousness, sending among the sheep that pestiferous murrein,
which much more justly should have fallen on the sheep-masters own heads. And
though the number of sheep increase never so fast, yet the price The cause of
dearth of Wool.
falls not one mite, because there be so few sellers: For they be almost all
come into a few rich men's hands, whom no need forces to sell before they lust,
and they lust not before they may sell as dear they lust. Now Dearth of
cattle, with the cause thereof.
the same cause brings in like dearth of the dearth of the other kinds of
Cattle, yea, and that so much the more, because that after Farms plucked
down, and husbandry decayed, there is no man that passes for the breeding of
young store: for these rich men bring not up the young ones of great cattle as
they do lambs.

But first they buy them abroad very cheap, and afterward when they be fatted
in their pastures, they sell them again exceeding dear. And therefore (as I
suppose) the whole incommodity hereof is not yet felt: for yet they make dearth
only in those places, where they sell. But when they shall fetch them away
from thence where they be bred faster then they can be bought up: then shall
there also be felt great dearth, store beginning there to fail; where the ware
is bought. Thus the unreasonable covetousness Dearth of victuals is the decay
of housekeeping; whereof c^s^eth beggary and thefs
of a few has turned that thing to the utter undoing of your Hand, in the
which thing the chiefefelicity of your Realm did consist: For this great
dearth of victuals causes men to keep as little houses, and as small
hospitality as they possible may, and to put away their servants: whither, I
pray you, but a begging; or else (which these gentle bloods, and stout
stomachs) will sooner set their minds unto stealing? Now to amend the matter,
to this wretched beggary, and miserable poverty, is joined great wantonness,
importunate superfluity, Excess in apparel and d^^t, a maintainer of beggary
and theft.
and excessive riot: For not only gentlemen's servants, but also handy craft
men; yea, and almost the Ploughmen of the Country, with all other sorts of
people, use much strange and proud new-fa^^gles in their apparel, and too much
prodigal riot, and sumptuous fare at their table. Baudes, Whores,
wine-tavernes, alehouses, and unlawful games* be very mothers of thee^es.


Now Baudes, queanes, whores, harlots, strumpets, brothelhouses, stews; and
yet another stews, wine-tauerns, alehouses, and tippling houses, with so many
naughty, lewd, and unlawful games; as dice, Cards, tables, tennis, boules,
coytes; do not all these send the haunters of them straight a stealing, when
their money i, gone? Cast ou^ these pernicious abominations; make a law, that
they which, plucked down f^rmes, and towns of husbandry, shall reedifie them,
or else yield, and vprender the possession thereof to such, as will go to the
cost of building them anew.

Suffer not these rich men to Richmen i^grossers and fore^tal^ers.
buy up all to ingro^^e, and forestall, and with their monopoly to keep the
market alone as please them. Let not so many be brought up in idleness; let
husbandry and tillage be restored; let Cloth-working be renewed, that there may
be honest labors for this idle sort to pass their time in profitably, which
hitherto either poverty has caused to be thieves, or else now be either
vagabonds, or idle Servingmen, and shortly will be thieves. Doubtless, unless
you The corrupt education of youth, a mother of theevery.
find a remedy for these enormities, you shall in vain advance your selves of
executing justice upon fellons: For this justice is more beautiful in
appearance, and more flourishing to the show, then either just or profitable:
For by suffering your youth wantonly, and viciously to be brought up, and to be
infected, even from their tender age, by little and little with vice: then a
Gods name to be punished, when they commit the same faults after being come to
man's state, which from their youth they were ever like to do. In this point, I
pray you, what other thing do you, then make thieves, and then punish them?
Now as I was thus speaking, the Lawyer began to make himself ready to answer,
and was determined with himself, to use the common fashion, and trade of
disputers, which be more diligent in rehearsing, then answering, as thinking
the memory worthy of the chief praise. Indeed Sir (quoth he) you have said
well, being but a stranger, and one that might rather hear something of these
matters, then have any exact or perfect knowledge of the same, as I will
incontinent by open proof make manifest and plain. For first I will rehearse
in order all that you have said: then I will declare wherein you be deceived,
through lack of knowledge, in all our fashions, manners, and customs* and
last of all, I will answer your arguments, and co^^^te them every one. First
therefore, I will He is worthily put to silence that ^s too full of words.
begin where I promised. Four things you seemed to me. Hold your peace, quoth
the Cardinal: for it appears that you will make no short answer, which make
such a beginning: Wherefore at this time, you shall not take the pains to make
your answer, but keep it to your next meeting, which I would be right glad,
that it might be to morrow next, unless either you, or Master Raphael have
earnest let. But now Master Raphael, I would very gladly hear of you, why you
think theft not worthy to be punished with death, or what other punishment you
can devise more exp^dient to the Weal public? for I am sure that you are not
of that mind, that you would have theft escape unpunished. For if now the
extreme punishment That theft ^ught not to ^^ punished by death.
of death cannot cause them to leave stealing, then if ruffians and robbers
should be sure of their lives, what violence, what fear, were able to hold
their hands from robbing; which would take the mittigation of the punishment,
as a very provocation to the mischief? Surely my Lord, I think it not right
nor justice, that the loss of money should cause the loss of man's life: For
mine opinion is, that all the goods in the world are not able to counterva^le
man's life.

But if they would thus say; that the breaking of Justice, and the
transgression of laws is recompensed with this punishment, and not the loss
of the money, then why may not this extreme and rigorous justice well be
called plain injury? For so Straight Laws not allowable.
cruel governance, so straight rules, and unmercifull laws be not allowable,
that if a small offense be committed, by and by the sword should be drawn: Nor
so stoicall ordinances are to be borne withal, as to count all offenses of
such equality, that the killing of a man, or the taking of his money from him
were both a matter, and the one no more heinous offense then the other:
between the which two if we have any respect to equity, no similitude or
equality consists. God commands us that we That man's law ought not to be
prejudicial to Gods law.
shall not kill. And be we then so hasty to kill a man for taking a little
money? And if a man would understand killing by this commandment of God, to be
forbidden after no larger wise, then man's constitutions define killing to be
lawful; then why may it not likewise by man's constitutions be determined after
what sort whoredom, fornication, and perjury may be lawful? For whereas by
the permission of God, no man neither has power to kill neither himself, no^
yet any other man: then if a law made by the consent of men, concerning
slaughter of men, ought to be of such strength, force, and virtue, that they
which contrary to the commandment of God have killed those, whom this
constitution of man commanded to be killed, be clean quit and exempt out of
the bonds and danger of Gods commandment? shall it not then by this reason
follow, that the power of Gods commandment shall extend no further, then man's
law does define, and permit? And so shall it come to pass, that in like
manner, man's constitutions in all things shall determine how far the
observation of all Gods commandments shall extend. To be short, Moses Law,
though it were ungentle and sharp, as a law that was given to bondmen, yea,
and them very obstinate, stubborn, and stiff-necked: yet it punished theft by
the purse, and not with death. And let us Theft is the old law not punished by
death.
not think that God in the new law of clemency and mercy, under the which he
rules us with fatherly gentleness, as his dear children has given us
greater scope and license to the execution of cruelty, one upon another. Now
you have heard the reasons, whereby I am persuaded, that this punishment is
unlawful. Furthermore, I think What in convenience ensues of punishing theft
with death.
that there is no body that knows not, how unreasonable, yea, how pernicious
a thing it is to the Weal public, that a thief and an homicide or murderer
should suffer equal and like punishment: Punishing of theft by death causes
theft to be a murderer.
For the thief seeing that man, that is condemned for theft in no less
^eopardy, nor judged to no less punishment, then him that is convict of
manslaughter; through this cogitation only he is strongly and forcibly
provoked, and in a manner constrained to kill him, whom else he would have but
robbed: For the murder being once done he is in le^^^ ^eare, and in more hope
that the ^^^^ shall not be bewrayed or known, seeing the party is now dead,
and ^id out of the way, which only might have vtt^^^^* and disclosed it.

But if he (...) and d^s^^i^^ (...) more danger and jeopardie, then if he had
committed but single felony. Therefore, while we go about with such cruelty
to make thieves afraid, we provoke them to kill good men. Now as touching this
question, what punishment were more commodious and better: that truly in my
judgment is easier to be found then what punishment might be worse. For why
should we doubt What lawful punishment may be devised for Theft.
that to be a good and a profitable way for the punishment of offenders, which
we know did in times past so long please the Romans, men in the administration
of a Weal public most expert, politic and cunning? Such as among them were
convict of great and heinous trespasses, How the Romans punished theft.
them they condemn into stone quarries, and into mines to dig metal, there
to be kept in chains all the day, of their life. But as concerning this
matter, I allow the ordinance of nation so well as that which I saw, whiles I
traveled abroad about the world, used in Persia among the people that commonly
be called the Polylerites: whose A worthy and commendable punishment of thieves
in the Weal public of the Polilerites in Persia.
land is both large and ample, and also well and wittily governed; and the
people in all conditions free, and ruled by their own laws, saving that they
pay a yearly tribute to the great King of Persia.

But because they be far from the Sea, compassed and enclosed, almost round
about with high mountains, and do content themselves with the fruits of their
own land, which is of it self very fertile and fruitful: for this cause
neither they go to other Countries, nor other come to them. And according to
the old custom of the Land, they desire not to enlarge the bounds of their
Dominions: and those that they have, by reason of the high hills, be easily
defended: and the tribute which they pay to their chief Lord and King, sets
them quit and free from warfare. Thus their life is commodious rather then
gallant, and may better be called happy or wealthy, then notable and famous:
For they be not known, as much as by name, I suppose saving only to their
next neighbor, and borders. They that in this Land be attained and convict of
Felony, make restitution of that which they stole, to the right A pr^vy nip
for them that do otherwise.
owner: and not (as they do in other lands) to the King: whom they think to
have no more right to the theefe-stollen thing, then the thief himself has.
But if the thing be lost or made away, then the value of it is paid of the
goods of such offenders, which else remains all whole Thieves condemned to be
c^^ ^^^ labo^ers.
to their wives, and children. And they themselves be condemned to be common
laborers, and unless the theft be very heinous, they be neither locked in
prison, nor fettered in gyues, but be united and go at large, laboring in the
common works. They that refuse labor, or go slowly or slack to their work,
be not only tied in chains, but also pricked forward with stripes. But being
diligent about their work, they live without check or rebuke. Every night
they be called in by name, and be locked in their chambers. Beside their daily
labor, their life is nothing hard or incommodious; their fare is indifferent
good, borne at the charges of the Weal public; because they be common
servants to the Commonwealth. But their charges in all places of the land is
not borne alike. For in some parts that which is bestowed upon them is gathered
of alms. And though that way be uncertain; yet the people be so full of mercy
and pity, that none is found more profitable or plentiful. In some places
certain Ladies be appointed hereunto: of the revenues whereof they be
maintained. And in some places every man gives a certain tribute for the same
use and purpose.

Again in some part of the Servingmen.
land these Servingmen (for so be these damned persons called) do not common
work, but as every private man needs labors, so he comes into the
marketplace, and there hireth some of them for meat and drink, and a certain
limited wages by the day, somewhat cheaper then he should hire a freeman. It
is also lawful for them to chastise the sloth of these servingmen with
stripes. By this means they never lack work, and besides the gaining of
their meat and drink, every one of them brings daily something into the
common Treasury. All and every one of them be apparelled in one color. Their
heads be not poled or shaven, but rounded a little above the ears. And the tip
of the one ear is cut off. Every one of them may take meat and drink of
their friends, and also a coat of their own color: but to receive money is
death, as well to the giver, as to the receiver. And no less jeopardy it is for
a freeman to receive money of a servingman, for any manner of cause: and
likewise for servingmen to touch weapons. The servingmen of every several
shiere be distinct and known from other, by their several and distinct
badges: which to cast away is death: as it is also to be seen out of the
precinct of their own shiere* or to talk with a servingman of another shiere.
And it is no less danger to them, for to intend to run away, then to An ^vi^
intent esteemed as the deed.
do it indeed. Yea, and to conceal such an enterprise in a servingman, it is
death; in a free man, servitude. Of the contrary part, to him that opens and
utters such counsels, be decreed large gifts: to a Freeman, a great sum of
money; to a Servingman freedom: and to them both forgiveness and pardon of
that they were of counsel in that pretense. So that it can never be so good
for them to go forward in their evil purpose, as by repentance to turn
back. This is the Law and order in this behalf, as I have showed you: Wherein
what humanity is used, how far it is from cruelty, and how commodious it is,
you do plainly perceive. For as much as the end The right ^^^ and intenn of
punishment.
of their wrath and punishment intends nothing else, but the destruction of
vices, and saving of men: with so using, and ordering them, that they cannot
choose but be good; and what harm soever they did before, in the residue of
their life, to make amends for the same.

Moreover it is so little feared, that they should turn again to their
vicious conditions, that wayfaring men will for their safeguard choose them to
their guides before any other, in every shiere changing and taking new: For if
they would commit robbery, they have nothing about them meet for that purpose.
They may touch no weapons: money found about them, should betray the robbery.
They should be no sooner taken with the manner, but forthwith they should be
punished. Neither can they have any hope at all to escape away by flying: For
how should a man, that in no part of his apparel is like other men, fly
privily and unknown, unless he would run away naked? Howbeit, so also
flying, he should be descri^d by the rounding of his head, and his c^re-marke.
But it is a thing to be doubted, that they will lay their heads together, and
conspire against the Weal public. No, no, I warrant you: For the Servingmen
of one shiere alone, could never hope to bring to pass such an enterprise,
without solyciting, entising, and alluring the Servingmen of many other sh^eres
to take their parts. Which thing is to them so impossible, that they may not as
much as speak or talk together, or salute one another. No, it ^^ not to be
thought that they would make their own Countrymen and companions of their
counsel in such a matter, which they know well should be jeopardy to the
concealor thereof, and great commodity and goodness to the opener and detector
of the same. Whereas on the other part, there is none of them all hopeless or
in despair to recover again his former estate of freedom, by humble
obedience, by patient suffering, and by giving good tokens and likelihood of
himself, that he will ever after that, live like a true, and an honest man.

For every year diverse of them be restored to their freedom, through the
commendation of patience. When I had thus spoken, saying moreover, that I could
see no cause why this order might not be had in England, with much more profit,
then the Justice with the Lawyer so highly praised. Nay, quoth the Lawyer this
could never be ^o stablished in England, but that it must needs bring the Weal
public into great jeopardy and hazard. And as he was thus saying, he shaked
his head, and made a wry mouth, and so he held his peace. And all that were
present, with one assent agreed to his saying. Well, quoth the Cardinal, yet
it were hard to judge with out a proof, whether this order would do well here
or no. But when the sentence of death is given, if then the King should command
execution to be referred and spared, and would prove this order and fashion,
taking away the privilege of Sanctuaries: if then the proof should declare
the thing to be good and profitable, then it were well done that it were
stablished: Else then condemned and reprived persons may as well be put to
death after this proof, as when they were first cast. Neither any jeopardy can
in the mean space grow hereof. Yea, and me thinks that these Vagabonds may
very well be ordered after the same (...)
fashion, against whom we have hitherto made so many laws, The ^^vering
judgement^ of (...).
and so little prevailed. When the Cardinal had thus said, then every man gave
great praise to my sayings, which a little before they had disallowed. But most
of all was esteemed that which was spoken of Vagabonds, because it was the
Cardinals addition. I cannot tell whether it were best to rehearse the
communication that followed; for it was not very sad. But yet you shall hear
it, for there was no evil in it, and partly it pertained to the matter
before-said. There chanced to stand by a certain jeasting Parasite, or
scoffer, which would seem to resemble and counterfeit, the fool. But he did
in such wise counterfeit, that he was almost the very same indeed that he
labored to present: he so studied with words and sayings, brought forth so out
of time and place, to make sport and more laughter, that he himself was oftener
laughed at, then his jeasts were. Yet the foolish fellow brought out now and
then such indifferent and reasonable stuffe^, that he made the Proverb true,
which says: He that shoots often, at the last shall h^^ the mark: So that
when one of the company said, that through my communication, a good order was
found for Thieves, and that the Cardinal also had well provided for Vagabonds,
so that only remained some good provision to be made for them that through
sickness and age were fallen into poverty, and were become so impotent and
unwieldy, that they were not able to work for their living. Tush (quoth he) let
me alone with them: you shall see me do well enough with them. For I had
rather then any good, that this kind of people Sick, aged, impotent persons and
begge^s.
were driven somewhere out of my sight, they have so sore troubled me many
times and often when they have with their lamentable reares begged money of me:
and yet they could never to my mind so tune their song, that thereby they ever
got of me one farthing. For evermore the one of these chanced: either that I
would not, or else that I could not, because I had it not. Therefore now they be
waxed wife: For when they see me go by, because they will not leese their
labor, they let me pass, and say not one word to me. So they look for
nothing of me, no in good sooth; no more, then if I were a Priest, or a Monk.
But I will make a Law, that all A common Proverb among Beggars.
these beggars shall be distributed, and bestowed into houses of religion. The
men shall be made Lay brethren, as they call them; and the women, Nuns.
Hereat the Cardinal smiled, and allowed it in jest, yea, and all the residue
in good earnest.

But a certain Friar, graduate in divinity, took such pleasure and delight in
this jeasts of Priests and Monks, that he also (being else a man of gr^sly and
A merry talk between a Friar and a Fool.
stern gravity) began merrily and wantonly to jest and taunt. Nay, (quoth he)
you shall not be so rid and dispatched of beggars, unless you make some
provision also for us Friars. Why, quoth the ^easter, that is done already, for
my Lord himself set a very good order for you, when he decreed, that Vagabonds
should be kept straight and set to work: for you be the greatest and veriest
Vagabonds that be. This jest also when they saw the Cardinal not disprove it,
every man took it gladly, saving only the Friar: For he (and that no
mervaile) being thus touched on the quick, and hit on the gaul, so fretted,
so fumed, and cha^ed at it, and was in such a rage, that he could not refrain
himself from ch^ding, scolding, raising, and reviling. He called the fellow
Ribbald, villain, javell, backbiter, slaunderer, and the child of perdi^ion:
citing therewith terrible threarnings out of holy Scripture. Then the jeasting
sco^^er began to play the sco^^er indeed, and verily he was good at that* for
he could play a part in that play, no man better. Patient your self, good
Master Friar (quoth he) and be not angry; for Scripture says: In your patience
you shall save your souls. Then the Friar (for I will rehearse his own very
Talk qualified according to the person that speaks.
words:) No gallows wretch, I am not angry (quoth he) or at the leastwise, I
do not sin: for the Psalmist says. Be you angry and sin not. Then the
Cardinal spoke gently to the Friar, and desired him to quiet himself. No my
Lord (quoth he) I speak not but of a good zeal as I ought; for holy men had a
good zeal: Wherefore it is said; The zeal of thy house has eaten me. And it
is sung in y^ Church: The scorners of Hel^z^us, whiles he went up into the
house of God, felt the zeal of the bald, as peradventure this scorning
villain R^bbauld shall feel. You do it (quoth the Cardinal) perchance of a
good mind and affection: but me thinks you should do, I cannot (...) and
esteem me and my sayings. I ensure you, Master Raphael, quoth I, I took great
delectation in hearing you: all things that you said, were spoken so wittily
and so pleasantly. And me thought me self to be in the mean time, not only
at home in my Country, but also through the pleasant remembrance of the
Cardinal, in whose house I was brought up of a Child, to wax a child again.
And friend Raphael, though I did bear very great love toward you before, yet
seeing you do so earnestly favor this man, you will not believe how much my
love toward you is now increased. But yet, all this notwithstanding, I can by
no means change my mind, but that I must needs believe, that you, if you be
disposed, and can find in your heart to follow some Princes Court, shall with
your good counsels greatly help and further the Commonwealth. Wherefore there
is nothing more appertaining to your duty, that is to say, to the duty of a
good man. For whereas your Plato judges that weale-publikes shall by this
means attain perfect felicity, either if Philosophers be Kings, or ^lse if
Kings give themselves to the study of Philosophy; how far I pray you, shall
Commonwealths then be from this felicity, if Philosophers will vouchsafe to
instruct Kings with their good counsel? They be not so unkind (quoth he) but
they would gladly do it, yea, many have done it already in books that they
have put forth, if Kings and Princes would be willing and ready to follow good
counsel. But Plato doubtless did well foresee, unless Kings themselves
would apply their minds to the study of Philosophy, that else they would never
thoroughly allow the counsel of Philosophers, being themselves before even from
their tender age infected, and corrupt with perverse and evil opinions, Which
thing Plato himself proved true in king Dyonise, If I should propose to any
King wholesome decrees, doing my endeavor to pluck out of his mind the
pernicious original causes of vice and naughtiness, think you not that I
should forthwith either be driven away, or else made a laughing stock? Well,
suppose I were with the French King* and there sitting in his Counsel, whiles
in that most secret consultation, the King himself there being present in hi^
own person, they beat their brains, and search the very bottomes of their
wits, to discuss by what craft and means the King may still keep Millaine,
and draw to him again fugitive The French men privily be counseled from the
desire of Italy.
Naples: and then how to conquer the Venetians, and how to bring under his
jurisdiction all Italy; then how to win the Dominion of Flanders, Brabant,
and all Burgundy; with diverse other Lands, whose Kingdoms he has long ago
in mind and purpose invaded. Here, whiles one counsaileth to conclude a League
of Peace with the Venetians; so long to endure, as shall be thought meet and
expedient for their purpose, and to make them also of their Council; yea and
besides that, to give them part of the prey, Which afterward, when they have
brought their purpose about, after their own minds, they may require and
claim again? Another thinks best to hyre the Germans: Lanceknights.
Another, would have the favor of the Switzers won with money: Another
advice, is to appease the puissant power of the Emperors Majesty with Gold, as
with a most pleasant and acceptable sacrifice: Whiles another gives counsel
to make peace with the King of Arragon, and to restore unto him his own
Kingdom of Navarre, as a full assurance of of peace: Another comes in with
his five eggs, and advises to hook in the King of Castile, with some hope of
affinity, or alliance; and to bring to their part certain Peers of his
Court, for great Pensions.

Whiles they all stay at the chiefest doubt of all, what to do in the mean
time with England; and yet agree all in this, to make with the Englishmen, and
with most sure and strong bonds to bind that weak and feeble friendship, so
that they must be called friends, and had in suspicion as enemies. And that
therefore the Scots must be had in a readiness, as it were in a standing,
ready at all occasions (in case the Englishmen should stir never so little)
incontinent to set upon them. And moreover, privily and secretly (for openly it
may not be done, by the Truce that is taken;) privily therefore, I say, to make
much of some Peer of England, that is banished his Country, which must claim
Title to the Crown of the Realm, and affirm himself just Inheritor thereof:
that by this subtle means they may hold to them the King, in whom else they
have but small trust and affiance.

Here, I say, where so great and high matters be in consultation* where so many
noble and wise men counsel their King only to War: here if I, silly man,
should rise up, and will them to turn over the Lea^e, and learn a new Lesson,
saying; That my counsel is not to meddle with Italy, but to tarry still at
home; and that the Kingdom of France alone is almost greater, then that it may
well begoverned of one man; so that the King should not need to study how to
get more: And then should propose unto them the Decrees of the People that be
called the Ach^riens, which be situate over against the Island of Vtopia, on
the South-east side.

These Ach^riens once made A notable Example, and worthy to be followed.
war, in their Kings quarrel, for to get him another Kingdom which he laid
claim unto, and advanced himself right Inheritor to the Crown thereof, by
the Title of an old alliance. At the last, when they had gotten it, and saw
that they had even as much vexation and trouble in keeping it, as they had in
getting it; and that either their new conquered Subjects by sundry occasions
were making daily Insurrections to rebel against them, or else that other
Countries were continually with diverse In^odes and forraines invading them; so
that they were ever Fighting, either for them, or against them, and never could
break up the^ Camps: Seeing themselves in the mean season, pilled and
impoverished, their money carried out of the Realm; their own men killed, to
maintain the glory of another Nation: when they had no War, peace nothing
better then war, by reason that their people in war had so injured
themselves to corrupt and wicked manners, that they had taken a delight and
pleasure in robbing and stealing; that through man^aughter, they had gathered
boldness to mischief; that their Laws were had in contempt, and nothing set
by or regarded; that their King being troubled with the charge and governance
of two Kingdoms, could not, nor was ^ot able perfectly to discharge his office
toward them both: seeing again, that all these evils and troubles were
endless, at the last laid their heads together, and like faithful and loving
subjects gave to their King free choice and liberty to keep still the one of
these two Kingdoms, whether he would; alleging, that he was not able to keep
both, and that they were more then might well be governed of half a King, for
as much as no man would be content to take him for his Mulettor, that keeps
another man's Mules besides his. So this good Prince was constrained to be
content with his old Kingdom, and to give over the new to one of his friends,
who shortly after was violently driven out.

Furthermore, if I should declare unto them, that all this busy preparance to
war, whereby so many Nations for his sake should be brought into a
troublesome hurly-burly, when all his Coffers were emptied, his Treasures
wasted, and his people destroyed, should at the length through some mischance,
be in vain, and to none effect: and that therefore it were best for him to
content himself with his own Kingdom of France, as his forefathers and
predecessors did before him; to make much of it, to enrich it, and to make it
as flourishing as he could; to endeavor himself to love his subjects, and
again to be beloved of them; willingly to live with them, peaceably to govern
them, and with other Kingdoms not to meddle, seeing that which he has already
is even enough for him, yea, and more then he can well turn him to.

This mine advice, Master Moore, how think you, would it not be hardly taken?
So God help me, not very thankfully* (quoth I.) Well let us proceed then
(quoth he.) Suppose that some King and his Council were together, whetting
their wlts, and devising what subtle craft they might invent, to enrich the
King with great Treasures of Money.

First, one coun saileth to raise Enhancing and embesing of Coins.
and enhance the valuation of Money, when the King must pay any; and again, to
call down the value of Coin to lesle then it is worth, when he must receive
or gather any: For thus, great sums shall be paid with a little money; and
where little is due, much shall be received.

Another counsaileth to feign Counterfes Wars.
War: that when under this color and pretense the King has gathered great
abundance of money, he may, when it shall please him, make peace with great
solemnity, and holy ceremonies, to blind the eyes of the poor Communalty, as
taking pity and compassion forsooth upon man's blood, like a loving and a
merciful Prince.

Another puts the King The (...) of old Laws
in remembrance of certain old and mouth-eaten Laws, that of long ti^e have
not been put in execution, which because no man can remember that they* were
made, every man has transgressed. The fines of these Laws he counsaileth the
King to require: for there is no way so profitable, nor more honorable, as
that which has a show and color of Justice.

Another advises him to forbid many things under great Penalties Restraint
and Fines, specially such things as is for the peoples profit not to be used;
and afterward, to dispense for money with them which by this prohibition
sustain loss and damage: For by this means, the favor of the people is won,
and profit rises two ways: first, by taking forfeits of them, whom
covetousness of gaynes has brought in danger of this Statute; and also by
selling Privileges and Licenses: which Selling of Licenses.
the better that the Prince is* forsooth, the dearer he sells them, as one
that is loath to grant to any private person any thing that is against the
profit of his People; and therefore may set none, but at an exceeding dear
price.

Another gives the king counsel to endanger unto ^ns Grace the Judges of the
Realm, that he may have them ever on his side, and that they may in every
matter dispute and reason for the Kings right. Yea, and further to call them
into his Palace, and to require them, there to argue and discuss his matters
in his own presence: So there shall be no matter of his so openly wrong and
unjust, wherein one or other of them, either because he will have something to
allege and object; or that he is ashamed to say that which is said already; or
else to pick a thank with his Prince, will not find some hole open to set a
snare in, wherewith to take the contrary part in a trip.

Thus whiles the Judges cannot agree amongst themselves, reasoning and arguing
of that which is plain enough, and bringing the manifest truth in doubt: in
the mean season, the King may take a fit occasion to understand the Law as
shall most make for his advantage, whereunto all other for shame, or for fear
will agree. Then the Judges may be bold to pronounce on the Kings side: for
he that gives sentence for the King, cannot be without a good excuse: For it
shall be sufficient for him to have equity on his part, or the bare words of
the Law, a wrythen and wrested understanding of the same (or else, which with
good and just Judges is of greater force then all laws be) the Kings
indisputable Prerogative. To conclude, all the Counselors agree and consent
together with the The saying of rich Crassus.
rich Crassus, That no abundance of gold can be sufficient for a Prince, which
must keep and maintain an Army: further more that a King, though he would,
can do nothing unjustly.

For all that men have, yea, also the men themselves be all his. And that every
man has so much of his own, as the Kings gentleness has not taken from him.
And that it shall be most for the Kings advantage, that his subjects have very
little or nothing in their possession, as whose safeguard does herein consist,
that his people do not wax wanton and wealthy through riches and liberty,
because where these things be, there men be not wont patiently to obey hard,
unjust, and unlawful commandments. Whereas on the other part, need and
poverty does hold down and keep under stout courages, and makes them patient
perforce, taking from them bold and rebelling stomachs.

Here again if I should rise up, and boldly affirm, that all these counsels
be to the King dishonor and reproach, whose honor and safety is more and
rather supported and vpholden by the wealth and riches of his people, then by
his own Treasures? and if I should declare that the communalty chooses their
king for their own sake, and not for his sake: to the intent, that through his
labor and study they might all live wealthy, safe from wrongs and injuries:
and that therefore the King ought to take more care for the wealth of his
people, then for his own wealth, even as the office and duty of a shepherd is
in that he is a shepherd, to feed his sheep rather then himself. For as
touching this, that they think the defense and maintenance of peace to consist
in poverty of the people, the thing it self shows that they be far out of
the way: For where shall a man find Poverty the mother of debate, and decay of
Realms.
more wrangling, quarrelling, brawling and chiding, then among Beggars? Who be
more desirous of new mutations and alterations, then they that be not content
with the present state of that life? Or finally, who be bolder stomacked to
bring all in a burly-burly (thereby trusting to get some wind-fall) then they
that have now nothing to leese? And if any King were so smally regarded, and so
lightly esteemed; yea, so be-hated of his Subjects, that other ways he could
not keep them in awe, but only by open wrongs, by polling and shaving, and by
bringing them to beggerie; surely, it were better for him to forsake his
Kingdom then to hold it by that means: whereby though the name of a King be
kept, yet the Majesty is lost: For it is against the dignity of a King to have
rule over Beggars, but rather over rich and wealthy men. Of this mind was the
hardy and courageous Fabrice, A wort^y saying of Fabrice.
when he said; that He had rather be a Ruler of rich men, then be rich himself.

And verily, one man to live in pleasure and wealth, whiles all all other weep
and smart for it, that is the part, not of a King, but a jaylour. To be short,
as he is a foolish Physician, that cannot cure his patients disease, unless he
cast him in another sickness; so he that cannot amend the lives of his
subjects, but by taking from them the wealth and commodity of life: he must
needs grant, that he knows not the wealth and commodity of life; he must
needs grant, that he knows not the feate how to govern men, But let him
rather amend his own life, renounce dishonest pleasures, and forsake pride: for
these be the chief vices that cause him to run in the contempt or hatred of
his people. Let him live of his own, ^urting no man: Lee him do cost not above
his power: Let him restrain wickedness: Let him prevent vices, and take away
the occasions of offenses by wellordering his subjects, and not by suffering
wickedness to increase, afterward to be punished: Let him not be too hasty in
calling again laws which a custom has abrogated; especially such as have
been ^ong forgotten, and never lacked nor needed. And let him never under the
cloak and ^^^tence of transgression, take such fines and forfeits, as no Judge
will suffer a private person to take, as unjust and full of guile.

Here if I should bring forth before them the Law of the Macarie^s, A stra^g^
and notable law of the M^^^ri^^s
which be not far distant from Vtop^a, whose King, the day of his Coronatio^
is bound (by a solemn Oath, that he shall never at any time have in his
Treasure above a thousand pound of Gold or Silver. They say, that a very good
King, which took far more care for the wealth and commodity of his Country,
then for the enriching of himself, made this law to be a stop and bar to
kings from heaping and whording up so much money as might impoverish their
people: For he foresaw that this sum of treasure would suffice to support the
king in battle against his own people, if they should chance to rebel: and
also to maintain his wars against the invasions of his foreign enemies.
Again, he perceived the same stock of money to be too little and insufficient
to encourage and enable him wrongfully to take away other men's goods: which was
ye chief cause why y^ law was made. Another cause was this. He thought y^ by
this provision his people should not lack money, wherewith to maintain their
daily occupying and chaffer.

And seeing the King could not choose but lay out and bestow all that came in
at oue the prescript sum of his stock, he thought he would seek no
occasions to do his subjects injury. Such a King shall be feared of evil men
and loved of good men. These, and such other informations, it I should use
among men wholly inclined and given to the contrary part, how deaf ears
think you shall I have? Deaf hearers doubtless (quoth I.) And in good faith
no mervaile. And to be plain with you, truly I cannot allow that such
communication shall be used, or such counsel given, as you be sure shall never
be regarded nor received: For how can so strange informations be profitable, or
how can they be beaten into their heads, whose minds be already prevented, with
clean contrary persuasions? This School Philosophy is not unpleasant among
friends in familiar communication, but School Philosophy in the consultations
of Princes has no place.
in the counsels of Kings, where great matters be debated and reasoned with
great authority, these things have no place.

That is it which I meant (quoth he) when I said Philosophy had no place among
Kings. Indeed (quoth I) this School philosophy has not: which thinks all
things meet for every place. But there is another Philosophy more civil, which
knows, as ye would say, her own stage, and thereafter ordering and behaving
her self in the play that she has in hand, plays her part accordingly with
comeliness, uttering nothing out of due order and fashion. And this is the
Philosophy that you must use. Or else whiles a Comody of A ^ine and fit
s^^ilitud^
Plautus is playing, and the vild bondmen scoffing and trifling among
themselves, if you should suddenly come upon the Stage in a Philosophers
apparel, and rehearse out of Octavia the place wherein Seneca disputes with
Nero: had it not been better for you to have played the dumme person, then by
rehearsing A d^mme player.
that, which served neither for the time nor place to have made such a
tragical Comedy or gallimalfry: For by bringing in other stuff that nothing
appertains to the matter, you must needs mar and prevent the play that is
in hand, though the stuff that you bring be much better. What part soever you
have taken upon you, play that as well as you can and make the best of it: And
do not therefore disturb and bring out of order the whole matter, because
that another, which is merrier and better comes to your remembrance.

So the case stands in a Commonwealth: and so it is in the consultations of
Kings and Princes. If evil opinions and naughty persuasion, cannot be utterly
and quite plucked out of their hearts, if you cannot even as you would remedy
vices, which use and custom has confirmed: yet for this cause you must not
leave and forsake the Commonwealth: you must not forsake the Ship in a
tempest, because you cannot rule and keep down the winds. No nor you must not
labor to drive into their heads new and strange informations, which you know
well shall be nothing regarded with them that be of clean contrary minds. But
you must with a crafty wile and subtle train study and endeavor your self, as
much as in you lies, to handle the matter wittily and handsomely for the
purpose, and that which you cannot turn to good, so to order it that it be not
very bad: For it is not possible for all things to be well, unless all men
were good: which I think will not be yet these good many years. By this means
(quoth he) nothing else will be brought to pass; but but whiles I go about to
remedy the madness of others, I should be even as mad as they: For if I should
speak things that be true, I must needs speak such things: but as for to
speak false things, whether that be a Philosophers part or no I cannot tell,
truly it is not my part. How beit this communication of mine though per
adventure it may seem unpleasant to them, yet cannot I see why it should seem
strange, or foolishly newfangled. If so be that I should speak those things
that PLATO faineth in his Weal public, or that The Vto pi^^ weal public.
the Vtopians do in theirs, these things though they were (as they be indeed)
better, yet they might seem spoken out of place. For as much as here amongst
us, every man has his possessions several to himself, and there all things
be in commen.

But what was in my communication contained, that might not, and ought not in
any place to be spoken? Saving that to them which have thoroughly decreed and
determined with themselves to run headlong on the contrary way, it cannot be
acceptable and pleasant, because it calls them back, and shows them the
jeopardies: Verily if all things that evil and vicious manners have caused to
seem vnconvenient and naught should be refused, as things unmeet and
reproachful, then we must among Christian people wink at the most part of all
those things which Christ taught us, and so straightly forbad them to be
wincked at, that those things also which he whispered in the ears of his
Disciples, he commanded to be proclaimed in open houses. And yet the most part
of them is more dissident from the manners of the world now a days, then my
communication was. But Preachers silly and wily men following (...) swarm into
the streets, and daily wet to the skin with rain, and yet cannot persuade
them to go out of the rain, and to take their house, knowing well, that if
they should go out to them, they should nothing prevail, nor win ought by
it, but with them be wet also in the rain, they do keep themselves within
their houses, being content that they be safe themselves, seeing they cannot
remedy the folly of the people. How be it doubtless Master Moore (to speak
truly as my mind gives me) where possessions be private, where money bears
all the stroke, it is hard and almost impossible that there the Weal public
may justly be governed, and prosperously flourish; unless you think thus:
That Justice is there executed, where all things come into the hands of evil
men; or that prosperity there flourishes, where all is divided among a few:
which few nevertheless do not lead their lives very wealthily, and the
residue live miserably, wretchedly, and beggarly.

Wherefore, when I consider with my self, and weigh in my mind, the wise and
godly ordinances of the Vtopians; among whom, with very few laws all things be
so well and wealthy ordered, that virtue is had in a price and estimation, and
yet all things being there common, every man has abundance of every thing.
Ag^^^^e, on the other part, when I compare with them so many Nations ever
making new laws, yet none of them all well and sufficiently furnished with
laws: where every man calls that he has gotten, his own proper and private
goods, where so many new laws daily made, be not sufficient for every man to
enjoy, defend, and know from another man's that which he calls his own: which
thing the infinite controversies in the law, daily rising, never to be ended,
painly declare to be true. These things (I say) when I consider with my self,
I hold well with Plato willed all things in a Commonwealth to be common.
Plat^, and do nothing mervaile that he would make no laws for them, that
refused those laws, whereby all men should have and enjoy equal portions of
wealths and commodities.

For the wise man did easily foresee, this to be the one and only way to the
wealth of a communalty, it equality of all things should be brought in and
stablished. Which I think is not possible to be observed, where every man's
goods be proper and peculiar to himself: For where every man under certain
titles and pretenses draws, and plucketh to himself as much as he can; so
that a few divide among themselves all the whole riches, be there never so much
abundance and store, there to the residue is left lack and poverty.

And for the most part it chances, that this latter sort is more worthy to
enjoy that sta^e of wealth, then the other be: because the rich men be covetous
crafty, and unprofitable. On the other part, the poor be lowly, simple, and by
their daily labor, more profitable to the commonwealth, then to themselves.
Thus I do fully persuade my self, that no equal and just distribution of
things can be made, nor that perfect-wealth shall ever be among men, vnle^le
this propriety be exiled and banished. But so long as it shall continue, so
long shall remain among the most and best part of men, the heavy and
inevitable burden of poverty and wretchednesle. Which, as I grant that it may
be somewhat cased, so I utterly deny that it can wholly to be taken away: For
if there were a Statute made, that no man should have in his stock above a
prescript and appointed sum of money: if it were by certain Laws decreed,
that neither the King should be of too great power, neither the People too
haughty and wealthy; and that Offices should not by inordinate suit, or by
bribes and gifts: that they should neither be bought nor sold; nor that it
should be needful for the Officers, to be at any cost or charge in their
Offices: For so occasion ^^ given to them by fraud and ravine to gather up
their money again; and by reason of gifts and bribes, the Offices be given to
rich men, which should r^ther have been executed of Wise men: By such laws I
say, like as Sick bodies that be desperate and past cure, be wont with
continual good cherishing to be kept and botched up for a time: so these evils
also may be lightened and mitigated. But that they may be perfectly cured,
brought to a good and upright state, it is not to be hoped for, whiles every
man is Master of his own to himself. Yea, and whiles you go about to do
your cure of one part, you shall make bigger the sore of another part, so the
help of one causes another harm: for as much, as nothing can be given to any
one unless it be taken from another.

But I am of a contrary opinion (quoth I) for me thinks that men shall never
there live wealthy, where all things be common: For how can there be abundance
of goods, or of any thing, where every man withdraws his hand from labor?
Whom the regard of his own gains drives not to work, but the hope that he
has in other men's travailes makes him sloathfull.

Then when they be pricked with poverty, and yet no man can by any law or right
defend that for his own, which he has gotten with the labor of his own hands,
shall not there of necessity be continual sedition and bloodshed? Specially
the authority and reverence of Magistrates, being taken away, which, what place
it may have with such men among whom is no difference, I cannot devise. I
marvel not (quoth he) that you be of this opinion. For you conceive in your
mind either none at all, or else a very false Image and similitude of this
thing. But if you had been with me in Vtopia, and had presently seen their
fashions and laws, as I did, which lived there five years, and more, and would
never have come thence, but only to make that new land known here: Then
doubtless you would grant, that you never saw people well ordered, but only
there. Surely (quorh Master PETER) it shall be hard for you to make me believe,
that there is better order in that New Land, then is here in the Countries that
we know. For good wits be as well here as there: and I think our
Commonwealths be ancienter then theirs; wherein long use and experience has
found out many things commodious for man's life; besides that many things here
among us have been found by chance, which no wit could ever have devised. As
touching the ancientnesse (quoth he) of Commonwealths, then, you might better
judge if you had read the Histories, and Chronicles of that land, which, if we
may believe, Cities were there, before men were here.

Now what thing soever hitherto by wit has been devised, or found by chance,
that might be as well there as here. But I think verily, though it were so
that we did pass them in wit: yet in study, in travel, and in laboursome
endeavor, they far pass us: For (as their Chronicles testify) before our
arrival there they never heard any thing of us, whom they call the
Vltraequinoctialles: saving that once about 1200 years ago, a certain Ship
was lost by the I^^ of Vtopia, which was driven thither by tempest. Certain
Romans and Egyptians were cast on Land. Which after that never went thence.

Mark now what profit they took of this one occasion through diligence and
earnest travail. There was no craft nor science within the Empire of Rome
whereof any profit could rise, but they either learned it of these strangers,
or else of them, taking occasion to search for it, found it out. So great
profit was it to them that ever any went thither, from hence. But if any like
chance before this has brought any man from thence hither, that is as quite
out of remembrance, as this also perchance in time to come shall be forgotten,
that ever I was there. And like as they quickly almost at the first meeting,
made their own, whatsoever is among us wealthily devised: So I suppose it
would be long before we should receive any thing, that among them is better
instituted then among us.

And this I suppose is the chief cause why their commonwealths be wiselyer
governed, and do flourish in more wealth then ours, though we neither in wit
nor riches be their inferiors. Therefore gentle Master Raphael (quoth I) I
pray you and beseech you describe unto us the Island. And study not to be
short: but declare largely in order their Grounds, their Rivers, their Cities,
their People, their Manners, their Ordinances, their Laws, and to be short,
all things that you shall think us desirous to know. And you shall think us
desirous to know whatsoever we know not yet.

There is nothing (quoth he) that I will do gl^dlier. For all these things I
have fresh in mind: But the matter requires leisure. Let us go in therefore
(quoth I) to dinner, and afterward we will bestow the time at our pleasure.
Content (quoth he) be it. So we went in and dined.

When dinner was done, we came into the same place again, and sat us down
upon the same bench, commanding our servants that no man should trouble us.
Then I and Master Peter Giles, desired Master Raphael to perform his promise.

He therefore seeing us desirous and willing to hearken to him, when he had
sat still and paused a little while, musing and bethinking himself, thus he
began to speak.

The end of the first Book.
THE SECOND BOOK of the Communication of RAPHAEL HYTHLODAY, concerning the
best State of a COMMONWEALTH.
Containing the Description of VTOPIA, with a large declaration of the politic
government, and of all the good Laws and Orders of the same Island.
THe Island of VTOPIA, The fight and fashion of the new Island Vtopia.
contains in breadth in the middle part of it (for there it is broadest) 200
miles. Which breadth continues through the most part of the Land, saving that
by little it comes in, and waxes narrower toward both the ends: which
fetching about a circuit or compass of 500 miles, do fashion y^ whole Island
like to the new Moon. between these two corners the Sea runs in, dividing
them a funder by the distance of 11 miles or there abouts, and there
surmounteth into a large Sea, which by reason that the Land on every side of
passes it about, and sheltreth it from the winds, is not rough, nor mounteth
not with great waves, but almost flows quietly not much unlike a great
standing poole: and makes well-nigh all the space within the belly of the Land
in manner of a haven: and to the great commodity of the inhabitants, receives
in Ships toward every part of the land. The forefront, or frontiers of the two
corners, what with bords and shelves and what with rock, be jeopardous and
dangerous. In the middle distance between them both, stands up above the
water a great Rock, which therefore it is is nothing perilous because it is in
sight. Upon the top of this rock is A place naturally ^eaced, needs one
Garrison.
a fair and strong tower builded, which they hold with a garrison of men.
Other rocks there be lying hid under the water, which therefore be dangerous.
The channels be known only to themselves. And therefore it seldom chances
that any Stranger unless he be guided by an Vtopian, can come into this haven.
Insomuch that they themselves could scarcely enter without jeopardy, but that
their way is directed and ruled by certain Land-markes standing on the shore.
By turning A politic devise in the changing landmarkes.
translating, and removing the marks into other places, they may destroy their
enemies navies, be they never so many. The outside or utter circuit of the
land, is also full of havens, but the landing is so surely fenced, what by
nature, and what by workmanship of men's hands, that a few defenders may drive
back many armies Howbeit as they say, and as the fashion of the place it self
does partly show, it was not ever compassed about with the Sea. But King
VTOPVS, whose name, as conqueror, the Island bears: The Island of Vtopis, so
named of King Vtopi^.
For before this time it was called Abrax^) which also brought the rude and
wild people to that excellent perfection in all good fashions, humanity, and
civil gentleness, wherein they now go beyond all the people in the world:
even at his arriving and entering upon the land, forthwith obtaining the
victory, caused fifteen miles space of vplandish ground, where the Sea had no
passage, to be cut and dug up. And so wrought the Sea round about the Land.
He set to this work: not only the inhabitants of this Island (because they
should not think it done in contumely and despite) but also all his own
soldiers.

Thus the work being divided into so great a number of workmen, Many hands
make light work.
was with exceeding marvailous speed dispatched. Insomuch that the borderers
which at the first began to mock, and to jest as the vain enterprise, then
turned their derision to mervaile at the success, and to fear. There be in
the Island fifty four large and fair Cities, or shiere towns, Cities in
Vtopia. Similitude causes concord.
agreeing altogether in one tongue, in like manners, institutions, and laws,
they be all set and situate alike, and in all points fashioned alike, as far
forth as the place or plot suffers. A mean distance between City and City.


Of these Cities, they that be nighest together be twenty four miles asunder.
Again, there is none of them distant from the next, above one days journey a
foot. There come yearly to Amaurote, out of every City, three old men wise and
well experienced, there to entreat and debate, of the common matters of the
Land. For this City (because it stands just in the midst of the Island, and is
therefore most meet for the Ambassadors of all parts of the Realm) is taken
for the chief and head City. The The distribution of Lands. But this now a
days is the ground of all mischief.
precincts and bounds of the Shieres, be so commodiously appointed out, and set
forth for the Cities, that none of them all has of any side les^e then twenty
miles of ground, and of some side also much more, as of that part where the
Cities be of further distance a sunder. None of the Cities desire to enlarge
the bounds and limits of their ^^ir^s. For they count themselves rather the
good husbands, then the Husbandry and tillage, chiefly and principally regarded
and advanced.
owners of their lands. They have in the Country in all parts of the shiere,
houses or f^rmes builded, well appointed and furnished with all sorts of
instruments and tools belonging to Husbandry. These houses be inhib^^^d of the
Citizens, which co^ithe^^o dwell by course. No household or Farm in the
Country has fewer then fifty persons men and women, besides two bondmen,
which be all under the rule and order of the good man, and the good wife of the
house, being both very sage, discreet; and ancient persons. And every thirty
Farms or families have one head ruler, which is called a Philarch, being as it
were a head Bayli^^e, Out of every one of these families or farms, comes
every year into the City twenty persons, which have continued two years
before in the Country. In their place so many fresh be sent thither out of the
City, who, of them that have been there a year already, and be therefore
expert and cunning in husbandry, shall be instructed and taught. And they the
next year shall teach other.

This order is used for fear that either scarceness of victuals, or some
other like incommodity should chance, through lack of knowledge: if they
should be altogether new, and fresh, and inexpert in husbandry. This manner and
fashion, of yearly changing and renewing the occupiers of husbandry, though it
be solemn and customably used, to think that no man shall be constrained
against his will to continue long in that hard and sharp kind of life; yet many
of them have such a pleasure and delight The duties of men of husbandry.
in husbandry, that they obtain a longer space of years. Th^se husbandmen,
plough and till the ground, and breed up cattle, and provide and make ready
wood, which they carry to the City either by land or water, as they most
conveniently. They bring up a g^ of (...) A strange fashion to ^atching and
bringing up of Pulle^^.
and that ^y (...) poll^* cie: for* the (...) upon the eggs; but by (...) in a
certain equ^ they bring life into them, and hatch them. The chickens, as soon
as they be come out of the shell, follow men and women in stead of the hens.
They bring up very few horses: nor none, but very The use. of Horses The use of
Oxen.
fierce ones: and that for none other use or purpose, but only to exercise
their youth in riding, and, feats of Arms: For Oxen be put to all the labor
of ploughing and drawing: which they grant not to be so good as horses at a
sudden brunt, and (as we say) at a dead lift; but yet they hold an opinion,
that Oxen will abide and suffer much more labor, pain and hardiness, then
Horses will. And they think that Oxen be not in danger and subject unto so
many diseases, and that they be kept and maintained with much less cost and
charge: and finally, that they be good for meat, when they be past labor. They
sow corn only for bread. For their drink is either Wine made of grapes, or
Bread and drink.
else of apples, or Pears, or else it is clear water: and many times Mead
made of honey, or Licouresse sodde in water; for thereof they have great store.
And though they know certainly (for they know it perfectly indeed) how much
victuals the City with the whole Country or Shire round about it does spend:
yet they A great discretion in sowing of Corn.
sow much more corn, and breed up much more cattle, then serves for their
own use, parting the overplus among their borderers. Whatsoever necessary
things be lacking in the Country, all such stuff they fetch oa^ of the City:
where without ^ay exchange, they easily obtain it of the Magistrates of the
City. For every month many of them go into the City on the Holiday. When
their harvest day draws near, and is at hand, then the Philarches, which be
the head Officers and B^iliffes of husbandry, send word to the Magistrates of
the City what number of harvest men is needful to be sent to them out of the
City. The which company of Mutual help quickly dispatched.
harvest men being ready at the day appointed, almost in one fair day
dispatcheth all the harvest work.

Of the Cities, and namely Amaurote.
AS for the Cities, who so knows one of them, knows them all: they be all
so like one to another, as far forth as the nature of the place permits. I
will describe to you one or other of them, for it skilleth not greatly which:
but which rather then Amaurote? Of them all, this is the worthiest and of most
dig^i^y* (...) another River which indeed is not very great. But it runs
gently and pleasantly: For it rises even out of the same hill that the City
stands upon, and runs down a slope through the midst of the City into
A^yder.

And because it rises a little without the City, the Amauritians have enclosed
the head spring of it, with strong fences, and Bulwarks, and so have joined it
to the City. This is done to the intent that the water The use of fresh water.
should not be stopped, no^ turned away, or poisoned, if their enemies should
chance to come upon them. From thence the water is derived and conveyed down
in channels of brick diverse ways, into the lower part of the City. Where
that cannot be done, by reason that the place will not suffer it, there they
gather the rain water in great ^^ sternes, which does them as good service.
The City is compassed about The defense of the Townew^ls.
with a high and thick stone wall full of tu^^ets and bulwarks. A dry ditch,
but deep and b^o^d, and overgrown with bus^^^, b^^ers, and thorns, goes
about three sides or quarters of the City. To the fourth side the river it
self serves as a ditch. The streets be appointed and set forth very
commodious, and handsome, both for carriage and also against the winds. The
Streets, Buildings and Houses
houses be of fair and gorgious building, and on the (...) side they stand
joy^^d together in a long row through the whole street, without any partition
(...) separation. The streets be ^^v^^^y ^^^^^ broad. O^ To (...)
the ba^ of the house* ^gh the (...) of (...). Eve^ on the backside into the
Garden. These doors be made with two leaves, never locked nor bolted, so easy
to be opened, that they will follow the least drawing of a finger, and shut
again alone. Who so will, may go in, for there is nothing within the houses
that is private, or any man's own. And every tenth year This gear sine ^leth
of Plato h^^ community
they change their Houses by lot. They set great store by their Gardens.

In them they have Vine-yards, all manner of Fruit, Herbs, and Flowers, so
pleasant, so well furnished, and so finely kept, that I never saw thing more
fruitful, nor better trimmed in any place. Their study and diligence herein
comes not only of pleasure, but also of a certain strife and contention
that is between street and street, concerning the trimming, husbanding, and
furnishing of their Gardens: every man for his own part. And verily you shall
not lightly find in all the City any thing, that is more commodious, either
for the profit of the Citizens, or for pleasure. And therefore it may seem
that the first founder of the City minded nothing so much, as these Gardens.
For they say that King Vtopus himself, even at the first beginning, appointed
and drew forth the plat-forme of the City into this fashion and figure that it
has now, but the gallant garnishing, and the beautiful setting forth of it,
whereunto he saw that one man's age would not suffice, that he left to his
posterity. For their Chronicles which they keep written with all diligent
circumspection, containing the History of 1760 years, even from the first
conquest of the Island, record and witness that the house* in the beginning
were very low, and like homely cottage* or poor shepherd houses, made at all
adventures of every rude piece of timber, that came first to hand, with mud
walls, and ridged roofes, thatched over with straw. But new the houses be
curiously builded after a gorgious and g^llant ^ort, with ^^^^ ^^^^^es one over
another. The outsides of y^ wall^ be made either of hand fi^^t, or of
Plaster, or else of brick, and the inner-sides be well strengthened with
timber work. The roofes be plain and ^^^t, covered with a certain kind of
Plaster, that is of ^o cost, and yet so tempered that ^o fire can hurt or
perish it* and withstandeth the violence of the weather Glased o^ canvased
windows.
better then any lead. They keep the wind out of their windows with gl^ste,
for it is there much used, and some here also with fine linen cloth dipped in
oil or amber, and that for two commodities: For by this means more light
comes in, and the wind i^ better kept out.

Of the Magistrates.
EVery thirty Fa^^es o^ F^rme, choose them yearly an Officer, which in their
old language is called the Syphogrant, and by a newer name, the Philarch. Every
ten Siphogrants, with all their thirty families be vnde an Officer, which was
once c^lled the Tranibore, A Tranibore in the Vtopian tongue, signifies a head
or chief Peer. A me^vilous strange fashion in choosing Magistrates.
now the chief Philarch. Moreover as concerning the election of the Prince,
all ^he Siphogrants which be in number two hundred, first be sworn to choose
him, whom they think most meet and expedient. Then by a secret election, they
name Prince one of those four whom the people before named unto them. For out
of the four quarters of the City there be four chosen, out of every quarter
^, to stand for the election: which be put up to the Counsel. The Tyranny in a
well ordered Weal public utterly to be abhorred.
Princes Office continues all his life time, unless he be deposed or put
down for suspicion of tyranny. They choose the Tranibores yearly, but lightly
they change them not. All the other Officer, be but for one year. The
Tranibores every third day, and sometimes, if need be, oftener come into the
Counsel house with the Prince. Their counsel ^^ite^ and ^fies between party
and party forthwith to be ended, which ^^w a dares of a set purpose be (...)
de^a^ed.
is concerning the Commonwealth. If there be any controversies among the
commoners, which be very few, they dispatch and end them by and by. They take
ever two Siphogrants to them in counsel, and every day a new couple. And it is
provided, that nothing touching the commonwealth shall be confirmed and
ratified, unless it have been ^easoned of and debated, three days in the
counsel before it be decreed. It is death to have any consultation, for the
commonwealth out of the counsel, or the place of the common Against hosty and
rash decrees or statutes.
election. This statute, they say, was made to the intent, that the Prince and
Tranibores, might not easily conspire together to oppresle the people by
tyranny, and to change the state of the Weale-publike. Therefore matters of
great weight and importance be brought to the election house of the
Siphogrants, which, open the matter to their families. And afterward, when they
have consulted among themselves, they show their devise of the counsel.
Sometime the matter is brought before the counsel of the whole Island.
Furthermore A custom worthy to be used in these days in our Councels and
Parli^ments.
this custom also the counsel uses, to dispute or reason of no matter the
same day that it is first proposed or put forth, but to defer it to the next
sitting of the counsel: Because that no m^n when he has rashly there (...)
none other occupation that any number to speak of does use there.

For their garments, which throughout all the Island be of Similitude in
apparel.
one fashion, (saving that there is a difference between the man's garment and
the woman's, between the married and the unmarried) and this one continues for
evermore unchanged, seemly and comely to the eye, no let to the moving and
welding of the body, also fit-both for winter and summer: as for these garments
(I say) every family makes their own. But of the other No Citizen without a
science.
foresaid crafts every man learneth one. And not only the men but also the
women. But the women, as the weaker sort, be put to the easier crafts: as to
work wool and flax. The more laborsome sciences be committed to the men. For
the most part, every man is brought up in his fathers craft. For most commonly*
they be naturally thereto bent and inclined. To what occupation every one is
naturally inclined that let hi^. learn.
But if a man's mind stand to any other, he is by adoption put into a family of
that occupation, which he does most fantasy. Whom not only his father, but
also the Magistrate do diligently look to, that he be put to a discreet and
an honest householder. Yea, and if any person, when he has learned one craft,
be desirous to learn also another, he is likewise suffered and permitted. When
he has learned both, he occupies whether he will: unless the City has more
need of the one, then the other. The chief and almost the only office of the
Syphogrants is, to see and take heed, that no man sit idle: but that every one
apply his own craft with earnest diligence. And yet for all that, Idle persons
to be driven out of the Weal public.
not to be wearied from early in the morning, too late in the evening, with
continual work, like laboring and toyling Beasts. For this is worse then the
miserable and wretched condition of bondmen.

Which, nevertheless is almost every where the life of workmen A moderation in
the labor and toil of artificers.
and artificers, saving in Vtopia. For they dividing the day and the night into
twenty four just hours, appoint and assign only 6 of those hours to work,
before noone upon the which they go strait to dinner, and after dinner, when
they have rested 2 hours, then they work three hours, and upon that they go
to supper. About eight of the clock in the evening (counting one of the clock
the first hour After noone) they go to bed: eight hours they give to sleep.
All the void time, that is between the hours of work, sleep, and meat,
that they be suffered to bestow every man a^ he likes best himself. Not to
the into it that they should mispend this time in riot, or sloathfulnesse, but
being then licensed from the labor of their own occupations, to bestow the
time well and thriftily upon some other Science, as shall please them: For it
is a solemn custom there, to have Lectures daily early in the morning,
whereto be present, they only be constrained, that be namely, chosen and
appointed to learning. Howbeit a great multitude of every sort of people, both
men and The study of good literature.
women go to hear Lectures, some one and some another, as every man's nature
is inclined. Yet this notwithstanding, if any man had rather bestow this time
upon his own occupation, as it chances in many (whose minds rise not in the
contemplation of any Science liberal) he is not let nor prohibited, but is
also praised and commended, as profitable Playing after supper.
to the Commonwealth. After Supper, they bestow one hour in play: in Summer,
in their Gardens: in Winter, in their common Halls, where they dine and sup.
There they exercise themselves in Music, or else in honest and wholesome
communication. Dice-play, and But new a days diceplay is the pastime of
Princes.
such other foolish and pernicious games, they know not. But they use two
games, not much unlike the Chesse. The one is the battle of numbers, wherein
one number steals away another. The other is where vices fight with virtues,
as it were in battle array, or a set Field. In the which game is very
properly Plays of games also profitable.
showed, both the strife and discord, that the vices have among themselves, and
again their unity and concord against virtues. And also what vices be
repugnant to what virtues: with what power and strength they assail them
openly: by what wiles and subtilty they assault them secretly: with what help
and aid the virtue, re^i^t, and overcome the the puissance of the vices: by
what craft they frustrate their purposes: and finally by what ^eight or means
the one gets the victory. But here least you be deceived, one thing you must
look more narrowly upon. For seeing they bestow but six hours in work,
perchance you may think that the lack of some necessary things hereof may
ensue. But this is nothing so; For that small time is not only enough, but
also too much for the store and abundance of all things, that be requisite,
either The kinds of sorts of idle people.
for the necessity, or commodity of life. The which thing you also shall
perceive, if you weigh and consider with your selves how great a part of the
people in other Countries lives idle. First Women.
almost all women, which be the half of the whole number: or else if the women
be somewhere occupied, there most commonly in their stead the men be idle.
Besides this, how great and how idle a company is there of Priests, and
religious men, is they Priests and religious men. Rich men and landed men.
call thein? put thereto all rich men, specially all landed men, which commonly
be called Gentlemen, and noblemen. Take into this number also their servants: I
mean all that flock of stout bragging rushbucklers. ^oyne to Servingmen.
Sturdy and valiant beggars.
them also sturdy and valiant beggars, cloaking their idle life under the
color of some disease or sickness.

And truly you shall find them much fewer then you thought, by whose labor all
these things are wrought, that in men's affairs are now daily used and
frequented. Now consider with your self, of these few that do work, how few
be occupied, in necessary works: For where money Wonderful wittily spoken.
bears all the swing, there many vain and superfluous occupations must needs
be used to serve only for riotous superfluity, and dishonest pleasure: for the
same multitude that now is occupied in work, if they were divided into so few
occupation, as the necessary use of nature requires, in so great plenty of
things a^ then of necessity would e^due, doubtless the prices would be too
little for the artificers to maintain their living.

But if all these, that be now busied about unprofitable occupations, with all
the whole fo^ke of the^ that live idly and sloathfully, which consume and
wast every one of them more of these things that come by other men's labor,
then two of the workmen themselves do: if all these (I say) were set to
profitable occupations: you easily perceive how little time would be enough,
yea, and too much to store us with all things that may be requisite either for
necessity or commodity, yea or for pleasure, so that the same pleasure be true
and natural. And this in Viopia the thing it self makes manifest and plain.
For there in all the City with the whole Country, or Shire adjoining to it,
scarcely five hundred persons of all the whole number of men and women, that be
neither too old nor too weak to work, be licensed and discharged from labor.
Among them be the Syphogrants Not as much as the Magistrates live idly.
(who though they be by the laws exempt and privileged from labor) yet they
exempt not themselves: to the intent they may the rather by their example to
provoke others to work.

The fame vocation from labor do they also enjoy, to whom the people
persuaded by the commendation of the Priests, and secret election of the
Syphogrant^, have given a perpetual license, from labor to learning. But if
any one of them prove not according to the expectation and hope of him
conceived, he is forthwith plucked back to the company of artificers. And
contrariwise, and often it chances that a handicrafts man does so earnestly
bestow his vacant and spare hours in learning, and through diligence so
profits therein, that he is taken from his handy occupation, and promoted to
the company of the learned. Only learned men called to Offices.
Out of this order of the learned be chosen Ambassadors, Priests, Tranibores,
and finally the Prince himself. Whom they in their old tongue call Barzanes,
and by a newer name, Adamus.

The residue of the people being neither idle, nor yet occupied about
unprofitable exercises, it may be easily judged in how few hours how much good
work by them may be done and dispatched, toward those things that I have
spoken off. This commodity they have also above other, that in the most part of
necessary occupations they need not so much work, as other nations do. For
first of all the building or repairing of houses asks How to avo^ ^excessiv^
(...) building.
every where so many men's co^ll labor, because that the vnth^y h^^re s^lfereth
the houses that his father b^^lded, in continuance of time, to fall in decay.
So that which he might have vpholden with little cost, h^^ successor is
constrained to build it again a new, to his great charge. Yea many (...) also
the house that stood one m^n in much money: and another is of so nice and so
delicate a mind, that he sets nothing by it. And it being neglected, and
therefore shortly falling into ruin, he builds up another in another place
with no less cost and charge.

But among the Vtopians, where all thing be set in good order, and the
Commonwealth in a good stay, it seldom chances, that they choose a new plot
to build an house upon. And they do not only find speedy (...) quick
remedies for present (...) but also prevent them th^^ be like to fall. And by
(...) their houses con^ l^st very long with little labor and sm^ll
reparations, ^^omuch that these kind of workmen sometimes have almost thing to
do. But that ^^^y ^e commanded to hew tim^er at home, and to square and (...)
up stones, to the intent that if any work chance, it may the speed^^^r ^se.
Now Sir, in How to l^ss^n the char^e in apparel.
their apparel, ^^^k^ (I pray you) how (...) they need. First ^ll, while* they
be at work, they be covered homely ^ther, or ^ki^, that will ^^st s^v^^re^*
When they go (...), they c^st upon them (...) hides the other ^pp^rell. These
(...) the (...) I (...) all of o^ and that is the natural color of the wool.
They therefore do not only spend much woollen cloth, then is spent in other
Countries, but also the same stands them in much less cost. But linen
cloth is made with less labor, and is therefore had more in use. But in
linen cloth only whiteness; in woollen, only clenlinesse is regarded. As for
the smalnesse or finenesse of the thread, that is nothing passed for. And this
is the cause wherefore in other places four or five cloth gowns of diverse
colors, and as many silk coats b^ not enough for one man. Yea, and if he be
of the dilicate and nice sort, ten be too few: where as there one garment
will serve a man most commonly two years: For why should he desire more? seeing
if he had them, he should not be the better hapt or covered from cold, neither
in his apparel any whit the comlier. Wherefore, seeing they be all exercised
in profitable occupations, and that few Artificiers in the same crafts be
sufficient: this is the cause that plenty of all things being among them, they
do sometimes bring forth an innumerable company of people to amend the
highways, if any be broken. Many times also, when they have no such work to
be occupied about, an open proclamation is made, that they shall bestow fewer
hours in work: for the Magistrates do not exercise their Citizens against
their will^ in unneedful labors. For why, in the institution of the Wea^^
public, this end is only and chiefly pretended and minded, that what t^ may
possibly be spared from the necessary occupation^ and affairs of the
Commonwealth, all that the Citizens should withdraw from the ^ily service to
the free liberty of the mi^d and gar^^shing of the same. For herein they
suppose the felicity of this life to consist.

Of their living and mutual conversation together.
But now will I declare how the Citizens use themselves one to another: what
familiar occupying and entertainment, there i^ among the people, and what
fashion they use in the distribution of every thing. First, the City consists
of ^^^^lie, the f^^^lies most co^^o^ly be made of ki^^^d. For the women when
they be married ^^ a l^^full ^ge, they go into their husb^^ds house.

But the male Children, with all the whole (...) offspring (...) still in
their (...) fi^^^^ (...) be governed of the (...) he dote for age: for then the
next to him in age, is placed in his room. But to the intent the prescript
number of the citizens The number of Citizens.
should neither decrease; nor above measure increase, it is ordained that no
family, which in every City be six thousand in the whole, besides them of the
Country, shall at once have ^ewer children of the age of fourteen years or
thereabout, then ten, or more then sixteen; for of children under this age, no
number can be prescribed or appointed. This measure or number is easily
observed and kept, by putting them that in fuller families be above the number
into families of smaller increase. But if chance be that in the whole City,
the store increase above the just number, wherewith they fill up the lack of
other Cities. But if so be that the multitude throughout the whole Island, pass
and exceed the due number, then they choose out of every City certain
Citizens, and build up a Town under their own laws in the next Land where
the inhabitauts have much waste and unoccupied ground, receiving also of the
same Country people to them, if they will join and dwell with them. They thus
joining and dwelling together do easily agree in one fashion of living, and
that to the great wealth of both the peoples: For they so bring the matter
about by their Laws, that the ground which before was neither good nor
profitable for the one nor for the other, is now sufficient and fruitful
enough for them both. But if the inhabitants of the land, will not dwell with
them to be ordered by their laws, then they drive them out of those bounds
which they have limited and appointed out for themselves.

And if they resist and rebel, then they make war against them. For they
count this the most just cause of war, when any people holds a piece of
ground void and vacant to no good nor profitable use, keeping other from the
use and possession of it, which notwithstanding by the law of Nature ought
thereof to be nourished and relieved. If any chance do so much diminish the
number of any of their Cities, that it cannot be filled up again, without the
diminishing of the just number of the other Cities (which they say chanced but
twice since the beginning of the Land, through a great pestilent Plague) then
they fulfill and make up the number with Citizen, fet^hed out of their own
foreign Towns, for they had rather suffer their foreign towns to decay
and perish, then any City of their own I^and to be diminished. But now again
to the conversation of the Citizens among themselves. (...) hands of their
Bondmen: for they permit not their free Citizens Of the slaughter of Beasts, we
have learned manslaughter. Filth and ordure b^ing the injection of Pestilence
into Cities
to accustom themselves to the killing of beasts, through the use whereof they
think, clemency the gentlest affection of our nature by little and little, to
decay and perish. Neither they suffer any thing that is filthy, loathsome, or
uncleanly, to be brought into the City, left the air by stench thereof
infected and corrupt, should cause Pestilent disease^. Moreover, every Street
has certain great large hals set in equal distance one from another, every
one known by a ^^verall name. In these hals dwell the Syphogrants. And to
every one of the same halles, be appointed thirty families, on either side
fifteen. The stewards of every hall, at a certain hour come into the meat
markets, where they receive meat according to the number of their hals.

But first and chiefly of all, respect is had to the sick, Care, diligence
and attendance about the sick,
that be cured in the hospitals. For in the circuit of the City, a little
without the walls, they have four Hospitals, so big, so wide, so ample, and so
large, that they may seem four little Towns, which were devised of that
bigness, partly to the intent the sick be they never so many in number, should
not lie too throng or strait, and therefore uneasily, and incommodiously: and
partly that they which were taken and holden with contagious diseases, such as
be wont by infection to creep from one to another, might be laid a far from
the company of the residue.

These Hospitals be so well appointed, and with all things necessary to health
so furnished, and moreover so diligent attendance through the continual
presence of cunning Physicians is given, that though no man be sent t^^ther
against his will, yet notwithstanding there is no sick person in all the City,
that had not rather lie there then at home at his own house. When the steward
of the sick has received such meats as the Physicians have prescribed, then
the best is equally divided among the halls according to the company of every
one, saving there is had a respect to the Prince, the Bishop, the Tranibores,
and to Ambassadors and all strangers, if there be any, which be very few and
seldom. But they also when they be there, have certain several houses
appointed and prepared for them. To these halls at the set hours of dinner and
supper, comes all the whole Syphograntie or Ward, warned by the noise of a
brazen Trumpet: except such as be sick in the Hospitals, or else in their own
houses.

Howbeit, no man is prohibited Everyman is at his liberty, so that nothing is
done by compulsio^
or forbid, or after the halls be served to fetch home meat out of the Market
to his own house; for they know that no man will do it without a cause
reasonable. For though no man be prohibited to dine at home, yet no man does it
willingly: because it is counted a point of small honesty. And also it were a
folly to take the pain to dress a bad dinner at home, when they may be
welcome to good and fine fare so nigh hand at the hall.

In this hall, all vile service, and all slavery, with all laboursome toil,
and drudgery, and base business, is done by bondmen. But the women of every
Women both dress and serve the meat.
family by course have the office and charge of cookery for seething and
dressing the meat, and ordering all things thereto belonging. They sit at
three tables or more, according to the number of their company. The men sit
upon the Beuch next the wall, and the women against them on the other side of
the table, and if any sudden evil should chance to them, as many times
happens to women with child, they may rise without trouble or disturbance of
any body, and go thence into the nursery. The Nurses.
Nurses sit seyerall alone with their young sucklings, in a certain parlour
appointed and deputed to the same purpose, never without fire and clean water,
nor yet without cradles, that when they will they may lay down the young
Infants, and at their pleasure take them out of their swathing clothes, and
hold them to the fire, and refresh them with play. Every mother is nurse to her
own child, unless either death, or sickness be the let. When that chances,
the wives of the Siphogrants quickly provide a Nurse. And that is not hard to
be done. For they that can do it, proffer themselves to no service so gladly
as to that. Because Nothing sooner provokes men to well doing then praise and
commendation.
that there this kind of piece is much praised: and the child that is
nourished, ever after, takes his nurse for his own natural mother. Also
among the nurses, sit all the children that be under the age of sieve years.
All the other children of both kinds, as well boys as girls, that be under
the age of marriage, do either serve at the tables, or else if they be too
young thereto, yet they stand by with marvailous silence. That The eles C^tt^n
of young children
which is given to them from the table they eat, and other several dinner
time they have none. The Syphogrant and his wife sit in the midst of the high
Table, for as much as that is counted the honourablest place, and because from
thence all the whole company i^ in their sight. For that table stands over
thwart the over end of the Hall. To them be joined two of the ancientest and
eldest. For at every table they sit four at a mess. But if there be a Church
standing in that Syphogranty, or Ward, then the Priest and his wife sits
with the Syphogrant, as chief in the company. On both sides of them sit young
men, and next unto them The young mixed with their elders.
again, old men. And thus throughout all the house, equal of age be set
together, and yet be mixed and matched with unequal ages.

This they say, was ordained, to the intent that the sage gravity and reverence
of the elders should keep the youngers from wanton license of words and
behavior. For as much as nothing can be so secretly spoken or done at the
table, but either they that sit on the one side or on the other, must needs
perceive Old men regarded and reverenced.
it. The dishes be not set down in order from the first place, but all the old
men (whose places be marked with some special token to be known) be first
served of their meat, and then the residue equally. The old men, divide their
dainties as they think best to the younger on each side of them. Thus the
elders be not defrauded of their due honor, and nevertheless equal commodity
comes to every one. They begin every dinner and supper of reading something
that pertains to good manners and virtue. But it is short, because no man
shall be grieved therewith. Hereof the elders take occasion of honest
communication, but neither sad nor This now adays is observed in our
University. Talk at Table.
unpleasant. Howbeit they do not spend all the whole dinner time themselves,
with long and tedious talk, but they gladly hear also the young men: yea, and
purposely provoke them to talk, to the intent that they may have a proof of
every man's wit, and towardness, or disposition to virtue, which commonly in
the liberty of feasting does show and utter it self. Their dinuers be very
short: but their suppers be somewhat This is repugnant to the opinion of our
Physiti^^s^ Music at the Table.
longer, because that after dinner follows labor, after supper, sleep and
natural rest, which they think to be of more strength and efficacy to
wholesome and healthful digestion. No supper is passed without Music. Nor
their banquets want no conceits, nor junkets. They burn sweet gummes and
spices or perfumes, and pleasant smells, and sprinckle about sweet ointments and
waters, yea, they have nothing undone that makes for the cherishing of the
company. For they be much inclined to this opinion: to think no kind of
pleasure forbidden, whereof Pleasure without bar^e, commendable.
comes no harm. Thus therefore, and after this sort they live together in
the City, but in the Country they that dwell alone far from any neighbors,
do dine at home in their own houses: For no family there lacks any
victuals, as from whom comes all that the Citizens eat and live by.

Of their journying or traveling abroad, with diverse other matters cunningly
reasoned, and wittily discussed.
But if any be desirous to visit either their friends dwelling in another
City, or to see the place it self, they easily obtain licence-of the
Syphogrants and Tranibores, unless there be some profitable let. No man goes
out alone but a company is sent forth together with their Princes letters, who
do testify that they have license to go that journey, and prescribes also
the day of their return.

They have a Waine given them, with a common bondsman, which drives the oxen,
and takes charge of them. But unless they have Women in their Company, they
send home the waine again, as an impediment and let. And though they carry
nothing forth with them, yet in all their journey they lack nothing. For
wheresoever they come, they be at home. If they tarry in a place longer then one
day, then there every one of them falls to his own occupation, and be very
gently entertained of the workmen and companies of the same crafts. If any man
of his own head and without leave, walk out of his precinct and bounds, taken
without the Princes letters, he is brought again for a fugitive, or a runaway
with great shame and rebuke, and is sharply punished. If he be taken in that
fault again, he is punished with bondage. If any be desirous to walk abroad
into the fields, or into the Country that belongs to the same City that he
dwells in, obtaining the good will of his Father, and the consent of his
Wife, he is not prohibited. But into what part of the Country soever he
comes, he has no meat given him until he have wrought out his forenoones
task, or dispatched so much work, as there is wont to be wrought before
supper. Observing this law and condition, he may go whither he will within the
bounds of his own City. For he shall be no less profitable to the City, then
if he were within it. Now you see how little liberty they have to loyter: how
they can have no cloak or pretense to Idleness. O holy commonwealth and of
Christians to be followed.
There be neither wine tauerns, nor alchouses, nor stews, nor any occasion of
vice or wickedness, no lurking corners, no places of wicked counsels an
unlawful assemblies, but they be in the present sigh^, and under the eyes of
every man. So that of necessity they must either apply their accustomed
labors, or else recreate themselves with honest and laudable past^^es.

This fashion and trade of li^e, being used among the people, it cannot be
chosen, but that they must of necessity have store and plenty of all things.
And seeing Equality is the cause that every man has enough.
they be all thereof partners equally, therefore can no man ther^ be poor or
needy. In the counsel of Amaur^^^, whether as I said, every City se^ ^eth
three men a piece yearly, as soon as it is perfectly known of what things
there is in every place plenty, and again what things be scant in any place,
incontinent the lack of the one, is performed and filled up with the abundance
of the other. And this they do freely without any benefit, talking nothing
again of them, to whom the things is given, but those Cities that have given
of their store to any other City, that lacks, requiring nothing again of the
same City, do take such things as they lack A common wealth is nothing else
but a great household.
of another City, to the which they gave nothing. So the whole Island is as it
were one family or household. But when they have made sufficient provision of
store for themselves (which they think not done, until they have provided for
two years following, because of the uncertainty of the next years proof) then
of those things, whereof they have abundance, they carry forth into other
Countries great plenty: as Grain, honey, wool, flax, wood, madd^^, purple
died felles, wax, tallow, leather, and living Beasts. And the seventh part of
all these things they give franckly and freely to the poor of that Country.
The residue they sell at a reasonable and mean price. By this means of
tra^^^que or merchandise, they bring into their own country; nor only great
plenty of gold and silver, but also all such things as they lack at home,
which is almost nothing but Iron. And by reason they have long used this trade,
now they have more abundance of these things, then any man will believe.

Now therefore they care not whether they sell for ready money, or else upon
trust to be paid at a day, and to have the most part in debts. But in so In all
things and above all things, to the community they have an eye.
doing they never follow the credence of private men: but the assurance or
warrantise, of the whole City, by instruments and writings made in that behalf
accordingly. When the day of payment is come and expired, the City gathers up
the debt of the private debtors, and puts it into the common box, and so
long has the use and profit of it, until the Vtopians their creditors demand
it. The most part of it, they never ask. For By what policy money ^^y be in
less estimation* It is better either with money or by policy to avoid warr^
th^^ with much loss of ma^s blood to fight.
that thing which is to them is no profit to take it from other, to whom it is
profitable, they think it no right nor conscience. But if the case so stand,
that they must lend part of that money to another people, then they require
their debt: or when they have war. For the which purpose only, they keep at
home all the ^^ea^^re which they have, to be helped and succored by it either
in extreme jeopardies, or in sudden dangers. But especially and chiefly to
hire therewith, and that for unreasonable great wages, strange Soldiers. For
they had rather put Strangers in jeopardy, then their own Countrymen: knowing
that for money enough, their enemies themselves ma^y times may be bought and
sold, or else through treason be set together by the ears, among themselves.
For this cause they keep an inestimable treasure. But yet not as a treasure:
But so they have it, and use it, as in good faith I am ashamed to show: fearing
that mywordes shall not be believed. And this I have more O fine wit.
cause to fear, for that I know how difficulty and hardly I my self would
have believed another man telling the same if I had not presently seen it with
mine eyes.

For it must needs be, that how far a thing is dissonant and disagreeing, from
the guise and trade of the hearers, so far shall it be out of their belief.
Howbeit, a wise and indifferent esteemer of things, will not greatly marvel
perchance, seeing all their other laws and customs do so much differ from
ours, if the use also of gold and silver among them be applied, rather to their
own fashions, then to ours. I mean in that they occupy-not money themselves,
but keep it for that chance, which as it may happen, so it may be, that it
shall never come to pass. In the mean time, gold and silver, whereof money is
made, they do so use, as none of them does more esteem it, then the very
nature of the thing deserves.

And then who does not plainly see, how far it is under Iron: Goldworse then
iron as touching the necessary use thereof.
as without the which men can no better live then without fire and water.
Whereas to gold and silver, nature has given no use, that we may not well
lack: if that the folly of men had not set it in higher estimation for the
rareness sake. But of the contrary part, nature as a most tender and loving
mother, has placed the best and necessary things open abroad: as the air, the
water, and the earth it self. And has remooved and hid farthest from us vain
and unprofitable things. Therefore if these metals, among them should be fast
locked up in some Tower, it might be suspected, that the Prince and the
Counsel (as the people is ever foolishly imagining) intended by some subtilty
to deceive the Commons, and to take some profit of it to themselves.
Furthermore if they should make thereof plate, and such other finely and
cunningly wrought stuff, if at any time they should have occasion to break
it, and melt it again, therewith to pay their soldiers wages, they see and
perceive very well, that men would be loath to part from those things, that they
once began to have pleasure and delight in. To remedy all this they have found
out a means, well as it is agreeable to all their other laws and customs, so
it is from ours, where gold is so much set by, and so diligently kept, very
far discripant and repug^^^t: and therefore uncredible, but only to them that
be wise. For whereas they eat and drink in earthen and O^^^ full (...).
glass veslels, which indeed be curiously and properly made, and yet be of
very small, value: of gold and silver, they make chamber-pots, and other
veslels that serve for most vile vse^, not only in their common hal^, but ^^
every man's private house. I ^more or the same (...) they make great chain,
s^^^^, and gyues, wherein they ^^^ their bondmen.

Finally, whosoever for a ^^^ ^^sence be ^^^^med, by their (...), Gold ^^^
repr^s.
^ang ^^^g, or gold: upon their f^^gers they wear rings of gold: and about
their neck (...) of ^d: and in conclusion then (...) tied with gold. Thus by
^^^^eanes p^^^^ble they p^o^ure to have gold and (...) among them (...) and
(...) And these metals, which other Nations do as grievously and sorrowfully
soregoe, as in a manner their own lives: if they should altogether at once be
taken from the (...), no man there would think that he had lost the worth of
one f^rthing. They gather also pearls by the sea sid^, and D^^^onds and
Carbun^l^^ Gemme^ and (...) ^to^^s, (...) ^^ildren to play ^^^all.
upon certain Rock, and yet they s^^ke ^^^ for them: but by chance finding
them, they ^ut and polish them. And therewith they deck their young Infants.
Which like as in the first years of their child hood, they make much, and
(...) and proud of such (...) so when they be a little ^ore grown in yeare^
and dis^retio^, perceive that ^o^e but children do wear such t^ye and
trifles: they ^^^ them away even of the^ shame astnesse, without (...) ^^dding
of their (...) our children, when they wax big, do cast away nuttes,
brouches, and puppets. Therefore these laws and custom, which be so far
different from all other nations, how diverse fantasies also and minds they do
cause, did I never so plainly perceive in the Ambassadors or the Inemolians.

These Ambassadors came to Amauro^e, wh^les I was there. A ver^ pleasant t^le.
And because they came to ^^treate of great (...) weighty matters, those three
Citizens a piece out of every City, were come thither before them. But all the
Ambassadors of the next Countries, which had been there before, and kn^w the
f^shions and manners of the Vt^pians, among wh^^ they perceived no (...) given
to sumptuou^ App^r^l^, (...) to be contemned, gold al^o to be ^^^^nied and
reproachf^ll, were wo^t to come thither in very ho^ely and simple array. But
the Inemolians because they dwell far thence, and had very little
acquai^^^nce with them, hearing that they were all apparelled alike, and that
very rudely and homely, thinking them not to have the things which they did not
wear: being therefore more proud, then wise, determined in the gorg^ousnesle
of their apparel to present very Gods, and with the bright shining and
glistering of their gay clothing to dazell the eyes of the silly poor
V^^p^ans.

So there came in four Ambassadors with one hundred s^rvant, all apparelled
in changeable colour^: the most of them in ^^^kes: the Ambassadors themselves
(for ^t home ^^ their own Country they were noble me^) ^^ (...) of gold, with
great (...) ^^ gold, with gold hanging ^^ then (...) gold (...) upon their
fingers, (...) and (...) of gold vp^ the, which glistered full of pearls and
precious sto^ies: to be short trimmied and adorned with all those things, which
among the Vtopians were either the punishment of bondmen, or the reproach of
infamed persons, or else trifies for young children to play withal. Therefore
it would have done a man good at his heart, to have seen how proudly they
displayed their Peacocks feathers, how much they made of their painted
sheathes, and how lottily they set forth and advanced themselves, when they
compared their gallant apparel, with the poor r^iment of the Vt^pians. For
all the people were s^^rmed forth into the streets.

And on the other side, it was no less pleasure to consider how much they were
deceived, and how far they m^led of then purpose being contrary ways taken,
then they thought they should have been. For so the eyes of all the Vtopians,
except very few, which had been in other Countries, for some reasonable cause,
all that gorgiousnesse of apparel, seemed shameful and reproachful. Insomuch
that they most reverently saluted the v^lest and most abject of them for Lords:
judged them by then we^^ing of Golden ch^^nes to be Bondmen. Yea you should
have ^^^e Children also, that had cast away their Pearls and precious stor^es,
when they saw the like sticking upon the Ambassadors caps: dig and push their
mothers under the sides, saying thus to them. Look mother how great a lubber
does yet wear pearls and precious O ^itty ^e^d.
^^^nes, as though he were a little child again.

But the Mother, yea, and that also in good earnest: Peace son, says she: I
think he be some of the Ambassadors fools. Some found fault at their Golden
chains, as to no use nor purpose, being so small and weak, that a bondsman
might ea^ily break them, and again so wide and large, that when it pleased
him, he might cast them off, and run away at liberty whether he would.

But when the Ambassadors had been th^re a day or two, and saw so great
abundance of Gold so light^y ^d, (...) less reproach, (...) them (...) that,
more gold in the (...) and gyve* or one ^^gitive bondsman, then all the ^^^tly
ornaments of them three (...) worth: they began to abate their courage, and for
very sh^^e ^ud away all that gorgious array, whereof they were so proud. And
specially when they ^^d ^^lked familiarly with the (...), and had learned all
their ^^^hions and opinions. For they (...) that any men be ^o foolish, as to
^ull ^t^ ^er (...) (...) an^ ^t ^t ^y (...)
have delight and pleasure in the doubtful glistering of a little ^^^^^ing
(...), which may behold a^y of the (...), or else the (...) it self.

Or that any (...) to (...) the ^* the (...) three (...), which (...) ((...)
^ever ^) (...) ^et (...). Th^^ (...) that gold, which of the own (...), ^^ so
^^profitable, ^^ now among all people in ^^ high estimation* ^* himself, by
whom yea and ^o^ the use of whom it is so much set by, is in much less
estimation, then the gold it self. Insomuch A tru^t ^t^^ and ^ ^itty
that a ^^mpish block-head churl, and which has no more wit then an A^^e, yea
and as full of ^^ughtinesse, as of folly, shall have nevertheless many wise
and good men in subjection and bondage, only for this, because he h^th a great
heap of gold.

Which i^ it should be taken from him by any fortune, or by some subtle wile
and cautle of the Law, (which no les^e then fortune does both raise up the low,
and pluck down the high) and be given to the most vile slave and abject
drivell of all his household, then shortly after he shall go into the service
of his servant, as an augmentation, or over^ money.

But they much more mervaile How much more wi^ is ^^ the ^eds of the V^^^^an^,
^^^^ of the common sort of Christians.
at and de^^st the madness of them, which to those rich men, in whose deb^ and
danger they be not, do give almost divine honors, for none other
consideration* but because they be rich: and yet knowing them to be such
^iggish pennyfathers, that they be sure as long as they live, not the worth of
one farthing of that heap of Gold, shall come to them. These and such like
opinions have they conceived, partly by education, being brought up in that
Commonwealth, whose laws and customs be far different from those kinds of
folly, and partly by good literature and learning. For though there be not many
in every City, which be exempt and discharged of all other labors, and
appointed only to learning, that is to say: such in whom even from their very
childhood they have perceived a singular towardness, a fine wit, and amind
apt to good learning: yet all in their childhood be instructed in learning.
And the better part of the people, both men and women throughout all their
whole life, do bestow in learning those spare hours, which we said they have
vacant from bodily labors. They be taught learning in their own native tongue.
For it is both copious in words, and also pleasant to the ear: The studies
among the Vtopians.
and for the utterance of a man's mind very perfect and sure. The most part of
all that side of the world, uses the same language, saving that among the
Vtopians it is finest and pu^^^^, and according to the diversity of the
Countries, it is diversely altered. Of all these Philosophers, whose names be
here famous in this part of the world to us known, before our coming thither,
not as much as the ^^me of any of them was come among them. And yet in Music,
Logique, Arythmetique, Music, Logique, Arithmetique, Geonetrie.
and Geometry they have found out in a manner all that our ancient
Philosopher, have ^a^gl^^. But as they in all things be almost equal to our
old and ancient Clerks; so our ^ew (...) in subtle inventio^ have far
passed and gone beyond them.

For they have not devised one (...)lace (...) to (...) a vp^
of all those rules, of restrictions, amplifications, very wittily invented in
the small Logicals, which here our Children in every place do learn.
Furthermore, they were never yet able to find out the second inventions:
Insomuch tha^ none of them could ever see man himself in common, as they call
him, though he be (as you know) bigger then ever was any Giant, ye^, and
pointed to of us even with our finger. But they be in the course of the
Stars, and the moving^ of the heavenly ^p^^ares very expert and ^ng. They A
(...)
have also (...) ex^ogitated and devised Instruments of diverse ^^t among (...)
t^is (...)
(...) wherein is exactly comprehended and conta^^ed the moving^ and (...) or
the Sun, the Moon, and of all the other Stars, which appear in (...)
Horizon. But (...) the (...) and d^ of (...) Planets, and all that deceitful
divination of the Stars, they never as much as dreamed thereof. Raines,
winds, and other courses of tempests, they know before by certain tokens,
which they have learned by long use and observation. But of the causes Natural
Philosophy is a knowledge most uncertain.
of all these things, and of the ^^bbing and flowing, and salt^^^^ie of the
Sea, and finally of the original beginning, and na^^^e o^ heaven and of the
world, they ^^l^. par^ly the some opinious that our old Philosophers hold, and
partly as our Philosophers vary among themselves, so they also, wh^les they
bring Moral philosophy.
new reasons of things, do disagree from all them, and yet among themselves in
all points they do not accord.

In that Philosophy, which which entreats of manners and virtue the^^ reasons
and opinions ^gree with our. They dispure of the good qualities of the Soul*
of the body, and of fortune. And whether the name of goodness may be ^pplied
to all these, or only to the endowments and guirt, of the soul. They reason
The ends of good things. The Vtopians hold opinion that felicity consists t^
honest pleasure.
of virtue and pleasure. But the chief and principal question is i^ what
thing be it one or more the felicity o^ man consists. But in this point they
seem almost too much given and inclined to (...) opinion of them, which de^end
pleasure, wherein they determine either all or the chiefest part of man's
felicity to re^t. And (which is m^^^ to be ^^^v^^^ed at) the defense of this so
d^y and (...) an opinion they fetch even from their gra^e, sharp, bitter, and
^^gorous religion. For they never dispute of felicity or blessedness, but they
join unto the reasons of Philosophy The theology of the Vtopians.
certain principles taken out of religion: without the which, to the
investigation of true f^, they think reason of it self weak and unperfect.
The immortality of the soul, whereof these days certain christians be
doubtful.
Those principles be these and such like. That the soul is immortal: and by
the bountiful goodness of GOD ordained to felicity. That to our virtues and
good deeds, rewards be appointed after this life, and to our evil deeds
punishments. Though these be pertaining to religion, yet they think it meet
that they should be believed and granted by proves of reason. But ^^ these
principles were condemned and disanulled, then without any delay, they
pronounce no man to be so foolish, which would not do ^ll his diligence and
endevor to obtain pleasure be it right or wrong, only avoiding this
inconvenience, that the less pleasure should not be a let or hinderance to the
bigger: or that he labored not for that pleasure, which would bring after it
displeasure, grief, and sorrow.

For they judge it extreme madness to follow sharp and As every pleasure
ought to be embraced, so grief is not to be pursue I ^ut for virtues sake.
painful virtue, and not only to banish the pleasure of life, but also
willingly to suffer grief, without any hope of profit thereof ensuing. For
what profit can there be, if a man, when he has pa^^ed over all his life
unpleasantly, that is to say, miserably, shall have no reward after his death?
But ^ow sir, they think not felicity to rest in all pleasure, but only in
that pleasure that is good and honest, and that hereto, as to perfect
blessedness our nature is allured and drawn even of virtue, whereto only
they that be of the contrary opinion In this definition of virtue they agree
with the S^^^cians*
do attribute felicity. For they de^^ne virtue to be life ordered according to
Nature, and that we be hereunto ordained of God. And that he does follow the
cou^^e of nature, which in The work a^^ effect of reason ^n ^^n.
desi^ing and refusing things is ruled by reason. Furthermore* the reason (...)
and prin^ the lo^^ ^^d veneration of the divine M^^^ty. Or whose goodness it
is ^^at we be, and that we be ^n possibility to attain felicity. And that
seconda^^ly it both stir^^th and provokes us to lead ^ur life out of c^re in
joy and ^h; and also moves us to (...) and further all other in re^p^^^ of the
society of nature to (...) and e^joy the same. For (...) ^ever man so earnest
(...) ^^llo^er of ve^e (...) pleasu^^* that would s^ enjoyne your labors,
watchings, and fastings, but he would also exhort you to ^a^e, ^g^n, re^^eve
to your power, the l^^ke and misery of others, pr^is^^g the same a^ ^ deed of
humanity and pity. Then i^ it be a point of humanity, for man to ^^ing health
and comfort to man, and specially (which is a virtue most peculiarly belonging
to man) to ^^itig^te and ass^^ge the grief of others, and by taking from them
the sorrow and heaviness of life to restore them to joy, that is to say to
pleasure: which may it not then be said, that nature does provoke every man to
do the same to himself? For a joyful life, that is to say, a But now a days
some there be that willingly procure unto themselves painful grief, as
though therein restedsome high point of religion where as rather the
religiously disposed person, if they happen to him either by chance or else by
natural necessity ought patiently to receive and suffer them.
pleasant life is either evil: and if it be so, then thou should not only
help no man thereto, but rather as much as in thee lies, withdraw all men
from it, as noisome and hurtful, or else if thou not only must, but also of
duty art bound to procure it to others? why not chiefly to thy self? To whom
thou art bound to show as much favor and gentleness as to other. For when
nature bids thee to be good and gentle to other, she commands thee not to
be cruel and ungentle to thy self. Therefore even very nature (say they)
prescribes us to a joyful life, that is to say, pleasure as the end of all
our operations. And they define virtue to be life ordered according to the
prescript of nature. But in that, that nature does all are and provoke men one
to help another to live merrily (which surely she does not without a good
cause: for no man is far above the lot of man's state, or condition, that
nature does carke and care for him only, which equally favors all, that he
comprehended under the communion of one shape, form and fashion) verily she
commands them to use diligent circumspection, that thou do not seek for
thine own commodities, that thou procure others incommodities. Wherefore their
opinion is, Bargains and laws.
that not only covenants and bargains made among private men, ought to be
well and faithfully followed, observed, and kept but also common laws, which
either a good Prince has justly published, or else the people neither
oppressed with tyranny, neither deceived by fraud and guile, has by their
common consent constituted and ratified, concerning the petition of the
commodity of life, that is to say, the matter of pleasure.

These laws not offended, it is wisdom, that thou look to thine own wealth.
And do the same for the common wealth is no less then thy duty, ^f thou
bear any reverent love, or any natural zeal and affection to thy native
Country. But to go about to let another man of his pleasure, whiles thou
procurest thine own, that is open wrong. Contrariwise, to withdraw something
from thy self to give to other, that is a point of humanity, and gentleness:
which never takes away so much commodity, as it brings again. For it is
recompensed with the return of benefits, and the conscience of the good deed,
with the remembrance of the thankful love and benevolence of them, to whom
thou have done it, does bring more pleasure to thy mind, then that which thou
The mutual recourse of kindness.
have withheld from thy self could have brought to thy body. Finally (which
to a godly disposed and a religious mind is easy to be persuaded) God
recompenseth the gift of a short and small pleasure with great and everlasting
joy.

Therefore the matter diligently weighed, and considered, thus they think,
that all our actions, and in them the virtues themselves, be referred at the
last to ple^sure, as their end and felicity. Pleasure they call every The
definition of pleasure.
motion, and state of the body or mind, wherein man has naturally delectation.
Appetite they join to nature, and that ^ot without a good cause. For like as,
not only the senses, but also ^ight reason coveteth whatsoever is naturally
pleasant, so that it may be gotten without wrong or injury, not letting or
debarring a greater pleasure, nor causing painful labor, even so those things
that men, by vain imagination do feign against nature to be pleasant (as
though it lay in their power to change the things, as they do the names False
and counterfeit pleasures
of things) all such pleasures they believe to be of so small help and
furtherance to felicity, that they count them a great let and hinderance.
Because that in whom they have once taken place, all his mind they possess
with a false opinion of pleasure. So that there is no place left for true and
natural delectations.

For there be many things, which of their own nature contain no
pleasantness: yea the most part of them much grief and sorrow. And yet
through the perverse and malicious flickering inticements of lewd and honest
desires, be taken not only for special and sovereign pleasures, but also be
counted among the chief causes of life. In this counterfeit kind of pleasure,
they put them that I sp^ke of before. Which the better gowns they The error
o^th* ^^ that ^e more for apparels sake.
have on, the better men they think themselves. In the which thing, they do
twice er^e. ^^^ they be no less deceived, i^ that they think their gown the
better then they be, in that they think themselves the better.

For if you consider the profi^^ble use of the garment, why should wool of a
fi^er spunne ^eed, be thought better, then the wool of a course spunne ^^^eed?
Yet they, as though the one did pass the other by nature, and not by their
mistaking, advance themselves, and think the price of their own persons
thereby greatly mereased. And therefore the honor, which in a course gown they
durst not have lo^ked for, they require, as it were of duty, for their finer
gowns sake. And if they be passed without reverence, they take it
displeasantly and disdainfully. And again, Foolish honor.
is it not alike madness to take a pride in vain and unprofitable honors?
For what natural or true pleasure do thou take of another man's bare head,
or bowed knees; Will this case the pain of thy knees, or remedy the frenzy
of thy head? In this image of counterfeit pleasure, they be of marvailous
madness, which for the opinion of Nobility, rejoice much in their own
conceit. Because: was their fortune to come of such ancestors, whose stock of
long time had been counted rich (for now nobility is nothing else) specially
rich in lands. And though their Ancestors left them not one foot of land, or
else they themselves have pissed it against the walls, yet they think
themselve, nor the less noble therefore of one hair. In this number also they
count them that take Pleasure in precious stones must foolish.
pleasure and delight (as I said) in gemmes and precious stones, and think
themselves almost gods, if they chance to get an excellent one specially of
that kind, which in that time of their own Countrymen, is had in highest
estimation. The opinion and fancy of people does a^g^^nt and diminish the
price and estimation of precious stones.


For one kind of stone keeps not his price still in all countries, and at all
times. Nor they buy them not, but taken out of the gold, and bare, no nor so
neither, until they have made the seller to swear, that he will warrant and
assure it to be a true stone and no counterfeit gemme. Such care they take
least a counterfeit stone should deceive their eyes in stead of a right stone.
But why should thou not take even as much pleasure in beholding a
counterfeit stone, which thine eye cannot discern from a right stone? They
should both be of like value to thee, even as to the blind man.

What shall I say of them, that keep superfluous riches, to take delectation
only in the beholding, and not in the use or occupying thereof? D^e they take
true pleasure, or else be they deceived with false pleasure? Or of them that be
in a contrary Hiders of Treasure.
vice, hiding the gold which they shall neither occuupy, nor peradventure never
see him more: And whiles they take care least they shall leese, do leese it
indeed. For what is it else, when they hide it in the ground taking it both
from their own use, and perchance from all other men's also,? And yet thou,
when thou have hid thy treasure, as one out of all care, hopest for joy. The
which treasure, if it should chance to be stolen, and thou ignorant of the
theft, should dye ten years after: all that ten years tho^ liuedst after
thy money was stolen, what matter was it to thee, whether it had been taken
away or else safe as thou leftest it? Truly both ways like profit came to
thee. To these so foolish pleasures they join Dicers, whose madness they know
by hearsay, and not by use. Hunters also, and Hawkers.

For what pleasure is there (say they) in casting the Dice upon a Dice-play
table. Which thou have done so often, that if there were any pleasure in it;
yet the often use might make thee weary thereof? Or what delight can there be,
and not rather displeasure in hearing Hunting and Hawking.
the barking and howling of dogs? Or what greater pleasure is there to be felt,
when a Dog follows an Hare, then when a Dog follows a dog? For one thing
is done in both, that is to say, running, if thou have pleasure therein. But if
the hope of slaughter, and the expectation of tearing in pieces the Beast does
please thee: thou should rather be moved with pity to see a silly innocent
Hare murdered of a dog: the weak of the stronger, the fearful of the
fierce, the innocent of the cruel and unmercifull. Therefore all this exercise
of hunting, as a thing unworthy to Hunting the basest part of butchery among
the Vtopians, yet this is now in the exercise of most noble men.
be used of Freemen, the Vtopians have rejected to their butchers, to the which
craft (as we said before) they appoint their bondmen. For they count hunting
the lowest, the vilest, and most abject part of butchery, and the other parts
of it, more profitable, and more honest, as bringing much more commodity, in
that they kill Beasts only for necessity.

Whereas the hunter secketh nothing but pleasure of the silly and woeful beasts
slaughter and murder. The which pleasure in beholding death, they think does
rise in the very Beasts, either of a cruel affection or mind, or else to be
changed in continuance of time into cruelty, by long use of so cruel a
pleasure. These therefore and all such like, which be innumerable, though the
common sort of people does take them for pleasures, yet they seeing there is no
natural pleasantness in them, do plainly determine them to have no affinity
with true and right pleasure. For as touching that they do commonly move the
sense with delectation (which seems to be a work of pleasure) this does
nothing diminish their opinion. For not the nature of the thing but their
perverse and lewd custom is the cause hereof. Which causes them to accept
bitter or sower things for sweet things. Even as women with child in their
vicia^ and corrupt taste, think pitch and ^allow sweeter then honey. Howbeit no
man's judgment depraved and corrupt, either by sickness, or by custom, The
kindness of true pleasure
can change the nature of pleasure, more then it can do the nature of other
things. They make diverse k^nds of pleasures. For some they attribute to the
Soul, and some to the body. To the soul they give intelligence, and that
delication, that comes of the contemplation of truth.

Here^nto is joined the pleasant remembrance of the good life past. The
pleasure of the body they divide into two parts. The first is, when delectation
is sensible felt and perceived, which many times chances by the renewing and
refreshing of those parts, which our natural heat dries up. This comes by
meat and drink. And sometimes whiles those things be expulsed, and voyded,
whereof is in the body over great abundance. This pleasure is felt, when we do
our natural ^asement, or when we be doing the act of generation, or when the
itching of any part is eased with rubbing or scratching. Sometimes pleasure
rises exhibiting to any member nothing that it desires, nor taking from it
any pain that it feels, which nevertheless tickleth and moves our senses
with a certain secret efficacy, but with a manifest motion turns them to
it. As is that which comes of Music. The second part of bodily pleasure
they Bodily health.
say, is that which consists and rests in the quiet and upright state of
the body. And that truly is every man's own proper health, intermingled and
disturbed with no grief. For this, if they be not let nor assaulted with no
grief, is delectable of it self, though it be moved with no external or
outward pleasure. For though it be not so plain and manifest to the sense, as
the greedy lust of eating and drinking yet nevertheless, many take it for the
chiefest pleasure. All the Vtopians grant it to be a right sovereign pleasure,
and as you would say the foundation and ground of all pleasures, as which even
alone is able to make the state and condition of life delectable and pleasant.
And it being once taken away, there is no place left for any pleasure. For to
be without grief not having health, that they call unsensibility, and not
pleasure.

The Vtopians have long ago^ rejected and condemned ^he opinion of them, which
said, that steadfast and quiet health, (for this question also has been
diligently debated among them) ought not therefore to be counted a pleasure,
because they say it cannot be presently and sensibly perceived and felt by some
outward motion. But of the contrary part, now they agree almost all in this,
that health is a most sovereign pleasure. For seeing that in sickness (say
they) is grief, which is a mortal enemy to pleasure, even as sickness is to
health, why should not then pleasure be in the quietness of health? For they say
it makes nothing to this matter, whether you say that sickness is a grief,
or that in sickness is grief for all comes to one purpose.

For whether health be a pleasure it self, or a necessary cause of pleasure,
as fire is of heat, truly both ways it follows, that they cannot be without
pleasure, that be in perfect health. Furthermore whiles we eat (say they) then
health, which began to be appaired, fights by the help of food against
hunger. In the which fight, whiles health by little and little gets the
upper hand, that same proceeding, and (as we would say) that onwardnesse to the
wonted strength, ministers that pleasure, whereby we be so refreshed. Health
therefore, which in the conflict is joyful, shall it not be merry, when it
has gotten the victory? But as soon as it has recovered the pristinate
strength, which thing only in all the sight it coveted, shall it incontinent be
astonished? Nor shall it not know nor embrace the own wealth and goodness? For
where it is said, health cannot be felt, this they think is nothing true. For
what man walking, say they, feels not himself in health, but he that is not?
Is there any man so possessed with stonish ^nsensibility, or with lethargy,
that is to say, the sleeping sickness, that he will not grant health to be
acceptable to him, and delectable? But what other things is delectation, then
that Delecta^ions. The pleasures of the mind.
which by another name is called pleasure a They embrace chiefly the pleasures
of the mind. For them they count the chiefest and most principal of all. The
chief part of them they think does come of the exercise of virtue, and
conscience of good life. Of these pleasures that the body ministers, they give
the pre-eminence to health. For the delight of eating and drinking, and
whatsoever has any like pleasantness, they determine to be pleasures much to
be desired, but no otherwise then for healths sake. For such things of their
own proper nature be not so pleasant, but in that they resist sickness
privily stealing on: Therefore, like as it is a wisemans part, rather to avoid
sickness, then to wish for medicines, and rather to drive away and put to
flight careful griefs, then to call for comfort: so it is much better not to
need this kind of pleasure, then thereby to be eased of the contrary grief.
The which kind of pleasure, if any man take for his felicity, that man must
needs grant, that then he shall be in most felicity, if he live that life,
which is lead in continual hunger, thirst, itching, eating, drinking,
scratching, and rubbing. The which life, how not only foul and unhonest, but
also how miserable and wretched it is, who perceives not? These doubtless be
the basest pleasures of all, as unpure and unperfect. For they never come but
accompanied with their contrary griefs. As with the pleasure of eating, i^
joined hunger, and that after no very equal sort. For of these two, the grief
is both the more vehement and also of longer continuance. For it begins
before the pleasure, and ends not until the pleasure die with it. Wherefore
such pleasures they think not greatly to be set by, but in that they be
necessary. Howbeit they have delight also in these. and thankfully knowledge
the tender love of mother Nature, which with most pleasant delectation allureth
her children to that, to the necessary use whereof, they must from time to time
continually be forced and driven. For how wretched and miserable should our
life be, if these daily griefs of hunger and thirst could not be driven away,
but with bitter potions, and sour medicines, as the other diseases be,
wherewith we be seldomer troubled? The gifts of nature.
But beauty, strength, nimblenesse, these as peculiar and pleasant gifts of
nature they make much off. But those pleasures that be received by the ears,
the eyes, and the nose, which nature wills to be proper and peculiar to man
(for no other living creature does behold the fairness and the beauty of the
world, or is moved with any respect of savors, but only for and diversity of
meats, neither perceveth the concordant and discordant distances of sounds and
tunes) these pleasures. I say, they accept and allow as certain pleasant
rejoycings of life. But in all things this cautell they use, that a less
pleasure hinder not a bigger, and that the pleasure be no cause of displeasure,
which they think to follow of necessity, if the pleasure be unhonest. But yet
to despise the comeliness of beauty, to wast the bodily strength, to turn
nimblenesse unto ^loathishnesse: to consume and make feeble the body with
fasting* to do injury to health, and to reject the pleasant motions of nature,
unless a man neglect these commodities, whiles he does with a fervent zeal
procure the wealth of others, or the common profit, for the which pleasure
forborne, he is in hope of a greater pleasure at Gods hand: else for a vain
shadow of virtue, for the wealth and profit of no man, to punish himself, or
to the intent he may be able courageously to suffer adversity, which perchance
shall never come to him: this to do, they think it a point of extreme
madness, and a token of a man cruelly minded toward himself, and unkind
toward nature, as one so disdaining to be in her danger, that he renounceth
and Mark this well.
refuses all her benefits. This is their sentence and opinion of virtue and
pleasure. And they believe that by man's reason none can be found truer then
this, unless any godlier be inspired into man from heaven. Wherein whether
they believe well or no, neither the time does suffer us to discuss, neither
it is now necessary. For we have taken upon us to show and declare their lores
and ordinancies, and not to defend them. But this thing I believe verily,
howsoever these decrees be, that there is in no place of the world, neither a
more excellent people, neither a more flourishing Commonwealth. They be light
and quick of body, full of activity and nimblenesse, and of more strength then
a man would judge them by their stature, which for all that is not too low. And
though their soil be not very fruitful, nor their air very wholesome, yet
against the air they so defend them with temperate diet, and so order and
husband their ground with diligent travail, th^^^^ no Country is greater
increase and plenty of Corn and Cattle, nor men's bodies of longer life, and
The w^lth ^^^ descirption of the V^^pi^^s.
subject or apt to fewer diseases. There therefore a man may see well, and
diligently exploited and furnished, not only those things which husbandmen do
commonly in other Countries, as by craft and cunning to remedy the barrenness
of the ground, but also a whole Wood by the hands of the people plucked up by
the roots in one place, and set again in another place. Wherein was had
regard and consideration, not of plenty, but of commodious carriage* that wood
and timber might be nigher to the Sea, or the Rivers, or the Cities. For it is
less labor and business to carry grain far by land then wood. The people
be gentle, merry, quick and fine witte^, delighting in quietness, and when
need requires, able to abide and suffer much bodily labor. Else they be not
greatly desirous and fond of it^: but in the exercise and study of the mind
they be never weary. When they had heard me speak of the Greek literature or
learning (for in Latin there was nothing that I thought they would greatly
allow, besides Histories and Poets) they made wonderful earnest and
importunate suit unto me that I would reach and instruct them in that tongue
and learning. I began therefore to read unto them, at the first truly, more
because I would not seem A wonderful ^p^ nesse to lea^^^g ^^ the Vtopians.
to refuse the labor, then that I hoped that they would any thing profit
therein. But when I had gone forward a little, I perceived incontinent by their
diligence, that my labor should not be bestowed in vain. For they began so
easily to fashion their letters, so plainly to pronounce the words, so quickly
to learn by heart, and so surely to rehearse the ^ame, that I merv^^le But now
most block beaded Ass* be set to learning, and most prog^^^^ ^its corrupt with
pleasures.
at it, saving that the most part of them were fine, and cho^ wits, and of ripe
age, picked out of the company of the learned men, which not only of their
own free and voluntary will, but also by the commandment of the Council,
undertook to learn this language. Therefore in less then three years space,
there was nothing in the Greek tongue that they lacked. They were able to read
good Authors without any stay, if the book were not false. This kind of
learning, as I suppose, they took so much the sooner, because, it is somewhat
alliant to them: For I think that this Nation took their beginning of the
Greeks, because their speech, which in all other points is not much unlike the
Per sian tongue, keeping diverse sig^es and token of the Greek language in the
names of their Cities, and of their Magistrates. They have of me (for when I
was determined to enter into my fourth voyage, I cast into ^he Ship in the
stead of merchandise a pretty far^le of books, because I intended to come
again rather never, then shortly) they have, I say of me, the most part of
Platoes works, more of Aristotle's, also Theophrastus of plants, but in diverse
places (which I am sorry for) imperfect. For whiles they were a Ship-boord, a
Marmoset chanced upon the book, as it was negligently laid by, which wantonly
playing therewith, plucked out certain leaves and tore them in pieces. Of them
that have written the Grammar, they have only Las^aris. For Theodorus I carried
not with me, nor never a Dictionarie, but Hes^chius, and Dioscorides. They set
great store by Plutarches books. And they be delighted with Lucianes merry
conceits and jeasts. Of the Poets they have Aristophanes, Homer, Euripides, and
Sophocles in Ald^s small print. Of the Historians they have Thucidides,
Herodotus, and Herodian. Also my companion Tricius Apinatus carried with him
Physic books, certain small works of Hippocrates, and Galens* Microtechne.
The which book they have in great estimation: For though there be almost no
nation under heaven that has less need of Physic then they, yet this
notwith standing, Physic is no where in greater honor. Because they count
the Physic highly regarded.
knowledge of it among the godliest, and most profitable parts of Philosophy.
For whiles they by the help of this Philosophy search out the secret my
steries of nature, they think themselves to recciue thereby not only
wonderful great pleasure, but also to obtain great thanks and favor of the
Author and maker thereof. Whom they think according to the fashion of other
Artificers, to have set forth the marvailous and gorgious frame of the world
for man, with great affection, incentiuely to behold. Whom The contemplation of
nature.
only he has made of wit, and capacity to consider and understand the
excellency of so great a work. And therefore he bears (say they) more good
will and love to the curious and diligent beholder, and viewer of his work and
marveilour at the same, then he does to him, which like a very bruit Beast
without wit and reason, or as one without sense or mooving, has no regard to
so great and so wonderful a spectacle. The wits therefore of the Vtopians
inured and exercised in learning, be marvailous quick in the invention of
feats, helping any thing to the advantage and wealth of life. Howbeit two feats
they may thank us for. That is, the science of Imprinting, and the craft of
making Paper. And yet not only us, but chiefly and principally themselves. For
when we showed to them Aldus his print in books of paper, and told them of the
stuff whereof paper is made, and of the feat of graving letters, speaking
somewhat more, then we could plainly declare (for there was none of us, that
knew perfectly either the one or the other) they forth with very wittily
conjectured the thing. And whereas before, they wrote only in skins, in barks
of Trees, and in reeds, now they have attempted to make Paper, and to imprint
Letters. And though at the first it proved not all of the best, yet by often
assaying the same, they shortly got the fear of both. And have so brought the
matter about, that if they had copies of Greek authors, they could lack no
Books. But now they have no more, then I rehearsed before, saving that by
printing of books, they have multiplied and increased the same into many
thousands of Copies. Whosoever comes thither to see the Land, being excellent
in any gift of wit, or through much and long journeying, well experienced and
seen in the knowledge of many Countries (for the which cause we were very
welcome to them) him they receive and entertain wondrous gently and lovingly.
For they have delight to hear what is done in every Land, howbeit very few
Merchant men come thither.

For what should they bring thither, unless it were iron, or else Gold and
silver, which they had rather carry home again? Also such things as are to be
carried out of their land, they think it more wisdom to carry that geere
forth themselves, then that other should come thither to fetch it, to the
intent they may the better know the out lands on every side of them, and keep
in ure the feate and knowledge of failing.

Of Bondmen, Sick Persons, Wedlock, and* diverse other matters.
THey neither make Bondmen A^^ ^^vailons ^quity of this nation.
of prisoners taken in Battle, unless it be in ba^^^ile that they fought
themselves, ^or of bondmens children; nor to be short, of any such as they can
get out of foreign Countries, though he were yet there a bondsman. But either
such, as among themselves for heinous offenses be punished bondage, or else
such, as in the Cities of other Lands for great trespasses be condemned to
death. And of this sort of bondmen they have most store.

For many of them they bring home sometimes, paying very little for them, yea
most commonly getting them for gramercy. These sorts of bondmen they keep not
only in continual work and labor, but also in bands. But their own men they
handle hardest, whom they judge more desperate, and to have deserved greater
punishment, because they being so godly brought up to virtue in so excellent a
common wealth, could not for all that be refrained from misdoing. Another kind
of bondmen they have, when a vile drudge being a poor laborer in another
Country, does choose of his own free will to be a bondsman among them. These
they entreat and o^der honestly, and entertain almost as gently, as their own
free citizens, saving that they put them to a little more labor, as thereto
accustomed. If any such, be disposed to depart thence (which seldom is seen)
they neither hold him against his will, neither send him a way with empty
hands. The sick (as I said) they see to with great (...) that be (...).
affection, and let nothing at all pass, c^cerning either Physic or good
diet, whereby they may be restored again to their health. Such as be sick or
incureable diseases, they comfort with sitting by them, and to be short,
withal manner of helps that may be. But if the disease be not only
incurable, but also full of continual pain and anguish the^ the Priests and
the Magistrates exhort the man, seeing he is not able to do any duty of life
and by overliving; his own death is noisome and irksome to other and grievous
to himself: that he will determine with himself no longer to cherish that
pestilent and painful disease* And seeing Voluntary death.
his life is to him but a torment, that he will not be unwilling to die, but
rather take a good hope to him, and either dispatch himself out of that
painful life, as out of a prison, or a rack of torment, or else suffer
himself willingly to be rid out of it by other. And in so doing, they tell
him he shall do wisely, seeing by his death he shall loose no commodity, but
end his pain. And because in that act he shall follow the counsel of the
Priests, that is to say, of the Interpreters of Gods will and pleasure, they
show him that he shall do like a godly and a virtuous man. They that be thus
persuaded, finish their lives willingly, either with hunger, or else dye in
their sleep without any feeling of death. But they cause none such to dye
against his will, nor they use no less ^iligence and attendance about him:
believing this to be an honorable death. Else he that kills himself before
that the Priests and the Counsel have allowed the cause of his death, him as
unworthy either to be buried, or with fire to be consumed, they cast v^buried
into some stinking marrish. The Of Wedl^.
woman is not married before she be eighteen years old.

The man is four years elder before he marry. If either the man or the woman
be proved to have actually offended before their marriage, with another, the
party that so has trespassed, is sharply punished. And both the offenders, be
forbidden ever after in all their life to marry: unless the fault be forgiven
by the Princes pardon. Both the good man and good wife of the house, where that
offense was committed, as being slack and negligent in looking to their
charge, be in danger of great reproach, and infamy. That offense is so sharply
punished, because they perceive that unless they be diligently kept from the
liberty of this vice, few will join together in the love of marriage, wherein
all the life must be led with one, and also all the griefs and displeasures
coming therewith patiently be taken and born. Furthermore in choosing wives
and husbands, they observe earnestly and straightly a custom, which seemed to
us very fond and foolish. For a sad and honest patron shows the woman be she
Maid or widow, naked to the wooer. And likewise a sage and discreet man,
exhibiteth the wooer naked to the woman. At this custom we laughed, and
disallowed it as foolish. But they on the other part do greatly wonder at the
folly of all other Nations, which in buying a Colt, whereas a little money is
in hazard, be so chary and circumspect, that though he be almost all bare, yet
they will not buy him, unless the saddle and all the harness be taken off,
least under those coverings be hid some gall or sore. And yet in choosing a
Wife, which shall be either pleasure or displeasure to them all their life
after, they be so rechlesse, that all the residue of the woman's body being
eovered with clothes, they esteem her scarcely by one hand breadth (for they
can see no more but her face) and so to join her to them not without great
jeopardy of evil agreeing together, if any thing in her body after ward should
chance to offend, and mislike them.

For all men be not so wise, as to have respect to the virtuous condition of
the party. And the endowments of the body, cause the virtues of the mind more
to be esteemed and regarded: yea, even the marriages of wise men. Verily so
foul deformity may be hid under those coverings, that it may quite alienate
and take away the man's mind from his wife, when it shall not be lawful for
their bodies to be separate again. If such deformity happen by any chance
after the Marriage is consummate and finished, well, therein no remedy but
patience. Every man must take his fortune well in worth. But it were well done
that a law were made whereby all such deceits might be eschewed, and avoided
before hand.

And this were they constrained more earnestly to look upon, because they
only of the nations in that part of the world be content every man with one
wife a piece. And matrimony is there never broken, but by death: except
adultery break the bond, or else the intolerable wayward Diversement.
manners of either party. For if either of them find themselves for any such
cause grieved, they may by the license of the Counsel, change and take
another. But the other party lives ever after in infamy, and out of wedlock.
Howbeit the husband to put away his wife for no other fault, but for that some
mishap is fallen to her body, this by no means they will suffer? for they
judge it a great point of cruelty, that any body in their most need of help
and comfort, should be cast off and forsaken, and that old age, which both
brings sickness with it, and is a sickness it self, should unkindly, and
unfaithfully be dealt withal. But now and then it chances, whereas the man and
woman cannot well agree between themselves both of them finding other, with
whom they hope to live more quietly and merrily, that they by the full consent
of them both, be divorsed asunder and married again to other. But that not
without the authority of the Council. Which agrees to no divorses, before
they and their wives have diligently tried and examined the matter. Yea, and
then also they be loath to consent to it, because they know this to be the next
way to break love between man and wife, to be in easy hope of a new
marriage. Breakers of wedlock be punished with most grievous bondage. And if
both the offenders were married, then the parties which in that behalf have
suffered wrong, being divorced from the adulterers, be married together, if
they will, or else to whom they lust. But if either of them both do still
continue in love toward so unkind a bedfellow, the use of wedlock is not to
them forbidden, if the party faultlesse be disposed to follow in toyling and
drudgery, ^he person, which for that offense is condemned to bondage. And very
often it chances, that the repentance of the one, and the earnest diligence of
the other, does so move the Prince with pity and compassion, that he restores
the bond person from servitude, to liberty and freedom again. But if the same
party be taken e^^soones in that fault, there is no other way but death. To
other trespasses no prescript punishment is appointed by any law. But according
to The deserving of punishment put to the discretion* of the Magistrates.
the heinousness of the offense, or contrary, so the punishment is moderated
by the discretion of the Council. The husbands chastise their wives, and the
parents their children, unless they have done any so horrible an offense, that
the open punishment thereof makes much for the advancement of honest manners.

But most commonly the most heinous faults be punished with the incommodity of
bondage. For that they suppose to be to the offenders no le^se grief, and to
the Commonwealth more profit, then if they should hastily put them to death,
and so make them quite out of the way. For their comes more profit of their
labor, the^ of their death, and by their example they fear other the longer
from like offenses. But if they being thus used, do^ rebel and kick again,
then forsooth they be ^laine as desperate and wild beasts, whom neither prison
nor chain could restrain and keep under. But they, which take their bondage
patiently, be not left al hopeless. For after they have been broken and tamed
with long miseries, if then they show such repentance, as thereby it may be
perceived that they be ^orier for their offense then for their punishment:
sometimes by the Princes prerogative, and sometimes by the voice or else
consent of the people, their bondage either is m^ttigated, or clean released
and forgiven. He that mooveth to adultery is in no less danger and jeopardy,
then Motion to Adultery punished.
if he had committed adultery in deed. For in all offenses they count the
intent and pretensed prpose as evil, as the act or deed it self, thanking
that no let ought to excuse him, that did his best to have no let. They have
singular delight and pleasure in Fools. And as it is Pleasure of fools.
a great reproach to do to any of them hurt or injury, so they prohibit not
to take pleasure of foolishness. For that they think, does much good to the
fools. And if any man be so sad and stern, that he cannot laugh neither at
their words, nor at their deeds, none of them be committed to his tuition: for
fear least he would not entreat them gently and favorably enough: to whom
they should bring no delectation (for other good ^esse in them is none) much
les^e any profit should they yield him. To ^ocke a man for his deformity, or
that he lacks one part or limme of his body, is counted great dishonesty and
reproach, not to him that is mocked, but to him that mocketh. Which unwisely
does imbraid any man of that as a vice, that was not in his power to eschew,
also as they count and reckon very little wit Co^^terfe^ beauty.
to be in him, that regards not natural beauty and comeliness; so to help
the same with paintings, is taken for a vain and a wanton pride, not without
great infamy. For they know even by very experience, that no comeliness of
beauty does so highly commend and advance the wives in the conceits of their
husbands, as honest conditions and lowliness: For as love is oftentimes won
with beauty, so it is not kept, preserved and continued, but by virtue and
obedience. Si^^e punished and virtue rewarded.
They do not only fear their people from doing evil, by punishments, but
also allure them to virtue with rewards of honor. Therefore they set up in the
Market place the Images of notable men, and of such as have been bountiful
benefactors to the Commonwealth, for the perpetual memory of their good acts:
and also that the glory and renown of the ancestors may stir and provoke
their posterity to virtue. He that inordinatly The inordinate desire of honors
condemned.
and ambitiously desires promotions, is left all hopeless for ever attaining
any promotion as long as he lives. They live together lovingly: For no
Magistrate is either haughty or fearful. Fathers they be called, and like
fathers they use themselves. The Citizens (as it is their duty) willingly
exhibit unto them due honor without any compulsion. Nor the Prince himself is
not known from the other by princely apparel, or a robe of state, nor by a
crown or diade me Magistrates honored.
royal, or cap of maintenance, but by a little sheafe of Corn carried before
him. And so a taper of wax is borne before the Bishop, whereby only he is
known. They have but few F^^ Laws.
laws. For to people to instruct and institute, very few do suffice. Yea,
this thing they chiefly reprove among other actions, that inumerable books of
laws and expositions upon the same be not sufficient. But they think it against
all right and justice, that men should be bound to those laws, which either be
in number more then be able to be read, or else blinder and darker, then that
any man can well understand them. Furthermore they utterly The multitude of
Lawyers superfluous.
exclude and banish all Atturnies, Proctors, and Sergeants at the Law, which
craftily handle matters, and subtly dispute of the laws. For they think it
most meet, that every man should plead his own matter, and tell the same tale
to the Judge, that he would tell to his man of law. So shall there be less
circumstance of words, and the truth shall sooner come to light, whiles the
Judge with a discreet judgment does away the words of him, who^ no lawyer has
instruct with deceit, and whiles he bears out simple wits against the false
and malicious circumventions of crafty children. This is hard to be observed in
other Countries, in so infinite a number of blind and intricate laws. But in
Vtopia every man is a cunning Lawyer. For as (I said) they have very few laws:
and the plainer and grosser that any interpretation is: that they allow as most
just. For all laws (say they) be made The intent of Laws.
and published only to the intent, that by them every man shall be put in
remembrance of his duty. But the crafty and subtle interpretation of them
(forasmuch as few can attain thereto) can put very few in that remembrance,
whereas the simple, the plain, and gross meaning of the laws is open to
every man. Else as touching the vulgar sort of the people, which be both most
in number, and* have most need to know their duties, were it not as good for
then that no Law were made at all, as when it is made to bring so blind an
interpretation upon it, that without great wit and long arguing no man can
discuss it? To the finding out whereof, neither the gross judgment of the
people can attain, neither the whole life of them that be occupied in working
for their livings, can suffice thereto. These verrues of the Vtopians have
caused their next neighbors and borderers, which live free and under no
subjection (for the Vtopians long ago, have delivered many of them from
Tyranny) to make Magistrates of them, some for a year, and some for five
years space. Which when the time of their office is expired, they bring home
again with honor and praise, and take new again with them into their Country.

These nations have undoubtedly very well and holsomly provided for their
Commonwealths. For seeing that both the making and the marring of the Weal
public, does depend and hang upon the manners of the Rulers and Magistrates,
what officers could they more wisely have chosen, then those which cannot be
lead from honesty by bribes (for to the^ that shortly after shall depart thence
into their own Country, money should be unprofitable) nor yet be moved either
with favor, or malice toward any man, as being strangers, and unacquainted
with the people? The which two vices of affection and avarice, where they take
place in judgments, incontinent they break justice, the strongest and surest
bond of a Commonwealth. These people which fetch their officers and rulers
from them, the Vtopians call their fellows. And other to whom they have been
beneficial, they call their friends. As (...) and to break both league and
truth. The which crafty dealing, yea the which fraud and deceit, if they should
know it to be practiced among private men in their bargains and contracts,
they would incontinent cry out a^^^ with an open mouth, and a sour
countenance, as an offense most detestable, and worthy to be punished with a
s^^^me^ all death: yea even very they that advance themselves Authors of like
counsel, is given to Princes. Wherefore it may well be thought, either that
all justice is but a base and a low virtue, and which avails it self far
under the high dignity of Kings: Or, at the leastwise, that there be two
lustices, the one meet for the inferior sort of the people, going a foot and
creeping low by the ground, and bound down on every side with many bands,
because it shall not run at rovers. The other a princely virtue, which like as
it is of much higher Majesty, then the other poor justice, so also it is of
much more liberty, as to the which nothing is unlawful that it h^steth after.
These manners of Princes (as I said) which be there so evil keepers of
leagues, cause the Vtopians, as I suppose, to make no leagues at all which
perchance would change their mind if they lived here. Howbeit they think that
though leagues be never so faithfully observed and kept, yet the custom or
making leagues was very evil begun. For this causes men (as though nations
which be separate a sunder, by the space of a little hill, or River, were
coupled together by no society or bond of nature) to think themselves borne
adversaries and enemies one to another, and that it were lawful for the one to
seek the death and destruction of the other, if leagues were not: yea, and
that after the leagues be accorded, friendship does not grow and increase: But
the license of robbing and stealing does still remain, as fair forth as for
lack of foresight and advisement in writing the words of the league, any
sentence or clause to the contrary is not therein sufficiently comprehended.
But they be of a contrary opinion. That is, that no man ought to be counted an
enemy which has done no injury. And that the fellowship of nature is a strong
league, and that men be better and more surely knit together by love and
benevolence, then by covenants of leagues: by hearty affection of mind, then by
words

Of War-fare.
War or Battle as a thing very beastly, and yet no kind of beasts in so
much use as to man, they do detest and abhor. And contrary to the custom
almost of all other nations, they count nothing so much against glory, as glory
gotten in war. And therefore though they do daily practice and exercise
themselves in the discipline of war, not only the men, but also the women
upon certain appointed days, least they should be to seek in the feat of
arms, if need should require, yet they never go to battle, but either in
the defense of their own Country, or to drive out of their friends Land the
enemies that have invaded it, or by the power to deliver from the yoke and
bondage of Tyranny some people, that be therewith oppressed. Which thing they
do of mere pity and compassion. Howbeit they send help to their friends,
not ever in their defense, but sometimes also to requite and revenge injuries
before to them done. But this they do not unless their counsel and advise in
the matter be asked, whiles it is yet new and fresh, For if they find the cause
probable, and if the contrary part will not restoreagaine such things as be of
them justly demanded, then they be the chief authors and makers of the war.
Which they do not only as often as by ^^rodes and invosions of soldiers preyes
and booties be driven, but then also much more mortally, when their friends
merchants in any land, either under the pretense of unjust laws, or else by
the wresting and wrong understanding of good laws, do sustain an unjust
accusation under the color of justice. Neither the battle which the Vtopians
fought for the Nephelogetes against the Alaopolitanes a little before our time,
was made for any other cause, but that the Nephelogete merchant men, as the
Vtopians thought, suffered wrong of the Alaopolitans, under the pretense of
right. But whether it were right or wrong, it was with so cruel and mortal
war revenged, the Countries round about joining their help and power to the
puissance and malice of both parties, that most flourishing and wealthy
peoples, being some of them shrewdly shaken, and some of them sharply beaten,
the mischiefs were not finished nor ended, until the Alaopolitans, at the
last were yielded up as bondmen into the jurisdiction of the Nephelogetes. For
the Vtopians fought not this war for themselves. And yet the Nephelogetes
before the war, when the Alaopolitanes flourished in wealth, were nothing to
be compared with them. So eagerly the Vtopians prosecute the injuries done to
their friends: yea, in money matters and not their own likewise. For if they
by covine or g^^le be wiped beside their goods, so that no violence be done to
their bodies, they ease their anger by abstaining from occupying with that
nation, until they have made satisfaction. Not for because they set less
store by their own Citizens, then by their friends: but that they take the
loss of their friends money more heavily then the loss of their own. Because
that their friends Merchant men, for as much as that the loss is their own
private goods, sustain great damage by the loss. But their own Citizens lose
nothing but of the common goods, and of that which was at home plentiful and
almost superfluous, else had it not been sent forth. Therefore no man feels
the loss. And for this cause they think it too cruel an act, to revenge the
loss with the death of man, the incommodity* of the which loss no man feels
neither in his life, nor yet in his living. But if it chance that any of their
men be in any other Country be maimed or killed, whether it be done by a common
or a private Council, knowing and trying out the truth of the matter by their
Ambassadors, unless the offenders be rendered unto them in recompense of the
injury, they will not be appeased: but incontinent they proclaim War against
them. The offenders yielded, they punish either with death, or with bondage.
They be not only sorry, but also ashamed to atchieve the victory with
bloodshed, counting it great folly to buy precious wares too dear. Victory
dear bought.
They rejoice and avaunt themselves, if they vanquish and oppress their enemy
by craft and deceit. And for that act they make a general triumph, and as if
the matter were manfully handled, they set up a pillar of stone in the place,
where they so vanquished their enemies, in token of their victory. For then
they glory, then they boast and crack, that they have played the men indeed,
when they have so overcome, as no other living creature, but only man could:
that is to say, by the might and puissance of wit. For with bodily strength
(say they) Bears, Lions, Boares, wolfes, dogs, and other wild beasts do
fight. And as the most part of them do pass us in strength and fierce
courage, so in wit and reason we be much stronger then they all. Their chief
and principal purpose in war, is to obtain that thing, which if they had
before obtained, they would not have moved battle. But if that be not
possible, they take such cruel vengeance of them which be in the fault, that
ever after they be afraid to do the like.

This is their chief and principal intent, which they immediately and first of
all prosecute, and set forward. But yet so, that they be more circumspect in
avoiding and eschewing jeopardies, then they be desirous of praise and renown.
Therefore immediately after that war is once solemnly denounced, they procure
many Proclamations signed with their own common seal, to be set up privily at
one time in their enemes land, in places most frequented. In these
proclamations they promise great rewards to him that will kill their enemies
Prince, and somewhat less gifts, but them very great also, for every head of
the^, whose names be in the said proclamations contained. They be those whom
they count their chief adversaries, next unto the Prince whom there is
prescribed, unto him that kills any of the proclaimed persons, that is
doubled to him that bri^geth any of the some to them alive: yea, and to the
procla^^ed persons themselves, if they will change their minds, and come into
them, taking their parts, they proffer the same great rewards with pardon and
surety of their lives. Therefore it quickly comes to pass, that their
enemies have all other men in suspicion, and be unthankful, and mistrusting
among themselves one to another living in great fear, and in no l^s^e
jeopardy. For it is well known, that diverse times the most part of them (and
specially the Prince himself) has been betrayed of them, in whom they put
their most hope and trust. So there is no manner of act nor deed that gifts and
rewards do not enforce men unto. And in rewards they keep no measure. But
remembering and considering into how great hazard and jeopardy they call them,
endeavor themselves to recompense the greatness of the danger with like great
benefits. And therefore they promise not only wonderful great abundance of
gold, but also lands of great revenues lying in most safe places among their
friends. And their promises they perform faithfully without any fraud or
covine.

This custom of buying and selling adversaries, among other people is
disallowed, as a cru^l act of a base and a cowardish mind. But they in this
behalf think themselves much praise worthy, as who likewise, men by this
means dispatch great Wars without Batta^^e o^ skirmish. Yea, they count it
also a deed of pity and mercy, because that by the death of a few offenders,
the lives of a great number of Innocents, as well of their own men, as also of
their enemies, be ransomed and saved, which in fighting should have been
slain. For they do no less pity the base and common sort of their enemies
people, then they do their own: knowing that they be driven and forced to
war against their wills, by the furious in^dnesse of their Princes and heads.
If by none of these means the matter go forward, as they would have it, then
they procure occasions of debate, and dissension to be spread among their
enemies. As by bringing the Princes brother, o^ some of the noble men in hope
to obtain the Kingdom. If this way prevail not, then they raise up the
people that be next neighbors and borde^e^s to their enemies, and them they
set in their necks under the color of some old title of right, such as Kings
do never lack. To them they promise their help and aid in their War. And
as for money they give them abundance. But of their own Citizens they send to
them few or none: whom they make so much of* and love so ^^tirely, that they
would not be willing to change any of them for their adversaries Prince. But
them gold and silver, because they keep it all for this only purpose, they
lay it out ^ranckly and ^^^ly: as who should live even a, wealthily, if they
had ^^stowed it every penny. Yea and besides their riches, which they keep at
home, they have also an infinite treasure abroad, by reason that (as I said
before) many Nations be in their debt. Therefor they hire soldiers out of
all Countries and send them to Battle, but chiefly of the Zapolets. This
people, is five hundred miles from Vtopia Eastward. They be hidious, savage,
and fierce, dwelling in wild Woods, and high mountains, where they were bred
and brought up. They be of an hard nature, able to abide and sustain heat,
cold, and labor, abhorring from all dilicate dainties, occupying no husbandry
no^ tillage of the ground, homely and rude both in building of their houses,
and in their apparel, given unto no goodness, but only to the breeding and
bringing up of Cat^le. The most part of their living is by hunting and
stealing. They be borne only to war, which they diligently and earnestly
seek for. And when they have gotten it, they be wondrous glad thereof. They go
forth of their Co^^^^y in great companies together and w^ ^os^ever lacks
souldio^rs, there they proffer their service for small wages. This is only the
craft that they have to get their living by. They maintain their lives, by
seeking their death. For them with whom they be in wages, they fight hardly,
fiercely, and faithfully. But they bind themselves for no certain time. But
upon this condition they enter into bonds, that the next day they will take
part with the other side for greater wages, and the next day after that, they
will be ready to come back again for a little more money. There be few wars
there away, wherein is not a great number of them in both parties. Therefore it
daily chances, that nigh kinsfolk which were hired together on one part, and
there very friendly and familiarly used themselves one with another, shortly
after being separate into contrary parts, run one against another enviously and
fiercely: and forgetting both kindred and friendship thrust their swords one in
another. And that for none other cause, but that they be hired for contrary
Princes for a little money. Which they do so highly regard and esteem, that
they will easily be provoked to change parts for a halfe-penny more wages by
the day. So quickly they have taken a smacke in covetousness. Which for all
that, is to them no profit. For that they get by fighting, immediately they
spend need^esse, unthri^^ily and wretchedly in ry^^.

This people sighteth for the Vtopians against all Nations, because they give
them greater wages, then any other nation will. For the Vtopians like as they
seek good men to use well, so they seek these evil and vicious men to abuse.
Whom, when need requires, with promises of great rewards, they put forth into
great jeopardies. From whence the most part of them never comes again to
ask their rewards. But to them that remain alive, they pay that which they
promised faithfully, that they may be the more willing to put themselves in
like danger another time. Nor the Vtopians pass not how many of them they
bring to destruction. For they believe that they should do a very good deed
for all mankind, if they could rid out of that world all that foul stinking
den of that most wicked and cursed people. Next unto these, they use the
soldiers of them for whom they fight: and then the help of their other
friends. And last of all, they join to their own Citizens. Among whom they
give to one of tried virtue* and powers, the rule, governance and conduction of
the whole Army. Under him they appoint two other, which whiles he is safe, be
both private and out of office. But if he be taken or slain the one of the
other succedeth him, as it were by inheritance. And if the second miscarry,
then the third takes his room, least that (as the chance of Battle is
uncertain and doubtful) the jeopardy of death of the Captain should bring
the whole army in hazard. They choose soldiers out of every City, those,
which put forth themselves willingly. For they thrust no man forth into war
against his will: because they believe, if any man be fearful and
faint-hearted of nature, he will not only do no manfull and hardy act
himself, but also be occasion of cowardnesse to his fellows. But if any
Battle be made against their own Country, then they put these cowards (so
that they be strong bodied) in Ships among other bold hearted men. Or else they
dispose them upon the w^ls, from whence they may n^^ fly. Thus what for shame
that their enemies be at hand, and what for because they be without hope of
running away, they forget all fear. And many times extreme necessity turns
cowardnesse into prowess and manliness. But as none o^ them is thrust forth
of his Country into war against his will, so women that be willing to
accompany their husbands in time of war, be not prohibited o^ let. Yea
they provoke and exhort them to it with praises. And in set field the wives do
stand every one by their own husbands side. Also every man is compassed next
about with his own children, kinsfolks, and alliance, That they whom nature
chiefly mooveth to mutual succor, thus stands together, may help one
another. It is a great reproach and dishonesty for the husband ^^ ^ome home
without his wife, or the wife without her husband, or the son without his
father. And therefore if the other part stick so hard by it, that the battle
come to their hands, it is fought with great slaughter and bloodshed, even to
the utter destruction of both parties. For as they make all the means and
shifts that may be, to keep themselves from the necessity of fighting, or that
they may dispatch the battle by their hired soldiers, so when there is no
remedy, but that they must needs fight themselves* then they do as
courageously fall to it, as before, whiles they might, they did wisely avoid
and refuse it. Nor they be not most fierce at the first brunt. But in
continuance by little and little their fierce courage increases, with so
stubborn and obstinate minds, that they will rather die then give back an
^nch. For that surety of living, which every man has at home, being joined
with no careful anxiety or remembrance how their posterity shall live after
them (for this pensiveness oftentimes breaks and abateth courageous
stomachs) making them stout and hardy, and disdainful to be conquered.
Moreover, their knowledge in chiualry and feats of arms, puts them in a
good hope. Finally the wholesome and virtuous opinions wherein they were
brought up even from their childhood, partly through learning, and partly
through the good ordinance and laws of their Weal public, augment and
increase their manfull courage. By reason whereof, they neither set so little
store by their lives, that they will rashly and unadvisedly cast them away: nor
they be not so far in lewd and fond love therewith, that they will shamefully
covet to keep them, when honesty bids leave them. When the battle is
hottest, and in all places most fierce and fervent, The Captain is chiefly to
be pursued to the intent the battle may the sooner ^e ended.
a band of chosen and picked young men, which be sworn to live and dye
together, take upon them to destroy their adversaries captain. Whom they
invade now with privy wiles, now by open strength. At him they strike both
near and far off. He is assailed with a long and a continual assault, fresh
men still coming in the wearied men's places. And seldom it chances (unless
he save himself by fiying) that he is not either slain or else taken prisoner,
and yielded to his enemies alive. If they win the field, they persecute not
their enemies with the violent rage of slaughter. For they had rather take them
alive, then kill them. Neither do they follow the chase and pursuit of their
enemies, but they leave behind them one part of their host in battle array,
under their standards. Insomuch, that if all their whole army be discomfited
and overcome, saving the reward, and that they therewith atchieue the victory,
then they had rather let all their enemies escape, then to follow them out of
array. For they remember it has chanced unto themselves more then once: the
whole power and strength of their host being vanquished and put to flight,
whiles their enemies rejoicing in the victory have persecuted them, flying some
one away and some another, a small company of their men lying in ambush, there
ready at all occasions, have suddenly risen upon them thus dispersed and
scattered out of array, and through presumption of safety unadvisedly pursuing
the chase and have incontinent changed the fortune of the whole battle, and
spite of their teethes wresting out of their hands the sure and undoubted
victory, being a little before conquered, have for their part conquered the
conquerers. It is hard to say whether they be craftier in laying an ambush, or
wittier in avoiding the same. You would think they ^^tend to file, when they
mean nothing less. And contrariwise, when they go about that purpose, you
would believe it were the least part of their thought. For if they perceive
themselves overmatched in number, or closed in too narrow a place, then they
remove their camp either in the night season with silence, or by some policy
they deceive their enemies, or in the day time they retire back so softly,
that it is no less jeopardy to meddle with them when they give back, then
when they press on. They fence and fortify their camp surely with a deep
and a broad trench. The earth thereof is cast inward. Nor they do not set
drudges and slaves a work about it. It is done by the hands of the soldiers
themselves. All the whole Army works upon it, except them that keep watch
and ward in armor before the trench for sudden adventures. Therefore by the
labor of so many, a large trench closing in a great compass of ground, is
made in less time then any man would believe. Their Armor or hardness Their
Armor.
which they wear, is sure and strong to receive strokes, and handsome for all
moovings and gestures of the body, insomuch that it is not unweldy to swim
in. For in the discipline of their war-fare, among other feats they learn to
swim in harness. Their weapons be arrows aloof, which they shoot both
strongly and surely, not only footmen, but also horsemen. At hand strokes they
used not sword, but Pollaxes, which be mortal, as well in sharpness as in
weight, both for foynes and down strokes. Engines for war they devise and
invent wondrous wittily. Which when they be made they keep very secret, least
if they should be known before need require, they should be but laughed at,
and serve to no purpose. But in making them, hereunto they have chief respect,
that they be both easy to be carried, and handsome to be moved, and turned
about. Truce taken with their enemies for a short time, they do so firinely Of
Truces
and faithfully keep, that they will not break it, no, not though they be
thereunto provoked. They do not waste nor destroy their enemies land with
forragings, nor they burn not up their Corn. Yea they save it as mnch as may
be from being overrunne and trodden down, either with men or horses, thinking
that it grows for their own use and profit. They hurt no man that is
unarmed, vnles^e he be an Espyall. All Cities that be yielded unto them, they
defend. And such as they win by force of assault, they neither dispoyle nor
sack, but them that withstood and dissuaded the yielding up of the same, they
put to death, the other soldiers they punish with bondage. All the weak
multitude they leave untouched If they know that any Citizens counseled to
yield and render up the City, to them they give part of the condemned men's
goods. The residue they distribute and give freely among them, whose help they
had in the same war. For none of themselves takes any portion of the prey.
But when the battle is finished and ended, they put their friends to never a
penny cost of all the charge; that they were at, but lay it upon their necks
that be conquered. Them they burden with the whole charge of their expenses,
which they demand of them partly in money, to be kept for like use of battle,
and partly in lands of great evenewes to be paid unto them yearly for ever.
Such revenewes they have now in many Countries. Which by little and little
rising of ^^vers and sundry causes, be increased above seven hundred thousand
ducates by the year. Thither they send forth some of their Citizens as Lieft
enants, to live there sumptuously, like men of honor and renown. And yet this
notwithstanding, much money is saved, which comes to the common treasury:
unless it so chan^e, that they had rather trust the Country with the money.
Which many times they do so long, until they have need to occupy it. And it
seldom happens that they demand all. Of these lands they assign part unto
them, which at their rebuest and exhortation, put themselves in such
jeopardies, as I spoke of before. If any Prince stir up war, against them,
intending to invade their land, they mee^ him incontinent out of their own
borderers, with great power and strength. For they never lightly make war in
their own Country. Nor they be never brought into so extreme necessity, as to
take help out of foreign lands into their own Island.

Of the Religions in Vtopia.
THere be diverse kinds of Religion, not only in sundry parts of the Island but
also in diverse places of every City. Some worship for God, the Sun: some the
Moon: some other of the Planets. There be that give worship to a man that was
once of excellent^ virtue or of famous glory, not only as GOD, but also as the
chiefest and highest GOD. But the most and the wisest part (rejecting all
these) believe, that there is a certain godly power unknown, everlasting,
incomprehensible, inexplicable, far above the capacity and reach of man's wit,
dispersed throughout all the whole world, not in bigness, but in virtue and
power. Him they call the father of all. To him alone they attribute the
beginnings, the increasings, the proceedings, the changes, and the ends of all
things. Neither they give any divine honors to any other then to him. Yea all
the other also, though they be in diverse opinions, yet in this point they agree
all together with the wisest sort, in believing that there is one principal
GOD, the maker and ruler of the whole world: whom they all commonly in their
Country language call Mythra. But in this they disagree that among some he is
counted one, and among some another. For every one of them, whatsoever that is
which he takes for the chief God, thinks it to be the very same nature, to
whose only divine might and majesty the sum and sovereignty of all things by
the consent of all people is attributed and given. Howbeit they all begin by
little and little to forsake and fall from this variety of superstitions, and
to agree together in that religion which seems by reason to pass and excel
the residue. And it is not to be doubted, but all the other would long ago
have been abolished, but that whatsoever unprosperous thing happened to any of
them, as he was minded to change his religion, the fearfulness of people did
take it, not as a thing coming by chance but as sent from GOD out of Heaven.
As though the the God, whose honor he was forsaking, would have revenged that
wicked purpose against him. But after they heard us speak of the name of
Christ, of his doctrine, laws, miracles, and of the no less wonderful
constancy of so many martyrs, whose blood willingly shead, brought a great
number of nations throughout all parts of the world into their sect: you will
not believe with how glad minds, they agreed unto the same: whether it were by
the secret inspiration of God, or else for that they thought it nighest unto
that opinion, which among them is counted the chiefest. Howbeit I think this
was no small help and furtherance in the matter, that they heard us say, that
Religious houses.
Christ instituted among his, all things common: and that the same co^munity
does yet remain amongst y^ rightest Christian companies. Verily howsoever it
came to pass, many of them consented together in our religion, and were washed
in the holy water of Baptisine. But because among us four (for no more of us
was left alive, two of our company being dead) there was no Priest, which I am
right sorry for: they being entered and instructed in all other points of our
religion, lack only those sacraments, which none but Priests do minister.
Howbeit they understand and percciue them, and be very desirous of the same.
Yea they reason and dispute the matter earnestly among themselves, whither
without the sending of a Christian Bishop, one chosen out of their own people,
may receive the order of Priesthood. And truly they were minded to choose one.
But at my departure thence they had chosen none.

They also which do not agree to Christ's religion, far no man from it, nor
speak against any man that has received it. Saving that one of our company in
my presence was sharply punished. He as soon as he was baptized began against
our wills with more earnest affection, then wisdom to reason of Christ's
Religion: and began to wax so hot in this matter, that he did not only
prefer our Religion before all other, but also did utterly despise and
condemn all other, calling them profane, and the followers of them wicked and
devilish, and the children of everlasting damnation. When he had thus long
reasoned the matter, they laid hold on him, accused him, and condemned him into
exile, not as a dispiser of religion, but as a sedicious person, and a rayser
up of dissension among the people. For this is one of the ancientest laws
among them: that no man shall be blamed for reasoning in the maintenance of his
own religion. For King Vtopus, even at the first beginning, hearing that the
inhabitants of the land were before his coming thither, at continual
dissension and strife among them selves for their religions: perceiving also
that this common dissension (whiles every several Sect took several parts in
fighting for their Country) was the only occasion of his Conquest over them
all, as soon as he had gotten the victory. First of all, he made a decree,
that it should be lawful for every man to favor and follow what religion he
would, and that he might do the best he could to bring other to his opinion,
so that he did it peaceably, gently, quietly, and soberly, without hasty and
contentious rebuking and inveying against other. If he could not by fair and
gentle speech induce them unto his opinion, yet he should use no kind of
violence, and refrain from displeasant and sedicious words. To him that would
vehemently and fervently in this cause strife and contend, was decreed,
Sedi^ious reasone^s punished.
banishment, or bondage. This law did King Vtopus make not only for the
maintenance of peace, which he saw through continual contentation and mortal
hatred utterly extinguished: but also because he thought this decree should
make for the furtherance of religion. Whereof he durst define and determine
nothing unadvisedly, as doubting whither God desiring manifold and diverse sorts
of honor, would inspire sundry men with sundry kinds of religion. And this
surely he thought a very unmeet and foolish thing, and a point of arrogant
presumption, to compel all other by violence and threatenings to agree to the
same, that thou beleevest to be true. Furthermore, though there be one
religion, which a lone is true, and all other vain and superstitions, yet did
he well foresee (so that the matter were handdled with reason and sober
modesty) that the truth of the own power would at the last issue out and come
to light. But if contention and debate in that behalf should continually be
used, as the worst men be most obstinate and stubborn, and in their evil
opinion most constant: he perceived that the^ the best and honest religion
would be ^roden under foot and destroyed by most vain superstitions, even as
good corn is by thorns and weeds over grown and choked. Therefore all this
matter he left undiscussed, and gave to every man free liberty and Novil^
opinion to be conceived of man's worthy ^^t^re.
choice to believe what he would. Saving that he earnestly and straightly charged
them, that no man should conceive so vile and base an (...) ^^ (...) of man's
nature, as to think that the souls do die and perish with the body: or that
the world runs at all adventures, governed by no divine providence. And
therefore they believe that after this life vices be extremely punished, and
virtues bountifully rewarded. He that is of a contrary opinion, they count not
in the number of men, as one that has availed the high nature of his soul, to
the vileness of brute beasts bodies: much less in the number of the Citizens.
whose laws and ordinances, if it were not for fear, he would nothing at all
esteem. For you may* be sure that he will study either with craft privily to
mock, or else violently to break the common laws of his country, in whom
remains no further fear then of the laws, nor no further hope then of the
body. Wherefore he that is thus minded is deprived of all honors, excluded from
all offices, and reject Irreligious people secluded from all honors.
from all common administrations in the weale-publique.

And thus he is of all sorts despised, as of an unprofitable, and of a base and
vile nature. Howbeit, they put him to no punishment, A very strange saying.
because they be persuaded, that it is in no man's power to believe what he
list. No, nor they constrain him not with threatenings to dissemble his mind,
and show countenance contrary to his thought. For deceit and Deceit and
falsehood detested.
falsehood, and all manner of lies, as next unto fraud, they do marveilously
deject and abhor. But they suffer him not to dispute in his opinion, and that
only among the common people. For else apart among the Priests and men of
gravity* they do not only suffer, but also exhort him to dispute and argue
hoping that, at the last, that mid^e^se will give place to reason. There be
also other, and of them no small number, which be not bidden to speak their
minds, as grounding their opinion upon some reason, being in their living
neither evil nor vicious. Their here^ie is much contrary to the A mar^eilous
strong opinion touching the souls of brute beasts.
other. For they believe that the souls of the brute beasts be immorall and
everlasting. But nothing to be compared with others in dignity, neither
ordained and predestinate to like felicity. For all they believe certainly and
surely that man's bliss shall be so great, that they do mourn and lament
every man's sickness, but no man's death, unless it be on whom they see depart
from his life carefully, and against his will. For this they take for a very
evil token, as though To die unwillingly an evil taken.
the soul being in despair, and vexed in conscience, through some privy and
secret forefeeling of the punishment now at hand, were afraid to depart. And
the^ they think he shall not be welcome to GOD, which when he is called,
runs not to him gladly, but is drawn by force, and sore against his will.
They therefore that see this kind of death, doc abhor it, and them that so
die, they bury with sorrow and silence. And when they have prayed to GOD to be
merciful to the soul, and merciful to pardon the infirmities thereof, they
cover the dead corse with earth. Contrariwise, all that depart A willing and
merry death not to be lamented.
merrily and full of good hope, for then no man mourns, but follows the
hearse with joyful singing, commending the souls to GOD with great affection.
And at the last, not with mourning sorrow, but with a great reverence they
burn the bodies. And in the same place they set up a pillar of stone, with the
dead men's titles therein graved. When they be come home, they rehearse his
virtuous manners and his good deeds. But no part of his life is so often or
gladly talked of, as his merry death. They think that this remembrance of the
virtue and goodness of the dead, does vehemently provoke and enforce the
living to virtue. And that nothing can be more pleasant and acceptable to the
dead. Whom they suppose to be present among them, when they talk of them,
though to the dull and feeble eyesight of mortal men they be invisible. For
it were an inconvenient thing, that the blessed should not be at liberty to go
whither they would. And it were a point of great unkindness in them, to have
utterly cast away the desire of visiting and seeing their friends, to whom they
were in their life time joined by mutual love and amity. Which in good men
after their death, they count to be rather increased the^ diminished. They
believe therefore that the dead be presently conversant among the quick, as
beholders and witnesses of all their words and deeds. Therefore they go more
courageously to their business, as having a trust and a fiance in such
overseers. And this belief of the present conversation of their forefathers
and ancestors among them, fears them from all secret dishonesty. They utterly
despise and mock southsayings Southsayers not regarded nor credited. Miracles.
and divinations of things to come, by the flight and voices of birds, and all
other divination of vain superstition, which in other countries be in great
observation. But they highly esteem and worship miracles that come by no help
of nature, as works and witnesses of the present power of GOD. And such they
say do chance there very often. And sometimes in great and doubtful matters,
by common intercession and prayers, they procure and obtain them with a sure
hope and confidence, and a steadfast belief.

They think that the contemplation of nature, and the praise The life
contemplation.
thereof coming, is to GOD a very acceptable honor, Yet there be many so
earnestly bent and affected to religion, that they pass nothing for learning,
nor give their minds to any knowledge of things. But idleness they utterly
forsake and ^schew, The life active.
thinking felicity after this life to be gotten and obtained by busy labor
and good exercises. Some therefore of the^ attend upon the sick, some amen^
highways, cleanse ditches, repair Bridges, dig turfes, gravel, and stone,
fell and cleave wood, bring wood corn, and other things, into the Cities in
carts, and serve not only in common works, but also in private labors, as
servants: yea, more then bondmen. For whatsoever unpleasant, hard and vile
work is any where, from the which labor, loathsomeness, and desperation does
fray other, all that they take upon the^ willingly and gladly, procuring rest
and quiet to other, remaining in continual work and labor themselves, not
embraiding others there with. They neither reprove other men's lives, nor glory
in their own. These men the more serviceable they behave themselves, the more
they be honored of all men. Yet they be divided into two sects. The one of them
that live single and chaste, abstaining not only from the company of women, but
also from eating of flesh, and some of them from all manner of beasts. Which
utterly rejecting the pleasures of this present life as hur^full, be all wholly
set upon the desire of the life to come, by watching, waiting, and sweating,
hoping shortly to obtain it, being in the mean season merry and lu^ty. The
other sect is no less desirous of Labor, but they embrace Matrimony, not
despising the solace thereof, thinking that they cannot be discharged of their
bounden duties toward nature, without labor and toil, nor toward their
native Country, without procreation of children. They abstain from no pleasure
that does nothing hinder them from labor. They love the flesh of foure-footed
beasts, because they believe that by the meat they be made hardy and stronger
to work. The Vtopians It is not all one to be wise and good.
count this Sect the wiser, but the other the holyer. Which in that they
prefer single life before matrimony, and that sharp life before the easier
life, if herein they grounded upon reason, they would mock them. But now
forasmuch as they say they be lead to it by religion, they honor and worship
them. And these be they whom in their language by a peculiar name, they call
Bruthe scas, the which word by interpretation, signifies to us, Men of
religion, or religious men. They have Priests of exceeding Priests.
holiness, and therefore very few. For there be but thirteen in every City
according to the number of their Churches, saving when they go forth to
battle. For then seven of them go forth with the army: in whose steads so
many n^w be made at home. But the other at their return home again, reenter
every one in his own place: they that be above the number, until such time as
they succeed into the places of the other at their dying, be in the mean
season continually in company with the Bishop. For he is the chief head of
them all. They be chosen of the people, as the other Magistrates be by secret
voices, for the avoiding of strife.

After their election, they be consecrate of their own company. They be
Overseers of all divine matters, orderers of religions, and as it were ^udges
and Masters of manners. And it is a great dishonesty and shame to be rebuk^^ or
spoken to by any of them, for dissolute and incontinent living. But as it is
their office to give good exhortations and counsel, so it is the duty of the
Prince and the other Magistrates, to correct and punish offenders, saving that
the Priests, whom they find exceeding vicious livers, them they excommunicate
Excommunicate.
from having any interest in divine matters. And there is almost no punishment
among them more feared. For they run in very great infamy, and be inwardly
tormented with a secret fear of religion, and shall not long escape free with
their bodies. For unless they by quick repentance approve the amendment of
their lives to the Priests, they be taken and punished of the Council, as
wicked and irreligious. Both childhood and youth is instructed and taught of
them. Nor they be not more diligent to instruct them in learning, then in
virtue and good manners. For they use with very great endeavor and diligence to
put into the heads of their children, whiles they be yet tender, and plyant,
good opinions and profitable for the conservation of the Weal public. Which
when they be once rooted in children do remain with them all their life
after, and be wondrous profitable for their defense and maintenance of the
state of the Commonwealth: which never decays but through vices rising of
evil opinions.

The Priests, unless they be women (for that kind is not excluded from
Priesthood, how beit few be chosen and none but v^ddowes and old women) the
men Priests, I say, take to their wives the chiefest women in all their
Country. For to no office among the Vtopians is there more honor and
pre-eminence given. Insomuch that if they commit any offense, they be under no
common judgment, but be left only to GOD and themselves. For they think it
The Mejesty and pre-eminence of Priests.
not lawful to touch him with man's hand, be he never so vicious, which after
so singular a sort was dedicate and consecrate to GOD, as a holy offering.

This manner may they easily observe, because they have so few Priests, and do
choose them with such circumspection. For it scarcely ever chances, that the
most virtuous among virtuous, which in respect only of his virtue is advanced
to so high a dignity, can fall to vice and wickedness. And if it should chance
indeed (as man's nature is mutable and frail) yet by reason they be so few, and
promoted to no might nor power, but only to honor, it were not to be feared
that any great damage by them should happen and ensue to the commonwealth.
They have so rare and few Priests, least if the honor were communicated to
many, the dignity of the order, which among them now is so highly estetmed,
should run in contempt. Specially because they think it hard to find many so
good, as to be meet for that dignity, to the execution and discharge whereof,
it is not sufficient to be endued with mean virtues.

Furthermore, these Priests be not more esteemed of their own Country men,
then they be of foreign and strange Countries. Which thing may hereby plainly
appear. And I think also that this is the cause of it. For whiles the armies
be fighting together in open field, they a little beside not far off kneel
upon their knees in their hallowed vestments, holding up their hands to heaven:
praying first of all for peace, next for victory of their own part, but to
neither part a bloody victory. If their Host get the upper hand, they run
into the maine Battle, and restrain their own men from slaying and cruelly
pursuing their vanquished enemies. Which enemies, if they do but see them and
speak to them, it is enough for the safeguard of their lives. And the touching
of their clothes defends and saves all their goods from ravine and spoil.
This thing has advanced them to so great worship and true Majesty among all
Nations, that many times they have as well preserved their own Citizens from
the cruel force of their enemies, as they have their enemies from the furious
rage of their own men. For it is well known, that when their own Army has
recoiled and in despair turned back, and run away, their enemies fiercely
pursuing with slaughter and spoil, then the Priests coming between have
stayed the murder, and parted both the hoasts. So that peace has been made
and concluded between both parts upon equal and indifferent conditions. For
there was never any Nation, so fierce, so cruel, and rude, but they had them
in such reverence, that they counted their bodies hallowed and sanctified, and
therefore not to be violently and unreverently touched.

They keep holy the first The observation of holy days among the Vtopians.
and last day of every Month and year, dividing the year into Months, which
they measure by the course of the Moon, as they do the year by the course of
the Sun. The first days they call in their language Cinimernes, and the last
Tapermernes, the which words may be interpreted, Primifest and Finifest, or
else in our speech, first feast and last feast. Their Churches Their Churches.
be very gorgious, not only of fine and curious workmanship, but also (which
in the fewness of them was necessary) very wide and large, and able to receive
a great company of people. But they be all somewhat dark. Howbeit that was not
Churches of adimme light, and a reason why.
done through ignorance in building, but as they say, by the counsel of the
Priests. Because they thought that overmuch light does disperse men's
cogitations, whereas in dim and doubtful light they be gathered together,
and more earnestly fixed upon religion and devotion: which because it is not
there of one sort among all men, and yet all the kinds and fashions of it,
though they be sundry and manifold, agree together in the honor of divine
nature, as going diverse ways to one end: therefore nothing is seen or heard
in the Churches, but that seems to agree indifferently with them all. If
there be a distinct kind of Sacrifice peculiar to any several sect, that they
execute at home in their own houses. The common sacrifices be so ordered, that
they be no derogation nor prejudice to any of the private sacrifices and
religions. Therefore no Image of any GOD is seen in the Church, to the intent
it may be free for every man to conceive GOD by their religion after what
likeness and similitude they will. They call upon no peculiar name of GOD but
only Mythra. In the which word they all agree together in one nature of the
divine Majesty whatsoever it be. No prayers be used such as every man may
boldly pronounce without the offending of any Sect. They come therefore to the
Church, the last day of every Month and year in the evening yet fasting,
there to give thanks to GOD for that they have prosperously passed over the
year or Month, whereof that holiday is the last day.

The next day they come to the Church early in the morning to pray to God that
they may have good fortune and success all the New year or Month, which they
do use to begin of that same holy day.

But in the holy days that be the last days of the Months and years, before
they come to the Church, the wives fall down prostrate before their husbands
feet at home, and the children before the feet of their parents, confessing and
acknowledging themselves offenders either by some actual deed, or by omission
of their duty, and desire pardon for their offense. Thus if any cloud of privy
displeasure was risen at home, by this satisfaction it is over-blowne, that
they may be present at the Sacrifices with pure and charitable minds. For they
be afraid to come there with troubled consciences. Therefore if they know
themselves to bear any hatred or grudge toward any man, they presume not to
come to the sacrifices, before they have reconciled themselves and purged their
consciences, for fear of great vengeance and punishment for their offense.

When they be come thither, the men go into the right side of the Church, and
the women into the left side. There they place themselves in such order, An
order for place in the Church.
that all they which be of the male-kind in every household, sit before the good
man of the house; and they of the female kind before the good wife. Thus it is
foreseen, that all their gestures and behaviors be marked and observed
abroad of them, by whose authority and discipline they be governed at home.
This also they diligently see unto, that the younger evermore be coupled with
his elder, least children being joined together, they should pass over the
time in childish wantonness, wherein they ought principally ^o conceive a
religious and devout fear toward GOD: which is the chief and almost the only
incitation to virtue. They kill no living beast in sacrifice, nor they think
not that the merciful clemency of GOD does dwell in blood and slaughter,
which has given life to beasts to the intent they should live. They burn
frankensence, and other sweet savors, and light also a great number of wax
candles and tapers, not supposing this geere to be any thing availeable to the
divine nature, as neither the prayers of men. But this unhurtfull and
harmless kind of worship pleases them. And by these sweet savours and
lights, and other such ceremonies men feel themselves secretly lifted up, and
encouraged to devotion with more willing and fervent hearts. The people wears
in the Church white apparel. The Priest is clothed in changeable colors,
which in workmanship be excellent, but in stuff not very precious. For their
vestments be neither imbrodered with gold, nor set with precious stones. But
they be wrought so finely and cunningly with diverse feathers of fowls, that
the estimation of no earthly stuff is able to countervaile the price of the
work. Furthermore, in these birds feathers, and in the due order of them, which
is observed in their setting; they say, is contained certain divine mysteries.
The interpretation whereof known, which is diligently taught by the Priests,
they be out in remembrance of the bountiful benefits of God toward them, and
of the love and honor which of their behalf is due to God: and also of their
duties one toward another.

When the Priest first comes out of the Vestry thus apparelled, they fall
down incontinent every one reverently to the ground, with so still silence,
that the very fashion of the thing strikes into them a certain fear of God,
as though he were there personally present. When they have l^en a little space
on the ground, the Priest gives them a sign to rise. Then they sing praises
unto God, which they intermixe with instruments of music, for the most part
of other fashions then-these that we use in this part of the world. Their
Church ^sic^ke.
And like as some of ours be much sweeter then theirs, so some of theirs do
far pass ours. But in one thing doubtless they go exceeding far beyond us.
For all their music both that they play upon instruments, and that they sing
with man's voice, does so resemble and express natural affections, the sound
and tune is so applied and made agreeable to the thing, that whether it be a
prayer, or else a duty of gladness, of patience, of trouble, of mourning, or
of anger: the fashion of the melody does so represent the meaning of the thing,
that it does wonderfully move, stir, pierce, and inflame the hearers minds.
At the last, the people and the Priest together, rehearse solemn prayers in
words, expressly pronounced, so made, that every man may privately apply to
himself that which is commonly spoken of all.

In these prayers every man recogniseth, and knowledgeth God to be his maker,
his governor, and the principal cause of all other goodness, thanking him for
so many benefits received at his hand. But namely that through the favor of
God he has chanced into that public weal, which is most happy and wealthy,
and has chosen that religion which he hops to be most true. In the which
thing if he do any thing err, or if there be any other better then either of
them is, being more acceptable to God, he desires him that he will of his
goodness let him have knowledge thereof, as one that is ready to follow what way
soever he will lead him. But if this form and fashion of a Commonwealth be
best, and his own religion most true and pefect, then he desires GOD to give
him a constant steadfastness in the same, and to bring all other people to the
same order of living, and to the same opinion of God, unless there be any
thing that in this diversity of Religions does delight his unsearchable
pleasure. To be short, he prays him that after his death he may come to him.
But how soon or late that he dare not assign nor determine. How beit, if it
might stand with his Majesty's pleasure, he would be much gladder to die a
painful death and so to go to GOD, then by long living in worldly prosperity
to be away from him. When this prayer is said, they fall down to the ground
again and a little after they rise up and go to dinner. And the residue of
the day they pass over in plays, and exercise of chiualry.

Now I have declared and prescribed unto you as truly as I could, the form
and order of that Commonwealth, which verily in my judgment is not only the
best, but also that which alone of good right may claim and take upon it the
name of a Common-welth or public weal. For in other places*they speak still
of the Common wealth. But every man procures his own private gain. Here
where nothing is private, the common affairs be earnestly looked upon. And
truly on both parts they have good cause so to do as they do. For in other
Countries who knows not that he shall starve for hunger, unless he make some
several provision for himself, though the Common wealth flourish never so
much in riches? And therefore he is compelled even of very necessity to have
regard to himself, rather then to the people, that is to say, to others.

Contrariwise, there where all things be common to every man, it is not to be
doubted that any man shall lack any thing necessary for his private uses, so
that the common store houses and barnes be sufficiently stored. For there
nothing is distributed after a niggish sort, neither there is any poor man or
beggar. And though no man have any thing, yet every man is rich. For what can
be more rich, then to live joyful and merrily, without all grief and
pensiveness: Not caring for his own living, nor vexed or troubled with his
wifes importunate complaints, nor dreading poverty to his son, nor sorrowful
for his daughters dowry. Yea they take no care at all for the living and wealth
of themselves and all theirs, and their wives, their children, their nephews,
their childrens children, and all the succession that ever shall follow in
their posterity. And yet besides this, there is no less provision for them
that were once laborers, and be now weak and impotent, then for them that do
now labor and take pain. Here now would I see, If any man dare be so bold as
to compare with the equity, the justice of other Nations. Among whom, I forsake
GOD, if I can find any sign or token of equity and justice. For what justice
is this, that a rich Goldsmiths, or an Usurer, or to be short, any of them,
which either do nothing at all, or else that which they do is such, that it is
not very necessary to the Commonwealth, should have a pleasant and a wealthy
living, either by idleness, or by unnecessary business: When in the mean
time poor laborers, Carters, iron smiths, Carpenters, and ploughmen, by so
great and continual toil, as drawing and bearing beasts be scant able to
sustain, and again so necessary toil, that without it no Commonwealth were
able to continue and endure one year, should yet get so hard and poor a
living, and live so wretched and miserable a life, that the state and condition
of the laboring beast may seem much better and wealthier? For they be not put
to so continual labor, nor their living is not much worse: yea, to them much
pleasanter, taking no thought in the mean season for the time to come. But
these silly poor wretches be presently tormented with barraine and unfruitful
labor. And the remembrance of their poor indigent and beggarly old age
kille^^ them up. For their daily wages is so little, that it will not suffice
for the same day, much less it yields any overplus, that may daily be laid
up for the relief of old age.

Is not this an unjust, and an unkind Public weal, which gives great fees
and rewards to Gentlemen, as they call them, and to Goldsmiths, and to such
other, which be either idle persons, or else only flatterers, and devisers of
vain pleasures: And of the contrary part, makes no gentle provision for poor
Plowmen, Colliers, Laborers, Yron-smiths, and Carpenters, without whom no
Commonwealth can continue? But after it has abused the Laborers of their
lusty and flowring age, at the last when they be oppressed with old age and
sickness being needy, poor, and indigent of all things, then so getting their
so many painful watchings, not remembering their so many and so great benefits,
recompenceth and acquainteth them most unkindly, with miserable death. And yet
besides this, the rich men not only by private fraud, but also by common
laws, do every day pluck and snatch away from the poor, some part of their
daily living. So whereas it seemed before unjust to repentance with unkindnesse
their pains, that they have been beneficial to the Commonweal, now they
have to their wrong and unjust dealing (which is yet a much worse point) given
the name of justice, yea, and that by force of a Law. Therefore when I consider
and weigh in my mind all these Commonwealths, which now a days any where do
flourish, so GOD help me, I can perceive nothing but a certain conspiracy of
rich men procuring their own commodities, under the name and title of the
Commonwealth. They invent and devise all means and crafts, first how to keep
safely without fear of loosing, that they have unjustly gathered together: and
next how to hire and abuse the work and labor of the poor for as little
money as may be. These devises when the rich men have decreed to be kept and
observed under color of the communalty, that is to say, also of the poor
people, then they be made laws. But these most vicious and wicked men, when
they have by their unsatiable covetousness, divided among themselves all those
things which would have sufficed all men, yet how far be they from the wealth
and felicity of the Vtopian Commonwealth? Out of the which, in that all the
desire Contempt of money.
of money with the use thereof is utterly secluded and banished, how great a
heap of cares is cut away? How great an occasion of wickedness and mischief
is pulled up by the root? For who knows not that fraud, theft, ravine,
brawling, quarrelling, b^abling, strife, chiding, contention, murder, treason,
poisoning, which by daily punishments are rather revenged then refrained, do
die when money dies? And also that fear, grief, care, labors, and watching,
do perish even the very same moment that money perishes? Yet poverty it
self, which only seemed to lack money, if money were gone, it also would
decrease and vanish away. And that you may perceive this more plainly, consider
with your selves some barraine and unfruitful year, wherein many thousands of
people have starved for hunger: I dare be bold to say, that in the end of that
penury, so much Corn or grain might have been found in rich men's barnes, if
they had been searched, as being divided among them who^ famine and pestilence
then consumed, no man at all should have felt that plague and penury. So easily
might men get their living if that same worthy Princess Lady money did not
alone stop up the way between us and our living, which a Gods name was very
excellently devised and invented, that by her the way thereto should be opened.
I am sure the rich men perceive this, nor they be not ignorant how much better
it were to lack no necessary thing, then to abound with overmuch superfluity:
to be rid out of innumerable cares and troubles, then to be besieged and
encombred with great riches.

And I doubt not that either the respect of every man's private commodity, or
else the authority of our Savior Christ A marvai^^^^ saying.
(which for his great wisdom could not but know what were best, and for his
inestimable goodness could not but counsel to that which he knew to the best)
would have brought all the World long ago into the laws of this Weal public
if it were not the one only best, the Princess and mother of all mischief
Pride, does withstand and let it. She measures not wealth and prosperity by
her own commodities, but by the misery and incommodities of other: she would
not by her good will be made a Goddess, if there were no wretches left, over
whom she might like a scornful Lady rule and triumph, over whose miseries her
felicities might shine, whose poverty she might vex, torment and increase, by
rigorously setting forth her riches. This hel-hound creeps into men's hearts,
and pulls them back from entering the right path of life, and is so deeply
rooted in men's breasts, that she cannot be pulled out.

This form and fashion of a Weal public, which I would gladly wish unto all
Nations, I am glad yet that it chanced to the Vtopians, which have followed
those institutions of life, whereby they have laid such foundations of their
Commonwealth, as shall continue and last not only wealthy, but also as far
as man's wit may judge and conjecture, shall endure for ever. For seeing the
chief causes of Ambition* and sedition, with other vices, be plucked up by the
roots, and abandoned at home there, can be no jeopardy of domestical
dissension, which alone has cast underfoot and brought to naught the
wel-fortified and strongly defenced wealth and riches of many Cities. But for
as much as perfect concord remains, and wholesome laws be executed at home,
the envy of all foreign Princes be not able to shake or moove the Empire,
though they have many times long ago gone about to do it, being evermore
driven back.

Thus when RAPHAEL had made an end of his tale, though many things came to my
mind, which in the manners and laws of that people, seemed to be instituted
and founded of no good reason, but only in the fashion of their chiualry, and
in their Sacrifices, and Religions, and in other of their Laws; but also, yea
and chiefly, in that which is the principal foundation of all their
ordinances: that is to say, in the communalty of their life and living, without
any occupying of money, by the which thing only all nobility, magnificience,
worship, honor, and majesty, the true ornaments and honors, as the common
opinion is, of a Commonwealth, utterly be overthrown and destroyed: yet
because I knew that he was weary of talking, and was not sure whether he could
abide that any thing should be said against his mind: specially remembering that
he had reprehended this fault in other, which be afraid least they should
seem not to be wise enough, unless they could find some fault in other men's
inventions: therefore I praising both their institutions and his communication,
took him by the hand, and lead him into supper, saying that we would choose
another time to weigh and examine the same matters, and to talk with him more
at large therein. Which would GOD it might once come to pass.

In the mean time, as I cannot agree and consent to all things that he said,
being else without doubt a man singularly well learned, and also in all wordly
matter exactly and profoundly experienced: so must I needs confess and grant,
that many things be in the Vtopian Wealepublique, which in our Cities I may
rather wish for, then hope after.

FINIS.

