THREE MEDITATIONS Upon these three places of Scripture:

1 COR. 2.2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified.

PSALM. 6.1. O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, etc.

PROVE. 3.11, 12. My son despise not the chastisement of the Lord, etc.

By JOHN BVLTEEL.

LONDON, Printed by I. H. for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold in
Pope's Head Alley at the sign of the Star. 1627.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable, the right virtuous, and most truly Religious Lord,
Robert Earl of Warwick, Baron of Leeze, etc.
Right Honorable:
IT is not without cause that the Apostle S. Paul did desire to know nothing
but Christ crucified; nor to glory in any thing but in his cross, because the
knowledge of this is the substance and marrow of true knowledge: for if we know
Christ, it is no matter though we know nothing else, but we know nothing if we
know not Christ, though we understand all mysteries and all knowledge; which
knowledge consists not in going on pilgrimage to the mount of Caluarie, and
beholding the place where Christ was crucified in Golgotha, or to behold him in
a wooden crucifix, or in an image as the Papists do; but as the Apostle says,
to go unto him out of the camp, not with bodily feet, or with corporal eyes
(he is in heaven) but with the feet of faith, which represents things past as
if they were present; with spiritual eyes to behold his passion with
compassion, himself bearing his cross, and his cross bears him, he carrying
the wood as Isaac whereon he was to be sacrificed: as Noah carried on the Arc;
yea carrying the Arc to save us from the Flood of Gods wrath: as Jacob bearing
on his shoulder the ladder whereby we mount up into heaven; as Moses with the
rod of his cross ouercomming his enemies in the red sea of his blood, and
saving his people: to behold the God of glory crucified between two thieves,
as the greatest sinner of all, that he might glorify us with Angels; that
divine head at whose presence the very powers of heaven were wont to tremble,
that had heretofore a crown of glory, all to be crowned and pricked with a
crown of thorns. That Angellike face defiled with the spittle of the Jews,
bowing it and his head to kiss us. Those crystal eyes once clearer than the
Sun beams, bloodshed and cast over with the darkness of death; thirsting
that he might show his desire of our salvation; his mouth so sweet full of Gall
and Vinegar, that he might satisfy for that deadly juice which Adam sucked out
of the forbidden fruit; his hands and arms that framed and fashioned the
heavens, all bespred and distrained on the cross, on the left and on the right
side, that he might call all unto him, ready to embrace both Jew and Gentile;
naked (but clothed with charity) because of Adams nakedness; that we may be
clothed with grace and glory: his blood gushing from him as the four rivers
of Paradise to water Gods Eden, wash his Church with his blood; crying with
fear, that we might cry in faith; crying in the anguish of his soul, in his
feeling, as if he were left not of Angels or men (that was but little) but of
God his Father, crying My God, my God, why have thou forsaken me. At this voice
the earth trembled, because it could not bear so great a burden as the
Cross. The Cross trembled because it bare Christ, Christ trembled and was in
a bloody sweat, because he had so great, so heavy, and so insupportable a
weight; for first he bare our persons, secondly, he bare our sins, a great
burden; thirdly, he bare the flood of Gods anger and justice powered on him for
our sins. At this most dreadful cry which at once moved all the powers of
heaven and earth, the Sun was eclipsed, and that contrary to its course and
custom, which made a Heathen Philosopher to cry, that either nature suffered,
or the world was at an end; and moved the Centurion to say, Verily this was a
just man, this was the Son of God; the Sun was eclipsed, because it could
not behold the Son of Righteousness, not only eclipsed with the
interposition of the body of the earth, of his humane nature; but also eclipsed
with the veil of his Passion; yea, the very stones were rent asunder, and the
graves were opened. Every creature, says S. Hierome, suffers with Christ at
his suffering; the Sun is darkened, the earth moved, the rocks cleave
asunder, the veil of the Temple divided, the graves opened; only miserable
mansuffereth not with Christ, for whom alone Christ suffered. Lest therefore we
show our selves insensible, unthankful and unfaithful, let us consider his
passion with compassion, with faith, with admiration; and as Saint Austin
says, behold the wounds of patient Christ, the blood of him dying, the price
of our redemption; consider what they are, and weigh them in the balance of
thy heart, that he may be wholly fixed in thy heart, that was for thee wholly
fastened on the cross. And in it consider the love of God the Father, the
charity, the humility, the patience of God the Son, who loved us his enemies
more than himself; consider our sins and wounds which were healed by the
precious balm of his blood. Consider Oman (says Bernard) how great are those
wounds for the curing of which the Lord Christ must needs be wounded: If these
wounds had not been deadly, yea, and to eternal death, the Son of God would
never have died that he might cure them. Besides, we must crucify our sins,
our members, as Christ was crucified; be crucified to the world, the world
crucified to us; he alone (says S. Hierom) can glory in the cross who takes
it up, and follows Christ, who crucifieth his flesh and his concupiscence. So
then we must crucify our heart, that it may die to wicked cogitations;
crucify our hands, so that they may have no life to commit evil actions;
crucify our eyes, that they take no delight to gaze on worldly vanities;
crucify our ears, that they listen not to fruitless and frivolous words;
crucify our tongue, yea, crucify the old man that has been a tenant so long,
and has had his habitation in our bosom, that he being dead he may be
carried to his grave; that our soul may be infected no longer with his carnal
impiety, and that we may no longer love but loathe, and for ever leave his
damnable company.

Besides the crucifying of the old man, we must suffer and bear afflictions,
as poverty, crosses, sickness, temptations, for what marvel? If God did
afflict his Son for our sins, if he afflict us for our own: and God had in
the arc of the Covenant both Manna, and the rod of Aaron; showing that as a
Father he nourishes us, and as a Father he chastises us as his Sons, and
these afflictions are ensigns and marks of his love: So says Christ, I
reprove and chastise those whom I love. So Jacob whom he loved, and Moses the
beloved of God and man. And David a man according to GODS heart. So Solomon
called Iedidia, i. the beloved of God, yet if he sin, God will chastise him
as a Father his Son; for God chastises us to humble us, to make us have zeal
and repentance, to try our faith, obedience, patience, hope; as Job, Though
thou kill me, yet will I hope in thee; and these afflictions, yea armies of
crosses God sends against his children to chastise them, not to hurt them; as
David sent his army against Absolon, Deal gently (for my sake) with the young
man, even with Absolon. He reproves us not in his fury, but in his mercy,
according to our desire, and sends us these vipers of afflictions, that we
may shake them off as Paul did, and make an antidote, and treackle against
sin and death; for they are not unto death, as Christ said of Lazarus, at
least not unto eternal death, but Chariots to carry us up to Heaven, for by
afflictions we must enter into the kingdom of heaven. Neither is this all,
for we must go forth unto Christ out of the camp, to bear reproaches and
crosses for Christ; for Augustine says, if we remember the passion of Christ,
there is nothing so difficult but we will patiently endure, bearing according
to his commandment his cross after him. And Simon Cyrenaeus example, to carry
Christ's cross for him, first, because he did bear the cross and reproach,
yea died: now if the head, then much more the members; if that was done to the
green wood, then much more to the dry wood; the servants condition ought not to
be better tha^ the masters: secondly, because Christ did bear our reproach,
died for us; and therefore with Thomas let us go and die with him, and for
him: thirdly, because the reproaches which we endure for Christ, are not termed
ours but his; so Christ says to James and John, Ye shall drink of my cup.
And Simon Cyrenaeus could not say I bear mine own cross, but Christ's cross
because he bare Christ's cross, and for Christ. And therefore S. Paul says, I
bear in my body the marks of the Lord Jesus; and that in three respects.

First, As a member of Christ; for as the mark on the hand or forehead
redounds not to that member, but to all the members, to the head, yea to the
whole person, and that hand should not be branded, but that it is the hand of
such a person; so the Christians branded and marked because the members of
Christ, Christ is branded, marked, whipped in their person. Paul and Silas are
they whipped in prison? Christ is whipped in their person; Christ, though in
heaven, yet he said, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me?

Secondly, As an Ambassador, for if the injury offered to an Ambassador
redounds to the King who sends him; so the dishonor offered by Hanun King of
the Ammonites unto the Ambassadors of King David, redounded unto King David,
and he revenged himself on the Ammonites; then the dishonor offered to
Christ's Ambassadors and Ministers redounds to Christ himself; for who
receives you, receives me; who rejects you, rejects me; who
dishonors you, dishonors me.

Thirdly, As a Soldier: for as a soldier who receives wounds and skarres in
his Princes quarrels, or for his Countries sake, dares say he bears his
Princes wounds, the skarres of his Country; so Paul bears the skarres and
marks of Christ Jesus, he bears on him (as Chrysostom says) the ensigns
of honor, he is not ashamed of them, but he shows them open to the whole
world; as Emperors that carry openly their Coronets, Diadems, and precious
ornaments; and as soldiers chosen out of companies to undertake some enter
prize, think themselves honored (though they undergo those dangers with the
danger of their lives) because they are preferred before the rest, though there
be no merit: so the Apostles rejoiced in that they were thought worthy to be
whipped for Christ his sake; and as a soldier is not ashamed to show his
wounds to the world. So Sertorius having an eye lost in war was not ashamed
thereof, but glorying in it said, that others keep in their houses their
ensigns and other marks of victory, but he carried the^ in his body. Yea as
men, yea noblemen think themselves honored with the order of a King; as for
example, the order of the Garter, though in it self it is a matter of naught:
it is but a Garter, yet because it is of a royal institution, and a King has
made this order, and held those Knights of that order to be his brethren and
companions; so though ignominies, reproaches, imprisonment, and chains, are
vile, and naught in its self, and ignominious to the world, yet are they
honorable to the Saints, Angels, and God, because they are the order of
Christ: the cross is his order, the chains are the order of Christ's gates;
and therefore Moses himself did esteem more of this order of the reproach of
Christ, than of all the riches of Egypt. And Tertullian said, There is no
nobler order of Chiualry, nor no better and fairer colors than the chains
wherewith the Martyrs of Christ are chained and manacled with, and there are
not more precious bracelets than the manacles wherewith the hands are chained.
And it is said in the Ecclesiastical History of an ancient Father Babylas the
holy Bishop of Antioch, who being detained in a filthy and villainous prison for
the name of Christ, wherein he died, did request his friends that came to
visit him, that after his death they should bury with him his ornaments and
marks of his valor, understanding by the^ the chains wherewith his hands and
feet were chained. So our holy Martyrs in the time of Queen Marie did kiss
the chains and stakes wherewith they were consumed to ashes; nay, even Kings
have much esteemed those skarres, and those persons that have suffered for the
name of Christ, as the Emperor Constantine, who did kiss the holes of the
eyes and the skarres of those Bishops, who had received those marks of the
Arians, for the maintenance of Christ's deity. And Chrysostom desired to see
the dust of that body, namely of the Apostle Paul, that had borne the marks of
the Lord Jesus. By these marks and skarres are the faithful Christian Martyrs
known, for these skarres as a consequent shall they triumph. For as. Arthur
the Kings body being taken up somewhat more than 600 years after his death,
was known to be his by nothing so much as by the print of ten several wounds
which appeared in his skull; and as Christ after his resurrection had his
skarres and wounds whereby he was known; so shall the faithful be known, not
having wounds or skarres, for their body shall be glorious; but notwithstanding
known of God, of Angels, of Saints, yea of their persecutors, for they shall
see them who^ they have pierced, yea those persecutors that have borne the
mark of the Beast, of Antichrist against Christ, against his Gospel; and
others that have carried skars of their villainies, of gluttony, whoredom, and
riot, and borne their own cross, which as bad Carpenters and wicked men they
have he wen unto themselves; for it is not the mark, nor the death, but the
cause that makes the Martyr: they as bearing the mark of the world, the
devil, and the flesh, shall be cast into utter darkness; but the faithful
bearing the marks and skarres of Christ, shall triumph for ever. For as the
people of Rome would have hindered Paulus Aemilius after his victory to
triumph, there was one that stood up, and made an oration in his behalf, in
the midst whereof he cast open his gown, and showed before them the infinite
skarres and cuts he had received upon his breast, the sight whereof prevailed
with the people, that they all agreed in one, and granted Aemilius his triumph,
which he did in the sight of all the Romans, and went to the Capitol. So God
(the Angels also) beholding the reproaches, banishments, wounds, yea, death,
which we have endured for his sake, and being marked upon our foreheads by the
Angel, and having the seal of the living God; maugre the Devil, the flesh,
the world, we shall triumph in the view of all the world, in the high Capitol
of Heaven, and there live eternally.

But lest I draw my lines beyond the limits of due measure and exceed an
Epistle, especially to such a small book, or shape Hercules shoe for a
childs foot, or make the gates and walls too big for the City, I here break
off.

These three soundly written by that reverend Author of blessed memory, that
worthy learned, religious, and noble Gentleman Mr. du Plessis, I have
translated them; and as Orphans and posthumes after their Fathers decease, I
have clothed them in a strange habit, making them that spoke French before, to
speak English; which I presume to present to your Honor, and publish the^ in
your name to the world, that by your countenance, and under the wings of your
Honorable protection it may safely walk abroad to the view and benefit of
others, and that it may be profitable to Gods Church, it being no new fashion
for those that publish any books whether of greater or lesser worth, whether
their own or others, unless especially such works wherein they have been
translators, to present them to great and worthy personages. It were infinite
to instance this point.

Now there are some reasons that have moved me to dedicate this Posthume unto
your Honor; First, because great men are content and desire to read great
men's works; So the Eunuch of Candace did read the Prophet Esaias, of the
Royal blood, and Kings and Princes do read the books of Kings and Princes.
Secondly, because as this Noble man had his Motto, Art and Mart: So your
Honor as Alexander may be represented with a Horse and a Book, the one to
signify your desire to martial endeavors, the other your diligence and desire
in letters. Alexander had no sooner off his Helmet, but he took in hand Homers
Iliads; So you delight not only in Martial actiuitie, but favor the study of
good letters. Thirdly, because they are Orphans, and have need of a good and
powerful Patron in a foreign land, and deserve to be beloved and protected
for their Fathers sake, as Mephibosheth for Ionathans. Besides, to whom does a
Treatise of godliness, more fitly agree, than to him that professes
godliness, and has the power of it dwelling in his heart? or to whom should I
commend the patronage of truth, better than to him that is a favorer and a
lover of the truth, and of such as love the truth? your true zeal and desire
of the knowledge of Jesus Christ crucified, your care to maintain the honor
of God, your constant profession, practice, and defense of the same Truth and
Religion, which you have been borne and bred in; to this may be added mine own
desire to give some testimony of my duty to your Lordship, which could not
suffer me elsewhere to seek the shelter of this Orphane volume; not doubting
but your Honor will accept it in good part. Apelles drawing the counterfeit of
Honor, pourtrayed her holding in the one hand a star, in the other a stone;
teaching that although Noble minds should reach as high as the sky, yet they
should not disdain to look as low as the earth. The widow in the Gospel
offered a little money, the woman a little oil to her Savior. Artaxerxes
accepted of a few drops from the hands of a poor Cynetas. Mercury vouchsafed
to drink of Philemons earthen pot; Sigismond took a Pomegranate; and Philip
of Macedon accepted a bunch of grapes presented by a simple countreyman; and
his son Alexander did parua libenter accipere; all of them did rather
consider the mind of the giver than the gift. I know your Honor will kindly
accept my small Mite, if you balance it with the willingness of my mind. If
you judge them worthy, vouchsafe your Patronage; if not, your pardon, at least
your gracious and favorable acceptance. Thus craving pardon for my boldness,
I cease to trouble your Honor, not to pray for you; the Lord establish your
Honor in every good word, and make you rich in name and fame by your good
works, to his glory, to the good of his Church, to your everlasting Honor in
this life, and eternal happiness in the life to come.

Your Honors in all duty to be commanded in the Lord Jesus, JOHN BVLTEEL.

A MEDITATION upon the first of the Corinthians:
1 COR. 2.2. For I determined not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified.


THe Apostle S. Paul who had so much knowledge both acquired and infused,
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, and most exquisitly instructed in the Law
of God; and since enriched as much as any other with spiritual gifts, as of
prophecy, and of tongues; 2 Cor. 12.4.
yea, a caught up into Paradise, where he heard unspeakable words, which it is
not lawful for a man to utter, does not propose to himself notwithstanding to
know any thing, or to propound any thing to the faithful Corinthians, save
Jesus Christ and him crucified. Is it that he despised those great gifts of
God, powerful instruments of his calling? those unspeakable mysteries that
were revealed unto him, unto him only of all the Apostles, unto him alone in
all ages ravished up so far, lifted up so high, and returned from thence to
us? No, God forbid. On the contrary, he knows both the price and the poise
thereof; he can give to God both thanks and glory, and that elsewhere very
often. But he knows also how to counterpoise the mystery and the ministry
of the holy Gospel, the word of the Cross (which he so terms) so eminent
above all other that even they do seem nothing to it. 1 Cor. 1.18.
All of them without this word unprofitable and vain, profitable only and
solid, as long and as much as they attend on it, and serve it, that word
notwithstanding al alone sufficient to content our souls, alone able to make
the Angels stoop to look into it to the depth. Therefore as he says
elsewhere in the like sense, 1 Pet. 1.12.
that whereas, Phil. 3.5, 6, 7.
He is of the stock of Israel, of the tribe of Benjamin, touching the
righteousness which is in the Law, blameless, which things were great gains
to him, those he counted loss for Christ. Not but that it was honorable for
him to be of the seed of Abraham the Father of the faithful; Neither but that
it was profitable unto him to endeavor to conform himself to the Law of God,
holy, spiritual, the rule of life, given by the Ministry of the Angels. But
says he, I count all things loss for the excellency of the knowledge of
Christ Jesus my Lord, for whom I have suffered the loss of all things, and do
count them but dung, that I may win Christ. Esteeming it more glorious to
participate of the ignomie of his Cross, than of all the prerogatives of the
circumcision: and therefore says he, Gal. 6.14.
God forbid that I should glory save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Glorying more in his infirmities, than in his virtues, than in his greatest
preheminencies. Therefore he says to the Corinthians, speaking even of his
Revelations, visions, and rauishment; 2 Cor. 12.1, 9.
It is not expedient for me doubtless to glory, most gladly will I rather
glory in my infirmities, that the power of Christ may rest upon me.

To know therefore Christ is a great Art, a great Mystery, which he will
only know, teach only: And that to the Graecians, so much presuming of their
knowledge, and that to the Corinthians so curious among the Greeks; who
without doubt would have taken more delight, if he had related to them some
news of Paradise, if he had made (as that pretended Areopagite) an Inuentory
of heaven, a numbering of Angels. Notwithstanding he makes them lay down all
their knowledge with his knowledge, much better than theirs, at the feet of the
Cross:

For I determined (says he) not to know any thing among you, save Jesus
Christ, and him crucified.

Jesus Christ (says he) crucified; and who knows it not? Where is that silly
woman, where is the child that is ignorant thereof? and what so great mystery
does he tell us of, whereas we expected (having seen so much) that he would
have decyphered unto us the Thrones and Dominions, the Cherubins and the
Seraphins, the Principalities and Powers. Yea but thou that speak thus,
stay, and thou shall quickly know that thou know not Christ, scarcely the
first letter, who notwithstanding would have the Apostle relate to thee here
2 Cor. 12.4.
those unspeakable words, which it is not lawful for a man to utter, as little
lawful to thee to understand them, yea to hear them.

Thou think thou know Christ, because thou have read and heard that he
is come into the world, is the Son of God, has taken our flesh: A history
which has passed through thine ear, which thou superficially belieuest, which
the Jews and other Infidels do not believe; and thereupon thou imaginest to
be at the end of thy lesson, as wise as S. Paul, who will learn, will teach no
other thing; but that which already thou think thou know? will thou
behold the small or no profit at all of this thy bare and superficial
knowledge? thou beleeuest that the Son of God, the Judge of the world, came
into the world; but if thou do know him, if thou have never so little a
feeling, can thou hope in him? rather shall he not be an horror to thee?
When as a malefactor as thou art, thou see him come, what can thou do but
hide thy self amongst the trees, as Adam did when God walked in the Garden? A
miserable shadow against too scorching a Sun. What can thou expect? naught
but confusion upon thee, fire and brimstone on all thy works, when God
vouchsafes to come down, and to consider them. For do thou not remember of
his walking in the cool of the day? what happened unto Adam? The earth did set
up its. bristles against him, bringing forth to him thistles and thorns:
himself (God withdrawing his graces) became a ground full of briers, a thicker
of brambles and thorns to himself. Besides, what seeft thou proceed from his
coming down, to see the proud work which the children of men had builded in the
plain of the land of Shinar, to inform himself of the enormities of the
Cities of Seboim? what else but unto those a ruin of their designs, confusion
of languages, division of men, and from thence how many evils multiplied to
mankind? To these an horrible combustion of a second Eden, of a place
heretofore as the garden of the Lord, a Paradise, the delights of the world, a
land which burns to the very bottom of the waters? which one may read as yet
to this day in its ashes. In a word, was it not unto the holy Patriarks an
argument of death to see God in this flesh, what veil soever he took? Judge.
13.22.
We shall surely die (said they) because we have seen God. Much less can we
live, subsist never so little, if he looks on us, if he eyes us with a stern
countenance? yea, if he visit us? and that with the eye of a Judge? for the
Judge of the world, comes he otherwise than with justice, than for justice?

But thou say, thou do not only know him come, descended from above; but
that which the Apostle says, crucified; what wants there therefore? Yea but
the Devil knows as much, who said to our Lord, Luke 4.34.
I know thee who thou art, the holy one of God. And can he be ignorant of his
cross who was chief and Captain of the commission, to put him on it? who put
it in the heart of Judas to betray him? notwithstanding he cries out, Thou
Jesus of Nazareth let us alone, what have we to do with thee, art thou come
to destroy us? Certes there is therefore something to be here added, or rather
to be understood, (which elsewhere he expresses) crucified for the sins of
men. Otherwise, to what purpose was the Son of man crucified? and what
followed; the slaying of the Son of the master of the Vineyard, of the Lord
of the world, but that the Vineyard was rooted up, the ground desolate, the
universal ruin at the last both of man, and of the world?

Besides, it suffices not, if thou do not know him crucified for thee. For
what carest thou that the rest be saved, if thou be lost? This knowledge will
it not encreasethy sorrow? b Eccl. 1.18.
and on the otherside, is it not the scope of the Apostle in this place, to
preach comfort and joy? Wherefore S. John a Doctor in this knowledge, faith
unto those that knew Christ, to the true believer, 1 Ioh. 3.5.10.
Ye know that he was manifested, to take away our sins. And comprehends
himself, Hereby perceive we the love of God, because he has laid down his
life for us. And S. Paul says, 1 Timothy 1.15, 16.
This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus
came into the world to save sinners. fears not to add with the same
certainty, of whom I am chief; for this cause I obtained mercy, that in me
first, Jesus Christ might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them
which should hereafter believe on him to life everlasting; The which he says
elsewhere, 2 Timothy 1.12.
I know whom I have believed, and I am persuaded that he is able to keep that
which I have committed unto him against that day. And it is that therefore
properly which this great Apostle (who did practice this knowledge in himself)
names, to know Christ and himself crucified.

To know a thing, is to know what it is, it is to know it (say the Schoolmen)
by its causes. To know Christ crucified, is to know that the eternal word, the
second person of the holy Trinity was made flesh in the fullness of time, has
undergone man's infirmities (sin excepted) the reproach of the world, in fine
the death of the cross. But that suffices not, has undergone (I say) all
this by the eternal counsel of the Father with a voluntary obedience, to
redeem mankind sold under sin, lost in himself, and by himself; to
release the believers, those who embrace him by a true faith, from the pains
of hell, and make the^ heirs of life everlasting. Cerces, this is a profound
knowledge which comprehends all, so that it is no marvel, that the Apostle
will have no other; it is knowledge, the knowledge of man, yea, the knowledge
of God himself.

He that first among the Heathen said, Know thy self, was judged the wisest
and most learned of all men. And from thence the Philosophers have propounded
thousands of precepts. Did they for all that go further than to the skin and
the flesh? did they teach them more than the cutting of the hair, or paring of
the nails? No truly; therefore study thou me Christ crucified, the eternal
Son of God for man, for his sins, for thine own, sighing under the burden
of sin, and of the curse and anger than followed it, and crying to his Father
in this agony. Thou can not choose but enter from the contemplation of the
horror of that death, yea, of his death, into the consideration of the horror
of sin, (yea of thy self) so vile, so enormous and heinous, that it could not,
ought not to be washed, to be abolished, but in and by the precious blood of
the Son of God. A price infinite, a crime therefore infinite, man all crime.
And thence gathering thy spirits, thou will descend into thy self, consider
thy self from top to toe, from the body to the soul, from the flesh to the
spirit, from sense to reason; and consider, the more nobler the parts, the
deeper, the more mortal the wounds; so that from this anatomy thou will be
brought to acknowledge, to protest with S. Paul, that the whole understanding,
the whole wisdom of the flesh, of man considered in his nature, is naught but
death, for Romans 8.7.
the minding of the flesh, that which in it seems to retain most, either of
wholsomnesse or holiness, is enmity against God, for it is not subject to the
law of God, neither indeed can be; consequently thou will detest thy perverse
nature, contest against it. In this contention thou will torment thy self, and
be discouraged, yea and cry out, Romans 7.24.
Who shall deliver me from the body of this death? In a word, thou will cast
thy self groueling on the ground before the justice of God, to ery unto him
earnestly for mercy, to use violence to force him to it, and then thank him,
but I thank God Romans 7.25.
through Jesus Christ our Lord. And for what? That Romans 8.1.
there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus. A necessary Science
which thou could not have learned in any book but this; not in the book of
nature, the knowledge thereof puffs up, but does not fill; as little in the
book of Ethicke morality, that does but palliate thy evil, and so gives
remedies which eat for a while, but heal nor. But by this Art which thou
learnest, thou comprehendest all, thou apprehendest in one sole Christ
crucified before thine eyes: In his wounds, learning, yea, feeling thine own;
in his wounds, both taking and applying the remedy of thine. According to that
of the Prophet, Isa. 53.4, 5.
We did esteem him (brutish world) stricken, smitten of God, and afflicted,
but he was wounded for our iniquities, he was bruised for our transgressions,
the chastisement of our peace was upon him, who makes atonement between God
and us, gives peace to our consciences, and with his stripes we are healed. And
therefore as he gives us here the root, the bulk and body of this knowledge;
so elsewhere he shows us the branches. Romans 7.18, 20, 23
I know that in me (that is in my body) dwells no good thing; evil present
with me, it dwells in me, bringing me into captivity to the law of sin which
is in my members. A knowledge derived from the meditation of Christ crucified,
taken from the necessity whereby it forces man to inform against himself,
from thence consequently to know and seek the remedy thereof. Romans 6.6, 11.
We know, we that have embraced the cross of Christ, that our elde man is
crucified with him, that the body of sin might be destroyed, that henceforth
we should not serve sin; that we should be displeased with it, renounce it
and our selves. And therefore he says, Reckon ye also your selves to be dead
indeed unto sin, but alive unto God through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Corollaries and dependances of this first knowledge of Christ crucified: for
why was the Son of God crucified, but for the sons of men? Men sinners,
confected in sin, they themselves sin? Why such a remedy, but for such a
wound? why descending from the highest heavens, but to hale us out of the
bottomless pit?

Again, we learn to know God better in Christ crucified, than in all books,
than in whole nature. Search narrowly, and peruse diligently nature, as Solomon
did from the Cedar unto the Hysope; thou know naught Romans 1.20.
but Gods greatness, but his power; yea, examine fully all the parts of
Philosophy, thou know scarce his shadow. On the contrary in this meditation,
thou entrest into his closet, yea, into his own nature. There thou do take
notice to the full, both of his infinite justice, and infinite mercy. That, in
that he hates so much the evil; sin which is the true evil, is so contrary
to him, that he burns it as the fire the stubble, and because of it, his
creatures; he cannot spare the^, does not abstain from doing it. But in as
much as he finds them wetted with the waters of Siloe, plunged in the spring
of eternal life, in the blood of his only Son. This, in that he also
loves so tenderly his creatures, that of a Creator he will become a Father,
spares not (to redeem them from perdition) the blood of his own Son,
himself the Creator for miserable creatures, the eternal God for mortal men,
the righteous for sinners, the Almighty king for vile slaves. And therefore
concerning that the Prophet tells us, Psalm. 130.3.
If thou Lord should mark iniquities, O Lord; who shall stand? Psalm. 143.2.
Enter not into judgment with thy servant, for in thy sight shall no man living
be justified. For Romans 6.23.
the wages of sin is death. And consequently the Scripture says, Romans 11.32.
God has concluded them all in unbelief, and Romans 3.19.
all the world is become guilty before God, and therefore guilty of eternal
death; this is the unmeasurable depth of his justice. But concerning this,
mercy does sweeten and over prize it, Ioh. 3.16.
God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son, that whosoever
belieueth in him should not perish, but have everlasting life. Fear thou
(poor sinner) to draw near him, as the Pitch near the fire? Ephesians. 3.12.
In him thou have boldness and access unto him with confidence by the faith
of Christ. Fear thou to be accused, to be condemned? Romans 8.33, 34.
It is God that justifies? it is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen
again, who is even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for
thee. Romans 6.23.
The gift of God is eternal life, which is given thee in Christ Jesus our
righteousness. The Col. 3.12.
Scripture indeed has concluded all under sin, but it is, that the promise
by faith of Jesus Christ, might be given to the^ that believe. Romans 11.32.
God has concluded all in unbelief, but it is, that he might have mercy upon
all, that none might glory of his salvation, but in his sole mercy. And
therefore the Apostle speaks of this grace which exceeds sin, of this
charity which ouerflowes his justice, Romans 5.20.
Where sin abounded by the law, grace did much more abound by faith in
Christ; In Christ sent graciously by the Father, undergoing charitably the hard
yoke of that commission for us; wherefore Saint John says, 1 Ioh. 3.16.
Hereby perceive we the love of God the Son, because he laid down his life
for us. And Saint Paul having most magnificently handled the mystery of the
cross of Christ, It is, says he, Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19.
That ye being rooted and grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all
Saints, what is the breadth, and length, and height, and to know the love of
Christ, which passes knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness
of God. He could not take the measure either of his justice or mercy, of these
two vnscrutable and unmeasurable depths, by any other thing than by the cross
of Christ, than by Christ crucified, sufficiently for all, effectually for us;
where one may read in great Characters legible for all men, be they never so
short sighted, both the infinite anger of God against sin, and his
unspeakable love toward his creatures; and cry out with the Apostle, (who
handles this point) on the brim of these depths, Romans 11.33.
O the depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out?

Why then, to know Christ crucified, is a profound mystery, an Art that goes
far. And you must not hereafter wonder if the Apostle stands to it, if with
more reason he detains us in it. But there is more; for it is not an idle
knowledge, a hollow meditation, but solid and active, that carries its fruit
in it self, is never empty. From the knowledge that it gives us of our
corruption, and of Gods justice, it engenders in us a hatred of sin, which
conuerts us from our selves to him, from our dead works to a better life, from
the knowledge of his mercy, of his love toward us, it kindles in us a love
toward him, toward his word. A love that makes us to compose all our actions
and behavior to the pleasure of his law. A love, which seeing it self not
able to do any thing that may serve him, or do him good, endeavors to
become so much the more faithful, so much the more affectioned, in that it
feels it self unprofitable, and therefore reflecteth it self upon our
neighbor, upon his image, on all that bears his mark or stamp. And that's
that which S. John says, 1 Ioh. 2.3.
Hereby we do know that we do know him, if we keep his commandments. On the
contrary, 1 Ioh. 3.6.
whosoever sins, that is to say, makes a trade of it, has not seen him,
neither knows him. S. Paul also, 1 Thessalonians. 4.1, 2, 3, 4.
Ye know what commandments we gave you by the Lord Jesus, and what? That
every one of you should know how to possess his vessel in sanctification and
honor. That every one endeavor so to walk, and to please God, that he may
abound more and more, not thinking it sufficient, 2 Cor. 4.14, 16.
That we know that he which raised up the Lord Jesus, shall raise us also by
Jesus. On the contrary, For this cause we faint not. but work, so that though
our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed day by day. And this is
one of the evidences, whereby we may know that we know Christ in effect. The
other follows, The love toward God which manifests it self toward our
brethren; for our Savior says, Ioh 5.24.
He that believes on me, is passed from death to life. But will thou know who
he is? We know, says S. John, 1 Ioh. 3.14, 16.
that we have passed from death unto life, because we love the brethren; he
that loves not his brother, abides in death. And again, Hereby perceive we
the love of God, because he laid down his life for us, and we ought to lay
down our lives for the brethren. For S. Paul tells us also, 1 Cor. 13.2.
Though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all mysteries, and all
knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could remove mou^tains, and
have no charity, I am nothing. Charity is that knowledge of Jesus Christ, and
him crucified, which his charity imprinteth in us, which we are to express
toward our brethren, not able to exercise it on him, for what heat, what light
can a small candle yield unto the Sun? what love, what charity can we render
back unto Christ? and notwithstanding, he will esteem it as his, and make
much reckoning of the good which we that are his impart unto our brethren.
Marth. 10 42.
Whosoever, says he, shall give to drink unto one of these little ones a cup
of cold water only, in the name of a Disciple, verily I say unto you, he shall
in no wise lose his reward.

Will thou now therefore see if in good earnest thou have learned Christ
crucified? repeat thy lesson, examine thy self; what would thou judge of a
neighbor, who being nothing beholding to thee, should take thee out of prison,
preserve thee from danger of death, and that by the death of his only Son;
how would thou think thy self beholding to him, or what would thou not
do for him? would thou spare thy self? God therefore to whom already thou
owe what thou art by creation, infinitely offended with thy rebellions, since
thou were; to redeem thee from hell, from eternal death, gives his eternal
Son, to the ignominy of the Cross for thee. And behold how this comparison
is without comparison between God and man, the Creator and the creature,
between him that is offended, and him to whom nothing is owing, between hell
and prison, eternal death and temporal, the eternal Son of God, and the
son of an ordinary man; what proportion between good and evil, the infinite
and the finite, the eternal and the feeble, all and nothing. Notwithstanding
art thou called to suffer for the Name of God, for Christ's quarrel; thou
refusest him the life which thou hold of him, which thou retainest by none
but by him, this life, miserable man that thou art, in exchange whereof he
imparts unto thee life everlasting. Naythou repinest to hazaro I know not what
goods, to lose the least of thy plesures and co^moduies, which should (and
every day thou do it for a friend) seek all occasions by them if thou
could to testify thy gratitude, with the price of thy blood, redeemed with
his blood. And do thou know then that Christ has been crucified for thee?
this knowledge has it made no impression in thy soul? no not in thy skin,
that thou dare not auow it? whereof thou have either fear or shame? And if
thou know it, art thou not the worse for it? or to interpret it more mildly,
is it not true thou do not know it, that it is but a hearsay to thee?

But it may be this lesson is too high for thee. Some man therefore has
redeemed thee from prison by his Son; has saved thee both from the guilt and
punishment. If thou have not the heart and courage to die for him at least,
surely thou should have the heart and desire to live to do him good. Yea,
what is there that thou would not do even for those that belong to him, for
the least of them if thou did meet them? And thou see the brethren of
Christ, his own members, freeze with cold, faint with hunger at thy door. And
do thou withdraw thy self from thy flesh, and from his, wilt not know them?
Art thou thy self then a member of Christ, insensible of his pains? and do
thou know Jesus crucified, his love toward thee, that have none toward his
own? and can thou number thy self amongst those of whom the Apostle
speaks, 2 Cor. 8.9
Ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that though he was rich, yet for
your sakes he became poor, that ye through his poverty might be rich; who in
thy riches suffer his poor members to die? therefore remember that which
Saint John says, 1 Ioh. 3.14.
He that loves not his brother, abides in death. And believe that thou do
not yet believe aright, for how can thou be passed from death to life? or how
can thou say that 1 Ioh. 4.20.
thou love God who^ thou have not seen, that love not thy brother whom
thou have seen? And how can thou know, or rather have studied Christ
crucified, without knowing there his infinite charity toward thee? without
being inflamed toward him? to be so toward him, and yet cold toward his
brethren? It may be thou have better practiced this knowledge in thy self,
have in Christ crucified considered the horror of thy sin, hereafter to
walk not after the flesh, but after the spirit; to put on daily the new man,
and to put off the old man, to conclude to live to Christ, who is dead for
thee; no more to the world, no more to thy self. Yea, but whilst thou
disputest and talkest Christ crucified, thou do abandon and prostitute thy
self more and more to thy insatiable lusts, thou do pollute this thy holy
confession with disordered and profused words, countenance and actions,
yesterday in sin, to day in scandal, to day out of the terms of modesty, and
to morrow into those of impudency. So that the night that should add
knowledge unto the night, adds blasphemy and insolency. Know thou that thou
art far from knowing Christ crucified, though thou be learned. And if thou
have known him thou have forgot him, and look to it lest he forget thee; for
the master of this knowledge says, Ye are Romans 7.4.
become dead, my brethren, to the Law by the body of Christ, that ye should
be married to another, even to him that is raised from the dead. And
wherefore? that we should bring forth fruit unto God, that heretofore did bring
forth fruit unto death. Neither is it enough to know 1 Timothy 3.9.
the mystery of faith; we must hold it in a pure conscience. For Luke 11.28.
blessed are they that hear the word of God and keep it. And therefore let us
boast never so much of this knowledge, Romans 8.11.
If the spirit of him that raised Jesus from the dead (says the Apostle) dwell
in you, he that raised up Christ from the dead, shall also quicken your
mortal bodies by his spirit that dwells in you. He will be but a bad earnest
though he dwell there, though he have chose his mansion, if we take pleasure
to grieve him by our disorders. And again, Romans 8.13.
If you live after the flesh ye shall die; but if ye, through the spirit, do
mortify the deeds of the body, ye shall live. If on the other side we quench
the spirit, or drown it in our pollutions, the Apostle tells us as he did the
Ephesians; Ephesians. 4.20, 21, 22.
Ye have not so learned Christ, if so be that ye have heard him, and have
been taught by him, as the truth is in Jesus, that ye put off concerning the
former conversation, the old man which is corrupt, according to the deceitful
lusts. But you are of the number of those Ibi. v. 19.
who being past feeling of pain (of sin) give themselves over unto
lasciviousness to work all uncleanness with greediness. To know therefore
Christ in this manner, yea crucified, will it not turn to our condemnation,
who take pleasure to crucify him? Therefore let us not think that the Apostle
said little, when he determined not to know any thing among the faithful,
save Jesus Christ, and him crucified. To know Christ is a long Art, and our
life is short. It is the mystery of God ( Coloss. 2.2, 3.
says the Apostle) and of the Father, and of Christ, in whom are hid all the
treasures of wisdom and knowledge, unto the which alone, charity, faith,
repentance, have reference. And therefore let us not be ashamed to study in it
at all hours, being sure, that if we should live an hundred years, we may
profit therein hourly. Notwithstanding, feeble and trembling soul fear not;
in this unmeasurable depth the Lambs wade over, and the Elephants find it
deep enough to swim.

To abridge thy lesson, know that thou art wholly lost in thy self, that God
by his infinite mercy has saved thee, in the alone blood of his Son
crucified: profit daily in it, conforming thy self unto his word, and thou
have indeed this knowledge. Proud heart, who think thou have thy flight more
lofty than other, think not thou have here done thy work, to sound and diue
deeply into man's misery and thine own, the justice of God and his mercy: to
fadome them in all dimensions, and in all senses, is not a small task for
thee, which surpasses the capacity and understanding of all the Angels, and
not of men only. The greatest spirits having past over all other Sciences,
have taken their harbor in this Haven, have happily bounded their courses in
this knowledge; because Luke 10.22.
no man knows who the Son is but the Father, and he to whom he will reveal
him. Now the mysteries that are hidden to us in this Son, but those unto whom
they are given, mysteries notwithstanding unprofitable unto us, and unto us
hurtful, saving in as much as we live in him, we live to him, let us ardently
and continually pray him, that as he has given us to have Jesus crucified
before our eyes, so he will give us more and more the grace to consider him,
and withal to be crucified with him, that we may say with the same Apostle,
Gal. 2.
I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and the life which I now live in
the flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God who loved me, and gave
himself for me. Procuring with all our power, on what peril soever it be, the
salvation of our brethren ready to die, when it shall please him by his grace
in him, by his virtue for him.

Amen.
A MEDITATION on the sixth Psalm.
PSALM. VI.
O LORD, unto whom does this Discourse sort better tha^ unto me? tha^ unto me,
whom thou pursuest in the flesh, yea, unto the bones? than unto me, whom thou
have made a But unto thine arrows? arrows dipped in gall, and piercing with
grief? Thou know how often I have made prayers unto thee, and thou hear
not. Thou hear, but alas not for me. O Lord, what can I say more? Certes,
but at last at least hear at this time.

1 O Lord rebuke me not in thine anger, neither chasten me in thy hot
displeasure.

I demand not, O Lord, that thou rebuke me not; God forbid; those whom thou
rebukest not, are those whom thou daignest not to amend, those of whom thou
have no care, whom thou vouchsafest not to be thy children, but disclaimest
them. And what would thy lessons avail, if thou did not rebuke? or thy
reproves, O Lord, in the hardness of our hearts, if thou tookest not
sometimes the rod? But, O God, rebuke me in thy mercy, and not in thine
anger; in thy gentleness, not in thy fury. Those whom thou sauest, O Lord,
thou rebukest them in thy mercies; but those whom thou destroyest, in thy
fury. O Lord, would thou then destroy me? yea, Lord, permit me to say this
word, Could thou cast me away? O Lord thou have made me with thine hands, and
the worke-man does not willingly lose his work. I was lost, and thou have
redeemed me, redeemed me with the precious blood of thine only Son. Lord,
how vile soever I be in my self, I cannot choose but be most precious to thee.
Keep, O Lord, thy fury for the vessels of thy fury, I am a vessel of thy
mercy; thy wrath, for the children of wrath. Thou have by thy grace redeemed
me, thou have adopted me for thy child, for heir of thy grace, and co-heire
with Christ: and now, O Lord, I cry unto thee with confidence, Abba Father;
Father therefore I beseech thee again in favor of thy Well-beloved, Rebuke me
not in thine anger, neither chastize me in thy hot displeasure; but rather

2. Have mercy upon me, O Lord, for I am weak; O Lord, heal me, for my bones
are vexed.

O Lord, I am assured, that thou rebukest me not to cast me away; and
therefore thy mercies will put some end unto my miseries. Ah father of mercies,
wherefore tarriest thou then? So many years are passed in grief, so many days
and nights in tears. My flesh sticks unto my bones, and my bones are
impaired. O Lord, why do thou any more with thy rod; and if thou redoublest
thy blows never so little, what difference will there be between the hand of
thy gentleness, and that of thy fury? The father strikes the child till he
feels it to the quick: And thou know it, O Lord, if I do feel thee, and
if thy chastisement has pierced even unto the marrow of my bones; Till he
has promised amendment. And thou know, O Lord, if I have a desire thereof,
and if continually I ask for thy Spirit to better me. But thou will do more,
O Lord, for thy rods are the medicines of the soul. And therefore thou will
have them pierce so far, that they penetrate into the very bottom of our
hearts. Certainly, O Lord, I will say more, for

3. My soul is also sore vexed; but thou, O Lord, how long?

O Lord, when thou do visit us with thy rods, it is justly; for thou art a
righteous Judge. Then thy justice does discover our injustice. The languishment
and drooping of our bodies, does manifest the impairement and defects of our
souls; our souls truly confected in leprousie, which giving feeling to the
body, feels not notwithstanding its own evil, but in the pain of the body;
never remembers its own misery but in the misery that it suffers. Thou do
afflict us, O Lord, we have therefore sinned; and continually. Ah good God, I
beseech thee, make my soul dolorous for it self, sensible for it self, and
not for this body; give it a feeling of its faults, and not of its punishment.
At least o Lord of its faults by its pains. But, O God, let it be pained, and
not troubled; pained in the acknowledgment of its sin, not troubled but
comforted in the assurance of thy mercies, for thy afflictions, O Lord, are
termed the visitations of our souls; and visitings are of a friend to his
friend, of the physician to his patient. Thy visitations therefore ought to be
welcomed of us, that are so wholesome unto us; wholesome to the soul by the
body, healthful and profitable unto the body it self, after the curing of the
soul. But, O Lord, our pain continues, and notwithstanding when thou do
afflict us, is it not to rowze in us the sense of sin? Well, but now I feel
it. Is it not to break our hearts? Behold, my heart is broken, softened, soaked
in tears before thee. Is it not to bow us to repentance. Why, O Lord, I am
displeased in my self, and with my self, hereafter will I do naught but
please thee, will not please my self but in thee. And therefore, my God, why
do thou continue thy blows? thy blows that do no more visit but trouble
my soul? thy blows which seem to hold no more of thy mercy, but of thine
anger? thy blows which cast me into despair? O Lord, how long? thus this
flesh speaks, O Lord, pardon it; and it seems unto it that it has well
spoken; and thereupon the Devil displayes his arguments. See thou not that
he hates thee, and will destroy thee? That he is a hard and strict Creditour?
And unto whom do thou cry? Who is too much diuerted to hear thee, too
far to hearken unto thee? unto whom cry, how long? who is above years, ages
and times, with whom a thousand years is as one day, thy longings and
languishings are less to him than a moment. Certainly, O Lord, for all that,
how high soever thou art, the most lowliest and humblest do attain unto thee;
how much retired soever thou seem to be, thou art never far from the
hearts of the afflicted. So is it also, O Lord, that thy eternity makes thee
not ignorant of the time, and though thou art void of passion, thou art not
exempted from compassion toward thine. Thou have measured the time unto thy
great and small creatures, thou can therefore succor every one of them in
due time. Thou shuttest up our tears in the bottles, our blood in thy saucers;
thou know therefore when the phlebotomie is sufficient, thou know when
the repentance is come to its full period and issue. Yea, O Lord, thy Apostle
says, that to have compassion on men thou becamest man; to save us in time,
thou have subjected thy self (O eternal God) unto time. It is therefore O
Lord this flesh that flattereth it self, that names her cries of grief,
cries of repentance; her conuulsions, conuersions; the tossings and unquiet
stirrings, the anguish and impatient turnings of the body, a turning of the
body and soul to thee. Certes, O Lord, my flesh abuses it self; it is in
vain, it is in vain that it thinks it can turn to thee, without thee.

4. Return, O Lord, deliver my soul; O save me, for thy mercies sake.

Behold me, O Lord, and I will behold thee; Turn unto me, O God, and I will
turn to thee, for certainly if thou do not convert me, I cannot be
converted; and then will thou convert me when thou turnest thine eye, the eye
of thy mercies toward me a miserable sinner. My God, it is said that thou
see what is done, that thou may judge the world. I demand not that seeing,
it is the sight of thy providence which sees alike all things and all men:
when thou punishest mankind, it is said that thou do behold them, thou
come down to see what it has done. I demand not, O God, this viewing, it is
the aspect of thy justice. On the contrary, enter not into judgment with thy
servant, for he knows that no man living shall be justified before this
sight. And notwithstanding, O my God, I have need that thou behold me; and if
thou beholdest me not, I find my self lost both in body and soul. I find my
self overwhelmed with grief and sin; with grief by reason of sin: O
Lord, let it be that look, wherewith thou beholdest thine own; thine own for
whom how few soever they be, thou preseruest this world; whereby also thou
absoluest and iustifiest thy children; thy children whom thou have withdrawn
from the condition and condemnation of this perverse generation. And this is
that aspect of thy mercy, thy good eye of thy good grace, when thou do
behold us in the justice of thy Well-beloved, who is made unto us righteousness
and justice; justice which makes thy mercy just, who will not, nor cannot show
mercy, but in justice. O Lord, with that eye of thy mercy thou will deliver
my soul, and wilt save me; for then my soul shall dislike it self, and shall
return wholly toward thee, to find there its good. But again; certes, not
for any thing that this aspect of thy mercy finds in me worthy thereof, but
because of thy mercy, because of thine own self; for what is thy mercy but
thine own self; O Lord, save me by thy mercy; that is to say, I know that
with what good eye soever thou may behold me, thou can see naught in me,
that may inuit thee to pity; nothing on the contrary, that causes thee not
to withdraw thine eye from me, or to inflame thee with anger and fury against
me. I know it, O Lord, and I feel it. I feel it, and grant me by thy Spirit,
that I may be more and more sensible thereof. But, O Lord, our goodness did
not move thee to make us, it was thine; neither since to make us anew by thy
Christ: it was thy goodness it self. Save us therefore in thy Christ, even by
that bounty, and that by us and in us this goodness may be acknowledged, and
thou glorified, who have begotten us, and renewed us, created and regenerated
us, for thy glory, to render thy goodness glorious and famous on earth; Save
us for that self same glory.

5. For in death there is no remembrance of thee; in the grave who shall give
thee thanks?

O Lord, the sins (we confess it) which are in the soul, are causes of the
evils which we endure here on earth. And therefore said I, Deliver my soul,
deliver my soul; that is to say, Forgive me my sin, for it is the slavery
of sin that binds it. For if the Son makes us not free, if he binds not the
strong enemy, who has us in hold, how shall we ever see our selves set free?
and when he shall have made me free, I am assured that even this body of mine
shall find some ease. For what meant he, when as he healing one sick of the
palsy, said to him; Son, thy sins be forgiven thee? but this, namely,
that for the obtaining of this remission, I must approach near unto thee with
the conversion of life; and this conversion cannot I bring, unless thou give
it me, neither draw near unto thee, if thou do not draw me. Therefore have
I said with the Prophet, Turn thou to me, and deliver my soul, and save me;
that is to say, Turn thou to me, and I will turn to thee; and when I shall
return to thee, thou shall forgive me my sins, and shall deliver me from
all my evils. So Lord, finding my self wholly lost in my self, I seek for
all in thee; I ask of thee the knowledge of my sin, contrition, conversion,
remission and life, and the life I say, both of this body and of this soul,
that I may owe, and owe again and again all unto thee; and that I may
glorify thee both in body and soul. O Lord, it is the prayer which thy
servant has elsewhere taughtime: Psalm. 51.7, 8.
Purge me with hyssope, and I shall be clean; wash me, and I shall be whiter
than snow: Make me to hear joy and gladness, the joyful news of the
remission of my sins, and the bones which thou have broken shall rejoice;
this flesh which thou have afflicted so much, shall be made whole; this spirit
which thou have humbled in this flesh, shall give thee thanks and glory. For,
O Lord, suffer me, I beseech thee, to speak unto thee, that am but dust and
ashes; When thou shall have reduced us again to ashes, those ashes will they
praise thee? what honor can thou have of the dust? and who of those that
descend in silence into the grave, shall give thee thanks? But, O Lord,
restore unto us our life, render to us our health, which is the life of our
life, and without the which life is but a shadow of life, and our life shall be
unto thee a continual Sacrifice, unto thee a perpetual Canticle. Restore it
to us, O Lord, and let us render it to thy glory. Render it to us, and let us
consecrate it to thy victory. Restore it to us, to edify thy people, instruct
the ignorant, to direct those children which thou have given us, before we die,
in the way of their salvation, and of thy glory. (And thou know, O Lord,
whether we pray thee not for this day and night.) And finally (O God) that all
that is within us and of us, with heart, with voice, with action, may meditate
on thee, praise thee, serve thee, and that not for some days, but for many
years; for, O Lord, I know that long life is given as a blessing unto those
that fear thee; whose bones thou preseruest, so that they are not broken;
whose lives are so dear unto thee, as the apple of thine eye; yea, whose
death, even this same death, which is but a passage unto a better life, is
precious before thine eyes. Now therefore, O Lord, have we not prayed enough,
seeing thou art so near? near unto the afflicted? and I so much afflicted?
and shall it not be from henceforth time for thee to withdraw me from this
evil? these ashes from the ashes? this dust from the dust? Behold,

6. I am weary with my groanings, all the night make I my bed to swim; I
water my couch with my tears.

7. Mine eye is consumed because of grief, it waxes old because of all mine
enemies.

O Lord, is it not then yet enough? and what other conversion do thou
require of me? what, have thou not turned thee to me in earnest? have thou not
beheld me with the eye of thy mercies, seeing that my heart is melted into
tears? Otherwise, O Lord, who could have drawn out these waters and rivers
out of this rock? so many tears out of the hardness of my heart? So Lord,
when thy servant Peter had sinned against thee, thou beheldest him, and he
wept; he wept in the bitterness of his soul, he wept, and withdrew himself
from the persecutors. O Lord, grant unto this stone that it may cast forth, and
shed in like manner, not the tears of Esan, but the tears of Peter, and not
lament the loss of the inheritance of this world, but the withdrawing of thy
favor; and then I may triumph with thy servant David; Auant my flesh; get you
gone, O Devil; back, O temptations; depart from me, O ye tempters.

8. Depart from me all ye workers of iniquity, for the Lord has heard the
voice of my weeping.

O Lord, they said unto me, Unto whom do thou cry? the Lord dwells far
from men; there is a great gulf between sinners and him; and thou, who art
thou? O Lord, I have found on the contrary, that thou art near, and surely
very near; for thou have not only heard my cry, but my sighs also: I said,
I will hold my peace, I will be dumb, I will not open my mouth, for thou have
done it. I held my peace, and thou heardst my silence, my sighs; O Lord, where
could thou be but near me? where could thou be, but in me? Certes, O
Lord, there is nothing that is farther off from man than thy self, from sin
than thy justice; therefore thou art said with good reason to be far off from
us. But there is nothing also nearer to us than thy self; thy well-beloued
Son, who is one nature with us, one essence with thee, who came down to us,
and has filled the gulf, who was clothed with our flesh, and of whom we are
flesh of his flesh. It is in him, O Lord, that thou do behold us, in him
that thou art near unto us, in him that thou drawest near unto the greatest
sinners. For whom came the Physician, but for the sick? for whom the ransom,
but for captives? and for whom has righteousness been made sin, but for
sinners? therefore depart from me ye tempters, for he has heard the voice of
my weeping; Depart from me, for

9. The Lord has heard my supplication, the Lord will receive my prayer.

Happy therefore am I, that have God for my Advocate, and God for my Judge,
God for my Creditour, and God for my Surety: if God be for me, who can be
against me? When he justifies, who can condemn? Behold, O Lord, they said,
Thou may wait long enough, time seems nothing to him that is not subject to
it; and do thou think that he will come down expressly from heaven to
help thee? Surely my flesh has spoken as one of the foolish women speaks,
he that receives good at thy hand, why not also evil? Satan also has
endeavored to surprise me with his sophistry; who can help us better in time,
than he that has made both us and time? Behold, O Lord, thy servant has no
sooner sighed in his heart, but thou answerest; he has no sooner made his
request, but thou grantest it; has no sooner prayed, but thou lendest a gentle
ear unto it. O Lord, let my supplication be answered, as it was unto David,
the confession of my sin answered in the remission thereof, the pain of my
body in health, the affliction of my Spirit in consolation. And

10. Let all mine enemies be ashamed and sore vexed; let them return and be
ashamed suddenly.

They have said, O Lord, where is his God? let them see thee; they have said,
in vain prays he; let them see me again. They have troubled my spirit, let
them be troubled. My flesh that has tempted me, let it blush for shame. Satan,
who has assaulted me, let him get him hence. I, O Lord, will bless thee, who
have taken this body out of the grave; I will praise thee for ever, who have
delivered my soul from death, and saved me by and through thy Son, who was
delivered and died for our offenses, and was raised again for our
justification. Amen.

A MEDITATION on PROVERBS 3.11, 12.
My Son, despise not the chastening of the Lord, neither be weary of his
correction. For whom the Lord loves, he corrects, even as a father the son
in whom he delights.
OVerwhelmed with grief in my flesh, oppressed with astonishment in my spirit,
with sorrow in my soul, in danger to yield my self unto the words of the
unadvised, who upon the redoubling of such rude blows, did murmr about me;
Where is now his God, that God whom he did call upon so often; my self to mutter
between my teeth; where are indeed those infinite bounties? And wherefore have
thou sued me as an adversary, have made me a But to thy most rough arrows? I
hear the wise man mildly saying, My son, despise not the chastening of the
Lord, neither be weary of his correction: For whom the Lord loves he
corrects, even as a father the son in whom he delights.

At this word I breathe a little, and come by little and little to my self:
this word as good strong Vinegar comforts my spirits, restores my pulse, brings
me out of sounding, restores life to my soul; one drop of this sour sweet
liquor on my tongue baked with grief refreshes it, changes its blackness,
yea, its language. Why then began I to say to my soul, this despair will it
change into hope? From a Judge, O Lord, whom I did dread thee, and an angry
Judge, shall I feel thee as a Father, a loving Father? shall it be then true,
that these rude chastisements are to me signs of thy love, seals of mine
adoption, the earnest of my salvation, and first fruits of thy grace? Therefore
will I hold this liquor in my palate, gargarise my mouth therewith, that it may
penetrate my heart, go to the bottom of my soul; for when men are afflicted,
it is from Gods hand; in this hand will he be heard, with this hand he
speaks. And these afflictions are chastisements to his own, though
punishments to others; with the same hand he does afflict them and heal them,
with the same rod he beats them down and raises them up, beats down the
flesh, raises the soul. If you behold the wound its opening, and the blood he
draws from us, he seems not much differing from an enemy; if his soft hand,
if his tender affection, if his wholesome intention, seeing he is thy Creator,
thy Redeemer, how much does he exceed any Surgeon, be he never so much thy
friend, yea, any father whatsoever?

And it is always a great point for us to consider, that our afflictions come
from God, make a part of his providence. For to omit that the creature ought to
yield to the whole and sovereign power of the Creator, (we do yield so much
to the power of a Prince, and that without reply) All-wise and just that he is,
can he do any thing either without reason, or without justice? and are they
not therefore either trials of our faith, or chastisements of our sins? yea,
all good that he is, a lover of his creature, can he do ought but in goodness?
in mercy which surpasses all his works? to the edificatio^ therefore of his
Church? to our own salvation? for our profit, says the Apostle, Heb. 12.10.
that we may be made partakers of his holiness, we may profit in holiness,
we may walk from faith to faith, from obedience to obedience.

My son, then says the wise man, despise not the chastening of the Lord. The
wise man, wise from elsewhere than from flesh and blood, inspired truly from
God in this matter, who teaches us here as his children; and seeing that he is
inspired from God, God by his mouth teaches us as children of God. Despise
not, says he: and who can despise this discipline? as well may he ward his
thunderbolts. Who can be exempted from them? decline his jurisdiction, or
eschew his censure? It is therefore as much as if he should say, undergo it
willingly, take it in good part; suppose it to be a lesson which he gives thee
in his School. The slave flies before his Master, who fears more the scourge
than his anger. Do not thou do so; child that thou art, fear more his anger
than his rod; fear more thy sin the cause of his anger, than his anger it
self. But if he shows thee his rod, humble thy self, kiss it, yea, adore
it. A door in thy God his benignity, who daignes to visit thee, whether in
chastisement, or in trial, and always finds in thee too much matter of
chastisement. Tell him with David, Psalm. 23.4
Thy rod and thy staff they comfort me. If he strike thee, if he cast a stone
at thee, he is thy shepherd, thou wentst astray, he sets thee in the way, and
therefore the wise man calls it discipline, not punishment. Discipline, because
by these afflictions he keeps thee to school, he conformes thy motions, thy
actions to his holy word. A discipline surely in his intention, how rough
soever it seems to thee, because it tends wholly to thy instruction, not to
thy destruction. A discipline also on thy part in its effect, if thou take
well thy chastisement, do amend, and return more and more unto him. Take it
therefore in good part, husband it well, for he adds, neither be weary of his
correction.

Not only despise it not, but undergo it, not for once, but often; if he
redouble, if he return often to it, be not weary of it. But truly, who is not
weary of the mildest reprehensions of his best friends, and whose ears and
head are not broken therewith? Why then when God redoubleth his blows on men,
and that with so heavy a hand, who can subsist? I, but attend with patience,
and be not weary thereof: Certes we have the same reason both to suffer this
chastisement, and to persevere in this patience, if we consider that it is God
who continues it, all just, all wise; he does it for our good, who is all
goodness, all mercy. And seeing we do not complain of the Physician who
purges us at several times, nor of the Surgion who searches the wound, and
that often in a day, though it be never without pain, yea smarting pain; when
God dresseth our sin, an obstinate evil, a mortal plague cleaving to our
spirits, yea, to our marrow, shall we complain if he resumes the Launcer,
presses the venom out, applies at diverse times the searing iron, or the
cautere? according as the ulcer threatens an issue, or that the humor inciteth
it self against the cataplasme, according as we are, and he knows us,
redoubleth his visitation either with the Launcet, or the Dose.

Be not (therefore) weary when the Lord does correct thee; why then, what shall
we do? accustom our selves to Gods rod, become lumpish or insensible? But on
the contrary, God will have thee to feel him, to understand him, feel his
blows, know the cause thereof, feel thy self by them, and woe unto him that
rouseth himself not up. He loves the child that understands him at half a
word, that is not dull, but is sensible of the chastisement, shakes at the very
shadow of his rod. Patience is not a stupidity or a want of apprehension of
grief in pain; it presupposes on the contrary a grief, a suffering, but the
quicker the pain is, the greater is the patience, which proceeds from faith,
and produces also obedience; faith, which makes us turn our eye to the
cause, rather than carry our hand to the sore: Faith, which makes thee mount up
to God, to receive from his hand that which he pleases to give, to descend
into thy self, to examine thy soul, turn over the leaves of thy conscience,
to find there that which displeases him, to dislike thy self, confess thy
debt, have recourse to his benignity. And that is it which he bids thee, be
not weary when God does chastise thee; this is the exercise properly which thou
must undertake. What have I done? what have I not done? beholding thy self in
the glass of the law, measuring thy self with his graces; the Law that shows
thee his will, and thy sin; his graces, which according to their proportion
do multiply it, according as thou have received more, and did owe more. An
exercise where the best men never want work, where the more they have, the
more they find, the more clear sighted they are in their infirmities,
sensible of his anger; yea, although that God does visit them; especially to
put them to the proof, to make it appear unto the world what the power of his
spirit can do in their weakness; unto Satan himself, what their faith can
do against his tentations, against his malice, against his warrefare; they
omit not to draw that profit from thence, seek for it themselves, and they
never want it; they know that their 1 Pet. 1.7
faith as gold in the furnace is to be tried with fire, (how many are there
who otherwise fail at the touch, and how pure soever they seem to be, have
but too much dross and skum, wherewith at all times they are ouercharged) that
Verse. 7.
the trial of their faith, being much more precious than of gold that
perishes, might be unto praise, and honor, and glory at the appearing of
Jesus Christ, according to that which is elsewhere said of this chastening,
Heb. 12.11.
for the present it seems not to be joyous, but grienous; and therefore thou
art weary thereof: Nevertheless afterward it yields the peaceable fruits of
righteousness unto them which are exercised thereby. And therefore thou better
instructed by the wise man, Be not weary of his correction:

And the reason follows; for God is so gentle and courteous, that he
disdaineth not to render a reason of that which he does to us his poor
miserable creatures. For whom the Lord loves he corrects, even as a father
the son in whom he delights. Not him whom simply he loves (his love is
powered over all creatures) but him whom he loves tenderly, whom of a creature
he has daigned to make his child, of whom he will have a particular care: so
that this discipline of affliction makes a difference between his children and
strangers; yea, a difference between his own children in regard of the
degrees of his graces; so that the Apostle grows confident, yea, presumes to
say to the Hebrews: Heb. 12.8.
If you be without chastisement, whereof all are partakers (namely, all the
faithful) then are ye bastards, and not sons. Allege not unto me, that ye
are the children of God, ye are not his scholars: Heb. 12.6.
For the Lord chasteneth him whom he loves, and the more certes he loves him;
for says he, He scourges every son whom he receives; whom particularly
he adopteth into his family, he measures him his correction according to his
love. And so indeed we let pass many things in our servants, with we correct,
which we cannot bear with in our children; in those not reprehending ought for
the most part, but that which hinders our business and profit; in these with
a cordial love, with a curious eye, with an exact judgment, regarding,
examining from the head to the foot, desirous to frame and order them to the
best gestures in their behavior and carriage; so that he that does it the
oftener, is reputed the better father. Prou. 13.24. and 23.14.
He that loves his son (says the Wise man) chasteneth him betimes,
delivers his soul from hell. Indulgence and forbearance, as they cause
contrary effects, so do they give him a contrary quality and name: He that
spares his rod, hates his son. And the Apostle does ordinarily argue from
our carnal fathers, to our principal Father; in as much, certes, as love
regards care, and care discipline; where discipline and correction is
wanting, there care seems to wither, yea love, yea and father-hood it self.
Why then it is a mark unto us, that we are children when God corrects us,
if we receive this chastisement as from a father with obedience. Heb. 12.9.
We have had fathers of our flesh which corrected us, and we gave them
reverence. We have interpreted and taken those corrections in good part, we
have acknowledged them, and reverenced, and respected them with an awful
observance; and the matter was only to dispose and conform us to this life.
Heb. 12.9.
Shall we not much rather be in subjection unto the father of spirits? unto
him, who by the afflictions of this flesh, qualifieth and composeth our
spirits. And live; to prepare us, to frame us to another life: A sign, say we
more, that we are children, in whom God takes his delight: For, says he, whom
the Lord loves, he corrects, not only as a father the son, but, the
son in whom he delights, the child whom he cherishes, the child for
whom he keeps an inheritance, that heavenly inheritance whereof he makes us
coheires, with that Well-beloued in whom he is well pleased; in whom and by
whom alone, in us and with us he is well pleased: Ephesians. 1.5.
He has predestined us unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ to
himself, according to the good pleasure of his will: whereupon we ought
surely to say with the Psalmist, Before Psalm. 119 67.71.
I was afflicted I went astray, it is good for me that I have been afflicted,
that I might learn thy statutes. Thy chastisements, O God, have been for my
conversion, for my correction: with the Apostle also, Iam. 1.12.
Blessed is the man that endures temptation, for when he is tried he shall
receive the crown of life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.
In as much, certes, Romans 5.3, 4, 5.
as tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and experience hope,
and hope makes not ashamed, because the love of God is shed abroad in our
hearts by the Holy Ghost, which is given unto us; whereupon he says we glory
in tribulation also: In as much also as Romans 8.28.
all things work together for good, as it were in emulation one of the other,
to them that love God, to them unto whom by his love shed abroad in their
hearts, he has given to love him, called according to his purpose; in as much
in a word, that in all things be they never so difficult, Verse. 37.
we are more than conquerours through him that loved us, our Lord and Savior
Jesus Christ, beloved with so strong a love and conjunction, that in him and by
him the father loves us, the father vouchsafes to delight in us; where we cry
confidently with the Apostle, that Romans 8.35, 38.
neither tribulation nor distress shall separate us from the love of Christ;
in those tribulations he acknowledges his badge, nay not death it self, nor
any thing that may happen unto us, how sharp soever it be, from the love of
God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. Nay rather they do assure us they do
testify unto us his love, are unto us pledges of his grace and good will,
first fruits of his glory.

But here the flesh repugneth. Why, says it, shall affliction be a mark of
the children of God? why then all they who are chastized, are they his
children? Contrariwise, look about you, see in how many sorts this mark is
defective. I but the wise man says not, that all those whom God strikes are
his children, for the^ what should become of his judgments, so frequent on
strangers, on the wicked? But he means that all his children, those to whom he
vouchsafes to be in his house, are subject to feel his hand; and children as
they are of his mercy, they feel it not in his anger, as those children of
wrath; but in his mercy. And will thou know the difference? those impute it to
fortune, to nature, to mischance, think on naught but on their pain; if any
thought of God enters perhaps into their minds, they smother it presently,
ready to do worse if they do but escape. These in their pain feel the hand
of God, think on their sin, forget their pain; convince themselves, and
convicted, humble themselves at the foot of his clemency; more ashamed of
their offense than of their punishment, more confounded in themselves before
the benignity of such a father, than before the inflamed anger of the most
rigorous Judge; walking henceforth warily, not so much for fear of incurring
his indignation, as out of a desire not to commit any thing unworthy of his
adoption, of his family. So do we read of Pharaoh, when he feels the lice and
swarms of flies, and the other rods of God, according as he does redouble them,
he grieueth, is disquieted, is impatient, makes a capitulation with God; but
eftsoons returns, who is that God, whom you do so much allege? it is
marvel he says not, Let me see him, and thereupon he hardneth his heart.
Gods rod went but to his back, little sensible thereof in his soul. On the
contrary, David sees the destroying Angel smiting his people, threatening very
near his own person, forgets his own danger for his sin, ready to redeem
Gods anger with the loss of his life; 2 Samuel 24.17.
Lee I have sinned, says he, and I have done wickedly; but these sheep, what
have these done? let thine hand I pray thee be against me, and against my
fathers house, because he was sensible of his sin, insensible of his pains.
Grieve not therefore when God chasteneth thee, rather grieve when he corrects
thee not; fear that he has forgot thee, and left thee to thy self: thou
ought to suspect those prosperities which thou drinkest in long draughts.
The sick man, who has never so little judgment, takes it for an ill sign,
when the Physician permits him to take any thing, lets him drink wine in his
full fever, because he forbids nothing to desperate sick folks, he never
makes incision on those that are mortally wounded; there is both reason and
art to let them die at leisure.

I but it is the correction of a father, the chastisement of a son, to cut
off an arm or leg, pull out our eyes or bowels; and shall we not think that
these words serve rather to lull us asleep? for what could the greatest enemy
do to us more in the heat of his anger? I but unadvised flesh refrain thy
self, it is God that speaks: and if thy vine could speak, and should vpbraid
thee, and tell thee how often thou make it to weep, when thou cutst it, and
cutst it again, leauest but a twig in an unassured hope notwithstanding of
more fruit; Good husbandman, as thou think thy self to be, would thou
not mock at it? And how often to heal the body, to prevent a Cangrene, secst
thou the arm, the leg offered to the Surgeons saw, without caution or assurance
to be bettered, to a loss, to an anguish both certain and extreme? Why then
ought we not to suffer in this body, and in all worldly things, to heal, to
soue the soul? of God above all, who has made the soul and body, Creator
of this universal world, who knows how far the damage of our body, the
loss of this present world may serve, may contribute to the salvation of our
souls?

But behold I see what troubles thee, I am the nian, Lam. Ier. 3. 1, 3.
say thou, that has seen affliction by the rod of his wrath; surely
against me is be turned; he turns his hand against me all the day. He has
taken from me an only son, and through the sons side has pierced the
mother. A son in the flower of his age, the stay of my declining years in
this corrupted age; a bud of manly virtue, already the honor of his age. A
woman, a wife, my counsel in perplexity, my comfort in adversity, a
continual spur to good, surpassing most, yea all, both in regard of her sex,
and of that age. And thereupon thou framest thy reply. And thereupon Satan does
tempt thee; Thy force and thy hope in God is gone. I but consider that we must
all die, and by Gods will according as it pleases him to call us. This call is
our calling, he has prevented thy son by his mercy, he has taken him away
from corruption, (what caution, what security, be it never so firm, can one
have to swim against the stream of this ^^^^uption) has taken him away from
hence with honor, has advanced and taken him up into his glory. Setapart the
interest thou have; have thou occasion to complain? And would thou, O
miserable man, on the hazard of his soul, have thy condition amended? to
support some few years which remains to thee, see him delivered and given
over to the winds of youth, the waves of vanity, among so many rocks, yea
amongst so many Sirens? He took a little while after thy wife away. But note
his providence, by the death of that dear Son she was weaned from all
pleasure, from all hope in this life. And so to weane our children, to set them
forwards, to use them to a better food, we use to (...) Orpin on the nurses
breast A while after thy wife melted with grief, wearied and tired with
anguish, cloyed with days, desirous of a better life, God took her away from
thee, and that before thine eyes, thy self, thy soul, thou will say and thine
own entrails. But would thou not have made conscience, for thy
contentment, rather than for hers, to see her endure, not able to dure under
such a torture? But seeing we must all part from hence, loving her so tenderly,
would thou have preceded her decease? And know thou what years remain
thee after her; and with what love then would thou have surcharged her,
overwhelmed her with such grief, to see thee die before her? yea, if thou
would but consisider thine interest; what greater good, yea almost what
other good joined with hers could thou draw, than from the death of thy wife,
who after having been given thee thirty years and more for an help to live
well, thou have had her as an example to die well, dying virtuously,
Christianly, for others to take example by? to learn of her and in her (a
lively lesson at the very stroke of death) to crown, to conclude thy life?

But in stead of replying, thou redoublest thy complaint, why could not God
take me some other way, and whether it has been to chastize me, or to prove
me, had he no other means, but he must needs come to extremities? But
whether it be to make thee feel his rod, or to put thy faith in evidence, what
could he do more? His goods given thee by his mercy, and worldly honors, how
often had thou spurned at them, trod them under foot, made vile account of
them? what had it been then else, than to have struck thee upon thy clothes,
to try the valor of a Soldier in a petty game, the constancy of a Senator
in a pupper. In that one therefore which remained to thee, whereof thou were
sensible, he has stricken thee, who knows thee better than thy self does;
elsewhere it had been unprofitable, yea ridiculous. He has struck thee but
in his mercy, to thy salvation, Job 5.17, 18.
for happy is the man whom God corrects, for he makes sore and binds up,
he wounds and his hands make whole. And therefore learn to say more and
more to God with Job, neither be weary thereof; Job 13.15.
though he slay me yet will I trust in him. And notwithstanding protest holily
with him, even upon that point, but I will maintain mine own wates before
him, all these temptations shall not slacken my course, but rather shall settle
me in his service, frame me and resolve me thereto. And then do not doubt,
Job 42.12.
but that God will bless thy latter end more than thy beginning. That he will
restore unto thee not the double, as to Job, but an hundred fold, when he
shall restore unto thee those whom thou bemoanest, and thee to them; but
glorious, but in his glory, 1 Cor. 15.
when these sensual bodies sown in corruption, in dishonor, in weakness
shall rise spiritual bodies, in incorruption, in glory, in power; when all
together at the voice of the Arch-Angell, 1 The. 4.16.
at the trump of God, we shall rise out of the dust, we shall meet the Lord
in the air, to dwell, live, reign, and triumph with him for ever. Amen.

These wholesome simples (O Lord) do I gather in thy Garden, in thy holy Word,
and do compound them, and dispose of them, but unprofitably (this flesh does
so much repugne) if thy Spirit does not apply them unto me. Therefore, O Father,
God of patience and comfort, effect in me this thy work; behold my wounds,
power therein the sweet balm of thy Word, give it virtue and efficacy; let
this pain turn into conversion, these medicines into comfort unto my soul.
That I may have matter to cry out with the Prophet, O Lord, Isai. 12.1, 2.
I will praise thee though thou wast angry with me; for I acknowledge it, I had
need thereof; I adore thy mercy in the scalding water of thine anger, but I
add also with one tenor in full confidence, Thine anger is turned away, and
thou comfortedst me; behold the Lord Jehovah is my strength, and my song, he
also is become my salvation; for his holy name sake, in his Son Jesus Christ
our Lord, Amen.

FINIS.

