MEDITATIONS upon Psalm. 101.

Written first in French, by PHILIP MORNAI lord of Plessis, and by him
dedicated to Henry the fourth, the French king.

And now translated into English, for the benefit of the Christian Reader, by
T. W.

LONDON, Printed by Adam Islip for Thomas Man, dwelling in Paternoster row, at
the sign of the Talbot. 1599.

To the right Honorable and his very good Lord, the L. Robert, Earl of
Essex, etc. L. high Marshall of England, etc. and now L. General of her
Majesty's forces, appointed for the reducing of Ireland, to former, yea and to
more faithful obedience than heretofore. T. W. wishes all prosperity and
blessedness through Christ, both now and for ever.
WE have (right Honorable) an old saying amongst us: He gives twice that
gives quickly. And the spirit (which is both antiquity and verity it self)
says: A word spoken in his place is like apples of gold with pictures of
silver. How fitly this will agree with other men's actions and my present
practice, I had rather others, and your L. especially should judge and feel
than my self speak. This I am sure of, that as hertofore many times you have
by sundry persons ben presented with great variety of words and works: so
now particularly upon your going out against the Irish rebels, you have, and
shall have the like performed, because as Solomon says, Many do seek the face
of the ruler. I say again, how fitly these have been, or are accomplished, as
also with what affections men do them, that is known to God alone who is the
only searcher of the heart and reins. And yet I doubt not, but that your L. is
endued with grace from above, in some measure to practice that in your self,
and toward other, which the holy ghost speaks: Though council in the heart
of man is like deep waters, yet a man that has understanding will draw it
out. I will leave others to the Lord, before whom they must stand or fall,
whosoever they be, for who am I that I should judge or justify any, since
that office belongs to the Lord alone? But touching my self, it is enough
for me, that I know mine own heart, and that I can in some sort and sense
truly say, as the Apostle does: This is our reioicing, the testimony of our
conscience, that as in other things, so in this that I now do, I walk not
according to fleshly wisdom, but in simplicity and godly pureness. Many
send your L. men and money, horse and armor, and many good things besides,
toward the furnishing and setting of you forward in this great and noble
voyage: yea sundry are content to adventure as it were their portions and
persons with you in this vvorthie service. All these things no doubt of it,
are good in themselves, and may be true testimonies of sincere affection in
your followers and fauourits, yea they may be powerful means of just defense
for you and yours, and our whole state, and of lawful annoiance and confusion
upon the enemies against whom you go. But take heed my L. that these cause
you not to be puffed up in your self, and so to go forth in the arm of flesh
and blood. The thing that you rather are especially to regard therein is, that
they be thankefullie received, as from God, and religiously used as in
regard of your self, and those that shall assist you, and be at your command.
Outward and humane helps, my self have not to present, but may rather say
with the Apostle, Silver and gold have I none: such as I have, such I give.
And yet let not I beseech you, my want of worldly things, make less
precious in your judgment, the spiritual graces, that God is pleased by me the
unworthiest of his servants, at this time to offer unto you: for this I can and
dare assure you, even in the word of truth and life (which is more than the
words of all mortal men in the world, though never so great) that though it
be little in outward appearance, and weak according to worldly show: yet if
it be thorowlie settled in you for knowledge, and continually observed for
practice, it vvil be not only as good as the most or best outward things that
you carry with you, but a vvorthie mean to sanctify all and every one of them
to you and others: yea it vvil make your going out glorious, and your coming
in again prosperous and full of renown (a matter that many I am sure, wish and
pray for with all their hearts) as which indeed will watch for you when you
sleep, and will uphold your credit at home, and person abroad, yea and
preserve you and yours, though you should come unto the greatest danger and
distress that could be. In all this great praise of the thing it self, I
neither praise mine own pain, I protest, nor provide for my commendation in
the world, nor couetouslie o^ cunningly seek gifts from your L. But
dutifullie thereby to provoke your L. care to diligent reading thereof, and
carefully to stir you up to daily performance of such good things as are
propounded therein. Your high place and person, your honorable and holy
profession, the worthy and weighty causes that you must manage, the manifold
perils that thereby you may prevent, the singular good that thereby you shall
atcheeue, with sundry such like, shou1d I am sure, and I doubt not but they
will provoke sincere obedience. Whereof I trust your L. will have no whit the
less regard, even in this respect, because that I for my part shall think my
care, my labor, my love, and whatsoever duty I have done or may do unto
your L. to be sufficiently recompensed, if these poor trauails may find good
acceptance with you, and patronage from you, and in you may bring forth these
good and gracious effects. And so humbly beseeching the Lord mercifully to
direct you in all affairs that you shall take in hand, according to his holy
vvil, and namely to prosper this present and so important service, for Gods
glory, the welfare of our kingdoms, her Majesty's Christian comfort and peace
every manner of way, your own particular good, and the confusion and
overthrow of al Gods, the estates, her Majesty's, and your own enemies, I
humbly take my leave.

At London the second of March, 1599. Your Honors very humble, and ready to
be commanded in all Christian duty. T. Wilcocks the Lords unworthy servant.

To the Christian Readers, grace and peace from God, etc.
I Beseech you all, of what state soever, with careful attendance, and serious
thoughts, to view and read over this Treatise following. This motion I make,
not for any doubt or suspicion J have of any unsound matter therein, for J am
persuaded it contains in it the truth of God: But because I am acquainted
with, or at the least wise not ignorant of those ordinary stops and lets, that
hinder our growth in goodness by good things, as Satan's malice, our blind and
ignorant hearts, our careless minds, discouragements from others, and sundry
such like: by means whereof, men are many times misseled: and because also I am
sure these things may, nay will fall out, in perusing and reading even the best
things, I can not but again and again entreat you herein also to have a good
eye to your selves and your own souls. Assuredly you shall find (specially if
you weigh things well, as in deed you should) that you have great and good
cause so to do: for besides that the points handled therein are not mean,
neither of any simple subject, and therefore would be regarded and received
with care and conscience of them: the very manner of handling of them
(according to the usual course and practice of the Author) is profound and
pithie, and therefore also will require a diligent and understanding heart: The
treaty was first written in French by a worthy Nobleman of that country, and
therefore does most properly appertain to that state. That which peculiarly
belongs thereto, understand it of, and refer it to the same. The rest that
is common, and according to general truth, make common, but yet good use
withal of it also. And this premonition I think very meet to give, as knowing
beforehand how ready men are to snatch and catch at that which belongs not
unto them, their times, and states: a point arguing great curiosity, and no
small lightness of mind, and lack of judgment: as also carelessly to neglect,
yea securely to contemn that which imports them much, a matter bewraying
carelesnes at the least, if not sencelesnesse of heart; from both which, as all
other extremes, I wish the Christian reader, as my self, in this and in all
other things of the like nature, to be freed and purged, and on the other side
to be fulfilled with all sound judgment and carfulness of spirit, that so
from this and other good things, we may always learn to know what that good,
holy, and acceptable will of his is, and may be enabled by the blessed spirit,
steadfastly to believe the same, and carefully to walk in the obedience thereof.
Now the very God of peace sanctify you thorowout: and I pray also, that your
whole spirit and soul, and body, may be kept blameless, until the coming
of our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom every where, but specially in the church, be
praise for ever and ever. Sobeit.

Yours ever in Christ. T. W.

Lord Jesus begin, and make an end.
MEn who are desirous to frame their faces, and to compound their countenances,
do ordinarily go to glasses, and endeavor to set them thereby: but Kings for
the direction of their doings and affairs, had much more need to look
thereinto, as well because their callings are more high and heavy than other
men's, as also because they have more lets from themselves, and others that be
about the^, to hinder their sight. And therefore they had need to have, (if
they could tell how) more lively and (...) then you shall indeed surely reign,
when you most soundly serve him. Wherein, if even the best princes have at
sundry times ben not only admonished, but threatened with the wrath and
displeasure of God, and all to prevent these evils in them, that they might not
fall away from their duty, or abuse his mercy, patience, and long suffering,
you (Sir) nor others, must think much to be often called upon, yea provoked
and whetted on, to these good things, because none runs so fast, but he had
need to be incour aged, 1. Cor. 9.24.
So to run, that he may attain: neither stands so sure, but he had need to
be admonished, and put in mind of the Apostles speech, 1. Cor. 10.10.
Let him that thinks he stands, take heed least he fall, and withal to
remember the saying of this very kingly Prophet, Psalm. 30.6, 7.
I said in my prosperity, I shall never be moved, but when thou did hide
thy face, I was sore troubled. For this is a certain and an assured point,
That men are in more danger to be overthrown, yea overwhelmed, when they enjoy
abundance of graces from God, than when they are under his chastisements and
corrections. For as for chastisements, even then when they beat down men in
themselves, they lift them up before God, and make them by consequent capable
and meet to receive his mercies: and that is it the Apostle means, when he
says, They do in the end bring with them the quiet fruit of righteousness unto
them which are thereby exercised. Hebr. 12.11.
Whereas graces on the other side, in Gods purpose indeed, and their own
nature, carrying men out of themselves unto God, cause them notwithstanding,
through Satan's malice, and the corruption of their own hearts, to despise
almighty God himself, and to say Who is the Lord, Prou. 30.9.
and so make them to become fit matter, upon whom to exercise and execute the
severity of his rigor and wrath, for the contempt or abuse of so singular
graces.

Men much trouble themselves (Sir) now a days to defend and maintain your
calling and coming to the crown. But iwis it needs not, for your very
birth alone is sufficient to entitle you thereto. But to come to it, to come
thoroughly to it, yea to come to the top of it, and to carry your self therein
as is most meet, there is indeed, and there must be indeed, required a far
other thing: and that is, a great ascendent, as men use to say, and a gracious
aspect and direction thereof, favoring this birth of yours, and being able to
correct all contrary co^stellations, yea every thing that either directly or
indirectly might annoy you with his influence. That which I mean, is not any
star or planet, or any whole zodiake, as they use to say, no not heaven it
self, or the heaven of heavens, but indeed the sovereign God, the only Lord,
maker and creator of all things, Job. 38.31.32.33.
who loses (as Job says) the power of the stars, and orders the
government of the heavens above the earth: by whom (as also says Solomon)
Kings reign, Pr. 8.15.16.
and Governors keep their estate: and by whom you (Sir) may say, as this our
King David does, The Lord is with me, I shall reign and rule: against him there
is neither counselnor strength: wherefore nothing in the world can shake me or
make me to be moved. We that live in the clear light of Gods word, wonder at
the conceits that in the times of blindness and superstition men have thrust
one another into. Astrologians made Princes in former time believe, that such
or such a planet bare rule over their birth. They persuaded othersome, that a
certain spirit assisted them, for the guidance, line, or leading of their life.
And it is as strange to consider what dotages these deceived persons fell into:
and that not only the basest of the people, but the best amongst men: for even
the very Princes themselves honored these conceits, and they did exactly
observe whatsoever they thought would please their instructers, planets,
spirits, and such like: and utterly abhorred whatsoever might any manner of
way offend or displease them. But you (Sir) have much more strong reason to
strive to please God, and to seek to serve him: for these were but fantasies
of their own framing, whereas God lives in himself, and gives unto you and
al others, Acts. 17.28.
Life, breath, and being. Grieve not therefore at any hand, or in any sort I
beseech you, this great ascendant, who is your almighty, and your most
merciful governor. He requires of men, Psalm. 37.27.
that they follow virtue, and that they fly vice: and this (so gracious is he
unto the^) does he for their own salvation and good. Of Kings he demands,
that they plant piety, that they render righteousness. What more favorable
tax or imposition could he lay upon them? This is a gentle tribute indeed,
and a sweet servitude, if I may so call it. Nay it is the only mean to rule
blessedly and well, and therefore should be the more carefully striuen to. And
of you certainly (Sir) so much the more carefully to be performed, because he
has done more for you, than for sundry Kings besides, yea so much the more, by
how much he has declared to you the gracious eye of a loving father, and not
the wrathful face of an angry Master, as he did to sundry your
predecessors. But it is now good time to leave you, and to hear David himself
speak, David I say, pronouncing his vow unto God, even then when he first
entered into his kingdom.

Verse 1. I will sing (says he) Mercy and Justices O eternal God, I will
sing them to thee.
David a warlike Prince, verily, if ever there were any, wanted not matter here
to sing, after the manner of profane and heathen princes, his triumphs and
victories: for he had vanquished strangers abroad, and rebels at home, he had
done very famous acts of a worthy captain and valiant soldier, yea therein
he had proceeded so far, that the princes and nobles of his kingdom were
enforced to present a solemn supplication unto him, that he would no more
hazard or endanger his person, 2. Sa. 21.17.
Least they might see the light of Israel put out. A man would think then,
that he should have made a vow, and have set out his valor, and magnified his
armor and weapons, and have exalted them: but being spiritually minded at this
time, he was far from the thoughts of these wordly things. And though for the
first instruction of a Prince, he might as a man would imagine, have taught him
to have been hardy and courageous, yet he was contented to omit all that, and
to come to deal with matters of greater consequence. For though I will not
deny, but confess rather, that it is a virtue very profitable for all great
Princes, and for David himself more necessary than for others, who had spent
the whole course of his life, as well in wars against them that lay nigh unto
him, as in compounding inward troubles at home: yet he will as it were in
silence for the time, pass by all these things, and sing of, and exalt before
them all, this benignity (as he says) and justice, Mercy and Judgment. Now
to sing them, what is it, but to publish them, and to cause them to sound and
shine forth, yea to sound them forth every where, to spread them abroad, and to
distribute them into all the quarters and corners of his kingdom? And good
reason it should be so, because they are indeed the two daughters of holy and
heavenly wisdom, by which kings reign: yea they are two special qualities, by
which God manifests himself unto men, and by which he will have his lawful
lieutenants known amongst men, and be marked. For take them away once, and
how can public persons be said, to be like the Lord? Or what difference then,
between them and private? Saving that they shall be worse, by how much in place
and power they are advanced above others. Yea two such they are, as in the
virtue and strength whereof, God blesses among the nations every estate and
condition, as well of peace, as of war. For what is peace I say, and what is
war (specially through men's corruption) without justice? Peace is nothing else
but carnal security, and war nothing else but contention and theeuerie. Yea
Justice it self, through strong and strange passion, that ouerruleth us all,
passes many times into his contrary, that is to say, injustice and
unrighteousness, unless we labor to make a good temperature, and intermingle
much mercy therewithal. And this is the cause also why these two virtues are
(as I may say) essential to all princes and magistrates, whereas the rest
tending to no other purpose, but as it were to serve these two, may be called,
and are in a manner accidental. Which that we may be the better persuaded
of, let us mark, that howsoever kings and states living without war, and by
consequent, without acts of prowess and valiant deeds, may by means thereof
be accounted, and be indeed much more happy than their neighbors, that
continually combat and fight one with another. Yet herein is not the
felicity, either of the public, or of the private condition, but that it
stands rather in this, that Justice bears sway, and Mercy also is
administered. For what are kings and states without justice and without mercy;
without punishment, and without recompense, Romans 13.4.
For terror to the wicked, and for honor to the good? What are they I say, but
either so many scar crows, or so many Tyrants? And it has never been seen,
that states have been well guided, and realms rightly ruled, at the least
without some appearance and apprehension of these qualities in them. The reason
whereof is this, States consist in their subjects: for as Solomon says, The
glory of a king, is the multitude of his people: and subjects in society and
fellowship one of the^ with another: and Justice is the only band of all
society amongst men, which if it decay once, and be not rightly executed,
what can me^ look for, but all confusion, disorder, oppression, and all other
violence and outrage besides? And hereof we may add yet a further reason,
Because kings subsist by the love of their people, and Mercy sweeteneth and
makes easy unto them that hard burden of their subjection. And therefore
Mercy also is not without cause well called by one, The preserver of scepters.
Yea I say, it seasoneth this great power, otherwise intolerable to men, (for
who would willingly be in subjection?) and otherwise also unsupportable to it
self; because it is the easiest thing of a thousand, to turn lawful
authority into cruel oppression and tyranny.

Those that teach, profess, and practice Physike, begin after this manner:
First they propound the knowledge of man's body, afterward follows
prescription of diet, either to uphold it in good state, or to bring it to it,
if it be decayed: iron and fire, that is to say, cutting off, and searing; come
in the last place, being of accidents become such instruments, as
inconveniences through noisome and festering diseases, have adioined to that
art, and man's intemperancie and corruption have made necessary. And even such
course as this must Magistrates observe in their politic bodies, and in the
sickenesses and fores that sprout and spread therein: not using corrosiues, but
when the disease calls for them: nor lenitiues, when biting plasters and
medicines are meet. Add hereunto, that David so well graced as he was, knew
well enough, that kings reign not by their arms, but by their heads; not by
strength only (much less by violence) but by virtue: yea he knew this
further, that when God should call them to an account, concerning their offices
and charges, he would not say unto them, You have not been bold enough,
valiant enough, etc. for men are naturally prone to such things, and when they
have authority on their sides, many times exceed therein: but this rather will
he charge them withal, even as this great king himself tells us, Ye have
not judged rightly. Ye that were, Psalm. 82.2.3. Wis. 6.4.
or should have been officers of my kingdom, ye have not ministered mercy to the
afflicted, the poor, and the widow. The common people think these two
virtues, contrary one of them to the other. But what a conceit is that? For if
they were so, they could not be in God, because the Godhead being but one, and
always like it self, cannot admit contraries. And if that were true, how
could it be said, Psalm. 25.10.
That all his ways are mercy and truth, and all his works mercy and justice?
And the like may be in kings, or else how could they be called Fathers and
Judges. Prou. 16.12.
And God himself has said in one place, The throne is established by Justice.
And in another place he says again, The king vpholdeth his throne by Mercy.
And as much is spoken doubtless of all other men, Psalm. 112.5.
of whom it is said, The just are merciful, Prou. 14.22.
and that their mercies are justice indeed. Again, if that were so, to wit,
that they were contraries, they could not themselves be virtues, but the one or
the other of them should be a vice; the reason whereof is plain, because no
virtue is contrary to virtue, but only opposite to vice. And therefore if
they were contraries, one of them, choose which you will, must needs be a vice.
Wherefore we may safely conclude, that seeing they are not contraries, they
do not destroy one another, but rather instruct and help one another: neither
do they drive away the one the other, but follow and accompany the one the
other, as those that are in one and the self same God, and as it were going
arm in arm together, tend to the same end. So that here that is verified,
which the Prophet promised: Psalm. 85.10.
Mercy and truth shall meet, righteousness and peace shall kiss one another.
In God verily these great graces flow, from that very eternal fountain,
which in him we call goodness, which he communicates to some after one manner
and measure, and to others after another, according to his own good pleasure.
And these graces, according to the diverse subjects wherein they are, and about
which they are occupied, have diners names. Gods goodness upon or toward his
own people, is called Clemency, Beniguitie, Mercy: but upon, or toward the
wicked, it changes his name, and is termed Severity, Judgment, and Justice,
Both the one and the other are good, and that not only as they come from God,
but even whether they tend, to blessing or to punishment. Good they are I say,
for the advancement of Gods glory, and the upholding of order in the world:
for take away Mercy and Justice and what shall we see amongst men, but hell as
it were let lose? Good I say again for the society and fellowship of men,
which without these two exercised and executed amongst them, can never be
vpheld. And lastly they are good, even for them also to whom they are
directed, and upon whom they are bestowed, as who without these cannot either
well or comfortablie pass the days of their pilgrimage, or be thoroughly
humbled. For as in respect of the godly, what consolation is this, to know,
that the very justice of God is in them, and for the^, Mercy and goodness,
that so his goodness might be exceeding great and large? And what a terror is
this to the wicked, or at the least wise ought it to be unto the^, that Gods
justice and judgment shall be so much the more great and grievous, by how
much they have fruit trampled and trodden underfoot his great grace and
goodness. Some are provoked by blessings to serve the Lord. Others are moved
to displease and offend him even by their punishments. In both God works, and
for both provides by these means. Respect the eternal God himself, and then
we shall see that his mercies are justices, and his justices are mercies. Will
you see it by example? His justice upon Adam, was infinite mercy, as may well
appear by this, that being at the very brinke of the bottomless pit, and
he might justly have thrust him into the same, he withheld him notwithstanding
from it, and which is more, even then gave to him and his, his own son to
save them from death. And yet this infinite Mercy was as a man may say,
swallowed up of justice, when he laid the sins of men upon the back and
body of his eternal son (I mean his whole person, yet without co^founding
of the properties of either nature) and was please, that in his only begotten,
all our debts should be exactly paid, and all our iniquities fully pardoned.

This point is meet for all estates and degrees to remember, as being full of
heavenly comfort and spiritual instruction, but cheefely profitable for princes
and great personages, who are Gods own lively images in this world, and
therefore should most remember and resemble these things. True it is, that they
cannot balance or bear them in themselves, or weigh the^ out to others so
rightly as God does, for they are imperfect when they are at the best, and God
is always perfect and just. And yet they should beware of this, how they set
the^ at war, or make them to jar one of them with another, or oppose them
one of them against another. They should rather on the other side persuade
themselves of this, that that is indeed the most true Mercy, that keeps in
it self, and ministers unto others most of justice: and that that is the most
true Justice, that holds in it self, and yet expresses to others most of
Mercy. So do Mercy and Justice in a prince, or under a prince, open the eyes
and clear the sight, as I may say, one of another. Mercy, whilst it rightly
rules the courage and haughtiness of Justice, which because rulers many times
enforce and constrain it further than is meet, may easily run riot, and be
turned into rage: And Justice, whilst it moderateth the affections that
enlarge mercy too much, because they are they that blind it, and cause it
sundry times to fall upon the wicked; it I say, even that mercy I mean, which
was borne and bred for the good only: as on the other side, it causes that
rigor to light upon good men, which was created and made for the wicked alone.
David therefore here sings and sets out unto us, both the one, and the
other. He makes them for our sakes to accord well upon his harp, and brings
both the one and the other to his proper and peculiar tune, them I say, which
in truth tend both to one end, that is, the glory of God, and the good of men,
and bring forth the like effect, to wit, faithful obedience to Gods will.
Prou. 21.3.
For says Solomon, Mercy and Judgment are more acceptable to God, them
sacrifices. So that we may thence gather, that they make kings, as also al
other me^, acceptable before God. And in another place he says, Prou. 21.17.
He that pursues Justice and Mercy, shall find life and glory. What means
he by this? Surely nothing else but this, that a good feeling, and faithful
practice of these two holy virtues, will defend princes, and get them glory in
this world, and in the other, bring the^ even to eternal life. But to find out
these virtues, and to follow after them; even the best, both men and
Magistrates, have need of a good guide. He only that gives this grace to
kings, that they be kings, must give them also grace to reign aright, or to
rule well. We say, no man is borne an artificer: much more safely may we say,
that no man is borne a goodking. For as it is one thing to be borne a man, and
another thing to be a good man, so is it also to be born a king, and to be a
goodking. To God therefore he must come. And this David did well see, when
praying for himself and his son Solomon, he says, Psalm. 72.1.2.
O God give thy judgments to the king, and thy righte^usnesse to the kings
son, to the end, that he may justly govern thy people, and judge the
afflicted with equity. And Solomon says of himself: 1. King. ^.7.8.9.
O Lord I know not how to go out or in. Thy seruent is set over this great
people: give him an understanding heart to judge rightly, that he may discern
between good and evil: otherwise, who is able to govern this great people?
Very notable and excellent doctrines are delivered unto us out of these few
words. These virtues of which we have spoken, have their root and resting place
in goodness, and indeed, cannot elsewhere be found. And goodness naturally
communicates and distributeth it self, as a grace that cannot contain it
self within it self, but needs must break forth for the glory of him that
gives it, and the good of them who are partakers thereof. Wherefore these
royal and kingly virtues must send out their boughs and branches, even unto
the borders of the kingdom and country, so as there may not be any, though
never so mean, but in some measure more or less, they should partake thereof.
One of them spreads out it self in the sinews, that so it may preserve the
people, and contain the^ in their duty. The other spreads out it self in
the veins, comfortably to water the land, and the people thereof, with the
Princes favor. And this is that same common and general good which the Prince
owes unto all his subjects, Justice I mean, and with it, peace and
protection, or defense also, and that without difference or respect, be herein
framing and conforming himself unto God, the sovereign Lord, Who makes his
sun to shine, Mat. 5.45.
and his rain to fall indifferently upon the good and the evil, giving more
sometimes to the debased and afflicted, than to others that are not humbled,
not only because they stand in more need, but also because Mercy in his own
nature, draws nigh unto him that has need thereof as Justice likewise to him
that lies more open to outrage and violence: he following herein that which is
commanded, Open thy mouth for the dumb, Prou. 31.8.
in the cause and right of them that are appointed to destruction: and herein
also fashioning himself like unto God, Pro. 23.10.
Who boweth down his head to hear him that is humbled, and keeps himself
continually about them that are by an afflicted spirit, and watches over the
harnest of the fatherless, and preserves the widows bounds. But to them
that are known for good people, and found indeed to be men of godliness, and
integrity, there is another mercy, there is another justice due, that is, to
show unto them Christian countenance, and particular or special favor, to
cherish them, to acknowledge them for such, and to honor in them that grace or
graces, which God has vouchsafed unto them to honor him withal: that so he
might apparently distinguish them from others, that indeed are not such. Every
one should learn to put a difference betwixt the precious and the vile, Psalm.
15.^.
and to make much of them that fear the Lord. Therefore the prince much more
should do it, because he should be of a more discerning spirit than other men,
and it is (...) piece of his duty to observe and make this difference. And yet
we many times see, that none are more blind than they, and none less
regarded; or rather more contemned than those that ^n^ai^e^tly fear God: It
may be we know not what it is to honor them. If that be so, let us listen and
learn a little. To honor good men is nothing else but to sound; yea and if
need be, to send them abroad into (...) world; and by that m^^nes to stir^e up
at desire in all, both to resemble them, and indeed to become such. But to
leave the^ wrapped up in confusion, and in a mass of misery, that is nothing
else but to make vice and virtue all one, or rather indeed, against virtue to
streng the^ vice: vice I say, which is but of too much account amongst men, yea
which is but too much in every one of us, by reason of the secret
intelligences, which it has with our corrupted nature. And so by this we see
second step of Gods goodness toward men, which as it appears in this, that
he makes them his children, his dearly beloved oues; his heirs, and
reserueth for them his treasures, and distributeth freely his graces unto them:
so does it more particularly appear, as in respect of kings, who though by
nature they may be borne to kingdoms, or by men be chosen thereto, yet never
can have grace to be kings indeed, but from him, I am. 1.17.
From whom alone descends every good gift, and perfect grace: and who can
never fail them indeed, or ever will, except it be through injustice, neglect
of duty, or other some grecuous transgression, seeing it has pleased the
sovereign Lord to make them such to himself and his servants: And from this
second degree or step, we come unto the third, that is, that amongst these good
people, those who^ God has in^^ed with some special grace for the managing of
some special affairs, and for all other good purposes, Justice would, that even
the very mercy (...) his own father. Here Mercy will restrain; and that
even as if it were in the air, and before it come to strike, the sword of
Justice, which otherwise is very ready to execute that same severe and hard
decree, He that kills, shall die the death. In laws (no more than in other
forms of speech) men are not so much to regard the words thereof, as the
meaning and end of the same, because many times the words may be much more
hard than the meaning. A certain young woman of Roman goes, and with her own
breast norisheth her father in prison, an yet the arrest and decree that was
pronounced against him meant, that he should die there by famine. Mercy in this
process against law, did right to nature, and turned that rigor into grace,
and that crime into virtue and praise. So that even here the Apostles speech is
true, (...). 2.13.
Mercy r^ioiceth against condemnation or judgment. Likewise, by Gods law it
was not permitted to any but to the priests, to eat the show bread And by the
same law men are also straightly commanded to observe and fanctifie the Sabbath.
But yet when the question is, to nourish and feed one sore bitten with hunger,
as for example, David Gods anointed, who was unjustly banished from Saules
presence: or else to comfort a man's neighbor in extremity, or to defend his
country, etc. the case will quickly be altered, and the stare of the
question soon changed. And here once again Mercy takes upon it the cause of
charity, against the letter of the law. Yea here the very author of Mercy
and Justice tells us, that the law must give place to charity ( which indeed
is the true butt and end of the law, 1. Tim. 1.5. Roma. 13.8.
yea the very fulfilling of it, as the Apostle says) yea that our neighbor in
this case must be preferred before the very Sabbath it self. Which if it be
true in a private and particular person, will much more be strong in an
extreme danger or necessity of a public state, which ought to be so much the
more regarded, by how much maine, yea all, are to be preferred before one, or
some. But perhaps it will seem to sundry that we do not far enough
enlarge the skirts and bounds of Mercy, because we make it the interpreter of
Justice, and some would, that we should make it a part thereof. Whereupon also
it may be, they will say unto us: what? shall not the king show favors?
Othersome perhaps will say again: shall not the king lift up and advance, or
create (as some use to say) such as he shall like of? But we answer, that
we are so far off from disliking his bounty, that if he will follow our
counsel, he sall do nothing but show favors, yea true favors indeed, for
they shall be civil, and such as savor of Justice and Mercy together.
Howbeit, under the color or shadow of Mercy and Justice, the king we mean
and speak of, shall not commit injustice. For Mercy and Justice to, shall
never serve him in steed of a mask or visar, neither shall they ever lend him
their glorious apparel to so bad a purpose, and wicked end, as to cover
iniquity. If he be such a Prince as he ought to be, he will not for some
tenderness of heart in himself, or toward others, much less at the
importunity of a courtier will he wink at a heinous crime, and make it no
offense: as for example, a desperate murder or a slaughter committed, with
thought of it beforehand, or a rape, etc. but as he will listen unto the wife
and friend of the offending party, so he will hear the cry of the
fatherless, he will set before his eyes the tears of the widow, and in
thinking upon the particular sorrow of some, he will weigh the public hurt
and damage, which no doubt of it cannot but be increased, by the letting of
sin go unpunished, and that that may ensue thereupon. The truth of this is
confirmed by that worthy speech of the spirit, Prou. 1^.15.
He that justifies the wicked (says Solomon) and he that condemns the
righteous, they are both an abomination to the Lord. And if a man would see it
watranted, let him regard but the sentence of God himself (who is no respecter
of persons) and that pronounced and given against a king, truly clothed with
the purble or scarlet robe, and then he shall hear a very fearful one: 2.
Kin. 20.42.
Because thou have saved him (says the eternal God) whom I appointed to die,
they life shall be for his life, and thy people for his people. Wherefore where
God strikes, the Princes heart, hand, or e^e, must not spare: and as God
appoints, so must he execute, both for soundness of sentence, uprightness
of affection, end of punishment and all, or else it is not aright.

Princes parasites pretend many privileges for them, as abolitions proceeding
from fullness of power, matters of merry motion, and sundry such like, as we
call them reserved cases, all which the sovereign king holds in his own
hands, neither transferreth them to any person whatsoever. Howbeit here it were
good for them to consider what they suppose, heold, or practice in such cases.
For though we will not impair, no not in the least jot, any part of kingly
dignity, yet this we cannot dissemble, that to use them, is to attempt against
God, to wound his Majesty, to violate his Justice, and to usurp upon his
Mercy. He himself being incomprehensible mercy, and infinite power, when he
purposed to abolish sin, has not so used to speak. Do we not see that it
was his good pleasure, and he determined it with himself, and in time
accomplished it, that in his only begotten son (a wonderful secret of his
grace) his Justice should be satisfied? That is to say, to speak properly,
that his Mercy toward us, became Justice. Little or no favor at all shall a
Prince bestow, nay rather he shall commit a great and grievous evil, when
under the shadow and color of Mercy, he shall raise up to one or sundry
dignities, an unworthy person, and shall create for Magistrates such as are
incapable and unmeet for the same. This word, to create, properly signifies to
raise up, or make of nothing. And flatterers would make Princes believe, that
herein they draw nigh to the greatness, and to goodness of Almighty God,
that they have their creatures. And that they might the more enforce, it they
say, that the less a man has in himself to be placed in dignity, this
shall be the more evident declaration and apparent act of their kingly power,
to set them very high. But fie upon such profane propositions, and far be
it from any Christian heart to delight in, or dare to hear such blasphemous
voices: for to create, is an incommunicable propriety of God, never to be
given to all or any of the creatures, to men or to kings. God himself, the
only law and ruler of all things, that he might the better set out unto kings
the examples of his grace, never uses it but justly, and in matters of great
goodness. And shall princes apply it to purposes and practices of
inconveniences and sin? God of a lump of clay creates a man. In confess
that to be true, but he leaves not there, he proceeds further, and
breaths into him the spirit of judgment, and of life, yea he puts into
him all that which is meet for the making of a man. Who can forbid him from a
cottage or sheepefold, to take a Prince for himself and his people ( as he did
David) seeing he gives him his spirit to conduct him, Psalm. 78.70.
and he powers abundantly upon his head all that is needful for him to make
him a Prince. In this respect is it, that very beasts themselves disdain not
to obey man, neither do men so refuse to honor their princes. But kings
verily, when they make men of no worth, Magistrates, they give them, yea they
can give them no more, but the name: yea they do less for the^, than a
painter does for the image that he has portraited, for he can alter and
change it at his pleasure, and make it and deface it, as seems good to
himself: but they change not either the quality or the substance, they cannot
alter his head, nay they cannot add or diminish an hair. And many times they
set them so high, that they are ready at leastwise in affection, to set them
besides the seat. All which should work lowliness in worldly governors, and
should make them wary whom they advance.

But our Prophet proceeds and says: O Lord I will sing them unto thee. He
says not, I will sing them unto men: neither says he, that he will exercise
Justice and Mercy to please them. And doubtless as little regard will he
have, of fear to displease them, but would respect the Lord only, Acts. 17.23.
because he did live and reign by him, to him, Prou. 8.15.
and for him: by him, as in respect of his power; to him, as in regard of the
rules he had set him; and for him, as in consideration of the advancement of
his praise. Good reason therefore he should do these things to him, for
verily, Justice and Mercy that are practiced by occasion of men, or for humane
respects, are flacteries, hypocrisies, idolatries: flatteries, because they are
done to please men; hypocrisies, because they make a better show than they are;
and idolatries, because they rob God of his glory, and cause men to fall down
before men. But concerning them in things of a like nature, the Lord has said,
Math. 6.2.
They have their reward, that is, acceptance, honor, and ceremonies from men,
because they are done to men. But the Justice and Mercy, that have God for
their object, and are referred to his glorrie, and set him before them, who is
the beholder of actions, and the searches of hearts, they I say, have him for a
rewarder and recompense of them, 1. Co. 10.13. Romans 8.32. Psalm. 16.11.
that is faithful. And having him, how can they not but together with him have
all things also, because in his presence is the fullness of joy, and at his
right hand there are pleasures for evermore. And this is it that Solomon says:
They have for their wages and hire of well doing, both glory and life. Again,
it many times falls out, that the Prince causes a wicked instrument or
person to be executed. The deed is good, but perhaps he is moved thereto,
rather with courage and stoutnesse of heart in himself, than with the
vileness or detestation of the deed. This work I say is just in it self, for
the malefactor by his sin deserved the punishment, yet he that does it, is
notwithstanding unjust. Nay, I will say more than so: Respect him and the
wicked affection of his heart, and then I cannot but say, he is a murderer,
and that not only when with a hateful heart he causes a guilty person to
be executed, but when he has appointed or commanded his innocent neighbor
to be slain. On the other side, a Prince powers out his favor upon a fit
person. The action is good, and the man it may be deserved all that is
bestowed upon him. Howbeit, he that did it, was happily moved with some
blameworthie affection, as he respected kindred only, or considered favor, or
did dread some fear, or had some such worldly regard or other. But here
neither the man that did it, nor the deed it self, as in respect of him, is to
be esteemed. And why? because it aimed neither at religious respects, nor
right ends: and so by that means his Mercy becomes corruption, and his
virtue shall be unto him, as if it were a vice. So much does virtue desire to
be cherished for her own sake, or rather so much is God (the very fountain
of all virtue) jealous of his honor, and jealous also of our love, that he
will have every good thing (to the end it may be good indeed) to be referred
unto himself, and to the ends that he has appointed, as indeed all is taken,
and comes from him alone, and therefore also should be referred unto him and
his glory only, as the Apostle plainly shows, when he says: Whether you
eat or drink, 1. Cor. 10.31.
or whatsoever else you do, do all to the glory of God. To be short, the
Prince should properly both refer and approve his actions to God, seeing that
God alone, and not man has set him up, and seeing that he is not to be
judged by men, and seeing also that in the power, by which he is established,
he has none for his Judge but God alone. Wherefore it is truly said by the wise
man, That where the kings word is, there is power: none can demand a reckoning
of him for that which he does. And yet notwithstanding he says also in another
place, John. 19.11. Wisd. 6.3.4.
That this power is given him by the almighty, whose minister or officer he
is, who also will make inquiry touching his life, and will sound even to his
very thoughts. By all which we may see, that though Kings and Princes be
supreme among men, yet they may not live as they list, Psalm 82.
But must die as other men, and afterward, as the rest of the people, render
an account to God of all things done in the flesh. To conclude this point
withal. Great and excellent things as we may see, are comprehended under these
two terms, Mercy and instice: which are indeed the very abridgement and
sum of all that kings should learn and do. And seeing that they are of so
deeper a reach, and extend so far as they do, we may thereby plainly
perceive, that it is no light care and charge to be a king, neither is it an
art or trade casily learned, to rule well. And that is the reason also why in
the words following, David tells us:

Verse 2. I will attend unto the perfect way, until that thou come to me:
In the vprightnes of my heart; I will walk in the midst of my house.
David in his former words had made a vow touching Mercy and Justice. The
things are good that all men will confess: but yet we are sure it is no easy
matter to bring them to execution, specially for him that is not merciful and
just. And that causes the Prophet now to say, that he will study and
endeavor to be such a one. His meaning in them words is, that he could not
become a good Prince, unless he did first begin to be a good man, rightly
ruling his own person, and his private life, that so having made proof of
them in that calling, he might be the better assured of the practice of them,
when he should come into public. This lesson and doctrine in quite and clean
contrary to the courts and courses of our age. And what better proof can we
have of it, than men's deeds and words. As for their deeds, they are too
apparent, and as for their speeches they have passed this as a customary and
ordinary point, yea they have made it a proverb, or byword, as we say, of an
il man a good Prince. Why do not they approve of this, A shrewd boy, a good
man, if that be true? And why do they not bring up their youths in all
dissolution and naughtiness? But Gods truth teaches us otherwise: for it is
the fear of God that makes a good man, and is indeed the beginning of a
Prince. Whereof we may yet be the better persuaded, since Princes (as says
Solomon) reign by wisdom: Pro. 8.15.
and since also, that even of that wisdom the fear of God is the very
beginning, Pro. 9.10.
that is to say, the beginning of a virtuous and wise Prince. The Prince
certainly by his office is the guide of his subjects. He must then either know
the way himself, or at leastwise learn it; or else how can he be able to
direct and guide others? He is an example for them to frame their manners by,
and therefore unless he can frame his own well, he shall do them small good.
But says the same wise Solomon, Pro. 14.12.
There is a way that seems right unto a man, but the issue thereof tends to
death. The Prince therefore, both as in regard of himself, and as in respect
of his subjects also, has great need to take heed thereto, and the rather
because by many auocaments, as if it were by bypath, he may more easily be
turned aside than others. And that causes Solomon in another place to say: The
way of a folle is right in his own eyes: Prou. 12.15.
by which also he would give us to understand, that it is not his own opinion
or judgment, that he must believe, and much less must he stick to the
opinion of other men, seeing that all men are nothing else but obscurity, yea
the world it self is very darkness. In which regard we may say, that our
steps are nothing else, but so many stumblings, yea so many falls. And yet
notwithstanding, they are our steps still, yea such as God weighs well, and
examineth rightly, yea such as the Lord has always before his eyes.
Wherefore certainly, Prou. 5.21.
if other men had need, much more the king must say with David, O Lord cause
me to know thy ways, even thy commandments, to the end, that mine eyes may
see them. Let thy word be a lantern unto my feet, Psalm. 19.8.
and a light unto my path: yea to pray as he does in another place. Ps. 119.
105. Ps. 119.133.
Stay my feet in thy word, and guide thou my steps, and suffer not any
iniquity to have dominion over me. Light of nature, good intents in our
selves, other men's advise or example, will not serve here. For neither are the^
the way, neither will they steed us to direct us therein. No, Gods law only is
this way: Psalm. 19.7.
that way (says he) which restores the soul, which gives wisdom to the
simple: this was the way that made him, even then when he as but a
Sheepeheard, to understand more than all the aged, Psa. 119 99.100.
and to be indeed more wise than those that had taught him. Psa. 119.24.
Yea (says he) Thy testimonies are my pleasures or pastimes, thy statutes are
my counselors: meaning by that manner of speech, that be thought, said, or did
nothing, but he advised with the Word, first. So much studied he in this book
of the Law, that God had graciously given for instruction to him and all other
Princes. And herein he did the rather and the more diligently employ and busy
himself, because God had commanded him, and such as he was, Deuteronomy. 17.18.19.
That after he should be set upon the throne of his kingdom, he should write
out a copy of his law into a book, to the end, says he, that he might
learn to fear the Lord his God, to execute his law, and not to lift up
himself in pride above his brethren, that so the fear of God might hold him
in his duty, and within the bounds of Mercy and Justice, without declining
therefrom either to the right hand, or to the left: without which he could not
but go aside, either to the one hand, or to the other. To the left, as they
do which make an occupation of rigor and roughness, that so under the pretext
of austeritie, they may obtain with the hurt and loss of some poor and
misrable people, the reputation and credit to be good Justices. Concerning whom
Solomon says, Be not ye just over much. Eccle. 7.18.
For who art thou O man, that wilt rule the balance more right and streit than
God? God I say, Who has made all things in weight, number, and measure. To the
right hand as they do, who under the pretext of pity, will with the hurt and
hinderance of Justice, play the merciful men: of whom the same Solomon says:
Many men will boast, every man of his own goodness and mercy, Prou. 20, 6.
but where shall one find a faithful man? But who art thou also O man, that
undertake to be more merciful, favorable and gentle than God? God I say,
that is an infinite fountain of mercy. God I say, who of that infinite mercy of
his only, has made thee, has maintainned thee, and sustaineth and norisheth
thee, in whom and by who^ alone thou art and must be just and merciful, and
without whom, if thou suppose thy self to have Justice, it is but injury, and
if thou take thy self to have mercy and compassion, it is but hard
heartedness and Tyranny.

Neither must man's wisdom here glorify or lift up it self against this of
Gods, as though it understood some further secret, mystery or matter, in or
about these gracious qualities. Kings reign by God, and therefore they must be
directed by him, yea they shall best and longest reign, that serve him best
and most. Now serve him they cannot, but according to his will: and his will is
not known to us, but by his Word and Law. They prosper through his blessing,
and his blessing is upon them that fear him. Luke. 1.50.
We will say a little more than this. The most assured art and skill by which
men may reign well and long, is the fear of God in their hearts, and
integrity and uprightness in themselves. Which that we might be the better
persuaded of, 1. Sam. 2.30.
God tells us that be will honor them that honor him. The only shadow of
these qualities made the Heathen to rule well and to reign long. Then what will
the effect and the substance do? And if for counterfeiting of them (as indeed
the Heathen had no more but the very picture of them, if they had so much) the
Pagans were yet notwithstanding beloved and feared of their subjects, who can
or will doubt then, but that a good, a godly, and a virtuous Prince, obtaining
them from God in himself, and possessing them and expressing them to the
people, shall be reverenced of his own for them, and admired at of others,
abroad, when he does accomplish and perform them. Wherefore I will study
says he, this lesson, waiting till thou come O Lord, and draw nigh unto me,
making me quiet and peaceable in my kingdom, that so coming with full
authority, and a good measure of graces from thee, I may find my self fit
therefore. Yea to this end also will I study, read, hear, and learn, that
thy blessing being begun in me, by this means may increase upon me, as thy
fear also in me, that so thou O Lord God (who art the beginning, midst, and
end of all things, and have bestowed this favor upon me to be a king) may
also give me grace to reign, yea above all things to be a good king, and to
rule and reign holilie. And in the self same steps and trace, must all good
kings tread, or else it will never be well with them. For if they think upon
other men's bad examples, or weigh weakness in themselves, or take of trouble,
past, present, or to come, a thousand to one but they will go awrie. Of a
truth David after that he was anointed, was not without his troubles and
trials. The holy history shows, that he had both the Philistims and
Israelites against him, strangers abroad, and them of his own people and
house at home. Yet he was not discouraged for all that, but he waited upon,
and looked for the accomplishment of Gods promises, and expected the very time
and hour that God hat set, traveling notwithstanding continually in the
duties of his calling, and above all things being careful for, yea as I may
say, curious about the glory of God. And why has God in the word, and in the
world, set forth his own and others examples? Is it not by them as it were to
provoke to well doing? To a Christian king, this is a great favor of God, to
be borne a king, and to be lawfully descended to the crown, and to wear and
enjoy the same. But who makes use of these mercies? If a man come not to it
when he would, and as he would, he begins to doubt of Gods grace, and
falls to shifting: whereas he ought rather steadfastly to assure himself,
that he shall come to it in good time, even in that time which God has
appointed: who being the protector of kings and princes, of laws and lands,
will never fail the one or the other, if they steadfastly depend on him.
Again, if they be once in possession of it, who abuses not Gods mercy, and
turns his, grace into wantonness, and their lawful authority into
Tyranny? So hard a matter is it to keep a mean, and to tarry the Lords
leisure. And whereas God, the better to hasten Princes on to their due, and to
settle them more fast in their kingdoms, will have them to call upon him, and
to walk in the obedience of his will: and the yield him, is to cause their
subjects to call upon him in spirit and truth. And for their better
encouragement, he has promised them that he will find them when they shall
come unto him, and manage his house well, and carefully watching over his
family, receive a blessing in the end, with that good servant in the Gospel,
whom his master will make ruler over all his goods: Math. 24.47.
yet hardly shall we find any king provoked by these good things, or
discouraged by the contrary evils, from violating their places and callings.
Those certainly that tee themselves seated in their thrones, and without
contradiction acknowledged of their subjects, that they in the midst of man's
vanity, should ouershoot themselves, and exceed their bounds, and think in
their prosperity they have no need of God, it is not much to be marvelled at,
because they suppose they hold it from their ancestors and humane right. But
he, who in all euidencie of judgment is become a sovereign prince by Gods
grace only, who by the hand has drawn him from the depth of misery, and yet
sees himself at the pits brinke, but that God holds him from it, he I say,
ought to have another manner of motion, and another manner of pulse, or else
surely his state (...) the same hand that has hurt and stricken for sin,
might salve and heal for his own mercies sake. And as mean might is there in
our plots, in our negotiations, in our treaties with other. For he that Prou.
16.7.
has said unto us, when a man's way pleases God, his very enemies shall become
his friends, has by consequent taught us, that if the Princes ways displease
the Lord, that then he is mighty enough to harden them against him by sundry
means, as war by sea and land, open hostility, private practices: and
indeed powerful to cause them that were friends and confederates, to revolt
and fall away from him, as be did from David his friends, his counselors,
yea his own children, and that in the time of great peace and prosperity,
which no doubt of it, did and might increase the judgment and afflictions.

And this is the cause why he (...) earning, I will walk in the integrity or
v^^^ght. Yea I of my heart, that is to say, I w^nd say, O how know the upright
way for s^^clare my love do, and be never a whit the b^^ means that he (...)
God I say, Ps. 139.11.12.
because darkness is light unto him, and the night and the light to him are
both alike. The people, because my self should stand them in steed of a light:
yea the people I say again, because by the multitude of their eyes, they
pierce even into the thickest of my close and hidden places, yea even into the
bottom of the vices of their prince. And in respect of men I will walk in this
course, the rather to remove surmises out of their minds, and obloquie and ill
speech out of their mouths, nothing being more ordinary with them, than not
only with a cause, but without a cause to detract. And as in regard of God, I
will the rather observe it, and do it in deed, because he being the Lord of
all (even he whom I call upon, and upon whom I wait) will come and call me to
an account, and say, Well good servant Luke 19.17.
thou have ben faithful in small matters, take thou authority notwithstanding
over ten Cities. Thou have had skill, and ben able to govern thine own
house, now take charge of mine. In this little authority and small power in
comparison, that I committed into thy hand, thou have carried thy self as thou
ought, I will therefore establish thy throne for ever, I will put thine
enemies under thy feet. This vow I confess, is a very hard point for a Prince.
Why, and so are all excellent things: And shall he therefore neglect them? And
they will be so much the more hard, if his will be tempted with power, and his
power be provoked by liberty, and his liberty lash out into licentiousness:
or if sin and evil come, and present it self even to confront him, and that
after diverse manners, and under sundry maskes (as no doubt but it will)
sometimes amiable to allure, sometimes ougly to terrirfie. But David knew well
how to discomfite and overthrow these crafts and deceits. And therefore he
says, as for the discharge of his own conscience, so for the instruction of
all other, whom it may concern:

Verse 3. I will set no wicked thing before mine eyes. I hate the works of
them that fall away, nothing thereof shall cleave unto me.
David heretofore, as we have heard, made a solemn vow to keep his heart
sound and sure unto God. And good reason it should be so, for if such as have
a place to keep, or a fort to look unto (to the end they may always keep
the enemy far off) do as well watch against afterclaps, as for fear of
present peril. Shall not we think that we have as great need to look to,
or watch over our heart? Yes verily. And therefore the Lord commands us in
his word, above all watchings to observe the heart. Which that we may the
better keep, and settle our hearts unto God, we must know that it becomes us
to keep our eyes, and indeed to stop our ears also. For vice has great power
and force against men, yea it easily ensnareth them by the ear, through
dissolute words, and leaud and evil speeches which corrupt good manners. 1.
Co. 15.33.
And a great entrance has vice also into our hearts, by occasion of the
windows. For even as when the enemy has gained our sentinels and
watchtoures, our overthrow in all likely hood, is not far off: so is it when
pleasure has bewitched our eyes, and sin thrust it self, by the strength
and sting of it, into our souls. Which we may see to be true even in our
first parents, who were taken, yea overtaken by the ear, by the only
whisteling of that wicked and wily serpent, who impoysoned by his sweet and
colored speeches, their hearts and their spirits, they being then
notwithstanding upright, and undefiled through creation, and as yet not subject
to appetites, nor worldly discourses, as we are since sin entered into the
world. Oh then what may Satan do now by our ears, against a, spirit that is
sensual, against a heart that is fleshly, against reason vanquished by sense,
and against a will, that sauoureth of nothing ^ut carnal appetites? So we see,
how David was caught, and yet a man according to Gods own heart. He had no
sooner set open the window, but the thief entered in thereat: vice I mean,
that assaieth nothing else, but by offering a taste, craftily to surprise us
indeed. And mark I pray you, how sin proceeds in him: by the eyes it
surprised the heart, yea it spoiled and robbed him of his soul. Of a gracious
king, and godly Prophet, he made him in a moment a wicked adulterer, and most
cruel murderer. But withal consider the equity of Gods judgment. By the
same window the Lord causes him to see his fearful wrath entering upon him,
and to behold the falling away of his son, the reuolting of his people, and
sundry such like, which are indeed the ordinary companions of our disorderous
enormities. So mighty to evil, is our infirmity, and our might and power to
resist it so weak. Does not our own observation of others, and experience in
our selves teach us, that if the eye be once gained, our fort yields up it
self, it can no longer be kept. Which the Prophet being well acquainted with,
does in one place pray, Turn away mine eyes from regarding vanity, Psa.
119.37.
as here also he tells us, I will shut mine ear. And our Lord and Savior
says: Math. 5.29.
Pull out the eye, if cause thee to hazard or destroy thy soul. In steed
whereof, the Princes of our age (that they may the better give themselves over
to evil and sin, and so not be seized with the mischeefes that follow
thereupon) most commonly set open all their five wits and senses as we say,
to pleasures: but against pains, punishments, and miseries, they shut their
eyes. Whereas indeed it were more fit for them, to behold these, because
thereby they might prevent evil, be humbled in themselves, and show compassion
to others: and to shut their sight against the other, because the more they
look upon them, the more they draw iniquity with the cords of vanity.
Isaiah. 5.18.
But we are to see what it is, not to set our eyes to behold evil. Surely it
is to fly evil: it is to fly and avoid the occasions of evil, it is to
arrest sin at the very bar, and to keep it as far as may be from the
gate, that so having no entrance, it may have no prevailing. But has it
sometimes gained, and prevailed even upon the eye? Let us not despair for all
that. God has provided for us good means to cut it off, and to pull it out.
Let us look to our weapons, and labor to use them, since God has been
pleased to minister diverse unto us, against the fraud and the force of our
eyes. As for example, let us stay our selves upon, and defend our selves by our
reason, against the assault of our appetites. Let us oppose our selves against
our will, being fortified by Gods word. Romans 7.23.
Against this law of our members, let us set the law of God, the force of the
spirit, and the power of the soul. And then let us not doubt, but that God
will assist us, that he will come and heal us, yea that he will help us and
claim us for his own, for so has he promised. And this is indeed the combat
of a soldier, yea of Christian princes against pleasures, against profits,
against affections, and whatsoever else, because as that is true that Solomon
says: Pro. 16.32.
He that is slow to wrath, is of great wisdom, but he that is of an hasty
mind exalts foolishness: so that is true likewise, He that maistereth his
affections, is more than he that subdueth or conquereth a city. And let us not
suffer our selves to be kept in by full force and strong hand as we say, and to
forsake and leave to our enemies, the base court, and the whole place it self.
Such cowardice we should so much the rather avoid, because it draws after it,
fire and faggot, sacking and pilling, slaughter and sword, even the very wrath
and curse of God, which follows him at the heels, and very often breaks
out from the Prince upon the people, and from his closet upon his estate. And
thus we see how the Prince should hold and reserve his heart to God, even
against his own eyes, that is to say, against the corruption, yea against the
very Treason (as I may term it) of his senses.

But even without, there are besides his own corruptions, sundry other
people, that slauishly offer themselves unto him, to feed his fantasy, and
bring him his pleasures, yea put his delights as it were into his hands. These
are common plague-sores in Princes palaces, and very poysoners indeed of the
public fountains, from whence so many millions of people and persons have to
draw the water that they must drink. But David will keep himself from these,
there is his care: and admonish others to beware of them, and therein he
expresses his love. And this is the cause why in the very next words he
says, That he hates the works of them that fall away, that nothing thereof
shall cleave unto him. He says, he hates their works or deeds, and yet for
all that he hated not their persons, but he hates their plague and their
contagion. He hates not them that were infected with the plague, or were
leprous: nay rather he desired that they might be healed, brought back to
their former health and soundness, and as it were set in a good way. In which
he notably shows his discretion, discerning between good and evil, men
and matters, and expresses his love, laboring the conversion of the corrupt.
A notable example for all men, but specially for Magistrates to imitate.
Howbeit in as much as vice and sin is a contagious poison, which makes men
infected therewith, no less dangerous to other men, than to themselves, he
protests that he will not suffer them about him, that he will lodge them
without the host of Gods people, as plaguie persons, and as leapers were wont
to be, and that nothing that has touched them, shall come nigh him or his. By
all which he would give us to understand, that such kind of men should be
far removed from the closets and chambers of earthly kings and Princes,
showing that David so far does sunder them from himself, that neither their
persons, their portions, nor any thing that has touched them, shall come nigh
to him. Their sight and presence, their breath and speech, yea their very
apparel should be suspected, and feared to be contagious and infectiue, and
that with a more piercing poison, than plague or pestilence, yea the same more
presently and dangerously assaulting and hurting than they, because it passes
from the body to the heart, from the heart to the soul, and as it goes,
increases, and multiplieth his strength, according to the proportion and
nature of the place which it sets upon, or takes hold of, and by consequent
spreads it self from a groom of the chamber, as we may say, to the king, from
the king to his subjects, from this present age, to and upon posterity to
come. So well skilled and able is humane infirmity to prevail against our
power and force. And so mighty is vice, when it is armed with authority, or
has a powerful example to countenance it, and yet notwithstanding of it self
both feeble and ill born, as it is shamlesse and cowardly of it own nature.
And therefore not only in hope of victory, but in hatred of evil specially,
every good man, in his measure, but most of all every godly prince should say,
as David does in another Psalm, Psalm. 6.8.
Away from me all ye workers of iniquity. But here the Courtiers will say, we
describe a monk rather than a man, and paint out rather a pilgrim than a
Prince, and a cloister or covent, rather than a court. And they will tell us,
that kings must have their pleasures, and that it was never seen otherwise as
yet. And verily, who or what is he, that plainly perceives not this, that
the bitternesses which accompany crowns, had need to be sugared and made sweet
with pleasures? And who will deny, but that so many greefes, sorrows,
heartbreakings, and headbreakings, as Princes have, should be mixed with much
joy and delight? We allow them to others, and they look to enjoy them: much
more fit are they for Princes, and they should have a greater portion thereof,
because they have more measure of fear, care, and other humane passions. And
this we should verily be persuaded of, that because they are become kings,
they cease not therefore to be men like unto our selves, but rather for that
show themselves so much the more men, by how much they have more occasion for
man's corruption to work upon, than meaner people. Neither is it needful, that
to be kings, they should be frustrate or deprived of honest pleasures, but
rather that they should be furnished with heavenly graces, both to make them
meet for their callings, and to instruct them to use these pleasures well. Yea
I say further, that besides these pleasures which they have and may use as men,
I would have them to have pleasures of the greatest excellency that may be: I
would have them to have pleasures indeed royal, and well fitting and beseeming
kings, that as their places are greater than others, so their pleasures might
far exceed others. Yea I would further have these pleasures to be so great
and precious unto them, that for them they should forget their other pleasures,
yea that the other in comparison of them, should become and be counted
displeasures. Think but a little of this I beseech you, what pleasure David
received, yea what deep and inward pleasure he had in his soul, when
notwithstanding the spite and malice of the Philistims, he had brought the
ark of God into the city of God. 1. Sa. 6.2. etc
A man would have supposed, that he had almost forgotten his dignity, and
that he had lost his countenance and kingly grace, if he should have seen him
dance, skip, and leap, even as if it had been out of himself. And his wife
Michal, a very pattern of worldly wits, frumpeth him for it, and says: O
how glorious was the king of Israel this day. But he tells her plainly,
That that he did was before the Lord, ^. Sa. 6.20.21.
who chose him rather than her father and all his house. And if that were to
be vile, he would be yet more vile than so. Solomon his son likewise, when
he saw the temple furnished, and beheld the service of God settled, and placed
therein, for which great favor also, he did so solemnly thank God, as is
recorded, who I say is able to conceive in his heart the great joy that he
received thereby? Or who would set in a balance against it those worldly
vanities that men commonly call pleasures? And such were the pleasures of
Constantine, Theodosius, and of Charles the great. Such were the pleasures of
these great kings and Emperors that conquered the Pagans, and were protectors
of the church. Yea in our age that great king Frauncis, so much renoumed in all
his pleasures, as no man more, yet gained little or nothing thereby, but the
spoiling and wasting of himself, his wealth and strength, he as it were rotting
in them. And yet even for that little labor and love which he gave unto virtue,
and employed about learning, he lives, and is worthily remembered even to this
day, and shall live for many ages hereafter. The least and last hour of his
life almost, being well employed, was of more worth than all his years before,
and that was it that got him the name of Great, made his very famous.

But behold Christendom, since that time hitherto, for many years together,
tossed which differences and diversities in religion, states troubled under that
pretext, and the people beaten down, yea utterly ruinated. All sigh and groan
under the burden of their calamine, all breath after and desire some
reformation, and some better estate and condition, if it might be. Think with
your selves what great love should that king purchase at the hands of his age,
and what glory should he procure in posterity to come, what peace and joy in
his own soul, that should build again the Lords temple, that should rear up
his alters, that should purge his service from corruption, and should by these
good means, and such like, compound schisms, divisions, partialities in the
church, in the State, and every where breaking forth? And should take from
robbers and Tyrants all the matter and occasion of their conspiracies; and of
their monopolies, and private profits? and should give a breathing space to so
many millions of peoples, and to such ^n infinite number of persons, assurance
^or their goods, freedom to their bodies, ^est to their souls? And should draw
or ^ull from under so confused a Chaos, and heap of all excess and outrage, a
good government, a certain and settled order, and a cheerful light?
Certainly I persuade my self, that the people even of a certain earnest
desire, and unfeigned good will to such, would kiss their apparel, and
reverence every thing that did belong to them, yea they would rejoice
exceedingly. And good reason, because they were restored as it were from death
to life, and from all misery, to all mercy both outward and inward. And I
think verily, that such a prince with so many clappings of hands, and
blessings, as he should receive, would go out of his body, and be void of his
senses, and become altogether spirit, and altogether soul, so far off would
he be to think upon, or make account of these poor pleasures that men esteem
to be such. These are the pleasures of a king, yea these are the pleasures
that I wish with all my heart, might be heaped, with measure pressed down, and
running over, upon my king: pleasures pure, and free from all displeasures and
greeffe, which to think upon, or remember, is full of honor, of profit, of
joy, whereof the pleasure and sweetness also, does not wither or decay;
pleasures, by which he approaches to God, and is exalt ed above honor it
self: and not those victous and sinful pleasures, which creep upon the earth,
and cause a Prince to be a private person, and a man a beast as it were, as
we see particularly in Nabuchadnetzar, mentioned in Daniels prophecy, Dani.
4.30.
and as Hoshea shows it in plain speeches, Hosc^. 4.11.
saying, Whoredom and Wine, and new wine, take away the heart. But touching
such plesaures, the king I speak of, will say as David does, I will fly from
both the persons that fall away, and the fallings away themselves: nothing that
belongs to them, shall approach unto me. But David made a vow concerning two
points. First, that he would be upright in all his judgments. And this
respects other men, with whom he should have to deal, and is as I may say
public or common. The second, that he would be pure and clean in his
conversation. But this concerns himself, and may be termed private. Howbeit
good also, whilst other men seeing his holy conversation coupled with fear,
1. Pet. 3.1.
might learn to glorify God in the day of their visitation. And both these
are according to the double person that he sustained; as he was a private man,
holy life for good example was fit: and as he was a king or Magistrate,
execution of justice was more than necessary. Otherwise, if he had failed in
both, he had destroyed both ways, and if he had failed in the one, and
performed in the other, he had as fast pulled down as set up. And theresore
that he might be the better helped and furthered to them both, he says of the
one, That he will fly both the occasion and the contagion thereof, and
contains his eyes, and utterly abstain from the wicked. And for the other, the
better to preserve the integrity of his reason, and of his judgment, yea his
uprightness, as well toward his neighbors, as to his subjects, he says and
promises to practice himself that which he had delivered, and therefore he
adds:

Verse 4. A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know or allow of
evil, or of an evil person.
BY these words, froward heart, David means such a one as hates the upright
way that he proposed unto himself, and propounded to others to follow and
walk in. And the reason thereof is expressed in Salomons saying. He that
walks in vprightnessee (says he) fears the Lord, but he that goes by odd
courses in his way, despises him. And why should not we take it to be such a
sin indeed, even contempt of God, when dispightfylly we will refuse the way
of good works, which he has prepared for us to walk in, and will follow
bypath of our own and of other men's devise? But if a man would take it more
largely, specially since the corruption of our first Parents has entered into
the world, we shall see, that our uprightness, yea the uprightness of all
and every one of us, is so vitiate and corrupted, that none can be counted
better than perverse and froward, be he what he may be in his own or other
men's judgment. Howbeit, here he calls them perverse or froward, that delight
in their frowardnes, yea that please and flatter themselves so much therein,
that in their frowardness and peruersitie, they will not spare to pervert and
corrupt all things, even the good course of honest life, and the very laws
which are established to redress things amiss: whereas good people knowing
their own imperfection, stoop down to the laws, and under the laws, and
according to them enforce to reform, both their heart inwardly, and their life
outwardly, knowing that they have need of this, and all other good means, to
redress and reform the world of wickedness that is within them. He had said
before, I will study in the right way. Away then from me must all those that
pervert their paths, and lead themselves as he says in another place, to
crooked ways. He said, Ps. 125.5.
That he would execute right judgment. Therefore they must depart, that
pervert judgment: concerning whom it is written in the law: Cursed be he that
makes a man to go out of his way: Deuteronomy 27.18. Deuteronomy. 2^.17.
cursed be he that peruerteth the right, yea indeed they are doubly accursed,
because they pervert and corrupt kings and their peoples, and because they make
peoples and kings to become accursed of God. For says he, Psalm. 18.26.
With the froward, thou will show thy self froward: even thou O Lord (says
he) whose ordinary way is goodness and mercy, yet sometimes, and in some
things, thou art pleased to go aside from that way of thine, to the end thou
may exercise thy most just wrath against the perverse and froward. But
concerning the point: this we may certainly hold, that the soul even of the
best (if there be any one better than another) is of it self, so infirm, and
so lowable, specially to evil, both in the will, and in the understanding
thereof, that it needs not either props or objects, to provoke the
uprightness of it, or to draw it away, for of it self it can do nothing, but
see, delight in, and perform evil. Nay rather it has need of all stops and
stays, to hinder it therefrom, and of all good and gracious helps, to hold
and keep it in well doing. Do not we see, that one very word corrupted or
perverted, changes the law? One masked or disguised circumstance alters an
action: one indirect: speech, or a little Sophistry, supplanteph judgment?
And from thence flow those false decrees, ordinances; and sentences, that kings
and states many times make and give out. Such was that of Achab, when he
accused Elias, to trouble the state. And so likewise was that of the Pharisees,
when they charged our (...) and Maginrates, for not preventing evil in other,
as for performing it in themselves. And great reason, because they have
infinite more means to provoke to well doing and obedience, than the meaner
sort. And therefore David, who knew that God had authorized him, and that God
was in him, speaks after another sort. Yea (says he) I will not acknowledge
nor aduow them: that is, as we would say in plain English, I will not account
them for mine, or any manner of way belonging unto me. They shall not at any
hand attend upon me, or in any thing serve me. He spoke it of such as fell
away, and were out of order, and unruly, of whom also he says, that nothing
belonging unto them, shall so much as once touch him. As though he should say:
I will have nothing of theirs: and I will do it to this end, that they may not
corrupt me. He speaks it as we have heard already, of the perverse and
froward, of those same black and wicked souls, they shall touch nothing of
that is mine, they shall have no part or fellowship with me. And this will I
do, to the end they may not abuse or deceive me. He means that he would not
communicate unto them, or bestow upon them any part of his authority, of his
dignity, of his strenght: no that he would not so far forth as lay in him,
bestow upon them either offices or honors. For this is certain, he that
honors the perverse and froward, increases them in themselves, as in regard
of their own minds, and amongst others also. In themselves, because that evil
in creaseth them in strength and power. For the more wicked the men are that
are advance, the greater evil do they commit, because they have power in
their hands. In others, because it stirs up by the same arguments of honor,
of preferment and power, a wicked b^d and stock, that is in men ready to
sprout out, by that bad example, and abu^e of that holy authority that is
bestowed upon them. Whereas without it, such a wicked man could be able to do
nothing: he could hurt none but himself, and it may be that his poison
(because he could not euaporate and vent it) would strangle himself, and stop
his breath. But make such a one a Magistrate, and wha^ insueth? Justice is
destroyed, because h^ that is exalted, is unjust: religion shall be suppressed,
because he that is irreligious, or has no care of true religion, but rather
is an enemy to it, is advanced. And this we may be sure of it, shall be so
much the greater, by how much ^he power and proportion whereunto ^he shall be
lifted up (be it in Church o^ Commonweal, in a City, in a country in an
estate) shall be high and great. But specially put the sword into his hand and
then you shall see nothing but rage insolency, extortion, and all manner o^
cruelty, as though some new Pharaoh or Phalaris were raised up. Or commi^ unto
him the keeping of the bag, and then you shall see nothing but catching and
snatching, craft and covetousness yea very treachery and treason, as if the
spirit of old Judas, were raised up from the dead.

Kings think to wash their hands from this wickedness when they be sorry or
grieved for it. Though that be somewhat, and indeed much more than such mighty
men many times practice, yet it will not serve their turn. Pilat by that
ceremony thought to clear himself of Christ's innocent and guiltless blood,
but all that notwithstanding, he was a murderer. The thing that deceives
them is this: They consider not that they shall render an account thereof:
neither consider they, that of all these enormious and sore strokes that fall
upon their people, they are the very first mouers and authors, and the
wel-springs from whence they flow, because they have placed such over the
people, as can do nothing but oppress. As for the officers themselves, even
those that make the greatest ado in their places, they are nothing else but
staves in the hands of the wicked to strike withal. He that gives authority
and power to a wicked man, commits a foul offense. For he auoweth and
allows all the evil that he does, yea he assisteth him to do it, because
he lends him his hand, yea he does it indeed because his power performs
the same. And reason will show it us. In actions that depend upon us, and be
in our power as we say, to do, there is small difference betwixt suffering
them to be done, and the doing of them, unless it be that to suffer them,
seems sometimes to be the more faulty. This will be thought a paradoxe in
reason and religion: but weigh this well I beseech you. He that does it, is
moved with prosit, and receives some advantage by it: and the more he has of
temptation the less he has of sin. But he that suffers it, receives
damage by it, in his honor, in his subjects, in his estate. In his honor,
because it is impaired by evil: in his subjects, because they are oppressed
and made worse by bad example: and in his state, because by sin he haleth
down upon it judgment and confusion. If he were but an indifferent and mean
man, as much inclined to good as to evil, certain it is, that he would not
have the evil done, that he would not suffer it, specially seeing that there
is adioined with it his own damage and hurt. Suffering it, is now no more
passion, as we may say, it is action, yea it is worse than the action, because
he that suffers it, takes pleasure therein. And to delight in sin, is as
bad, if not worse than sin: and the rather because the Prophet in a feeling
and fearful heart says: If I delight in evil, Psalm. 66.18.
God will not hear my prayers. And a strange metamorphosis does sin make,
when it does alter and change the nature of things, turning passion into
action, as has been said before. This is a very goodlesson for princes. They
will have the praise and the profit of such victories, as wherein their
generals and captains fight and prevail, and the credit and glory of the
conquests, in which their lieutenants have labored, and taken sore pain. And
yet they will make themselves and others believe, that they are not partakers
of the blame and shame of their evil Magistrates, and unmeet Officer^ when
they commit injustice, and of the sin of their courtiers, when they do
violence, and of their treasurers and exchequer men, when they do extortion.
But the law says: He that has the profit, he must also endure the pain and
the damage. And if man's law in die light of nature could say so, no doubt but
Gods law in the precise equity thereof will much more affirm it. And since the
labor likewise of the servant belongs to his Master, whether he do well
or ill: no doubt but he that will tyth the pains, the labor, and the valor
of all men, and bring it to his own pleasure, to his own profit, to his own
praise, must think also to have the selfsame, portion, in the disgrace, in
the evil speech, and in the pain that falls out at other times. My meaning
is this, that since from the loss of sundry men's lives, the kings of the earth
draw glorious victories, and from diverse men's purses, great and infinite
treasures, neither of which they have made, or can make, that therefore
certainly and indeed by very good reason it must needs ensue, that seeing it
is either through the Princes default, or through his deed, that many injuries
and iniustices are committed by them whom he has negligently and carelessly
established in the government, he must needs undergo a just condemnation
therefore.

Now from actions and deeds, David comes consequently to deal with words:
and from the heart (the very mouer or moving of actions) he passes to the
tongue, the very instrument and mean of speech: the tongue I say, I am. 3.6.
which (as Saint James says) defiles the whole body, and sets all the
world on fire, but in the end (says he) is set on fire by hell it self.
Wheretore we have need of great aid to restrain and repress this fire, which
will cast us, if we avoid it not, into a most fearful fire, of endless death
and condemnation. And therefore the Prophet David presently adds, saying:

Verse 5. He that privily wounds his neighbor with his tongue, I will cut him
off And afterward in the same verse, passing from words to thoughts and
gestures of loftiness, he says: He that has his eyes lifted up, and a
gross or high heart, I can at no hand susser or indare him.
AMongst the manifold mercies that Job in Gods name promises to them that
fear the Lord, this is one: Job. 5.20.21.
The Lord shall deliver thee from the force and power of the sword: he shall
hide thee from the scourge of the tongue. If we mark these words well, we
shall see, that there is as we say, a gradation in them. For his speech
ascends, and his meaning is, That the tongue is no less dangerous and
hurtful than the sword. Nay rather it seems to be more dangerous indeed,
and that in many respects, as first it pierces and proceeds further than the
sword can: then the stripes and blows of it are more secret and close. Lastly,
they hurt not the body only, but the good name: in all which, respects also,
they are surely more hard to be healed and helped: which though it be true, as
in respect of all men generally, yet the nearer they are to Princes, that use
to strike with that weapon, the more grievous and great are those wounds and
blows. Great I say, because the tongue there, provoke, yea inflameth a very
great and mighty power, yea such apower, as has (says Solomon) in the
outward part of his lips, death or life. Great again I say, because it is
skillful to possess beforehand, and to pervert an ear, that is very much
busied: and by consequent more meet to believe eueric matter, than to direct or
order all, or any thing. Dioclesian the Emperor was a very wise Prince, and
in his wise dome he could truly say, That two or three courtiers could quickly
seize or take hold of a Princes care. What meant he thereby? Surely this: that
by such men's means he did understand every thing: they caused him sometimes to
look this way, sometimes that way, and to carry such countenances to or
against others, as pleased themselves, wherein many times their sin by abuse
of the tongue was the greater, by how much they did not only speak besides or
against truth, but delivered deceit and falsehood. By which we may see, how
much it imports all sorts and states of people, but specially princes and
great personages, that the tongues which are about them, should be pure and
clean, and exempted and freed to the uttermost, from the poison of lying,
flattery, detraction, and other such gross corruptions: which, (if the
passage thereof be not ftopped) will slide from the care to the heart, from
the heart to the head, and from the head to the hands of a Prince, and so shall
iniquity be perfected.

Princes hands we say, whether it be for evil, or for good, are of very
large reach, even unto the skirts and borders of a very great Empire and
Kingdom, yea many times unto other men's territories and governments. The blows
and strokes which they give, are very fore and heavy, even according to the
proportion of the Prince himself: and yet they are but set on work, or thrust
forward by a very light and slight tongue, which afterward can neither call
these blows back again, nor repair the breaches that they have made. But if
wicked tongues be domageable and hurtful to Princes servants, as they are,
because they make them to become flatterers, false witness bearers, etc. they
must needs be much more hurtful to Kings and Princes themselves, if they once
draw nigh to their persons and presence, because through slander, and lying,
and ill speech, they trouble their estates, and by flattery, they blind the
Princes own eyes. And therefore in this respect, good men have good cause to
say as the Prophet does: Psa. 52.1.2 3. etc.
Why boasltest thou thy self in thy wickedness, O man of power? The loving
kindness of God indureth daily. Thy tongue imagines mischief, and it like a
sharp rasor that cutteth deceitfully. Thou do love evil more than gord,
and lies more than to speak the truth: thou love all words that may destroy,
O deceitful tongue. So shall God destroy thee for ever. He shall take thee
and pluck thee out of thy tabernacle, and root thee out of the land of the
living. Wherein it shall not be amiss to mark how and after what sort the
tongue proceeds, and effects these evil things. By ill speech they
disguise good men's actions and deeds, and set another manner of hue and shape
upon them, than indeed they bear. And the better men are, the worse are they
spoken of. The reason, because that their proceeding being less close and
colored, their goodness and well doing is so much the more laid open to calumny
and slander: that we may say nothing of the hateful heart that the wicked
carry against them. And this is certain, that where slander sees the flesh
naked, or a man laid open, it will not with Shem and Iapheth cover it, but
rather with Ham rejoice at it, yea there it takes occasion with the wicked of
the world to insult and triumph, there it nippeth, and there it biteth, because
elsewhere to assay it, it were but lost labor, and the breaking of their own
teeth. And what are the effects that flow from this evil? The better the men
are, the more sensible and feeling are they, the sooner offended and grieved,
and by means thereof begin lively to be touched, yea being touched indeed,
either they become malecontent as we say, or at the least thrown down into
despair of their state, and past hope of recovery, they make themselves
unfit, either for public or private, and unprofitable almost for any
implo^ment. And from hence come so many disgraces offered them from abroad, so
many just forrows and sighings in themfelues, by means whereof the country and
Commonwealth, have oftentimes been spoiled of worthy persons, and besides
these noble and worthy spirits, cast down in themselves, and disgraced before
the world. And these and fundrie such like are the fruits of slander or ill
speech. But flattery is much worse, and more dangerous by much, for by it the
Prince is disguised to himself, yea he is so subtellie deceived, that he does
not any longer know himself, or his own estate, turning his vice into virtue,
his cruelty into justice, his cowardice and faint-heartednesse into clemency
and mercy, telling him that his words are Oracles, that his laws are above
all reason and nature whatsoever, that he himself is not Gods officer, but his
companion, with a thousand other such Syrenian songs: so much the more
dangerous, yea deadly, by how much the person is great that is corrupted
thereby, and the effects flowing therefrom, desperate, and past recovery.
Surely, surely, these are not only close and secret, but dangerous and deadly
wounds For it appears by the stories of all ages and times, that these
adulations and flatteries, these adorations and worshippings have very quietly,
and almost without any sense or feeling, brought the most mighty Princes of
the world to their end, as if it were oxen that did wear the garland against
the day of their slaughter. Nature teaches the quite and clean contrary. And
we see by experience that Chirurgians heal, when they hurt and put to pain.
Whereas flatterers tonugs kill men, when they would seem to tickle and please
the^. The feeling knowledge of this point, made David elfewhere both to pray
and say: Let me not eat the delicats of the wicked. Psa. 141.^.5.
Let the righteous rather smite me, for that is a benefit, and let him reprove
me, and it shall be a precious oil that shall not breaks my head. meaning,
that the reprooses of the righteous, yea his very wounds and stripes are as a
precious baulme or oil, to help and heal. And Solomon after him: The chiding
or rebuke of the wise, is much better than the song of the soole. And therefore
much better indeed is the free speech of a good and faithful servant, than the
enchanting words of flatterers. Wise Princes in the world, have always taken
great heed to keep themselves safe and sure from such people. Hence is it,
that even the Heathen could say, It is better to fall into the hands of crows
and cormorants, than to come amongst flatterers. And they have rendered this
reason of it: For those do but prey upon dead carcasses, and those eat
vpliuing men. And we read of sundry great kings, who fearing that their
favorites, courtiers, and attendants, did set a better color upon causes, tha^
they were worthy of, or had indeed, would now and then dissemble their states
and persons, that so from the common sort they might the better understand that
which they could not by their friends and favorites. This was a good intent
and purpose I confess, but not well guided or ordered. For what could they
learn thereby but the common voice of the people (as we say) which is as
ready to blame the good, as to accuse the evil, yea many times more ready to
that than to this, because as the wife man says, The just is an abomination
to the wicked: and our Savior tells us, that the world will love his own.
But the truth is, kings that are wise indeed, will practice another manner of
matter, and keep a far other course. They will choose virtuous people, and
place them about them, and they will give all manner of liberty to those that
are not passionate, to speak unto them: yea they will open their mouths that
are fit to speak, and will take in good part their good aduertisements and
councels, yea they will profit by their accusations, whether they be bent
against their actions, or against their persons and lives. And good reason it
should be so: For they speak from a sound heart, and direct their words to
religious and right ends. And besides the wise man tells us: A faithfulfriend
is the medicine of life: it purges the affections, and corrects the actions.
And the same wise man adds, saying: He that seareth the Lord, shall find
such a one. And ^f we should profit by that which is spoken untruly, and with
an unsound and ^atefull heart, that so we may bring out of men's darkness the
sound light of faithful obedience, as we see David did at the railing of
Shimei: Should we not much more make use of that which is delivered truly, as
in regard of matter, dutifully, as in respect of manner, and soundry as in
regard of affection?

This is a doctrine and lesson most necessary for Princes to learn, who in
steed of opening such men's mouths, must stop and shut their own ears against
them: and in steed of laying open their hearts unto them, must pull out their
^ies and their tongues, and hold this for a certain and sure saying that they
have received a great mercy from God and man, when they have escaped, or are
delivered from such. We have seen and heard of some Princes, that having been
hurt and wounded, have desired the Chirurgians to think them, and to take them
for private soldiers, and never to cocker them, or to respect them. Why did
they so? They knew full well, that to heal them, and to flatter them, were
things that could not well stand together. And this they could do for bodily
health and strength. How much more should they make themselves, as if it were
private persons, to good and virtuous people, that so they might help and
heal the maladies of their mind, or their vices. We will willingly reach out,
and suffer the Physician to feel our pulses: and we will lay open or discover
our plague sore to the Barber or Chirurgian. And why do we not the like for our
spiritual sicknesses? Nay rather we are sick of a contrary humor, for we
will not discover our vices, or our imperfections to any but such as shall
foster and cherish them in us. If any man speak plain, we are of Achabs
mind: 1. Kin. 22.8.
there is one man Michaiah the son of Imlah, but I hate him, for he does not
prophecy good unto me, but evil. We cannot endure, that one should so much
as touch them, unless it be to tickle them, and as it were with a certain
pleasant delight in them, to lull us asleep therein. And yet for all this I am
not of those men's minds that would have great persons, at all times, without
any discretion or difference, to be reproved. Some think the hatred of evil
in others, and the duty that is laid upon them to admonish or reprove, does
make the^ lawless as in regard of the manner. But they are foully deceived, for
every good thing must be done well, and we are tied, not only to matter, but
to manner of doing, yea to such a form as God has sanctified unto us in his
word. Princes persons are great I confess, and their places high, I
acknowledge that also, but they do not either privilege the Princes
themselves from instruction, admonition, or rebuke: or entitle private and
particular persons to do it, when, where, and as they will. Nathan Gods own
Prophet proceeds not therein after such a sort. He made his entrance into the
king, by windings about and fetches, c. Samu. 21.12. etc.
even by parables and dark speeches at the first: then he defended softely and
gently to charge him with the sin, and at the last to threaten him for his
transgression. I will say no more but this, use what reverence you will, or
what art you can, only let them think you see their finnes, and do you your
best endeavor to cause them to feel sorrow for it ( yea a godly sorrow which
causes repentance unto salvation, 2. Cor. 7.10.
never to he repented of) and to comprehend the danger of it, that so you may
prevent the accidents and the occasions of a canker. So Nathan ceased not to
purge David from his sin: he squised and crushed out the matter and filth of
it, he pressed upon him confession of it, contrition for it, and sound
conversion unto God, and all bathed in the bitter tears of a faithful soul.
And what does this great king for that? Does he command him silence? No, for
that had been impious. Does he forbid him coming into his presence? No neither,
for that had been inhumane, as in regard of the Prophet, and hurtful to David
himself. Or does he disgrace him in the sight of his subjects, nobility, or
such like? No such matter, for that had been the debasing of Gods own
ordinance. What then? He imbraceth him as his faithful friend, and loves him
so much the more heartily, for that he had dealt so plainly and soundly with
him, in a cause concerning his soul. And good reason, for open rebuke is
better than secret love, Pro. 27.5.6.
and the words of a lover are faithfully, and the kisses of an enemy are
pleasant. Besides, he was a worthy instrument to beget him again to God, and
to bring him again into the Lords favor, from which he was separated by
means of his sins, Isaiah. 59.2.
and therefore in these respects also to be beloved. But what would a
flatterer have done here? He would have left him in his sin, and have let him
alone defiled in his own blood, Ezech.16.6.
polluted with his ordure, beaten down with the curse of God against him, and
humbled with the hatred of his subjects, and all for his sins sake, and the
just punishment of his transgression. But what man of pity in himself, of
piety to God, or of charity toward men, could leave a man in such a
miserable taking? And yet we see flatterers do it daily. They wound men
closely, and they destroy both the persons, and the dignities of kings, whilst
they make them believe that they alter and change the nature of their vices.
Luke 10.37.
Christ in the gospel commends the Samaritan for kindness showed to the
wounded man: and upon it infers this doctrine, that we must go, and do
likewise. But surely he will condemn these, not only for want of doing the
good they ought to have done, bur for doing the evil they should not have done.

And princes are not in danger this way alone, by flattery I mean: but even by
silence also. For it may, yea it does many times so fall out, that even kings
fauorits and familiers, do no less hurt or evil by holding their peace, than
the other do by speaking. Silence is another abuse of the tongue, because God
and nature has made this proper and peculiar unto it, to speak good things,
and in due time. But herein is our corruption manifested, and Satan's malice
also against us, that when we may not speak the evil things we should not,
we will not speak the good things we ought. A Sentinel or watchman that is
silent or holds his peace, does no less betray a town or city, than a spy
or a traitor that speaks. And that also is the reason why the law says: that
he is as culpable before the prince that speaks not of the evil he knows
or hears, as he that works the evil himself. Thou fear belike to
offend the ear. And yet thou fear not to offend or hurt the soul. But
whether is the greatest, if both were offended? Or which should thou in holy
wisdom, and good nature most respect? reason without religion, I think will
easily teach thee. And then no small transgression surely do thou commit,
that in laying thy hand upon thy mouth, blottest out religion and reason, with
the light thereof in thy self, and neglectest a more than necessary duty to
Prince, people, kingdom, and all. Know this of a surety, that so often as thou
concealest any thing, and can conveniently or possibly reveal it, thou
woundest the kingly Majesty, and his estate also. If an ambush were laid
against his person or power, thou would carefully tell him thereof, yea thou
would, though it were rudely and roughly, pull him from any place where he
might be too much seen, and so by consequent in danger: and thou would hale
him, so thou might save him, thou didddst not care whither. This is well
done, but it reaches only to his body. And what? Will thou fear to set
before him, and to free him if thou can, from a horrible headlong downfall
of his soul? No, no, here thou must tell him: Gods eye sees thee in these
disorders of thine, God will rain down upon thee for thy sins, the fire and
the flambe of his indignations, thunders and the lightenings of his
displeasure, even all manner of miseries and curses whatsoever; he is in his
fury ready to fall upon thee and thy people, yea pressed to pour out such
punishments, as thou can neither take away or remove, and from which no cloak
or color, no castle or defense shall be able to shelter and defend thee. If
thou deal not thus soundly with thy king, as in regard of his soul, what art
thou? Humane laws say, that if thou neglect it, as in respect of his body,
thou art a Traitor. Gods law that lays this duty upon thee, will much more
condemn thee for this crime, and that not only against the Prince, but
against the Lord himself. And these judgments of God, and wrath of his, are
such points indeed, as would be well and seriously thought of, and the rather,
because he holds the principalities and gouernements of the world in his
own hand, and sets up in them for as long time, as seems good to his own
wisdom, such as he sees to be profitable and fit therefore. And yet on the
other side, for the iniquities, for the dissolutions, and for the outrages that
men do commit therein, translateth them from me people to another nation, and
from a stock, to another family and kindred. And indeed he that in this
behalf, uses not liberty and freedom, does secretly and privily wound:
which yet is the more foul in him, because he does it hot so much with this
respect, not to offend or hurt his Master, as for his own sake, and having a
regard to his own particular profit, that so he may not offer injury to his
favor and his fortune, as men use profanely to say, yea so much the more
mischief does he, because he would seem to be, and be taken to be a right
honest man, who if he were that, that he would seem to be, could not be
silent against that which is evil, nor but speak for that which is good. And
this evil is not as in regard of himself only, for then it were the less to
be regarded, because it were private and particular: but as in respect of his
Prince and Soueraign, who being a public person, and having this evil
commitred against him, has with him the public state endamaged. Who also,
because such a one holds his peace, as he takes to be a right honest or
holy man, does so much the more flatter himself in his sin, supposing, that
because he that is so good, speaks nothing of it or against it, that
therefore it is no great or weighty matter, and that that which such good
peoples eyes can endure to see, is nothing at all so dangerous, as men would
make them believe it to be. In the mean while the suburbs as I may say, yea
the whole city is let on fire, Gods wrath waxes hot, and breaks forth
against men's sins, and all by reason of the want of an incision, as the
Chirurgians use to say, I mean a free, a lively, and a piercing speech. Yea
behold further mischeefes and inconveniences that follow upon this cursed
silence, as for example, reuolting of the people, dispossessing of kings,
throwing down of crowns and scepters, and the utter ruin and subversion of
States. Where are then these good counselors, that will say, that if men
would have believed them, all should have been much better than it is? Neither
had things come to such grievous disorder and confusion? whereas they have been
for fear of others, for favor toward themselves, for ignorance of the
causes, and other worldly respects as mute as fishes. But surely say what they
will or can, they themselves, and the poor Princes that they have deceived,
are worthy as in this behalf, and in these storms and tempests, to meet that
ruinated king, of whom Plutarch speaks, flying from the force of his
enemies, and avoiding what he could the murmurings of his subjects, to whom if
one of those silent, yea dum courtiers or counselors should say, I foresaw
all this evil; the Prince might justly call him traitor, and stab him to, and
tell him* If thou did foresee this, it had been thy duty then to have told
it me, and not to have waited a time, to have spoken to me of it out of time,
and when it is past remedy: for what good gettest thou by that? Thou do but
bewray faintheartednesse in thy self, a fault no way fitting a cou^fellor of
estate; little or no love toward me, whom thou should have accounted more
dear and precious than thine own life, and that not only for thine own
private profit, but the common good of the whole kingdom; and least care
toward thy Country or Commonweal, which being thy common parent, and giving
thee all good things, thou should have again at the least requited with
premonition of evil. But what shall say? Certainly I know not one (and I would
wish that it might be observed every where) that is not culpable of this
crime. And I beseech God of his infinite goodness and mercy, to pardon all of
us, and every one of us. Those that offend by speaking too much to the
pleasure and delight of Princes, do it doubtless for some particular and
private good to themselves, which they look to receive thereby, and many times
obtain it indeed. On the other side, those that through silence dissemble the
evil which they foresee, sin certainly much more grievously, and that not
only as in regard of the sour fruits before rehearsed, but also because they
do themselves no good, yea they grievously hurt themselves and others also:
themselves, whilst through silence, and winking at transgression, they become
partakers of other men's sins: and others, whilst they do not by premonition
provoke prevention and turning away of evil. By speech some at the least reap
some good, though happily it be but outward, and rather seeming so to be, than
such indeed. But those that are silent, have nothing, nor do nothing but that
which is evil, yea evil indeed. Wherefore David upon very good reason says
both of the one and the other, I will cut them off. And great cause surely, for
they are unprofitable people, and not only so, but hurtful also, even to
theirkings, and to their country, and to their own selves? Plants they are
that have no fruit, nor any good thing else in them but a shadow, and yet that
shadow to is dangerous, and if it be not deadly, it is well. And therefore
they worthy, as unprofitable wood or trees, to be bewen down, and to be cast
into the fire, yea into that fire which shall never be put out. But as we have
said already, he comes even unto the thoughts: the lifted up eyes, (says
he) the heart that is puffed up, I will not suffer or endure them.

To try out this point, we need not go seek for rules, either of
Phisiognomie, for they are for the most part false or of Anatomy, for they are
not always sure. And indeed, to speak properly, the first of these, are at
the most but coniecturall, and therefore will not steed us here. And the second
is to as small purpose as possibly may be in this behalf. What shall we say
then? Discerned they must be, that is true. And we can hardly be better
instructed than from the things themselves, specially if God give us grace to
fetch light from thence. The eyes doubtless be as it were the windows of the
soul. In our eyes, or through them, the soul it self looks: for that is
true in reason and religion, that we are wont to say, the foul feeth by the
eye, yea by it many times, it discovers it self, or causes it self to be
seen; as in regard of the affections thereof. Now haughty or lifted up eyes,
are such eyes as go beyond their bounds and limits, eyes of presumption and of
pride: eyes lifted up indeed, I confess that, but not unto God (for then they
would humble themselves before so high and heavenly a Majesty, as good cause
they have, and as the poor Publican did, who durst not lift up so much as bis
eyes to heaven) but ^ifted up in themselves. Luke 18.13.
Such eyes (to be short) that see nothing, but they think it all belongs to
them, and make an account of it, as too base for them, yea as if it were their
very underling. And such eyes as these are, do always presuppose, yea argue,
a heart of the like condition and nature. Such a heart as cannot or will not
contain it self within his own bosom or breast, such a will as will have no
law, nor measure, nor bounds set it, which has all the motions thereof
answereable, or proportionable thereto, that is to say, unruly, highly
conceited, and violent. So we have in a few words the description of proud
persons, as the Scripture calls them; and against which it cries our so
loud, and so continually. People they are that God cannot abide: and therefore
it is said in the Word, The Lord brings the proud down from their thrones:
and in diverse places, Iam. 4.6.
the Lord resists the proud. Ye he pulls up the very roots of proud
peoples and nation, and in their rooms planteth, and that with great honor,
the lowly and meek. And again, people they are that men cannot brook or
bear: and good reason, for i^ they be insupportable to God, to men much more.
Whereupon also it is commonly said, That a proud person is hateful to all men:
to the good, because they detest, as other sins, so that iniquity and to the
wicked, because they are greened that any is preferred with them, or before
them. Yea indeed they are pursued, as if it were with public execution. And
least of all are they to be born with by kings, or to be suffered nigh unto
the^, yea less there than in any other place whatsoever. For besides that
kings are great persons, and therefore should be good, yea the best of men, as
they be the highest amongst them, and should have none approach unto them but
such as are good indeed, proud persons about them will do nothing but leave in
them a ielous spirit touching their present greatness, or a fear of that
which is to come, and so both those humors fill them full of all unquietness,
and make them unfit for public rule. And if Princes be once hurt by these, or
such like, the damage rests not within themselves, but flows, yea
ouerfloweth to all men's hearts. Who for the maintenance of their pride every
way, must be pinched in their purses, burdened in their bodies, and grieved in
their souls. And therefore that wise king Solomon tells us, that the Lord
abhors seven things, and the first of them which he names, Pro. 6.17.
are these same high looks, or these haughty and lifted up eyes. Such
fellows, when they are nigh unto or about Princes, they make them believe,
that there is neither law nor king above them, and that all that likes them,
is lawful for them to do, yea that whatsoever they can perform by violence,
is right and just. These are they that cause Princes and themselves also when
they are once aloft, to abuse their greatness, even according to their own
passions and affections. And because they imagine themselves (though fondly and
untruly) to be petty gods about the Princes whom they govern, they cause
themselves and their Princes also to despise that great and eternal God which
has set them on their seats, and as much as in them lies, exempt them from
subjection to his Majesty, and from his homage and service. Neither are they
dangerous to Princes only, as before has been showed, but even to people also.
For they are like those counselors that said to Rehoboam: 1. Kin. 12.11.
Thy father did beat them with rods: thou that have more strong reins and
loins than he, make them bloody even with scourges and scorpions, yea they
are instruments of all manner of Tyranny against the people, and by consequent
also, means of the peoples reuolting from their Princes: all which is evident
in Rehoboams fury, ten tribes at one time falling away from David's stock to
Jeroboam, and never afterward (for ought we can read) adioined there to since:
wherein we are yet to mark further, that the more mighty the Monarchs and
kings are, about which such proud persons are placed, the more pernicions and
hurtful are they, by how much they have a greater power to work upon, where if
once they prevail, then comes in iniquity, not as some little flood or
river, but as the maine sea, and carries all down before it. And this is it
as I think, that is written, where it is said, That for this monstrous pride
God vngirdeth kings loins, and takes away from them the girdle of their
reins, and depriueth, yea spoileth them of their sovereignty, because they
have not done their homage, and their service unto him. Yea and these are they
also, which most co^monlie cast away their Countries and States, and overthrow
hosts and armies, who counsel and persuade Princes to unjust wars, and such
as are founded and grounded only upon ambition and outward appearance, and
when they come to manage them, perform them more unjustly. Whereupon that
falls out which Solomon says: Humility goes before glory, Prou. 11.2.
but pride no sooner approaches, but by and by appears ignominy and shame.
God verily would not suffer proud persons to serve him in heaven, this being
most likely, the sin of those Angels that continued not in their first estate,
Iud. verse. 6.
as likewise of our parents Adam and Heuah. Much less should kings let them
reign under them in earth. The beginning of this pride (as the wise man shows
us) was man's apostasy, reuolting, and salling from the Lord that had made him.
And the very end of the pride of Princes servants is this, that after for a
while they have governed under them, they would at the last reign over them,
and in their place, or at the leastwise with them. Much like unto our Popish
meritmongers, who having a little while served God, as they suppose in their
superstitious conceits, count God to be so tied unto them, that whether he
will, yea or no, they will have the crown of eternal life set upon their
heads. And we see but too many of such bad disposition both ways. And yet this
is so much the worse, because when they are once up and aloft, they forget al
proportion, and all measure. The highest step of their service, is the first
step of their ruling, and to their rising and getting up upon their throne.
Whatsoever they see, either beneath them, or on the one side or other of them,
is nothing worth. Their eye, their heart, and all is carried to that which is
above them, and they can never be contented in their spirits, till they have
attained the same, if it may be. Wherefore David, and the king we treat of,
will not suffer them to violate their greatness, or to offer violence to their
people. They are of a far better mind, than to lay to pledge or to pawn to
them, either their authority, or their power, much less their affections, or
their favors, or their secrets. There is no reason, that the vassale or
subject should receive and entertain such as the king or Lord has banished.
If they do, it will be found fellonie by law. Such people as God abhors
and excludes out of his house, earthly kings (who are vassals of that
sovereign Empite of his) may not call them back, nor keep them close, or
cherish them about them, neither can the Princes themselves rightly or by law,
open the gate unto them, and cause them to enter into the palace or any
public place. If they do so, it shall be a sore offense against his
Majesty, yea treason even of it self, and therefore they must look to i^*
These haughty hearts, these light lips and tongues, these violent hands,
should not come into the courts of such kings, as either are blessed, or would
be blessed from God. And yet we see, that the world honors not but such. He
that cannot boast and brag by big looks and swelling words, is counted but a
beast. He that cannot tell a smooth and pleasant tale, is esteemed to be but
a paltrie companion. He that cannot scratch and catch by book or by crook, is
a fool, and has no care for himself and his. If Princes may not have such,
alas, who shall they then have? Not these surely: for it were better none, than
those that will pill prey for themselves, and spoil and hurt others, even the
Commonweal. But I will tell you who they should have, even such surely as God
gives leave to approach most nigh unto himself, and such as he reckons and
receives for his own. And such verily and none other should come into their
closets, or enter into their chamber, manage their matters, execute their
offices, and do whatsoever they themselves are not able by themselves to do.
And is there not great reason for it Shall he be meet to come into Gods
presence, and shall he have no place or employment amongst the gods of the
earth? Or shall he not be fit for the Lord of heaven, but banished his blessed
sight; and shall he be faithful and fast to earthly lords? There is not, as I
take it, such cotrariety betwixt God and his own ordinance, neither ought
there to be such great odds and jar betwixt the Lord in heaven; and his
lieutenants upon earth. Nay rather seeing all that these inferiors have, is
from the highest, it behooves them in all things, and therefore in this also to
resemble him, that so all things returning to him from whom they came, he may
be all in all. 1. Cor. 15.28 Psa. 15.3.4.
And this is that the Psalmist says, They that walk uprightly, they that hurt
not with their tongue, they that have righteous lips, in whose eyes the wicked
are despised: Prou. 16.13.
but on the other side, he honors them that fear the Lord, in what
condition or state soever they be. And let not Princes for all this, think
that they shall be any whit the worse served, but the better rather. For if
they be wise according to the Word, that will make them wise in the world to:
because whatsoever is against or without that, is not only folly, but mere
madness. And therefore they that think and say, they will not be brave
enough, or sufficiently glorious for Princes greatness and magnificence, they
do nothing indeed but paint out patched Princes, yea they stuff them within
and without, with that which is worst; and neglect, and contemn, and in
despightfull words reject that which is best. The very wise men among the
Heathen, have always acknowledged, That nothing stands so upright in the
time of danger, nor continues so long, as a right, sound, and relegious soul.
And they have told us, That nobleness of courage, and gentleness of spirit,
is natural to the gracious. Whereas if any such thing be in the proud, it is
but borrowed, it is but bastardly indeed. But we that have been brought up in
Gods schoole-house, should proceed much further, knowing, believing, and
confessing, that God properly is said to bless the actions and the works of
the good only, always setting himself against the proud, and caring for the
humble and meek, that so he may be against the one sort in all manner of
justice and wrath: and with, and for the other, in all favor and mercy, both
of this life, and of that which is to come.

And let this much suffice for the private life of the king we treat of By
private life I mean that which he practices himself, and causes to be
practiced by others that are about him in his court, at home, abroad, and
elsewhere. But it is not sufficient for a king, that as in regard of himself he
be just and merciful, neither yet that his house be open to good and virtuous
people, and shut against the wicked. These are good things I confess. And I
would to God we might see these beginnings of goodness, that so in them we
might have an assured testimony of continuance and increase. But yet they are
not all, neither must princes stay there, but proceed further indeed, for
though a Princes example be of very great force and power, and that is it
that we say commonly, All men frame themselves to the kings example: yet that
is not all, we must look for more, and he must carefully accomplish more, or
cause it to be accomplished. Hoe has another person upon him, and other
duties to perform, besides these common and general duties of the calling of
a Christian. In which notwithstanding also he must go^ before others, because
he is advanced above others, For look to whomsoever God has committed much,
of them will he require much also. And therefore though I confess indeed, as I
have done already, that his good example be much, yea the very same in his
house and kingdom, that the first mouer (as the Philosophers use to speak) is
in Nature, which seems by his motion and turning, to draw unto it self, and
to carry with it all the inferior bodies: yet even in them we know that every
one of them has by himself his own course and moving, and the same sometimes
diverse, sometimes contrary, whereupon also we see in the heavens so many
configurations, so many diverse aspects, and the same sundry times deadly
also. And so must it be in all kingdoms and politic bodies Wherefore it is
necessary that the Prince or King should be followed, yea that he should be
served of all, seeing that he reigns over and for all. Howbeit, it will not
thereupon follow, that he should not in his own person exercise mercy and
judgment, or command it, and see it executed by those that are under him.
That goodness which is enclosed in his person, must abound in his house, and
must redound, and be spread abroad through his whole kingdom. From that
fountain of mercy and justice which is in himself, the streams (in a good
order running trom it) must spread themselves to the utmost parts, by the means
of such officers as he shall choose and set in his estate, and make distributors
of his virtue, therein as well answering his goodness, as in their authority,
partaking of his power. And therefore for our good and instruction David adds:

Verse 6. Mine cies shall be unto the good and faithful people of the land,
that they may dwell or sit with me. He that walks in an upright way shall
serve me.
We may behold in these few words the sure establishment of a worldly State
and Kingdom, and also the constituting of a Princes good counsel. That other
men may be just and merciful, it is sufficient that they themselves have
these graces lodged and dwelling within them. But it is not so with a king or
prince: for though he be just and merciful in himself, yet he is not just or
merciful indeed, if he be so alone, or to himself only. The reason is, be
cause the king is not of himself, nor for himself, but consists of others
as well as of himself, and communicates unto others as well as to himself,
and indeed is set up more for others than for himself. Wherefore he must of
necessity be assisted with counselors and officers: the weakness of his
body, the wants of his mind, the greatness and hardness of his charge, and
all, calls therefore, that so in all good things generally, and in these two
particularly, Mercy I mean and Justice, and in all the parts and pieces of his
kingdom, he may be like to himself. A king perhaps may sometimes imagine,
that if he were alone, he should reign safely, he should rule surely. But
(...) nesse, retchlesnesse, and weakness, when under pretext of
administration of justice, they create for Magistrates peevish and perverse
men, and under color of governing well, they set up ignorant persons, and for
pillars of their authority, they establish such as can do nothing that good
is, and besides are slaves to sin? Certainly, it is a hard if not an
impossible thing, that the good nesse of a Prince, though it be never so great,
should redress and bring back to good order such bad choice. Nay rather it is
to be feared, that with great violence and a full swinge, they will carry him
and his state away to evil and destruction, considering what great power and
force evil has, in and against all things, yea the good things of God. For
the prince, for resisting of evil, and to draw on to pood, has no need to be
aided with such people as he must hale with himself, and lift up by force
(for that were nothing else save for his pleasure sake, to pull upon himself
manifold burdens and dangers) but rather he must have men that will lend
their shoulders, and bend their necks, as himself, yea and more also, if need
be: who will second his good purposes, and comfort his sore pains that are
stayed and strengthened against corruption, iniquity, and violence: yet
forsooth the other will think they have wrought hard and sore, specially if
good things fall out well, and come to good effect. So ready and natural an
inclination is there in men and matters to evil.

Wherefore the Princes eyes and care should be upon the best sort of people to
set them in Offices, and bestow charges upon them. He will not give those
places at hap hazard as we say, or according either to his unbridled or blind
desire: neither will he bestow them upon those whom he favors most, or upon
the greatest persons, for that were nothing else but to make parties and
partialities in his kingdom, and to create officers for themselves, and not
for his own good, and the benefit of his people. And much less will he do
it for importunity and suites sake. But rather he will take this course:
Those that shall affect such places, he will always suspect them, their
persons, and practices. For certain it is, that he that very earnestly aims
at an office or living, has laid his plot already: and without doubt he
desires it for the profit, and not for the charge. And least of all will a
good Prince sell such places under any color, whatsoever it be. For he
knows, that he that buyeth is shrewdly provoked, nay is after a sort openly
dispensed withal to sell again. If he be an exchequer man, he will rob and
spoil: if he have to do with justice and judgment, he will take presents and
bribes: if he meddle with the matter of warte, or deal with government, or
any part of the state, he will go further: such people will make small account
to sell a state, and to deliver up a kingdom. By such breaches as these, has
all manner of mischief entered into our land, and prevailed upon all estates,
civil, ecclesiastical, and all. I will add but one word more, weknow but too
much of these corruptions. And I would to God we either knew or felt less,
unless we could make better use of them, for prayer to God, for patience in
ourselves, and for all other good fruits besides. The king that our Prophet
speaks of, will for the avoiding of these mischeefes, with his eyes look out
into all the quarters and corners of his kingdom, and find eyes among them,
making every where good people his eyes to see for him: and to inform him,
he will know, and have in every town men of merit, and of service, I mean
men of conscience also as well as of science or skill. He will hold the reins
in his hand, that he may provide for such, even for every one according to his
profession, and according to his degree. Shall any charge or place come to be
void? The first thing he will do, shall be to go and seek out meet men for
that place. And though they would hide them in their gardens, or amongst the
baggage and sluffe, as did Saul, or be at the cart, and follow the oxen, as did
Elisha, yet from thence will he fetch the^, and cause them to become exchequer
men and treasurers without deceit, cou^sellors without passion, and governors
without faction, whose continual care, and mark that they should aim at,
should be by gracious effects and fruits to justify the good choice that their
king had made of them. And though perhaps before they had not deserved, either
the good report of virtuous people, or the grace and favor of the faithful
Prince, yet now they would deserve it, and that by all manner of well doing.
And this is the reason why he that has said in one place, that the king is
the stay and strength of the people, has also said in another place: the
multitude of wise men is the salvation of the king, and the health of the
world. And he presently tells us what this wisdom is, the fear of God,
(says he) the fullness, and the crown, the beginning and the end of wisdom.
Because verily to him that has this fear of God, God, who is the full treasure
of all good things, will add and give graces sufficient for his calling, and
of his own mercy and blessing will supply all his lackes, and will cause his
simplicity rather appear and break forth than his subtlety; his liberty and
freedom, rather than his dissimulation; his weakness rather than another
man's force; and all, that the glory of the world may be Gods and not man's.
Whereupon it oftentimes follows and falls out, that the Master florisheth
in his servant, as did Laban in Jacob, and Potipherah in Joseph, or to speak
more properly to the purpose, the king in his officer, as did Pharaoh in
Joseph: and by consequent the whole people, in such a worthy instrument.
According unto which also Solomon says, When the righteous are in authority,
Prou. 29.2.
the people reioiceth: but when the wicked bears rule, the people sigh.
Wherefore we may safely conclude, that it does by a manner of speech
infinitely import the Prince, the people, the Commonweal and all, to set up in
the same meet and worthy persons, because they be as it were the life and
soul that holds all together, and without which the body it self cannot not
chufe, but languish and pine. Howbeit, before they can be settled and placed
there, they must be known. For as that is true, that of an unknown thing
there is no desire: so virtuous and faithful people cannot be advanced,
unless they be first spied out. Now first and most assured make to know them
by, is the fear of God, without which indeed all wisdom easily degenerateth
into craft and deceit, valor into violence, instice into private revenge,
policy into private profit and monopolies, as we say, and as we have seen in
our age and land, where the wifest men have been overtaken with covetousness,
oppression, briberie, and infinite numbers such like. Yea without which also
even the very best grace that God has given us, is an instrument of great
evil and corruption, our affections breaking forth (...) to passions, and
reason it self a canse (...) cauillation and craft. And yet this is (...)
thing that is the least sought after, of (...) most or greatest number of
Princes, and which in the election or choice of servants and public officers,
finds as small place and entertainment, as possibly can be. Nay rather men
say of such, and it is received for a common sentence, That these people are
not folk fit for service: and that kings are great and might enough, to be
served alone without God: and that all that is attributed and given to God, is
abated and taken from their service. But fie upon such profane and blasphemous
speeches, so directly derogatorious to Gods glory, Who alone must be served,
Math. 4.10.
and so peremptorily prejudicial to Princes, Gods Lieutenants upon earth: for
is not this as much to say, that their Princes or Kings are Athests, and
without God in the world. They tell us further, that those that are strict in
conscience, and tie themselves to reason and to laws, are not fit servants for
Princes. And their flatterers tell them they are above law, above nature, yea
equal with God. What profane? What blaspemous speeches are these? Is not this
to defac^ equity and honesty? To puff up flesh and blood to it own
confusion, to euacuate all humane society, if Princes may make and leave laws
when they list. In such cases as these, the Apostle does not without cause
admonish, saying, 1 Cor. 15.33.
Be not deceived, evil speeches corrupt good manners. Yea verily the author
of verity it self tells us, Math. 6.24.
No man can serve two masters. And yet in another place the spirit says, ^.
Pet 2.17.
Fear God, honor the king. By which we may see, that these two masters are
not always, and of their own nature contrary (for if they were so, we could
not obey them) and much less are their services contrary. Nay rather they
follow one upon another, and come in their order and degree, as God first, the
king after; and so Gods service first, and the Kings after. A vassal that
serves his proper Lord, is not for the duty that he does to him, a rebel to
his Prince. No more is he disobedient to God, that serves his king, commanding
good things, and when and as he should. Nay, I will say more: the vassale never
better serves his Lord, than when he faithfully serves him that is king to
both. And the reason thereof is plain: not only the vassale, but the lord
himself and all, owe the king all manner of homage and service. So none
serves the king so well, as he that religiously serves God, Who is lord of
lords, and king of kings. It is too apparent in these days, that the greatest
number of servants serve not, but as we say, unto the eye, and whilst their
masters are present. And that is one reason amongst many, why kings are ill
served by their servants when they are far off, and are secretly betrayed, when
they are nigh. But such as serve their king, and in doing of that duty, are
assured and persuaded, that they serve God, they keep always one course:
whether they be nigh at hand or far of, that is not material, because their
obedience is not tied to place, but to persons, and yet no further to persons,
than as in the fear and faith of God they may perform the duties they do.
And surely it must be so with them, because they serve to pacify, appease,
and content their own conscience, and not to satisfy their masters sight and
eye alone* For if it be so, the back shall no sooner be turned, but the hand
will wax idle, and the heart will be auerse from the business. No no, they
have always God before their eyes, and they know him to be the beholder of
their facts, more than of their faces, and the very searcher of their hearts
and reins. From him they look for their wages and hire, from him, yea from
him alone they expect grace and favor, being certainly assured that he will
give them a gracious recompense, though their Masters should not, but should
be unkind rather and froward. 1. Pet. 2.18.
From these trees then, and not from elsewhere, must kings choose and fetch the
graffes and sciences of good Officers, of good subjects. But specially he must
look to have from hence (as David tells us here) good cornsellors of estate,
whom they should cause to fit near and about themselves, and make them
partakers of their authori^^^, and of their power. For to keep and hold this
burke or ship of the Commonweal (yea and of the church also) upright, and
tight as we say, against all winds and blasts, inward, outward, boisterous,
gentle, etc. they must have upright and entire persons, or else it will never
be. And reason, for being a sound and entire body, it must have such to guide
and tend it. Otherwise, if they be infected and unfaithful, they may put it,
and all that is in it, in danger. And these are such as must not carry the
rout, and bear the sway in themselves, nor keep it for, or direct it to
others, much less lay it upon the people, whom they are to guide and govern,
and least of all upon the Kings and Princes, who are but men, and many times
must be brought to good courses, beeause they stray fowlie, but must refer
all to the common good, and the benefit of the country and kingdom, which
must continue, when they themselnes, Princes, and all, shall be dead and rotten.
Now against these good and faithful people, whom he will employ and use in
public place, he opposes and sets others, whom he will banish his house
and kingdom, and presence. And of them is it that he says:

Verse 7. He that shall use deceit, shall not dwell in my house: he that
speaks a lie, shall not remain before me.
THis is that he means and says: Good and virtuous people shall come into
my closet and secret chambers: they are they that I will be most familiar
withal, and take best delight in. And good reason, for they are good, and will
do me good, and my kingdom also, as I see by that ancient example of Joseph
in Pharoahs state. But the wicked shall be shut out of my house, yea they shall
not come so much as into the utmost court, for the very gate it self shall be
shut against the^. And good reason also, for being naught themselves, they will
pollute the place, and defile the people, and a little leaven of maliciousness
and wickedness, soureth the whole lump. Yea he means more, 1. Cor. 5.6.
that good and virtuous people shall have seats and places of honor in his
counsel, but the wicked shall not so much as stand in his presence, but rather
shall fly and fall down before him, so small hope shall they have of
preferment. And these wicked and ungodly men are described here by these two
terms, Deceit and Lying, both which he sets against in upright and a sound
way, mentioned in the last verse before this* Deceit, is no other thing but
indirect dealing and carriage, as in respect of men's actions and deeds: as
lying also is nothing else but indirect deling, as in respect of speech and
words. Both the one and the other of them are contrary to integrity or
vprightnes: whether it be the uprightness of the hands, against which is
opposed deceit; and the sincerity or uprightness of our lips, against which
is opposed lying. And indeed, these two amongst other, are (...) witnesses of
the crookedness and indirectnesse of our understanding and wills, and to be
short, clear witnesses indeed, of that perverseness and peevishness, which
we have in our souls through sin. Yea both the one and the other of them are
directly contrary to that true wisdom that ought to be found in kings
counsels. For says the wise man, The wicked have not seen it, Eccle, 15.8.
and that wisdom holds her self aloose from pride and deceit. Liers shall
not so much as remember it. By all which we may see and learn, that it is not
enough to seek after, and to pursue good things, Psalm. 37.27.
but also we must fly from evil. Yea and not only fly from evil, but also
we must chase and drive it away, yea we must so lively and speedily chase it,
that it may never be able to gather strength, or get footing: yea and we must
drive it so far away, that it may never be able to hurt, hinder, or trouble
any good thing. Here if in any thing, ^^e Physicians rules of flying from the
^^^gue, are most meet to be practiced, as soon, and as far as may be, for
this is a plague indeed. But the world is of a clea^e contrary mind, and
foulie deceived in this behalf. Many deceived with the pleasures of sin,
Hebr. 11.25
which last but for a while, coll it, and embrace it, as if it were virtue it
self. These are either ignorant in judgment, or careless in practice.
Othersome suppose, that good and evil are not contrary, but may well agree
together in a house, in a kingdom, in a church. But why do you not in nature
compound fire and water; or in policy, peace, and war; orin Gods church, 1.
Cor. 6.16.
the temple it self, and images? Surely they may as well and as soon make
light and darkness, heaven and hell, to agree together. Others imagine, that
the good we have, should make us hold our peace at the evil that molesteth us.
But this is to corrupt our judgment, as well as to tie our tongues and hands,
and indeed by consequent also defacing Gods graces in us to rob him of his
glory and praise. Private and particular persons suppose the^^ are not to
blamed, but excused rather when they are content to abstain from evil, or
when they do in some sore wink at it. And they imagine that this is reason
sufficient, we have no means to repress it, or to redress it, and it has
gotten such a head, that it is too great and strong for us to deal withal.
Grant that to be good and true, yet if thou belong to God, he has given thee
a heart to hate it, though not a hand to reform it, and he has given thee a
tongue to speak against it, though not power to suppress it. To abstain from
evil is well. But that is but the first step to goodness. And thou, if thou
do appertain to God, Hebr. 6.1. Romans 12, 9.
must be carried forward toward perfection. He that says, Abhor that which
is evil, presently adds, and be fast glued to that which is good. Have thou
used these good means? Do thou use them? Have thou kept thy self free from
the action and affection of evil? Thou do well. But beware of blaunching
and mincing, for that is not only evil to thy self, but to infinite
thousands of souls besides. And though to hurt thy self be much, yet to draw
other with thee to the same sin, and by means thereof to the same condemnation,
is much more grievous.

And though these things may be some cloak for private persons, yet such
neutralitie and halting betwixt two, is not or cannot be justifiable in a
prince: nay they can have no color of it, or for it at all. God has set him
up to punish it, and has strengthened him with his own arm to repress it:
in his very face and countenance God has graven his own Majesty, to astonish
it, yea to discomfit it, and drive it away. According to which Solomon
himself, who had good proof thereof, says, Pro. 20.8.
A Prince that sits in his throne of justice, chaseth away all evil with his
eye. So that they that walk not according to this rule, answer not the end of
their callings and offices, weaken Gods mighty power, put out his glorious
Majesty, discourage the godly, hearten the wicked, give sin the head, and a
man cannot reckon up the mischeefs besides. But on the other side, this should
be no small comfort to godly kings and princes, and should animate them, not to
fear to punish the wicked, whatsoever accident to the contrary either they
themselves might imagine, or other might propound unto them for discouragement.
And the rather hereof should they be well assured, because they know that God
will defend and maintain his justice, 2. Chr. 19.6.
which they execute: and set this before them, that since they administer the
judgments of almighty God, and not their own, he that is jealous over his
own glory, Ichosh. 1.5.
and will not give it to another, cannot destitute them, neither will he forsake
them for ever. But what shall we say, there is nothing more rife in all the
courts of the world (whether they be those that we call Princes palaces, or
name seats of justice) than wincking at evil, from which men pass to
suffering of it, from suffering of it, they proceed to licentiousness in it,
then they come to plead prescription for it, to take pleasure in it, to speak
for it under hand, to justify it openly, and at the last to set it vp^n (...)
triumphant chariot, and so to bring it ^o usurpation and tyranny. Such a hand,
such a head does sin get: and such sower fruits does winking at iniquity, at
the first, bring forth at the last. Men therefore should be wise to withstand
the beginnings of evil. A little fire at the first beginning of it, might be
put out with a handful of dust. But if that be neglected, and matter be
ministered unto it, it takes hold of houses, and burns whole towns, and
there can hardly be found water or liquour to quench it, yea sometimes it
prevails against ponds and rivers. And who can marvel at this, that knows
the nature of evil? It is corrupted in it self:it finds in all things,
specially humane and belonging to man, corruption, as fit matter to feed it,
and for it self to work upon. And do we not see, that sometimes a grain of
some noisome or poysonfull thing, is powerful against an ounce, against a
pound, yea a whole lump of things of better complexion? One drop of poison,
specially of some very strong poison, will prevail upon a tun of wine or
water, yea even upon a very great body. One malicious man will get the upper
hand of a whole council yea of a whole state. And many times a very mean man,
if we respect his qualities and graces, shall prevail against the best and
the greatest. Our own Chronicles, and the stories of other nations, afford us
store of such bad examples. Many men will not stoop so low, as to regard these
things. But they are to true notwithstanding, for other men's imaginations or
exaltations, cannot euacuate truth, but it will always remain like it self.
But what shall we say? virtue is negligently, yea carelessely husbanded: and
surely goodness is tilled and dressed after the same measure and manner. Our
humors fight against it, that is much: and our manners to, that is more:
because evil inward is lesser offensive, than when it breaks forth outwardly.
Yea goodness even in the best people (besides the outward forces that are
offered unto it by the wicked) is beaten back by themselves, and as I may say,
cooled within the^, sometimes, by the remainders of their own sin, sometimes
by the malice of Satan: sometimes by the slippings and fallings away of others:
sometimes, by the bad examples that are in the world: sometimes by the
buffetings and beatings that the wicked use against it. And therefore no marvel
though it be so backward in bearing and bringing forth fruit, when even the
very friends and lovers of it do give it so cold a currying, and base
entertainment, as it finds at this day in the world.

We may see then, that as well for repressing of evil, as heartening on to
well doing, it greatly behooves kings to perform these things that David
prescribes here. Which they shall do, if they as David, set goodness in
authority above evil, and place virtuous persons, over and above the wicked.
For howsoever evil be of it self shameless, and as in regard of men, insolent
and arrogant; yet when it shall see it self suppressed, and goodness
advanced, it will banish it self, yea vanish and fly away. Yea and this shall
they the sooner effect, if in their deeds, if in their words, they detest
evil, and love good, and if they they themselves carry in their faces and
foreheads the mark and impression of virtue, justice, mercy, and such like.
For darkness without doubt shall and must fly before light. And even so evil,
which is nothing but a privation of good, as darkness is of light, if
goodness once appear, and be established, cannot hold his place, nor continue,
or be at all, where goodness once enters. But if it so fall out, thet a Prince
come to government and state in an age so corrupt as ours is, and he is not
able to root out evil so soon as he would, or as he should, this specially at
the least, he must advise and look to, that he suffer it not to fall or drop
upon the more noble parts of the body (for if they be once taken, the other
being overtaken therewith, no part shall be free) but rather that he send it
packing to the b^sest and furthest parts of the Commonweal: even as nature it
self, in a natural and humane body teaches us, expelling that which would
annoy or hurt the vitals, as we say, to the furthest parts, that so in that
care and wisdom the Prince may provide, that it be no part either of his
sense, or of his life, and least of all certainly of his spirit, and of his
soul. In a word, this is my meaning: The Prince should not admit such
corruption, neither to his presence, nor to his person, nor to his practice and
affairs, nor commit unto it his life, his council, or estate: for if he do
so, he hazardeth all, his body, his soul, his scepter, his kingdom, his
subjects, etc. And since this is the nature of naughtiness and sin, that if
it may be but permitted to prease into presence, it will conceive hope of
further access and entertainment: mighty men must stop the passage of it,
and shut their palaces gates, the eyes and ears of their head, the power of
their hands, the passions and affections of their hearts and whatsoever else,
against it. But this is a very great work indeed for a Prince or King, I
confess it. But the person is great that is to do it, and he has many more
means to effect it than meaner men, and therefore (...) taught his fingers to
fight, Psalm. 144.1.
and made him able to overcome all: yea and to instruct all Princes, present,
and to come. ( For whatsoever things are written beforehand, Romans 15.4.
art written for our learning, that we through patience and comfort of the
scriptures, might have hope.) What course to keep, and what remedy to use
(specially when they have established peace at home and abroad) for the
redressing and the repressing generally of all evils, and particularly of such,
as either civil or foreign wars, have set on foot in the kingdom.

Verse 8. I will cut off (says he) betimes all the wicked of the land: that I
may root out of the city of the Lord, the workers of iniquity.
IT is as much in effect, as if he should say: I will not put off from day to
day, neither to frame mine own life well, nor by mine own example to amend my
people: for delays are dangerous, specially of good things, and occasion as
we say, is bald behind, and therefore good taking hold of her forelockes:
besides, I have no charter or patent of my life, and therefore I will not
defer the doing of this good. Neither will I for a long time, or many years,
delay the reformation of my estate, but as much as in me lies, labor to bring
it to a good condition speedily. I know pother Princes are or will be of
another mind, and that they may allege for themselves many goodly clokes and
colors, as innouatian is dangerous, fear of the people, doubts and
diffidences concerning the action it self, and diverse such like. But I will
cast all these behind me, and make no account thereof: for the first is but a
principle of Policy, and that is as uncertain, as man's brain that bred it.
And for the second, it has small force in it, and it may be, specially
standing for God, that when I fear most, I shall be most favored and followe^,
for he has the hearts of men in his hand, to turn them at his pleasure. And
as for the third, concerning the action it self, seeing mine own heart tells
me it is good, and I am persuaded thereof by the truth of the Word, why should
I lay, or suffer to lie stumbling blocks in my way? Nay rather through Gods
goodness and strength, I will rise up so much the more early, and put my hand
to that business, whatsoever may come of it. This is my full and flat
resolution. And since the lord by nature does teach it me, I will through his
assistance and grace perform it. Does not the sun, as soon as it rises, yea
before it rises, drive and chase away darkness? And then why should not I so
soon as I ascend to the scepter and throne, and come to the crown, perform
these good things? Surely I will erect the throne of Justice, certainly I will
establish piety, virtue shall find entertainment at my hands, and I will
banish vice. This did David say, and this did he do also. And in both these,
it behooves all good kings to resemble him. An excellen^ enterprise, and of
great consequence I confess, specially in this State and Kingdom, in which
vice has triumphed a long time, nay in which it yet rules and bears sway.
But yet if men will begin in time, the day is long, and there are many hours
yet before night come. Delays in other things are not good, but here they are
sta^ke naught. Purposes will not serve, for they are but the imaginations of
our mind: nor promises neither, because they are but bare words, and uttered
many times to deceive men: but practice and performance is it that will
glorify God, and do good to Church, Commonweal, Country, Kingdom, and all.
The beams and streams of a virtuous Prince, may make hot and comfort, and
that without ouerheating or discomforting of himself, his country, and
kingdom: yea they may cause virtue to bud and spring, and they may nip vice in
the head And why should we doubt of it? Seeing we know that Gods graces,
though in private persons, shall not yet be unprofitable, much less shall they
b^^ without life in men that resemble his Majesty, and bear his mark upon
them. His Zodiake as we may say, is furnished: a man may see it planted with
much goodness: he is not yet at the midst of his age, and if God would, we
might see all things in the Kingdom and Commonweal changed into better: the
sores thereof strengthened and healed, and that without any wound or scar: the
former evils softened, yea almost worn out of memory, and as it were quite
and clean forgotten. And though it were so, that the greatest part of a
Princes life were past, yet that should not hinder redress and amendment of
matters. The more that has been neglected in former time, die more should be
reformed in the rest of the days of the pilgrimage that we are to live. Who
knows whether God ^ati^ granted life to that end? That so acc^^ding to the
breaches of our former y^ares, our lives might be more glorious to him, and
profitable to the people, and our lives and our deaths to, more comfortable to
our selves. Sure we are of this, Eccle. 5.16.
that God commands us to redeem the season, and renders this reason of it,
for the days of evil. And we know this is a sure note of excellent blessing
from God upon his people: they shall bring forth fruit in their age, Psalm.
92.14.
they shall be sat and flourishing.

And yet I mean not for all this, that Princes unwisely, or without advise,
shall cut off, burn, sear, or as we say in plain Emglish, without consultation
run into and set open alterations and changes of state, execution of justice,
etc. for so perhaps in seeking to settle good, and to avoid evil, they might
fall into a mischief, more intolerable by much than their present condition
In nature we see that such a humane body there may be, as in which all the
blood shall be so corrupted, that before a man should find any good blood
therein, he might (if he wuld use phlebotomie or blood letting) draw out and
take away both the life and the last drop together. In such a case, when the
corruptions are so gross and infinite, a skillful Physician will use
Epicrasis, as they call it, or labor to bring it to a better temperature or
mixture of the humors. He will draw from the body I confess, both by diverse
means, and at diverse times, but yet he will take no more but what is needful
and necessary to unburden Nature of. Which when it is discharged indeed,
gathers vigorand force unto it self again, and euaporateth and euacuateth
by sweating, and other good means, the rest of the poison or malign humors:
and to be short, does by this gentle euacuating and sundring evil from good,
make good indeed at the length the very blood it self. And even so must the
Prince do in this abundance of superfluous and corrupt humors in the State or
Commonweal. There may be in a kingdom sometimes such malign influence, and
such store of poysonfull corruption, that though the Prince would willingly
purge the evil in that estate, yet wanes at home and abroad, plagues, famines,
and a number such like pestilences within the bosom of the Commonweal, will
not suffer him to do it. If he should open a vein, the spirit would depart
with the blood, and the life would go away with the strength. What must he do
then? Countenance evil? At no hand. Shall he wincke at transgression? Not so
neither. Shall he disgrace and keep back from preferment the good and
virtuous? Be it and all the rest far from him. For the first is to commit
sin with a high hand, Deuteronomy. 29.20.
and the Lord will not be merciful to such. The second is to suffer it to get
a head, and when it is once aloft, it will hardly or not at all be beaten
down. And the third is to wound, yea to break the hearts of the faithful,
who the more they be discouraged, the more do the wicked prevail. What then?
He must as he may, take away from the wicked and ungodly all their
government and autharitie, for they are not men meet for it, because it being
a holy and a heavenly thing, it must have men to exercise it, that do in some
sort sort with the nature thereof. On the other side, he must, raise up good
people from under their yoke and burden, he must divide amongst them his
favor, his authorities, his offices, for they only are both worthy of them,
and fit for them, because God and not man, by shedding his graces into their
hearts, has made them meet therfo^e. This if they would do, they should in a
small time see by this discretion, and through Gods blessing upon their care a
conversion or turning of their State, without any subversion, nay without any
great great trouble to it or in it: and a new kingdom, yet without any great
novelty or change. The ship of Delos, so much read of, and celebrated in
antiquity, for lasting many years and ages without renewing, whence got it
that fame, but because that so soon as a lord or planet was in danger, they
diligently and presently provided another in the room thereof. And even so, if
a King will amend an estate or kingdom that is deca^ed, he must proceed by the
same course: If so soon as a dignity, state, or office shall be void, he be
careful to have it replenished with good and virtuous people, and such as are
fit for the charge, he shall within less than ten years make all new, and
yet without innovation, yea he shall do it by an increasing that shall not
be perceived, till God make it break forth, and so shall bring back piety
and justice to their ancient glory, and shall beget again in the hearts of
his subjects, virtue, honesty, loyalty, and every good thing besides,
specially if every one in his Country, in his College, in his company, in
his Town, according as he has been chosen by the Prince, to a good place,
shall bring to this good work the same good affection, and shall set it
forward after the selfsame manner. But if on the other side, he set up in the
room of a wicked man a wicked successor: if he provide for the place by lot as
we say, or bestow it upon him that will offer most, or give it for
importunity, or for favor, then I can say no more but this, The good that was
done in nine months, will be overthrown in three days. For this we may
assure our selves of, an estate or a building decays in fewer days than
there was of years spent to rear it up, and establish it. So true is that
saying of the Philosopher, It is more easy to destroy than to build.

Wherefore the king that we treat of, seeing he is fallen into such a wicked
age, will begin his work early in the morning: even as soon as he enters,
so soon will he begin, because he is persuaded that God has advanced him
to that end. And our Savior commands, First seek the kingdom of heaven,
Math. 6.33.
and the righteousness thereof, and then all these things shall be given unto
you. And he will, do it also even with the same heart and affection that David
did, that is, that he might purge and reform the city of his God: and he will
not do it that he might reign quietly and at his ease, for that is but a
private and worldly thing, and not thanks worthy; but that the Lord might
rule and reign in his ^ate and Kingdom, and that he mi^^^ ^^ee religiously
and holilie served (...) his church. For let men think and say what they list,
it is for the churches sake alone, (which God has everlastingly loved, even
from before all worlds) that he vpholdeth and maintains this world. For the
Churches sake he preserves Monarchies, Commonweales, and Kingdoms, which are
rather the Innes as I may so call them, than the houses of the church, that
warfa^eth and trauaileth to and fro in the world: which otherwise we might
account (saving that by their grossness and thieknesse, they shelter and
cover the precious fruits that God has put into them) not very profitable,
specially as in regard of godliness. And yet notwithstanding, this is the
Church that is sustained and maintained by God for his only sons sake, who
has suffered death for it, even Christ our Lord and Savior, and
notwithstanding is the king of kings, under whom of necessity, all the kings
of the world must bow, and for whom it is that they must reign, casting down,
at the very feet of his cross, because in that he triumphed, their crowns,
their diademes, and their scepters, specially if they desire to reign in
blessedness over their subjects in the world, and would one day reign for all
eternity in the heavens, without which they are more miserable than the
meanest of men, Because for mighty men there are mighty torments prepared, and
the Prophet Isaih in express terms says: Tophet is prepared of old, Isaiah.
30.33
it is even prepared for the king: he has made it deep and large: the burning
thereof is fire and much wood, the breath of the Lord like a river of brimstone
does kindle it. In a word then as it were, or short sum to shut up all, and
to conclude with David: Our king will frame his soul to Mercy and to Justice.
From his person they shall run, and flow into his court, into his counsel, and
from thence they shall spread themselves ^^^r all the members of his state,
even unto the very borders and utmost bounds of his kingdom. All his ways, in
a word, (...) according to Gods own example, (...) 10.
shall be Judgment and Mercy. But because that the body is made for the
Church, he will with all his heart give himself to the study of truth, and be
very mindful of and careful for the service of God, and will refer all that
he has or may have, to the defense and maintenance, to the restoration and
reformation of his Church, the rarest jewel that God has vouchsafed to make
shine in the world.

O God which have from before all times appointed our king to be borne in so
troublesome a time and wicked age, as wherein the state is rent by factions,
the Church is troubled with schisms, and the most wise see nothing but
darkness, and the same so thick, as no eye* nay no discourse is able to
pierce it much less to drive it away; double in these double mischeefes and
evils, thy blessed anointing, even thy holy grace upon him. Pour upon his
head the spirit of thy servant David, yea double and treble that blessed spirit
of thine upon him, that under him we may once again see our State established,
and thy church gathered together, that so under thee by his means, we may
with one accord sing, as thy holy Angels did and do, Glory be to God in the
most high places, and in earth peace, Luke 2.14.
and toward men good will: and that I my self might then say, though it were
even at this present hour, Lord, now let thou thy servant depart in peace,
Luke 2.29.
according to thy word, seeing that mine eyes have seen thy salvation.

So be it.

