A Work concerning the trewnesse of the Christian Religion, written in French:

Against Atheists, Epicures, Paynims, Jews, Mahumetists, and other Infidels.

By Philip of Mornay Lord of Plessie Marlie.

Begun to be translated into English by Sir Philip Sidney Knight, and at his
request finished by Arthur Golding.

Imprinted at London for Thomas Cadman. 1587.



To the right Honorable his singular good Lord, Robert Earl of Leycestor,
Baron of Denbigh, Knight of the order of the Garter, and of S. Michaell, one of
the Lords of the most Honorable privy Counsel, and Master of the Horse to
the Queens Majesty: Lord General of her Majesty's Forces in the Low
Countries, and Governor General of the united Provinces, and of their
Associates: Arthur Golding wishes long continuance of health, much increase of
Honor, and in the life to come in endless felicity.
MAny causes do fully persuade me (right Honorable,) that this present work
which I presume to offer unto you, will in diverse respects be unto you very
acceptable. For unto such as are of greatest wisdom, virtue and Nobility,
the wisest best and weightiest matters are always most agreeable. And whereas
all men are naturally desirous of the souereine welfare, highest felicity, or
chief good, howbeit that very few do know what it is, or wherein it
consists, or which is the right way that leads thereunto: And yet not
withstanding, without the knowledge of that truth, all their wisdom is but
mere ignorance blyndnesse and folly, all their goodness is but mere corruption
and wickedness, and al their bravery tryumphe iollitie and pomp is but utter
misery and wretchedness: This present work treats of the trewnesse, that
is to say of the perpetual and inuariable constancy and sted fastness of the
Christian Religion, the only band that linketh God unto man, and men one to
another, and all unto God, the only Lamp that enlighteneth man's wit with true
wisdom, the only waterspring that replenisheth his will with true goodness,
and the only mightis power that gives strength and courage to man's spirit,
whereby he is enabled both perfectly to discern and behold his souereine
welfare or felicity, which is God the very founder furtherer and finisher of
truth or rather the very truth it self; and constantly to hold on with joy
to the obteynement of the same; than the which no greater thing can by any
means be imagined. And in the discourse of this most grave and weighty
matter, many deep points of human Philosophy, and many high mysteries of
heavenly Divinity, be learnedly breefly and plainly discussed and laid open,
to the understanding even of the meanest capacities, that will vout safe to
read advisedly, and to confer the parts together with diligence. For the
Author of this work being a man of great reading, judgment, learning and
skill, and there with addicted or rather vowed (as appears by this and diverse
other of his excellent writings) to the furthering of Gods glory by his most
faithful and painful employing of himself in the service of his Church; has
conveyed into this work, what soever he found either in the common reason of
all Nations, or in the peculiar principles of the chief Philosophers, or in
the mystical doctrine of the Jewish Rabbines, or in the writings of the
Historiographers and Poets; that might conveniently make to the manifestation
of that truth which he takes in hand to prove. VVherby he has so effectually
brought his purpose to pass; that if any Atheist Infidel or Jew having read
this his work with aduiseme^t, shall yet donye the Christian Religion to be
the true and only path way to eternal felicity, and all other Religions to
be mere vanity and wickedness; must needs she we himself to be either
utterly void even of human sense, or else obstinatly and wilfully bent to
impugn the manifest truth against the continual testimony of his own
conscience. Not without just cause therefore has so great love and lyking of
this work of his been generally conceived; that many not only of Gentlemen in
the Court and Country, but also of Students in both the Universities, have
purposed and attempted the translating thereof into our English tongue, as an
increase of comfort and gladness to such as are already rooted and grounded
in the truth, as a stablishment to such as any way either by their own
infirmity or through the wiliness of wicked persons are made to waver and
hang in suspense, and as a mean to revoke such as of themselves or by sinister
persuasions are gone away into error, and also (if it possible be) to reform
the malicious and stubbornhearted. Among which number of weldisposed and
rightlyzealous Gentlemen, I may not without just desert of blame (...) to say
some what (though far less than is meet) of that, right worthy and valiant
Knight, your good Lordships noble kinsman Sir Philip Sidney, whose rare virtue,
valor, and courtesy, matched with equal love and care of the true Christian
Religion, being disappoynted of their purposed end by ouerhastie death in the
very entrance of his honorable race, have left just cause to his loving
Country to be wayle the untimely forgoing of so great an Ornament, and the
sodeyne bereuing of so hopeful a stay and defense. Whereof not withstanding
this comfort remains, That he dyed not languishing in idleness riot and
excess, nor as overcome with nyce pleasures and fond vanities; but of manly
wounds received in service of his Prince, in defense of persons oppressed, in
maintenance of the only true Catholic and Christian Religion, among the noble
valiant and wise, in the open field, in Martial manner, the honorablest death
that could be desired, and best be seeming a Christian Knight, whereby he has
worthly won to himself immortal fame among the godly, and left example
worthy of imitation to others of his calling. This honorable gentleman being
delighted with the excellency of this present work, began to put the same into
our Language for the benefit of this his native Country, and had proceeded
certain Chapters therein; until that intending a higher kind of service to
wards God and his Prince, not drawn thereto by subtle deuyce of a wily
Ulysses from company of Courtly Ladies, himself being disguised in Ladies
attire after the manner of Achilles; nor discovered against his will by the
wisdom of a Palamedes after the manner of Ulysses; but advanced through the
hardynesse of his own knightly courage like to Prosilaus, he willingly passed
for a time from the company of the Muses to the Camp of Mars, there to make
trial as well of the Pyke as he had done of his Pen, after the example of the
valiant Julius Caesar, whose excellency in all kind of knowledge and
learning, could not hold him back from seeking to enlarge his renown by
hazarding his noble person among the weapons of armed Souldyers. Being thus
determined to follow the affairs of Chivalry; it was his pleasure to commit
the performance of this piece of service which he had intended to the Muses or
rather to Christ's Church and his native Country, unto my charge; declaring
unto me how it was his meaning, that the same being accomplished should be
dedicated unto your Honor; a matter so acceptable unto me, both in respect of
the charge it self, and of the party that imposed it upon me, and of the
person to whom it was intended: that although in respect of the toylesome and
tedious troubles wherewith I was then pressed and am yet still in manner
oppressed, I could have found in my heart to have forborne the undertaking of
so great a task at that time; yet notwithstanding I gladly took it upon me,
and (by the goodness of God) have faithfully performed it to the uttermost of
my skill. In his name therefore and as an executor of his will in that behalf,
I humbly offer this excellent work unto your good Lordship, as his and not
mine. Wherein if any words or phrases shall seem strange, (as in some places
perchance they may) I doubt not but your good Lordship will impute it to the
rareness and profoundnesse of the matters there handled, not accustomed
heretofore to be treated of in our language. For the avoiding of which
inconvenience as much as might be, great care has been taken, by forming and
deryuing of fit names and terms, out of the fountaynes of our own tongne,
though not altogether most usual, yet always conceyuable and easy to be
understood; rather than by usurping the Latin terms, or by borrowing the words
of any foreign language, least the matters which in some cases are mystical
enough of themselves by reason of their own profoundnesse, might have been
made more obscure to the unlearned, by setting them down in terms utterly
unknown unto them. Wherefore forbearing to withhold your Honor with any
further process of words from reading the matter it self, which may much more
delight you: I refer both my self and it to your favorable acceptance.
Written the 13. day of May 1587.

Your good Lordships most humble always at your commandment, Artbur Golding.

To the right high and mighty Prince, Henry king of Navarre, Sovereign of
Bearne, and a Peer and chief Prince of the blood royal of France.
IN this wretched time Sir, wherein ungodliness (which was wont but to
whisper men in the ear, and to mumble between the teeth) has bin so bold as
to step into the pulpit, and to belke out blasphemies against God and his
Gospel: I take upon me (though a new kind of hardiness, as in respect of the
small ability that God has put into me) to convince her, even by her own
principles and peculiar records, that if I cannot make her to come back again
to a better mind, I may at leastwise yet make her hold her peace for shame, and
keep close her venim in her heart: A right great enterprise, and (in the
judgment of most men) ouerhard, but yet such as wherein I see great helps to
imbolden me; namely the World, Man, the open examples of all ages, and (at one
Word) God himself (who never fails those which seek his glory) and all
that ever he has uttered concerning himself, as well in the creating as in
the go^ering of all things. The world, for that it is as a shadow of Gods
brightness: and Man, for that he is his image and likeness: And both of them,
for that if it appear even by the philosophers themselves, that the World was
made for man, how greatly then are we bound unto the Creator thereof? How great
is the dignity of this creature? and what else is his shooteanker and his
welfare, but to stick wholly unto God? Soothly he for whom the world was made,
must needs be made for more than the World. He for whom so durable and
substantial a thing was made, must needs be made for another than this frail
and wretched life, that is to wit for the everlasting life, with him that is
the everlasting. And that is the foundation of all Religion. For Religion (to
speak properly) is nothing else but the school wherein we learn man's duty
toward God, and the way to be lincked most straightly unto him. Again, in the
world we see a stedie and fastsettled order, and every creature to do service
in his sort. Only man withdraws his duty, shrinking from God, and wandering
away in himself. He that is most indebted, is lothest to pay and least able to
pay. He for whom the highest things are made, is become a bondslaue to the
basest and vilest things: And the Records of all ages are as inditements
against all mankind; proving him to be unthankful to God, a murderer of his
neighbors, a violater of nature, and an enemy to himself. Shall not he then,
which instead of doing his duty, is not asbamed to offend God, stand in dread
of the death which wayteth upon him for his offense? ^es: for what is God, but
Justice? What is Justice, but a judgment of duty? And before that judgment
who dares appear? What remedy than is there, both for Gods glory and for
man's welfare: but that the debt be discharged by release, and the Justice
satisfied with free favor? The duty therefore of true Religion, is to convict
us by the Law, and to justify us by grace, to make us feel our discase, and
there with all to offer us remedy. But who shall purchase us this grace so
necessary for man's welfare? Either the world (as we think) or else man. Nay,
what is there in man (I say even in the best man) which burns not before Gods
Justice, and which sets it not on fire? And what shall become of the world
then, if man for whom it is created be unable to stand? soothly it is the
well-beloved son of God that must stand for all: the righteous for the
unrighteous, the mighty for the vnmightye, the rich for the poor, the
dearling and the well-beloved for them that are in the displeasure and curse of
God his father, and the same (say I) is our Lord Jesus Christ. The fool
(says the Psalmist) has said in his heart, Psalm. 14, Auicen the Arabian.
There is no God. And a Heathen man has passed yet further, saying: He that
denies the one God and his prourdence in all things, is not only witless,
but also senseless. And his so saying is, because the world which offers it
self continually unto us, replenisheth our wits with the knowledge of God:
even in this respect, that with one view of the eye, we see this universal
mass furnished with so many and so diverse things, linked one to another, and
tending all to one mark. Traly I dare say and by Gods grace I dare under take
to prove, that whosocuer will lay before him wholly in one table (so as he may
see them together with one view) the promises and prophesies concerning Christ,
the coming of our Lord Jesus and the proceeding of his Gospel, he shall not
be able to deny, even by the very rules of Philosophy, but that he was sent of
God, yea and that he was God himself. Howbeit, in this lies our fault, that
(whether it be through ignorance or through negligence) we consider not the
incomparable work of our creator and Recreator, but by piecemeale, without
laying the one of them to the other: like as if a man would judge of the whole
space of time by the night, or by some one season of the year, or by some one
of the Elements: or as if he would judge of a building by some one quarter: or
of an Oration by some syllables thereof: whereas notwithstanding, Gods wisdom
in creating things cannot be considered, but in the union of the parts with
the whole, and of themselves among themselves: nor his goodness in recreating
or renewing them, and in regenerating of mankind for whom he made the world,
but by the heed full conferring of all times from the first birth of Man unto
the second birth, and repairing of him again, which it has pleased God to
ordain and make for him.

As for the world, it is sufficiently conversant before our eyes, and would God
it were less graven in our hearts: and therefore let us leave the world, and
busy our selves in the universal table of man's salvation and reparation. When
man had by his sin drawn Gods wrath and the decay of the world upon his
own head: Gods everlasting wisdom, even the same whereby God had created
him, stepped in and procured his favor, so as it was promised unto the first
man, that Christ should come and break the serpents head, and make atonement
between God and man. That was the foundation-stone of the wonderful building
of the Church, and the seed whereof men were to be regenerated new again,
whom God did as it were create, beget, and adopt new again in his son,
which is his everlasting wisdom. This promise was delivered over from hand to
hand, and conveyed from Father to Son, solemnly declared to Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob: committed as a pawn by Moses to the people of Israel, celebrated
by David in his songs, and renewed from time to time by many excellent
Prophets, which pointed out the time, place, and manner of his coming, and
set down plainly and expressly his stock, his parents and his birth, many
hundred years, yea and some thousand years a forehand: which are such things
as noman could know, nor any creature teach or conceive. What were they else
therefore but Herauldes that foreshewed the coming of the king of the world
into the world: and certes by another spirit than the spirit of the world:
After a long success of these Herauldes, came the savior in the self same
manner which they had foretold and painted out. Whatsoever they had said of
him, agreed unto him, and which more is could agree to none but him. Who then
can doubt that the promise is not performed, and that he is not the bringer of
the promised grace to the World? And seeing that the prophets could not tell any
tidings of him but from God, from whence can he be sent but from God? I know
well that this one thing is a stumbling block unto us, namely that after the
sounding of so many clarions and trumpets, we see a man in outward show base,
and to the sight of our fleshly eyes contemptible, come into the world; whereas
notwithstanding if we opened the eyes of our mind, we should contrariwise epsy
in that wretchedness, the very Godhead, and in that humane weakness, the
selfsame infinite almightines which made both the world and man. He was borne
say you: but of a virgin. He was weak: but yet with his only voice he healed
all infirmities. He died: but yet he raized the dead, and rose himself from
the dead too. If thou believe that, thou beleeuest that he was both sent and
sustained by God. Or if thou will doubt thereof, tell me then how he did the
things after his death, which are witnessed by thine own histories? As soon
as he was borne say I, he by and by changed the outward shape of the world,
making it to spring new again all after another sort. When he was once
crucified, he turned the reproach of his cross into glory, and the curse
thereof into a blessing. He was crowned with thorns, and now Kings and
Emperors do cast down their crowns and Diademes at his feet. What a death
was that, which did such things as all the living could not do? By ignorance
he subdued learning; by folly, wisdom; by weakness, power, by misery,
victory; by reproach, triumphs; by that which seemed not to be, the things
which seemed verily and chiefly for to be. Twelve Fishermen in effect, did in
short space subdue the whole world unto him, by suffering and by teaching to
suffer, yea and by dying, and by teaching to die And the great Christian
kingdoms which we now gaze at, and which we exalt so much, are but small
remnants of their exploites, and little pieces of their conquests. If his birth
offend thee, look upon the Heralds that went a fore him, and upon the
Trumpetters that told tidings of him, both in the beginning and in the chief
state of the world, from whom, but from him that made the world? And wherefore
in all ages, but for the welfare of the world? If his cross offend thee, see
how the Emperors and their Empyres, the Idols whom they worshipped, and the
devils whom they served. Lie altogether overthrown, broken in pieces, fast
bound and stricken dumb at the feet of this crucified man. And how, but by a
power passing the power of man passing the power of Kings, passing the power of
Angels, yea, passing the power of all creainpes together^ If the little show of
the Apostles move thee: consider how the silionettes of those Fishermen, dre we
the pride of the world, namely (...) wisemen, the Philosophers, and the
Orators, by ignorance (as thou tearmest it) to believe, and by folly to die for
beleiuing. And forbeleaing of what? even of things contrary to the law of the
world, and to the wit of man: namely that this Jesus Christ crucified is God,
and that it is a blesfull thing to endure all misfortune for his sake. Behold
also how one of them draws me into his net the lesser Asia, another Italye,
the third Egypt. And some other of them extend unto the s^ythians, the
Ethiopians, and the Indians, and unto other places, whither the power of the
most renowned Empyres did never attain, and which have hardly come to our
knowledge now within these bundred years, and yet have we even there found
very great conquests of theirs^ and like renowned to^ens of their victories as
are here among our selves. Nay, which more is, see how these conquero^^
enriched with (...) from him, and that they be nothing, further forth than
they are in him and for him? that is to say, that he lives and makes them to
live, yea even for ever, which die in him and for him. surely upon the
considering of this table, we become as men ravished, distraught, and besides
our selves,^ and have nothing to say, but that he which created man and the
world of nothing, and none other was able to make and regenerate man and the
world again of nothing, even in despite of man and the world This invisible
God which has made himself visible by creating the visible world and has she
wed himself almightic, in (...) infirmity of con temptible man, is the (...)
Man, the Son of God, and is come in the flesh (...) Lord.

Here Sir, you have in few words the ^^oot-anker of this book, wherein I
declare the trewnesse of the christian Religion, and that (as I hope) with such
Reasons, that the despisers of God, if they will ^^^leeue, shall at leastwise
find themselves graueled to gainsay it. Moreover to offer this to your
Majesty, I have chiefly two causes, the one is, that God has made you to be
borne, not only a Christian, but also a Christian Prince, to whom it belongs
chiefly both for himself and for others, to know what the Christian Religion
is. For ye shall be the more instamed to adu^unce it, when you be thoroughly
persuaded that it is not a devise of man as other Religions are, but the Law
and truth of God, which makes both kings and kingdoms. and has made you a
man^ye ^ and set you over men. To be short, that it is both your prospe^itie in
this life which depends upon Gods gracious goodness, and your welfare in the
other life which is of far greater importance, than all that ever we can endure
or attain unto here.

The other reason is, that forasmuch as God has called me to be about your
Majesty (as I hope) to do you service in that notable work which he is about
to do in our days to his glory, and wherein he has put into your heart to
employ your person without sparing of your life: reason would that the fruits
both of my labors and of my leisure should be yours, as well as the field is
yours, without that it should be in my power to dispose otherwise thereof. And
I pray the almighty to increase his grace in you from day to day, and to give
unto you his spirit to go for ward with his work, and unto me to do you
service to the uttermost of my small power as long as I live. Amen.

Your most humble, obedient, and faithful Servant, Du. Plessis.

The Preface to the Reader.
IT is the ordinary matter of Prefaces, to declare first of all the apparent
profit, or rather necessity that moves them to undertake any work. But I
to my great grief, do think my self discharged of that pain, in this case.
For he that shall but read the title of this book, Of the Trewnesse of the
Christian Religion, if he list to call to remembrance how maine blasphemies he
heareth^ howerly against God and his word; how many despisers of Religion he
meets with at every step; and how great either coldness in the things which
they ought to follow most wholly, or doubting in the things which they ought to
be leeue most steadfastly, he finds even in those which profess the
Christian godliness: shall by and by answer and yield the reason of himself,
why I have taken this work in hand, more needful now adays (yea even (which
I am ashamed, to say) among those which bear the name of Christians) than
ever it was among the very Heathen and Infidels. Some busy themselves so much
about their pleasures, that they can never find any leisure, not to mount up
unto God, but only so much as to enter into themselves: in so much that they
be more strangers to their own nature, to their own Souls, and to the things
which concern them most neerelie and peculiarly, than they bin either to the
deserts of Inde, or to the Seas that are worst to be haunted and least known.
That is the very welspring of the Atheists, who (to speak rightly of them)
offend not through reasoning, but for want of reasoning; nor by abusing of
reason, but by drowning of reason, or rather by bemiring it in the filthy and
beastly pleasures of the world. Othersome match their pleasures with malice,
and to make short way to the atteinement of goods or honor, do ouerreach and
betraie othermen, selling their friends, their kinsfolk, yea and their own
souls, and not sticking to do any evil, that may serve their turn, never
alleging or pretending honesty or conscience, but to their own profit. Of
such kind of stuff are the Epicures made, who because they feel their minds
guilty of so many crimes, do think themselves to have escaped the Justice and
providence of GOD by denying it. And of these we may say, that their reason is
carried away and oueimaistered by the course of the world, whereunto it is
wholly tied, so as they can have none other course or discourse than his.

Some go yet a little further, both in respect of God, and of themselves. They
think there is a God, and that of him man has received an immortal soul:
that God governs all things, and that man ought to serve him. But forasmuch
as they see both Gentiles and Jews, Turks and Christians in the world, and in
diverse nations diverse Religions, whereof ^uery one thinks he serves God,
and that he shall find salvation in his own Religion: These (like men at a
stop where many ways meet,) in steed of choosing the right way by the
judgment of reason, do stand still amazed, and in that amazement conclude that
all comes to one, as who would say, that South and North lead both to one
place. But foothly if they applied their wit as advisedly to judge between
truth and falsehood, godliness and worldliness, as every man in his trade does
to judge between profit and loss: they should forthwith by principles bred
within themselves, and by conclusions, following upon the same, discern the
true Religion from the false: and the way which GOD has ordained to welfare,
from the deceitful bywaies and from the cross and crooked inventions of men.
What shall I say of the most part of us? Of us I mean which believe the
Gospel and profess the Christian Religion, and yet live as though we believed
it not? Which preach the kingdom of heaven, and have our groynes cuer wrooting
in the ground? Which will needs seem and be taken to be Gods children and
coheires with Christ, children of so rich a father and heirs of so goodly an
inheritance, and yet do scarsly think earnestly upon it once in a whole
year, but are ready to forsake it every hour, for less than a mess of
grewell and a bit of bread? Surely we may well say then, that if ever it were
needful, it is needful at this time to waken such as are asleep, to bring
back such as are gone astraie, to lift up such as are sunk down, and to
chafe them a heat which are waxed cold. And that is to be done by painting out
the true Religion lively before their eyes, with the joy, happiness, and glory
which ensue thereupon, to the intent that the voluptuous may seek their joy,
the co^etous their gain, and the ambitious their glory there, bending
themselves with their whole hearts unto that alone, which all only can fill
their hearts, and satisfy their desires.

That is the thing which I endeavor to do in this work, and GOD of his
gracious goodness vouchsafe to guide my hand, to his own glory and to the
welfare of those that are his. But before I enter into the matter, I have to
answer unto two sorts of people. The one are such as say that Religion cannot
be declared unto Infidels or unbelievers by reason. The other sort are those
which uphold, that although reason do somewhat inlighten it, yet it is
neither lawful nor expedient to do it. But let us see what reason they can
have, to exclude reason from this discourse. The first sort say, It is to no
purpose to dispute against such as deny grounded principles. And by this
means, because one grounded principle is denied them, they break of quite and
clean, as though all mean of conference were taken away. Surely this
principle of theirs is very true, but yet (in my judgment) it is very ill
understood. I grant it is to no purpose to dispute against such as deny
grounded principles, by the same principles which they deny: That is very
true. But there may be some other principles common to both sides, by the which
a man may profitably dispute with them, and by those common principles
oftentimes prove and verify his own principles. And that is the thing which
I intend to do in this work. As for example; The Christian groundeth himself
upon the Gospel; the Jew denies it: and therefore it were to no purpose to
allege it unto him. But both the Jew and the Christian have one common
principle and ground, which is the old Testament: By this may the Christian
profitably dispute against the Iew^yea eue^ to the verifying of the gospel, as
if ye should make one to call some man to his knowledge, by the draughts or
descriptions of his portraiture. Likewise the Jew is grounded upon the old
Testament, which the Gentile would mock at if he should allege it unto him.
But both the Gentile and the Jew have one common nature, which furnishes them
both with one common Philosophy, and with one common sort of principles; as
that there is one God which governs all things; that he is good, and no
author of evil; That he is wise, and does not any thing in vain. Also that
man is borne to be immortal; that to be happy he ought to serve God and
continue in his favor. And therewithal, that he is subject to passions,
inclined to evil, weak unto good and so forth. Of these common principles,
the Jew may draw necessary conclusions, which the Gentile shall not perceive
at the first, like as when a man understands a proposition, but conceiueth
not yet the drift and consequence thereof. He that marketh that the Adamant or
Loadstone points to the North, perceives not forthwith that by the same a
man may go about the world, although he was of capacity to cenceiue it.
After the same manner, by this principle: Euclid. lib. 1. prop. 45.
He that from equal things takes equal things, leaves the remainder equal;
and by a few other propositions which children learn in playing; the
Mathematician leads us gently (and ere we be aware of any mounting) unto
this so greatly renowned proposition and experiment of Pythagoras, that in a
Triangle, the side that bears up the right Angle, yields a square equal to
the other twain, which at the first sight seems impossible, and yet by
degrees is found to be so of necessity. Thus shall the Jew by common
principles and conclusions, verify his own ground which is the old Testament.
For he shall prove unto the Gentiles by their own Philosophers, that unto God
alone, things to come are present, and that unto Spirits they be known but
only by conjecture, and so far forth as they can read them in the stars.
And he shall prove by their Astrologers, that the names of men and the
circumstances of their doings cannot be betokened nor red in the stars. And
he shall prove by their Historiographers, that the books of the old Testament,
which contain so many and so particular prophesies, were written many
hundred years before the things came to pass. Now what will reasonably ensue
hereof, but the proof of the principle which is in controversy, by the
principles which are agreed upon between them both: namel^e that the old
Testament is of God, seeing it cannot be from any other. And what else is all
this, than that which is commonly done in Geometric and Logic, which by two
lines or by two propositions that are co^monlie known and certain, do gather
a third proportion that was unknown, or a third proposition (that is to say a
conclusion) that was erst either doubted of or hidden, and by means of the
other two is evidently found out, and necessarily proved. Such are these
proofs against the Atheists: nothing has moving of it self. It is nature
that says so. The world turns about, and the heavenly bodies have a
moving: and that does man himself see. Therefore they must needs be moved by
some other power and that is the Godhead; which our eye sees not, and yet by
means of the eye, our reason conceiueth and perceives it in all things.
Against them which deny ^hristes Godhead, [we allege this principle of their
own.] That naturally of nothing nothing is made. It is the saying of
Aristotle, and the schools would have him by the ears that should deny it.
Jesus Christ has of nothing made very great things, yea even contraries by
contraries. The Heathen wonder at it, all ages cry it out, our eyes do still
behold it. He that will deny this; must deny the world, he must deny all
things, he must deny himself. It follows then that Christ wrought by a
power, that is mistress of Nature. Aristotle himself saw it not, and yet
Aristotle makes us to see it. The writers of Histories took no heed of it;
and yet they themselves make us to believe it. The Philosopher thought but
only upon nature, and the Histographer but only upon his own writing. And
yet from both twain of them, we draw both the Godhead of Christ, and the
truth of our Scriptures: Certesse in like manner as by Arithmetike, out of two
and six we draw out one continual proportionable line hidden after a sort in
either of them, and yet greater than both of them together, which is Eighteen:
and as out of two sticks chafed one against another, we draw out fire which is
not seen in the two, the consuming of the^ both out of hand. To be short, the
mark that our faith looks at, is the Author of Nature and principle of all
principles. The rules therefore and the principles of Nature which he has made
cannot be contrary unto himself. And he is also the very reason and truth it
self. All other reason then, and all other truth depends upon him, and
relieth upon him, neither is there, or can there be any reason or truth but in
him: So far off is it, that the thing which is true and reasonable in nature,
is or can be false in Divinity, which (to speak properly) is not against
nature, but against the corruption of nature, and in very deed about nature.

Now come I consequently to the other sort, How far matters of faith are to
be dealt with by reason.
which say that although it be possible in some sort; yet the faith (that is
to say, the Christian doctrine) ought not to be proved or declared by reason:
And their reason is, because it consists in many things which exceed the
capacity of man, and therefore that he which should measure them by reason,
should diminish the dignity and greatness of them. Surely I will say more for
them than they require: namely, that man's reason is so far off from being the
measurer of far^n, which very far exceeds nature, that it is not so much as
the measurer of nature, and of the least creatures which lie far underneath
man; because of the ignorance and untowardness which is in us and reigns in
us. But in this they deceive themselves, that they imagine us to uphold, that
we should believe no further than reason can measure and comprehend. For what
a great way does the truth of things excend further than man's reason? But we
say that man's reason is able to lead us to that point; namely, that we ought to
believe even beyond reason, I mean the things whereunto all the capacity of
man cannot attain. And like wise, that when things are revealed unto us, which
reason could never have entered into nor once imagined, no not even when it was
at the soundest; the same reason (which never could have found them out) makes
us to allow of them: the reason I say (whereunto those mysteries were
insuisible before) makes them credible unto us: surely even after the same
manner that our eye makes us to see that in the visible things, which we ought
to believe of the invisible, without the which the visible could have no being:
that is to wit, the invisible God, by the visible Son, and also to see many
things when the Sun is up, which were hidden before in darkness: not that the
eie-sight was of less force, or the thing it self less visible before: but
because the Son is now up, which lighteneth the air with his brightness,
which is the mean both whereby the eye sees, and whereby the thing is seen. As
for example, we believe that there is one God, the Father, the Son, and the
holy Ghost. This is the article which they oppose against us, and therefore do
I take the very same. This article cannot in any wise fall within the compass
of understanding, and much less be comprehended by man's reason. But yet does
reason lead us to the said point, that there is a God: that he has created man
to live for ever: that whereas man has stepped out of the way, to follow his
own sway, he reformeth him again by his word: That this word (as I have said
already heretofore) is the old and new Testament, which contain things that
cannot proceed from creatures. Here Reason stays, and holds it self
contented. For seeing that God speaks, it becomes man to hold his peace:
and seeing that he vouchsafes to teach us, it becomes us to belecue. Now
we read this doctrine in Gods foresaid books, yea oftentimes repeated. Lo
how Reason teaches us that which she her self neither knew nor believed,
namely by leading us to the teacher, whom we ought to hear and believe; and to
the book wherein he vouchsafes to open himself unto us, in giving us
infallible marks and tokens, whereby to discern what comes of God, and what
comes not of him. But when Reason comes to the reading of the doctrine, and
is persuaded thereof; then she awaketh, and if the Gentile refuse it as
impossible and repugnant to reason and truth, then steppeth she forth stoutly,
and marketh the likeness thereof in nature, the images thereof in her self to
set it foo^th, and the Records of the Gentiles themselves to encounter them
withal.

Also she finds out solutions of their arguments, and aunswers to their
absurdities. For surely all truth cannot be sufficiently proved by reason,
considering that many things exceed reason and nature. But yet cannot any
untruth pr^^ayle by reason against truth; nor any truth be vanquished by the
judgment of reason. For untruth is contrary to nature, nature helps reason,
reason is servant to truth; and one truth is not contrary to another, that is
to say, to it self. For truth cannot be but truth, and Reason, reason.

The like may we say of the incarnation of the Son of God; that no man could
of himself have imagined it, nor as now also conceive it^ and yet not
withstanding, that reason (...) able both to teach it us, and to defend it.
What will she say then to us in this behalf? That the works which JESUS
wrought could not proceed, neither from a man, nor from a devil, nor from an
Angel considered in their several kinds, but only from God the maker of
heaven and earth. And this will she prove unto us, both in the respect of the
history, and in respect of the kinds of his works, as well by the
Historiographers and Philosophers who were enemies to Christ and his doctrine,
as by conclusions of necessity conveyed from the principles which remain in
the natures of every of them. And what will ensue thereof, but that Jesus
woorking by the power of God, was sent of God, and therefore ought to be heard
and believed? Believed (say I) to be God the son of God, because he says
it; and to be man borne of woman, because the world saw him to be so; and
that otherwise he should be an enemy to God, and God an enemy to mankind; God
(I say) too good to assist him with his power to our overthrow, and too wise
to lend him his spirit, to the defacing of his own glory? But if ungodliness
stir coals; Reason will open her mouth and show, that it was agreeable to
Gods Justice, and necessary for man's welfare; possible to the power of the
creator, and agreeable to his will and promises; behooffull for our baseness, and
beseeming his glory. And even in ungodliness it self she will find wherewith
to put ungodliness to silence, howbeit that even in all godliness, she finds
not wherewith to speak thereof sufficiently. The same is to be understood of
other like mysteries, which shall be treated of in their due places. And this
brings us back again to the said point, that the truth being revealed,
enlighteneth reason; and that reason rowseth up her self to rest upon truth.
And so far off is Reason from abasing faith, to make us attain thereto, that
contrariwise she lifts us up as it were upon her shoulders, to make us to see
it, and to take it for our guide, as the only thing that can bring us to God;
and the only schoolemistresse of whom we ought to learn our salvation. To
be short, we say not that because. Reason comprehends not this or that,
therefore let us not believe it: for that were a measuring of Faith by
Reason, as they say. But we say that Reason and Nature have such a Rule, and
that that is the common way, and yet notwithstanding, that this thing or that
thing is done or spoken beyond reason and beyond nature. I say then that the
work and word of God are an extraordinary case, and that forasmuch as they
are of God, it behooves us to believe them; and to believe is to submit our
reason and understanding to him. And so it is a making of reason servant to
faith by reason, and a making of reason to stoop to the highness of faith:
and not an abasing of faith to the measure of reason.

Now forasmuch as we take reason to our help against the Infidels, the proofs
which she shall yield unto us to guide us to the doctrine and school of faith,
shall be chiefly of two sorts; namely, Arguments and Records. The Arguments which
we will use against the Jews, we will take out of the grounds of the Jewish
Religion, the majesty of God, the nature and state of man, and the most
evident and best authorized principles or conclusions among them. Against the
Gentiles, we will take them out of their substantiallest Rules, out of the
most renowned Authors of Philosophy, and out of the expositions of their own
most approved Interpreters; one while abiding upon their principles, and
another while standing upon the conclusions which they themselves do gather of
them, and sometimes drawing such necessary consequents and sequeales out of
them my self, as they oftentimes perceived not, as though they had not
understood what they themselves spoke. Also against either of them, we will
judge of the cause by his effects, and of the effects by their cause; of the
end, by the instrument or moouer thereto, and of the mouer, by the end, and so
forth of other things: which are the strongest arguments that can be, as which
are either demonstratiue, or very near demonstratiue. At a word, we will not
allege any argument which shall not be substantial, or at leastwise which we
shall not think to be so, neither will we urge any thing whereof we be not
thoroughly persuaded in our selves: choosing always the euidentest and easiest
that we can, to apply our selves to all men's capacities. Notwithstanding, let
not any man look here for arguments that may be felt, as that I should prove
fire to be hot by touching it, or the mysteries of GOD and Religion by the
outward sense: but let it suffice him that mine arguments shall be fully as
apparent, and commonly more apparent, than the arguments which the
Philosophers allege in natural things: Howbeit that Aristotle would have men
to look for arguments of less sorce at his hand in his first Philosophy,
then in his discourses of natural things; and for reasons of less force in
his morals (so they be likely,) than in his first and highest Philosophy:
which thing we may with much better right require in the things that surmount
both nature and man, that is to wit, in Divinity. Moreover, oftentimes here
shall be questions propounded to unfold, or objections made to be confuted,
which might trouble the Reader if he were not satisfied in them, or else break
off the continuance of our proofs. And in them I shall be compelled now and
then to be obscure, either by reason that the nature of the thing depending in
controversy, may perchance be of some old forworne opinion, or else in
respect of the terms peculiar to the case, which may hap to be less
understood of the common sort, and more diffuze, and less pithie in our
language, wherein such things have not hitherto been treated of. Nevertheless,
I hope to take such pains in the opening of them that the Reader whosoever he
be, if he take any heed at all, shall easily attain to the understanding of
them.

As touching the Records, they shall be (in my judgment) of the worthiest sort,
and such as are least to be suspected or refused, as near as I can choose. We
be to declare our doctrine unto men, and men themselves are a part of the
doctrine which we set forth. And what more clearenesse can there be, than to
make themselves parties in the proof, Judges in their own case, and witnesses
against themselves? Unto men therefore we will bring the witnessings of men,
even the things that every man reads in his own nature, and in his own
heart, from whence he utters them either wittingly or unwittingly, as things
that are so written there, that he cannot wype them out though he would never
so feign. These are common insightes, or inse^s (as a man may term them)
namely the persuasion of the Godhead, the conscience of evil, the desire of
immortality, the longing for felicity, and such other things, which in this
nether world are incident unto man alone, and in all men, without the which a
man is no more a man; insomuch that he cannot deny them except he be out of
his wits, nor call them in question without beiying of himself wrongfully. And
here of proceeds the agreeable consent of all mankind in certain^ beleefes
which depend immediately upon the said Principles; which consent we ought to
hold for certain and undoubted. For the vniuersalnesse of this consent she
weth that it is nature, and not instruction, imitation, or bringing up, that
speaks, and the voice or nature is the voice of truth. As for lying or
untruth, it is a fondling, and not a thing bred; a mere corruption, and not a
fruit of nature. Nevertheless, whether it were thorough ignorance which has
as good as choked the, or through frowardness which has turned reason a wrong
way and made man as a stranger to himself: those common and general Insets
have remained ba^ren in the most part of men. Yet notwithstanding some men in
sundry nations have mounted above the common rate, and endeavored to cherish
and advance the said Insights, and drawn some small sparks of truth and
wisdom out of them, as out of some little fire raked up under a great heap
of ashes; the which they have afterward taught unto others; and for so doing
have been called Sophies and Philosophers, that is to say, Wise men and lovers
of wisdom. These also do we take for witnesses of our doctrine; and amongst
them, the notablest and such as the world has esteemed to be wisest. And
wheresoever they shall disagree, either one with another, or with themselves;
there shall common reason be Judge. And like as they have caught some sparks
from the fire, so will we kindle a fire of their sparks: how be it (in very
deed) not to lead us to salvation the haven of our life; for in that behalf we
have need of God himself to be our Pilote: but to show us as it were from a
Tower; which way it stands in the dark wherein we now be, to the end we may
call to God for help, and ever after make thither ward with all our whole
heart. Particularly against the Atheists and Epicures, we will bring themselves,
the world, and the creatures therein for witnesses. For those are the Records
which they best love and most believe, and from the which they be lothest to
depart. Against the false naturalists [that is to say professors of the
knowledge of nature and natural things] I will allege nature it self, the
Sects that have sought out nature, and such writers in every Sect, as they
hold for chief Disciples, Interpreters, and Anatomists or Decipherets of
nature; as Pyt hagoras, Plato, Aristotle, the Academikes and peripatetikes both
old and new, and specially such as have most stoutly defended their own
Philosophy, and impugned our doctrine; as Iamblich, Plotin, Porphirie, Procle,
Simplice, and such others: whose depositions or rather oppositions against us,
I think men will wonder at.

Against the Jews I will produce the old Testament, for that is the Scripture
where to their fathers trusted, and for the which they have suffered death, and
whereby they assure themselves of life. And for the interpreting thereof, I
will allege their Paraphrasts, and those which translated it into the Greek
and Chaldey tongues before the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. For they were
Jews borne, of the notablest men among them, chosen by public authority to
translate it, and at that time reason was not so entangled with passions, as it
has been since. Also I will allege their ancient doctors, dispersed as well
in their Cabales as in their Talmud, which are their books of greatest
authority and most credit. And diverse times I will interlace the Commentaries
of their late writers, which generally have been most contrary to the Christen
doctrine, whom (notwithstanding) the truth has compelled severally to agree,
in expounding the Texts whereon the same is chiefly grounded.

Now in these allegations I shall sometimes be long, and peradventure tedious
to the Reader, whom manifest reason shall have satisfied already, so as (to
his seeming) there needed not so many testimonies. But I pray him to believe,
that in this longnesse of mine, I strain my nature to apply myself to all
men; knowing that some like better of Reasons, and othersome of Testimonies;
and that all men (notwithstanding that they make more account of the one than
of the other) are best satisfied by both, when they see, both reason authorized
by witnesses, (for that is as much to say, as that many men had one self same
reason) and also Records declared by reason; for that is as much to say, as
that credit is not given to the outward person, but to the divine thing which
the person has within him, that is to wit, to Reason. Herewithall I thought
also, that all men have not either the mean to come by all books, or the
leisure to read them; whose labor I have by that mean eased. And oftentimes I
am driven to do that in one Chapter; whereof others have made whole volumes.

To conclude, I pray the Reader, first to read this book throughout, for
without mounting by degrees, a man cannot attain to high things; and the
breaking of a ladders steal casts a man back, and makes the thing
wearisome which was easy. Secondly I desire him to bring his wit rather than
his will, to the reading thereof. For foredeemings and foresetled opinions do
bring in bondage the reason of them that have best wits; whereas
notwithstanding, it belongs not to the will to ouerrule the wit, but to the
wit to guide the will. Thirdly and most of all I beseech him to bear alwaie in
mind that I am a man, and among men, one of the least; that is to say, that if
I satisfy him not in all points, my reason attaineth not eueriewhere so far as
truth does; to the end that mine ignorance and weakness prejudice not the
case, mine undertaking whereof, in good sooth is not upon trust of mine own
wit, or of mine own ability; but upon assured trust of the cleernesse,
soundness, substantialnesse, and soothnesse thereof.

Now God vouchsafe to shead out his blessing upon this work, and by the
furtherance thereof to glad them that believe, to confirm them that waver, and
to confute them which go about to shake down his doctrine. This is the only
pleasure that I desire, the only fruit which I seek of my labor. And (to say
the truth) I feel already some effect and contentment thereof in my heart. But
let us pray him also to vouchsafe in our days, to touch our stony hearts
with the force^ of his spirit, and with his own finger to plant his doctrine
so deeply in them, as it may take root and bring^ forth fruit. For certesse
it is Gods work to persuade and win men, albeit that to counsel them, yea and
to move them, seems in some sort to lie in man.

The Sums of the Chapters.

The Conclusion of the whole book.

OF THE TREWNES OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
The first Chapter.
That there is a God, and that all men agree in the Godhead.
SUch as make profession to teach us, do say they never find less what too
say, then when the thing which they treat of is more manifest and more known
of (...) self, then all that can be alleged for the setting forth thereof.
And such are the principles of all the Sciences, and specially of the
certeynest, as which consist in Demonstration. The whole (will Euclyde say) is
greater then his part. And if from equal things ye take equal things, the
Remaynder shall be equal. This is rather perceived of every man by common
sense, then proved by sharpness of Reason. And like as they that would go
about too prove it, do show themselves worthy to be laughed at, as which
should take upon them to inlighten the Sun with a Candle: so they that deny
it, do show themselves to be wranglers and unworthy of all conference, as
contenders against their own mother wit, yea and against their own
confession; according to this common saying of the Schools, That there is no
reazoning against those which deny the Principles. Now, if there be any matter
wherein this Rule is found true; it is most peculiarly in this, that there is a
God. For it is so many ways and so lively painted forth in all things, and so
peculiarly engraven in man's heart; that all that ever can be deuized, said, and
written thereof, is much less then that which is seen thereof every where,
and which men feel thereof in themselves. If ye look upward, ye see there
infinite bodies and infinite mouings; diverse, and yet not trubling one another.
If ye look downward, ye see the Sea continuasly threatening the Earth, and
yet not passing his bounds: and likewise the Earth altoogither heavy and
massy, and yetnotwithstanding settled or rather hanged in ye Air, so as it
stirs not awh^. These bodies dire^ us incontinently too a Spirit, and this
orderlines too a certain Gouerner; for so much as it is certain in nature, that
bodies have of themselves no moving, and that even those bodies which are
quickened, could not agree steadfastly either with other bodies or with
themselves, but by the ordering and governing of a Superior. But when we
enter afterward intoo our selves, and find there an abridgement of the whole
universal; a body fit for all sorts of mouings, a Soul which (without
removing) makes the bodies too move which way it lists; a Reazon therein
which guydeth them euerychone in their doings; and yetnothwithstanding, this
Soul too be such as we can neither see it nor conceive it: It ought in all
reazon too make us all too understand, that in this great universal mass,
there is a sovereign Spirit which makes, moves, and gouern^^^ all that we
see there; by whom we live, move, and be; who in our bodies has framed a
Counterfeit of the whole world, and in our Souls has engraven an image of
himself. T^imegistus in Poeriandro. Iamblichus, concerning Misteryes. Chapt. 8.
This is it that caused one ancient Philosopher too say, that whereas our eyes
cannot pearce unto God; he suffers himself too be felt with our hands: And
another too say, that the very first use of Reazon, is employed in conceiving
the Godhead; not properly by knowing it, but as it were by feeling it, which is
more certain: yea, and that the being of our Soul is nothing else, but the
knowing of God upon whom it depends. And Auicen speaks yet more boldly,
saying that he which acknowledges not the Godhead, is void, not of Reason, but
even of Sense. Now, if these Senses from whence our first knowledge proceeds,
do witness the thing unto us; and we do firmly believe a thing when we feel
it, and that (as they teach us) we may feel GOD as well in the world as in
our selves: Surely unto him that treats of Religion, it ought too be
granted as an unviolable Principle, That there is a God; and all men ought too
be forbidden too call it into question, upon pain of ^ot being men any more.
For if every Science have his Principles, which it is not lawful to remove,
be it never so little: much more reason is it that it should be so, with that
thing which has the ground of all Principles for his Principle. Nevertheless,
let us with the leave of all good men, bestow this Chapter upon the
wickedness of this our age: and if there be any which by forgetting God, have
in very deed forgotten their own shape, and mistaken their own nature: let
them learn hereby too reknowledge themselves again.

It is a strange case, The World leads us unto God.
that these men which ordinarily speak of nothing but the world, will not see
in the world, the thing which the world shows and teaches in all parts. For,
let us begin at the lowest, and mount up too the highest; and let us consider
it whole together or in his parts; and we shall not find any thing therein,
either so great or so small, which leads us not step by step unto a Godhead.
In this world (too consider it first in the whole,) we have four degrees of
things: to wit, which have Being, which have Life, which have Sense, and which
have Reason: Some are indewed with all these gifts, and some but with some of
them. The Air, the Sea, and the Earth are great, and have a great scope. They
bear up and sustain all things that have Life, all things that have Sense,
and all things that have Reason. And yet notwithstanding, they themselves have
not any more then only bare Being, without Life, without Sense, without
Reason: that is too say, the nearest too not being. The Plants, besides being,
have also life, and they draw their nourishment from the Earth, and their
refresshing from the Air. The Beasts have both Being, Life, and Sense, and
take their food both from the Elements and from the Plants. Man has Being,
and Life, and Sense, and Reason; and he inioyeth the Elements, lives of the
Plants, commands the Beasts, and discourses of all things both above him
and beneath him. Lo here an order, such from degree too degree, that whosoever
conceiueth not by and by some Author thereof, has neither Reason nor Sense, no
nor is worthy too have either life or being. I pray you from whence comes
this goodly proportion, and this orderly proceeding of things by degrees?
Whence comes the difference in their partitions? Whence comes it that the
hugest and widest things are underlings to the least and weakest things?
Whereof comes it that some things have but a dead being, and next unto
notbeing; and that othersome have a being that is moving, sensible, and
reasonable, howbeit some more, and some less? Comes it of the things
themselves? How can that be? For seeing that nothing does willingly become an
underling unto others: why be not the heauiest masses allotted to the best
shares? Whereof comes it that the living things which in respect of the whole
Sea are but as a drop, and in respect of the whole Earth are but as a grain of
dust, are in degree of pre-eminence above them? And whereof comes it, that
man being the fraylest of all living wightes, is served by the Elements, by the
Plants, and by the Beasts, yea even by the wildest of them? Then is there a
deuider or distributer of these things, who having imparted the^ too others,
had them first himself, and that most abundantly; and who moreover is of
necessity, almighty, seeing that in so unequal partition, he holds them
nevertheless in concord. I say further, that all things are comprised under
these four: that is too wit, under Being, Life, Sense, and Reason, according
too his diverse imparting of them unto all things.

Now I demand, whether was first, of Being or Notbeing; of Living or
Notliuing; of Sensible, or Notsensible; of Reasonable or Notreasonable? Surely
it was neither Reasonable, nor Sensible, nor living; for the time has bin that
we were not. But we know that we had fathers, and that our fathers had
forefathers: and the end of them makes us too believe that they had a
beginning. In like case is it with beasts and plants; for we know the
breeding, growing, decaying and fading of them. Much more then may we say the
same of Being. For the things here beneath which have but only bare being,
are far inferior too the other things; and therefore cannot bring forth
themselves, and consequently much less bring forth the other things. It
remains then that Notbeeing, Notliuing, Notsensible, and Notreasonable, were
before Being, Living, Sensible, and Reasonable. And yet notwithstanding we
have both Being, Life, Sense, and Reason. It follows therefore that it is a
power from without us, which has brought us out of Notbeeing into being, and
has parted the said gifts among us diuerlly according too his good pleasure.
For otherwise, from out of that nothing which we were (If I may so term it,)
we should never have come too be any thing at all. Now between nothing and
something, (how little so ever that something can be) there is an infinite
space. Needs therefore must it be that the cause thereof was infinite (at
leastwise if it may be called a cause,) and that is the very same which we
call God.

Let us come to the nature of the Elements whereof the whole is compated. The
Fire is contrary too the Water, and the dry to the moist; and of these
contraries are infinite other things produced under them. Now the nature of
contraries is too destroy one another; and no two things, even of the least,
can be coupled together, but by the working of a higher power that is able too
compel them. But we see that these things do not incroche or usurp one
upon another, but contrariwise that they match toogither in the composing of
many things: and yet notwithstanding that not so much as two strings being of
one selfsame nature, can agree in one tune, without the wit of a man that can
skill too streine them and too slake them as he sees it good. It follows
therefore that the heavenly harmony wherein so many contraries are made too
accord both universally and particularly, are set toogither and guyded by a
spirit. Insomuch that if we will say, that according too the common opinion, the
air is spread forth as a stickler between the Fire and the Water, and is
joined too the one by his moisture, and too the other by his heat: Ye must
needs say also, that there is a great and souerein Judge above them, which
has made them too abide that stickler.

Let us mount up higher. We see the Heaven how it mowweth round with a
continual moving. Also we see there the Planets one under another, which
(notwithstanding the violence of the first moveable) have every one his
several course and moving by himself. And shall we say that these mouings
happen by adventure? But the same adventure which made them to move, should
also make them to stand still. Agein, as for adventure or chance, it is
nothing else but disorder and confusion: but in all these diversities, there is
one uniformity of moving, which is never interrupted. How then? Do they move
of them selves? Nay; for nothing moves it self, and where things move one
another, there is no possibility of infinite holding on; but in the end men
must be feign to mount vpto a first beginning, and that is a rest. As for
example, from the hammer of a Clock we come too a wheel, and from that
wheel too another, and finally too the wit of the Clockmaker, who by his
cunning has so ordered them, that notwithstanding that he makes them all too
move, yet he himself remoueth not. It remains then that of all these
mouings, we must imagine one [Mouer] immovable: and of all these so constant
diversities, one [vnuariable] always like it self: and of all these bodies,
one spirit. And like as from the Earth we have styed up too the Air, from
the Air too the Sky, from the Sky too the Heaven of Heavens, still mounting
up from greater too greater, from light too light, and from subtle to subtle:
so let us advance our selves yet one degree higher, namely too the infinite,
too the light which is not too be conceived but in understanding, and too the
quickening spirit; in respect whereof, the thing that we wonder at here
beneath, is less then a point, our light is but a shadow, and our spirit is
but a vapor. And yet notwithstanding he has so painted out his glory and
instuitenesse, even in the things which we most despise; as that even the
grossest wits may easily comprehend it.

Let us come down again too do the like here below. We shall see the
Earth replenished with Herbs, Trees, and Fruits: both Sea and Land furnished
with Beasts, Fisshes, Woormes, and Birds of al sorts; every of them so perfect
in his kind, as man's understanding cannot spy any want or superstuitie in
the^. Whence is all this? Is it of the Elements? Nay, how shall the thing which
has neither life nor sense, give life and sense too other things? Or comes
it of the Sun? Nay, when did we ever see him bring forth any such like
thing: Whence then is this variety, but of a mast fruitful and vnco^sumable
might? Whence comes this perfection, but of a singular wisdom? Of Plants,
some are hot, and some cold; some sweet, and some bitter; some nourishing, and
some healing. And of the most dangerous, the remedy is found either in
themselves or in the next unto them. Also as touching Beasts, the wildest and
such as live by pray, keep by themselves alone, because the flocking of them
together would be noisome. But the tame and such as are most for our profit,
do naturally live in flocks and heardes, because the great numbers of them
are for our commodity. Is this also a work of fortune? Nay, I say further:
The Sun heateth the Earth, the Stars do limit her seazons, the Air
moysteneth her drought; the Earth serves the Grass, the Grass serves the
Beasts, and the Beasts serve Man. Each thing serves other, and all serve one
alone. Whence may this bond come? If things be everlastingly, and of
themselves; how have they thus put themselves in subjection? By what means or
when began they first too do so? Also how can one of them be for another,
seeing that the end wherefore things are, is ever before the things themselves,
either in nature, or else in consideration; and that the eternity has not any
thing either before or after it? So that if they have had their beginning of
themselves; did they bring forth them selves in seed, in flower, or in
kernel? in Egg, or in full life? small or great, and so forth? Again,
seeing that the one cannot be without the other, neither Beasts without
Grass, nor Grass without the Earth, nor the Earth bring forth any thing
without the Heaven: which of them came before, and which of them came after? Or
if they were all bred together: whence comes this agreement among so many
diverse things; but of the same mind which made and still governs all things?
Seeing then that these things are so linked together, and that they tend all to
one: let us conclude also that that cannot come to pass but through one, who
brought them forth altogether at one instaunt and one burden, when he
thought good. But now let us see whence comes this other one whereunto they
tend, that is to wit Man; and whether he also be not for and by that one which
has made them, that is to wit, for and by God.

He that sees but only the portrayture of a man, Man leaded^ us to God.
falls by and by to think upon a Paynter; and the first speech that he
utters, is to ask who made it. Now, if a dead work do make us to conceive
a living worker: much more reason is it, that a living work as man is, should
make us to bethink us of a quickening workemaister: yea even of such a one as
may be (at least wise) as far above man, as man is above the portrayture of
his own making, (for so much as there is an infinite distaunce betwixt being and
not being, living and not living;) and the same again is God. The proportion
in man's body, which is so well observed, that all our Arts do borrow from
thence, does witness unto us a singular Cunning: and the parts also in that
they all serve each others use, and every of them serve the whole; betoken a
great wisdom. Now, where Cunning and wisdom be, there chance has no
place. For when a man loses an eye, an arm, or a leg; we following the
common error do commonly say, it is a mischaunce. But when a member that was
out of joint is set in again, or a member that was lost is supplied, though it
be but with a botched one: none of us will say it was chance; because that in
the judgment even of the grossest sort, the property of chance is to undo
and to mar things, and not to make or mend any thing at all. Again, by our
Senses which conceive al Colors, Sounds, Sents, Sauors, and Feelings; we may
see, hear, smell, taste, and feel, that one selfsame workman made both the
Senses, and the things that are subject to the Senses. For to what purpose were
the Senses without the sensible things? or the sensible things, without the
Senses? And seeing that they rely one upon another; which of them was bred
first in the world? If man made them for his Senses; why makes he not the like
still? If he made himself to be borne for them; why suffers he himself to
be bereft of his Senses one after another? Then is it to be sought for
elsewhere then in man. But when in the same man we yet further consider Speech:
must we not needs say that he was made to communicate himself to many? And
how are they borne one for another? Again, when we come to his Mind, which in
discoursing reaches far beyond all sensible things; shall we not say that
there are things merely to be comprehended by understanding, for the which the
Mind was made? And on the other side, if we find a Mind in our selves which
are but a little grain of the whole world; dare we say that there is no Mind
elsewhere then in our selves? Moreover, seeing that by this Mind of ours we
understand all other things; which Mind yet for all that understands not ne
knows not it self, neither perceive we what or whence this Mind is which
so understands in us: ought we not to acknowledge that there is a Mind above
us, whereby we have understanding of other things, and which understands and
knows in us the things which we our selves know not there?

Now then, seeing we understand not ne know not our selves, (my meaning is
that we be ignorant what we be, and what it is from whence our noblest
actions proceed:) can we be the authors of our selves? And from whence then
ought we too acknowledge our selves too have our original? O man, it may be
that thou look but too thy father. But from father too father, we shall come
at length too a beginning. And soothly thou art very dulheaded too think thy
self too be the author of a man, considering that neither thou in begetting
him, nor his Mother in breeding him, did once think upon the fashioning of
him in her womb: No more (say I) than the Nuttree does when a Nutte falls
from it to the ground, which nevertheless without the Nuttrees thinking
thereof, grows into Root, Sprig, Bark, and boughs; and in ye end
shootefoorth intoo Leaves, Flowers and fruit: And yet notwithstanding, in
peinting of an Image thou look upon it a hundred times, and diverse days;
thou amendest it, and thou busiest all thy wits about it. If thou be the dooer
of this work in the making of man, tell me why thou have not children when
thou would, and why thou have them sometime when thou would not? Why have
thou a Daughter, when thou would have a Son, or a Son when thou would
have a Daughter? In peinting thy Pictures thou do not so disapoint thy
felfe. Also, if thou be this good workemaister in making of thy child; tell
me how thou have fashioned it? Whence is the hardness of his bones? the liquor
of his veins, the spirit of his Heartstrings, and the beating of his Pulses?
See thou this, which is also as smally in thy power, as if it were none of
thine? Tell me what is hidden in his breast, and the whole workmanship that
is couched within him. If thou have not seen it in the opening of thy like,
thou know nothing thereof. Tell me yet further the imaginations of his
brain, and the thoughts of his heart: nay, tell me thine own, which
oftentimes thou would fame alter or stay, and can not. It is a bottemlesse
Pit, the which thou can not gage: and therefore it follows that thou made
it not. Know thou therefore O man, that all this comes too thee from some
cause that is above thy self. And seeing that thou have understanding, needs
must that cause have understanding too; and seeing that thou understand not
thy self, needs must that understand thee: and seeing that thou after a sort
art infinite in number, but much more infinite in thy thoughts and deeds:
needs must that be infinite too. And that is it which we call God. What shall
I say more? or rather or what remains not for me too say? I say with the
ancient Trismegist, Lord, shall I look upon thee in the things that are here
beneath, or o^ the things that are above? Thou made all things, and whol^
nature is nothing else but an image of thee. And I will conclude with David,
Bless ye the Lord all ye works of his; ye Heavens, ye waters, ye Winds,
ye Lightenings, ye Showers, ye Seas, ye Rivers, and all that ever is,
bless ye the Lord: yea and thou my soul also bless thou the Lord for ever.
For, to lay forth the proofs which are both in the great world and in the
little world; it would stand me in hand to ransacke the whole world; as the
which (with all that ever is therein,) is a plain book laid open to all men,
yea even unto Children to read, and (as ye would say) even to spell God
therein.

Now like as all men may read in this book as well of the world as of
themselves; Universal Consent.
so was there never yet any Nation under heaven, which has not thereby learned
and perceived a certain Godhead, notwithstanding that they have conceived it
diversely, according to the diversity of their own imaginations. Let a man
run from East to West, and from South to North: let him ransacke all ages one
after another: and wheresoever he finds any men, there shall he find also a
kind of Religion and Serving of God, with Prayers and Sacrifices. The
diversity whereof is very great; but yet they have always consented all in
this point, That there is a GOD. And as touching the diversity which is in
that behalf, it bears witness that it is a doctrine not delivered alonly
from people to people; but also bred and brought up with every of them in their
own Clymate, yea and even in their own selves. Within these hundred years
many Nations have been discovered, and many are daily discovered still, which
were unknown in former ages. Among them, some have been found to live without
Law, without King, without House, going stark naked, and wandering abroad in
the fields: but yet none without some knowledge of God, none without some spice
of Religion: to show unto us, that it is not so natural a thing in man to love
company, and to clad himself against hurts of the wether, (which things we
esteem to be very kindly:) as it is natural unto him to know the author of
his life, that is to say, God. Or if we yield more to the judgment of those
which were counted wise among the Heathen nations, (whom afterward by a more
modest name men called Philosophers:) The Brachmanes among the Indians, and the
Magies among the Persians, never began any thing without praying unto God. The
lessons of Pythagoras and Plato, and of their Disciples, began with prayer and
ended with prayer. The ancient Poets (who were all Philosophers,) as Orphey,
Homer, Hesiodus, Pherecides, and Theognis, speak of none other thing. The
Schools of the Stoikes, Academikes, and Peripatetikes, and all other schools
that flourished in old time, roong of that. The very Epicures themselves who
were shameless in all other things, were ashamed to deny God. To be short,
the men of old time (as witnesses Plato) those their Priests (which were to
have regard of the service that was to be yielded unto God,) from among the
Philosophers, as from among those which by their consideration of nature, had
atteined to know God. And so (which sildome happens but in an apparent
truth) the opinion of the common people and the opinion of the wise, have met
both iump together in this point.

Well may there be found in all ages some wretched kaytifes, which have not
acknowledged God, as there be some even at this day. But if we look into the^,
either they were some young fools given over to their pleasures, which never
had leisure to bethink them of the matter, and yet when years came upon
them, came back again to the knowing of themselves, and consequently of God:
or else they were some persons grown quite out of kind, saped in wickedness,
and such as had defaced their own nature in the^ selves; who to the intent they
might practice all manner of wickedness with the less remorse, have striued to
persuade themselves by soothing their own sins, that they have no Soul at
all, and that there is no Judge to make inquiry of their sins. And yet
notwithstanding, if these fall into never so little danger, or be but taken
upon the hip, they fall to quaking, they cry out unto heaven, they call upon
God. And if they approach, but a far of, unto death, they fall to fretting and
gnashing of their teeth. And when they be well beaten; there is not any shadow
of the Godhead so soon offered unto them, but they embrace it: so ready are
nature and conscience (which they would have restreined and imprisoned) to put
them in mind thereof at all hours. Suctonius in the life of Caligula.
They be loath to confess God, for fear to stand in awe of him; and yet the
fear of the least things makes them to confess him. Nay, because they fear
not him that made all things, therefore they stand in awe of all things; as we
see in the Emperor Caligula, who threatened the Air if it rayned upon his
Gameplayers; and yet notwithstanding he wrapped his Cape about his head, or hid
himself under his Bed, at every flash of lightening. I believe (says Seneca
Seneca in his first book concerning Wrath.
concerning the same matter) that this threatening of his did greatly hasten
his death, for so much as folk saw that they were too bear such a one, as
could not bear, even with the Gods.

Among the learned, Objections concerning such as were counted Atheists.
although the liberty of Sects was lawless: yet the chief that men counted
for Atheists, were one Diagoras a Melian Poet, one Theodore a Cyrenian, one
Ewhemere a Tegean, and a very few others. But to say truly, these rather
skorned the Idolles and false Gods of their times, then denied the true God.
Accordingly as we see many of them yet still among us, which hold themselves
contented with the knowing of untruth, without seeking after the truth; and
with mocking of Superstitions, without seeking the pure and true Religion. Of
the said Diagoras it is reported, that as he was burning an Image of Hercules
in his fire; he said, Thou must now do me service in this thirteenth
encounter, as well as thou have done to Euristheus in the other twelve. This
was but a skorning of Idolles. For notwithstanding this: his Uerses began thus,
that all things are governed by a Godhead. Also it is reported of the other,
that he should say to the Egiptians; If they be Gods, why bewail ye them? and
if they be dead folks, why worship ye them? This also was a disprouing of the
false Gods. And as for Ewhemere of Tegea, men are of accord that the cause why
he was called an Atheist, was for that he wrate the true History and
Genealogy of the Heathen Gods; showing that they were Kings, Princes, and
great Personages, whose Images being kept for a remembrance of them were turned
into Idolles, their worthy doings into yearly Gamings, and their honorings
into worshippings. And which of us at this day believes not as much? There
were in deed a kind of Philosophers called Scepticks (that is to say Dowters)
which did rather suspend their Judgment concerning the Godhead, then call it
in question. But yet it ought to suffize us, that they be the selfsame which
deny al Sciences, yea even those which consist in Demonstration; and which
profess themselves to doubt of the things which they see and feel; in so much
that they doubt whether they themselves have any being or no. But yet for all
that, let us see after what manner these kind of people do reason. Against the
thing which the world preaches, which Nations worship, and which wise men
wonder at; these folk say at a word for all, how shall we believe that there
is a God, since we see him not? O fool, and (which worse is) O fool by being
wise in thine own conceyt: Thou beleeuest that there is a Sun, even when
thou art in a Dongeon or in the bottom of a Prison, because his beams are
shed in at thy windows: and doubtest thou yet still whether there be a God or
no, when he shows himself to thee through the Sun, the Moon, and the
Stars; in the Air, the Earth, the Sea; in all things that they conteyne, yea
and even in they self? If thou had never seen Tree before, thy wit at the
very first sight of it, would lead thee to the root which is under the Tree:
and the sight of a River would lead thee to the welspring thereof, which may
peradventure be two hundred Leagues of. And whosoever should tell thee the
contrary, thou would stand at defiaunce against him. O man, like as the
Tree leads thee to the root by his branches; does not the root lead thee
likewise to the kernel, and the kernel to him that made it? And as the River
leads thee to his head; shall not the head lead thee to the original spring
thereof, seeing thou can not doubt but it has a beginning, since thou see
that it runs with a stream? If thou should arrive among the Indians, and
find but some sislie Cottage in the desolatest Country thereof; Thou would
by and by conclude, this I Will is inhabited, some man has passed here. And why?
Because thou see there some tokens of man's wit, and know well that the
Goats which thou have seen raunging or skipping upon the Rocks, can build no
such thing. Now, when thou being borne beneath, see here a hundred and a
hundred thousand things which are not possible to be made by man: nay (which
more is,) which it is not possible for him to know nor to understand: ought
thou not to say immediately, Gods spirit has passed this way, needs must here
have been some higher thing then man?

Mention is made of certain precize persons, Plutarch in his treatise of the
ceassing of Oracles, reports that a Ruler of Cilicia which was an Atheist,
came to the belief of a God, by an answer given from the Oracle of Mopsus, to
a demand of his which was delivered sealed.
which believed nothing but that which they saw, and the Wizards made them to
see Deuilles: Whereupon they came to believe also that there is a God. It was a
mad kind of conversion, to believe in God by the ministry of the Devil. But
what a number of other things beleeuest thou which thou see not? Thou
beleeuest that ye Plants have a kind of Soul, that is to say, a certain
inward power or virtue which makes them to shoot forth in their season. Thou
see them, but thou see not it; neither know thou whence it comes, or
where it lies. Thou beleeuest that the Beasts also have one other kind of
Soul, which makes them to move: and yet thou see it as little as the
other. Also thou beleeuest that thou thy self (besides these) have an ability
of reasoning both upon them, and upon thy self, and upon such as are like thy
self. And yet as touching the body, thou see not any thing altered in the
parts thereof after death; neither within nor without. Where is that Soul
then, or where have thou ever seen it? If thou believe thereof because of the
effects which thou see, which cannot come from any thing else: I assure thee
even by the same effects, that if thou believe nothing thereof but that which
thou see with thine eyes; thine eyes see not but by thy Soul, and thine eyes
themselves see not thy Soul. To be short, thou beleeuest that thou have a
face, which without a looking Glass thou see not: And will thou not believe
there is a God, whose face shines forth in all things?

Othersome to show themselves more fineheaded, have argewed thus. If there be
a GOD, he must needs be a bodily living wight, or else he should be senseless.
And if he have senses, then is he chaungeable; and if he be chaungeable, then
may be perish: that is to say, he is no longer God. Beasts are they in very
deed, which can conceive no better then that which is common to Beasts.

Others have said thus: If he be without body, he is also without Soul, and
consequently without action. Or if he be a body, he is subject to the chaunges
thereof. Alas that they should not be abls to conceive a Spirit without a
body, nor to see that even in our selves it is the only Soul that works,
and that the body stirs not but as it is moved by the Soul.

Others again do reason, that if there be a God, he must needs be perfectly
happy: and if he be perfectly happy, he is virtuous: if virtuous, he
ouermaistereth his affections: and if he ouermaister his affections, he is
tempted of his lusts; a thing altogether unbeseeming the Godhead. And by these
incouneniences they conclude, that there is no God at all: not perceiving, or
rather wilfully refusing to perceive that which Plutarke Plutarke in his
^reatise of moral virtue.
says very well: namely, that the person which ouermaistereth his affections,
is but half virtuous, but the stayed person is wholly virtuous, because the
one does but bridle his passions by force of reason, whereas the other has
them already settled according to reason, But there is yet more in God: for he
is reason it self, and there is nothing in him but reasou. Soothly this kind
of reasoning of theirs agrees in effect with this saying of Xenophanes,
Xenophanes as he is alleged by Clement of Alexandria in his Stromats.
that if Beasts were able to paynt, they would portray God like to themselves,
because they could not naturally conceive any further. Such and other like are
the arguments of these goodly Philosophers, which even little babes might laugh
to skorne: but else they could not have been against so manifest and evident a
truth. And yet dare I also well assure you, that they themselves knew the
falsenesse of those arguments, but that they were as it were sworn to doubt of
all things, and to gainsay all things.

Let us then conclude with the learned and the ignorant, the Greeks and the
Barbarians, Men and Beasts, things sensible and senseless, the whole and
every part thereof: That there is a God. And if there be yet any folk that
cast doubts thereof, indeuouring to race out not only God but also man
himself out of their hearts: let us boldly appeal even unto themselves; not
doubting at all, but that their own Conscience which cannot be defeated, will
one day make them to understand it.

The second Chapter.
That there is but only one God.
LEt us study further in the book of nature, The World leads to one only
God.
and see whether that as it has taught us a Godhead, it teach us not also that
the same consists in only one God. I have told you already, that of things,
some have being, some have being and life, some have being, life and sense; and
other some have being, life, fence, and reason. These four sorts fall into
three, from three into two, and from two into one, and that one is Being;
before the which (as I have proved already) there went a Notbeeing. The residue
therefore how diverse so ever they be, are all conveyed in the one Being, and
this one Being must needs rest in the power of one first Being, whereof the
being which we see, is but a shadow. Again, in all ye things which we see; we
reduce the particulars too an vnderkind, the vnderkinds to an vpperkind, and
the vpperkind to a most general. As for example, we reduce all particular
humane persons under the term of man; All men under the term of Wight; all
wights under the term of living things; and all living things under the term
of things that are or be; always referring every diversity to some unity,
and the same unity to another unity which is more universal. It remains
then that when we can mount no higher, we must distinguish ye things that are,
into the thing which is of it self, and the thing which is not of it self.
That which is not of it self, is the World and all that ever is therein, as I
have proved before. That which is of it self, is the thing which we call God,
beyond whom nothing can be imagined, and by whom all things both are and have
been, as which could have no being of themselves. Now to produce from
Notheeing into being, requires an infinite power. For between nothing and
something is an infinite distance; and two infinites cannot be abidden, no nor
imagined together. For the infiniteness of the one does incloase and bynd the
power of the other, and look whatsoever is given too the one, is taken away
from all others. Therefore like as there must needs be one Infinite, so must
there be but only one, yea and most simply one: from whose unity nevertheless
flow all the diversities which we see in the whole world, like as from a
Prick, proceeds a Line, an outside, and all substantial bodies. And of
unity or one in nombering, proceeds even and odd, round and square, and all
the multiplicities, proportions, and harmonies which we see: saving that the
Prick and the unity of number are intermingled and interlaced with all
things, whereas the foresaid most single and alonly One, abiding still one in
it self, brings forth all the other unities, and contains them all.

Let us examine every sort of things severally by them selves, and we shall
learn the like still in them. In the Elements we see contrary qualities and
operations. And where contraries are, there need but two heads to set them at
war. For they cannot dwell together, neither can they match together, and
much less can they reign together. The further that any of them extends his
power, the less can he away with any fellow. Now then if one reigned over
the Heat, and another over the Cold; one over the Dryth, and another over the
Moisture; so as there were diverse makers or gouerners of the world: we should
also see diversities of factions, Element against Element in the whole world
and in every thing that is compounded, and continual war in the mids of
their Bowels. But now see we no such thing; but every of them imbraceth other,
both in the whole and in every several thing, notwithstanding that naturally
they displace and destroy one another.

Furthermore they stand not at defyance alone by them selves, but the Sea
becleapeth the Earth, the Sea and Earth together are lapped up in the Air, the
Air is compast about with the Sky, and every of them stoopeth under other;
insomuch that of their contrarieties ye see there proceeds a goodly
uniformity. Seeing then that there are not two factions, there is but one
maker, and seeing they yield all into one, it cannot be but also by one. In the
Earth we see Rivers, which run a very long race, but yet from one head: and
again many streams, which yield themselves all into one, which one is the
Sea; and the Sea also being vndiuidable passes through the whole inferior
world. Like as they come out of one unity, so do they yield themselves up
into one other unity. In the Heaven we observe infinite diverse mouings, but
yet all obeying unto one. There is one light which sheadeth it self throughout
all places, but yet it proceeds from one only; which seems to multiply it
self infinitely, and yet cannot by any means be parted: I mean one Sun,
whose beams spreading out on all sides, do reach from the Sky unto the
Earth, and yet nevertheless continue still fast knit together in one bond by
one unity. Now all these parts, which proceed from one and tend to one, do
make us to believe that all proceed from one most single one.

Again, in the things that have life, as in Herbs and Trees; we see a
bark, a stalk or trunk, many boughs or branches, and an infinite number of
leaves. The body has no likeness to the leaves, nor the leaves to the
fruit, nor the fruit to the blossoms. And yet do all these come from one
root, which has his force united to it self; and the root springing of a
kernel or of a grain, (which cannot be the work of any mo then one workman)
conteyueth all the said diversities in his uniformity, and of it self alone
yields forth infinite of the same kind; and of one beginning of life which
is not multiplied in it self, makes it self a beginning of life (as well
within it self as without it self) unto many things that have life.

Likewise as touching wights, we see in every of them a thousand diverse parts.
Outwardly, Head, Eyes, Nose, Ears, Teeth, Tongue, Feet, Tail, and so forth:
and inwardly the Heart, the Lungs, the Stomach, the Liver, the Bowelles, the
Kidneys, the Bones, the Sinews, the Heartstrings, the Ueynes, and such other
things. The beginning of this whole Mass and of all those so manifold parts,
is next cosen unto nothing; a very small drop, of one shape, but only one.
Yet notwithstanding, it has the beginning of life and sense united in it
self; which multiplyeth it self into many abilities, senses, actions, and
mouings: and that not inwardly only, but also outwardly in infinite numbers of
the same kind, which in process of time do fill whole Countries. So certain
is this principle in nature, that all multitudes come from an unity or One,
and that there cannot be any multitude, unless the same have first bin no
multitude. But we take no heed of it, because we see it every day: and yet
is it given us to look upon, to the end we should have regard of it. Howbeit,
forasmuch as man is both the image of God, and the Counterpane of the world
together: we cannot see this unity so apparently in any thing, as in man
himself. Man leads us to one God.
If we look upon his body, all the parts thereof are made one for another,
and minister one to another with mutual duties: and without so doing, he
could not continue nor live. The Eyes guide the Feet; the Feet bear the
Eyes; by one part the things that are needful are taken in; and by another the
things that are superfluous are voyded out: and all and every of them refer
their doings to the benefit of the whole body. This union of diverse
operations tending al to one point, shows that the framing of man was made by
one only workmanship. And as the workmanship is but one, so must the
workemaister also needs be but one. For, like as by a building that is made
by pieces and of diverse proportions, we deem the diversity of the
maysterbuilders; so by the uniformity thereof we judge it to be the devise and
wo^kmanship of one alone. The Ueynes are spread forth throughout the whole
body, howbeit from one welhead, that is to say from the Liver: so be the
Sinews, howbeit from the Brain; So likewise are the Heartstrings, howbeit
from the Heart. By these three sorts of Cunditpypes, are life, sense, and
breath shead forth even to the least and uttermost parts, and the branches
thereof are without number, but the original of all is only one. But yet does
this shine forth more clearly in the Soul of man. It has life, sense, and
moving. All these are dealt forth, maynteyned, and guyded by the only one
Soul. Here ye see already one unity. The Soul which has his powers so
diverse and so far spread, is whole thorowout all the whole body, and whole in
every part thereof, as much in the least as in the greatest, and as much in the
least as in the whole. There ye see yet a streighter unity. Again, the Soul
is yet more straightly shut up into Mind, which is the Soul of the Soul, as
the Apple of the Eye is the Eye of the Eye; and yet notwithstanding, this Mind
(as entierly one as it is,) conceiueth and does infinite things, enters into
a thousand places without removing, passes over the Seas, mounteth up to the
Heavens, and reaches down to the deapth of the Earth. Lo here an unity most
straight in it self, and yet extended to the utmost parts of the world.

Hermes says that the Sunnebeames of God are his Actions, the Sunnebeames of
the World are the Natures of things, and the Sunnebeames of Man are Arts and
Sciences. Therefore let us see whether the Arts and Sciences will guide us to
the same unity, whereunto those Actions and the natures of things have led us
already, beginning at the lower, and mounting up to the higher. Grammar
teaches us to bring the diverse parts of speech into oue congruetie, and the
end thereof is to speak; and the end of speaking is society. Rhetorike
teaches to draw men's minds to one selfsame opinion. Logike teaches to sift
out ye truth from a number of falshods, which treuth can be but one. Their
ends then are congruetie, society, unity of mind and truth, which are but
sundry sorts of unity. Arithmetic proceeds from unity, Geometry from a
prick; and Music from agreement of sounds; and the end of them is to reduce
things to one common reason, to one proportion, and to one harmony, all which
are kinds of unity, and their branches are branches of the same. For
Perspecttiue draws all his lines to one point: Masourie and Carpentrie tend
to uniformity. The handicraft indeuereth to bring many powers and many mouings
under one, to ouerrule them all: All which again are but sundry sorts of
unity. Physic tends to the preservation or restitution of health; and
health is nothing else but a welproportioned union of diverse humors together.
The skill of Law tends to Right, and there is but one Right, though there be
infinite wrongs. Then serves it but to mainteyne, restore, and bring men back
ageine unto unity. Let us proceed further; Moral Philosophy subdeweth many
diverse passions and affections unto one reason, in one man. How should
government brings many men to the obeying of one householder:
Ciuillgouernment reduces many households into one Commonweal, which is
nothing but an unity of many people, whether it be under one Law or under one
magistrate; insomuch that eue^ the most popular Comonweales have (in their
extremities) taken a Dictator, and in their ordinary course of government a
Consul, the one after the other. Now then all that ever man conceiueth,
inuenteth and disposes, does lead us always to an unity. Where unity is
lost, there things go to wrecke, Arts are confounded, and Commonweales are
dissolved. Then like as in vnvnited diversity we find waste and subversion;
so must we look in unity for the increase and preservation of all things. Now
if man, and all that is within man and without him do lead us to one alone:
shall he suffer himself to raunge out unto many? And if all the Sonnebeames of
man, I mean his Arts and Sciences, tend too one unity: shall only divinity
turn us aside to a plurality of Gods? Nay rather, by so many unities, she
will make us stye up to the true and perfect unity, and that unity is the
only one God.

But let us see now how all things being so diverse in the whole world, are
referred one to another. The Water moysteneth the Earth, The linking in of
things together.
the Air makes it fat with his showers, the Sun inlighteneth it and
heateth it according to his seasons. The Earth nourishes the Plants, the
Plants ^eede the Beasts, and the Beasts serve man. Again, nothing is seen
here to be made for itself. The Sun shines and heateth; but not for it
self: the Earth hears and yet has no benefit thereby: the Winds blow, and
yet they sail not: but all these things redound to the glory of the maker, to
the accomplishment of the whole, and to the benefit of man. To be short, the
noblest creatures have need of the bacest, and the bacest are served by the
noblest; and all are so linked together from the highest to the lowest, that
the ring thereof cannot be broken without confusion. The Sun cannot be
Eclipsed, the Plants withered, or the Rain want; but all things feel the
hurt thereof. Now then, can we imagine that this work which consists of so
many and so diverse pieces, tending all to one end, so cuppled one to another,
making one body, and full of so apparent consents of affections; proceeds from
elsewhere than from the power of one alone? When in a feeld we see many
Battles, diverse Standerds, sundry Liueries, and yet all turning head with one
swaye; we conceive that there is one General of the field, who commands
them all. Also when in a City or a Realm we see an equality of good
behauior in an vnequality of degrees of people, infinite trades which serve one
another, the smaller reuerensing the greater, the greater serving to the
benefit of the smaller, both of them made equal in Justice, and all tending
in this diversity to the common service of their Country: we doubt not but
there is one Law, and a Magistrate which by that Law holds the said
diversity in union. And if any man tell of many Magistrates; we will by and by
inquire for the sovereign. Yet notwithstanding, all this is but an order set
among diverse men, who ought even naturally to be united, by the community of
their kind. But when things as well light as heavy, whot as cold, moist as dry,
living as vnliuing, endewed with sense as senseless, and each of infinite
sorts, do so close in one composition, as one of them cannot forbear
another; nay rather to our seeming, the worthiest do service to the bacest,
the greatest to the smallest, the strongest to the weakest, and all of them
together are disposed to the accomplishment of the world, and to the
contentment of man who alonly is able to consider it: ought we not forthwith to
perceive, that the whole world and all things contained therein, do by their
tending unto us, teach us to tend unto one alone? And seeing that so many
things tend unto man; shall man scatter his doings unto diverse ends? Or shall
he be so wretched as to serve many masters? Nay further, to knit up this
point withal, seeing that all things the nobler they be, the more they do
close into one unity, (as for example, we see that the things which have but
mere being are of infinite kynds, the things that have life are of infinite
sorts, the things that have sense are of many sorts, howbeit not of so many;
and the things that have reason are many, only in particulars): does it not
follow also that the Godhead from whence they have their reason (as nobler
tha^ they) is also much more one than they, that is to say, only one as well in
particularitie and number, as also in kind?

Howbeit, notwithstanding all these considerations, The obiectio^s of such as
mainteyne mo Gods tha^ one.
forasmuch as there is diversity, yea and contraritie in worldly things; some
have gathered upon this diversity, that there be diverse Gods, acknowledging
nevertheless one Almighty above them all. And othersome, in respect of the
contrariety, have set down but two Gods only. Julian the Apostata, in
Cyrillus.
The first say, If only one God had made all things, there should have been no
difference in things: but there is difference; and therefore it must needs be
that there are many Gods. Surely had these men well considered the things before
alleged by me; they should have seen that nature is wholly and altogether
against this Consequence. There is great diversity in one Plant, in one Wight,
in one Man: and yet notwithstanding the ground thereof is uniform. Yea and it
is so true that only unity is fruitful, that we see how the diversity it
self and that which comes thereof, is utterly barrein, both in Wights, (as
in Mules) and in Plants, as in the Stergon, Stergon is an herb which grows
of an Onyon stuffed with Linseede or seed of Flax.
and also in all other like things. If they consider the Sun, he makes
Plants to grow all at one time, diverse one from another, and as diverse in
themselves. He makes some of them too shootefoorth, some to rypen, and some
to wither. At one instant he both works drought in the Earth, and draws up
Clouds out of it to moysten it: he gives Summer, Daylight, and fair weather
to some, and Winter, night, and foul wether unto othersome: He makes some
folks white, some black, some read, and some Tawny; and yet is he but one
selfsame Sun, and one selfsame Creature, which at one selfsame instant, by
one selfsame course, and with one selfsame quality of heat, does all the
said things, not only diverse, but also contrary. And he that should say that
it is any other than one selfsame Sun that makes the Ethyopian black, and
the Scotte yellowi^h, were not worthy to be answered. Now if a Creature does by
heat (which is but a quality) breed so diverse effects; what shall we say of
the Creator, I mean the infinite Being of GOD, who imparteth himself to all
things?

Again, if man consider himself, he feels, he sees, he speaks, he
understands a thousand diverse things, without any alteration in himself. Nay
which more is, he conceiueth, he inuenteth, and he performs so diverse works,
that Nations do wonder one at another. One man portrayeth out the whole world
in a little piece of Paper, peinting out all the Images of the Heavens, and all
the Climates of the Earth. Some one other counterfeiteth all living wights,
which Creep, which Go, which Fly, which Swim. And all this comes but of
one mind which conceiueth and breeds all these forms, because it has no
form of it own; for had it any of it own, it could not breed them, because
it own would occupy it to the full. What have we then to think of him, whose
willings are powers, and whose thoughts are deeds? Who is an infinite mind; in
comparison of the brightness whereof our mynds are but a shadow? If we, who
(to speak properly) are but in outward show, do things in outward show so
diverse: do we doubt that he which is in very truth, cannot do them also in
very truth? Moreover, if the diversity make us to imagine diverse Gods,
howbeit all proceeding of one alone: shall we say that he which in his unity,
bred the rest of the Gods with their so diverse powers, had not the same powers
in his unity? Again, seeing the said diversity was once included within the
said unity; is it to be said that he was feign to hatch up diverse Gods, for
the bringing of that diversity to light? Nay, like as nature does all things
the shortest way: so also God made all things immediately. And if they say it
was his pleasure to make the high things himself, and to leave the low things
to be done by the petty Gods: we must consider that High and Low, Noble and
Unnoble, are but considerations of man. For to make the one or the other, is
all one unto God; who of his infinite goodness and power, has drawn both
twain of them out of nothing, which was no more the one than the other, as we
shall see hereafter.

Let us come to such as have vphilde two beginnings, Against two beginnings.
the one good whom they call Oromases; and the other evil whom they call
Arimanius; Plutark in the life of Osyris and Isis.
which opinion men say proceeded first from Zoroastres, and afterward from the
Persians and Manichies; but we shall find no foundation thereof in nature.
Their meaning is, that the Elements, the Plants, Beasts, Men, yea and
Spirits, were as ye would say parted betwixt these two Gods, so as the one
should be the Creator of the one, and the other of other; the good God, of the
good; and the evil of the evil. If it be so, then is there a Civil war
fully furnished, of forces set in battelray on both sides: so as there
remains nothing but fighting, and yet after so long time we see no such fight
at all. And therefore let us conclude, that this co^trarietie of beginnings is
not. Unto the one, they allotted Light: and unto the other, Darkness: unto the
one, Summer: and unto the other Winter: unto the one, Heat: and unto the
other, Cold. In very deed these are Contraries, but yet is one selfsame Sun
the doer of them all, after as he goes further from us or comes nearer to
us. And his going from us is not to forgo his light, but to shine therewith
the neerlyer unto others; nor to cool himself, but to heat other folks.
Then if these contraries come of one selfsame one, that is to wit of the Sun:
Much more likely is it in reason, that the Sun himself should not come of
two. Again, why should the one of these contraries be good, and the other bad?
Whosoever shall have tried the extremity both of the Heat and of the Cold,
shall not be able to discern which is the worser. Likewise he that shall have
observed the benefit that comes of either of them in their seasons, shall
not be able to discern which of them to take for the better. The Heat
ripeneth fruits; but it also seareth and parcheth them. The Cold starueth
them; but it also makes them to bud. Take away either of them both, and you
take away all fruits. And like as both of them are needful to one selfsame
thing, that is to wit, to the bringing forth of fruits: so be they also
procured by ye course of one selfsame might, which is the Sun. The same Sun
is the lightner of our eyes to our behoof; and he is also the blinder of them
if we gaze upon him at the heyhth of the day. Yet notwithstanding, both in the
Sun and in our eyes is the selffame light which they call good, and which by
his reckoning should be to them both good and bad: and if it be so, on which
side shall they turn themselves?

They add further: Among Plants there are so many poisons, and among living
wights, so many noisome Beasts: that how should a good God be author of them?
Silly man that thou art! The Poisons thou occupyest in Tryacles for thy
health, even against the Plague. And of those Beasts thou can skill to use
the skins to clothe thee against the Cold. And if thou have an evil opinion
of some of them, because thou can not serve thy turn with them; as much
would thou have said sometime of ye Horse, which as now does thee service so
many ways: and as much might the Satyr have said of Fire when it burned him,
notwithstanding that as now it be so many ways necessary. Now then they might
benefit thee, if thou wistest how to use them: and whereas they anoy thee, it
is not of their nature, but through thine own weakness or rather ignorance.
But if they be good so far forth as thou have skill of them: shall they not
be good to him which knows them thoroughly? In the Closet of a Surgion who is
but a man as thou art, thou shall find a thousand tools; and thou will
perchance esteem him so wise, that thou will not think there is any one of
them, which serves not to some purpose. Yea, and if any of them do cut thee
or race thee; thou will not blame the tool nor the master thereof, but thy
self which tookest it by the blade, whereas thou should have taken it by
the handle. And as little can thou say, that the tool which did cut thee, as
that the tool wherewith thou did cut what thou would, had another
master or maker. Now then, will thou bring less regard with thee in this
great shop of the Creator? It is his will that some things shall serve other
living wights which serve thee, and othersome shall serve thee alone. Yea, and
he will have even the harms which thou receiuest by them, to serve thee to
some purpose: and he serves his own turn better by thee, then thou can
serve thine own. And if thou which art nothing, have yet so much wit as to
draw some peculiar good to thy self, out of another bodies works, yea even
out of such as thou accountest evil; as out of Poison, health; from the Wolf,
his skin to cover thee; from the night, rest; and so forth: Shall not the
almighty and infinity Spirit much better dispose them for the benefit of all
men, yea and of all the whole world which comprehends so many things together?

They say yet again; But why should a good God take pleasure in so many
needless things? For to what purpose serves the Fly, and such other things?
Tell me, would thou like well that thine own Children should speak such
reproach of thy works? Nay rather wherein does the Fly anoye thee? And
wherefore served the Fly that Zeuxis painted in his Table? It served to make
his greatest disdeyners, (even those which would have had that rather then all
the rest wyped out of the Table) to confess his art and excellent skill. And
this serves to convict thee of blockishnes, thee (I say) which had rather
to find fault with God and with the Fly, then to wonder at the excellency of
him, who has enclosed so lively a life, so quick a moving, and so great an
excellency in so little a thing. So then, it is not for us to chase her out of
the table; but rather to confess our own ignorance, or else to chase it away.
Hereby therefore we perceive, that of all the things which they can allege,
there is none which is not good and behofefull in it self; and that the
euilnesse thereof comes only through us, and therefore that the thing has
but only one Beginner thereof, who is good.

But behold, they urge the matter yet more strongly. Howsoever the case stand
(say they) it cannot be denied but there is euilnesse in things, seeing that
they corrupt themselves, and the sin that is in our selves is utterly evil:
and since it is so, from whence may that be? For if God be good, he cannot be
the author of evil; and therefore there must needs be another author
thereof. This question shall be handled more lightsomely when I come to treat
of Man's fall, which is the bringer in of the two euilles, namely both of pain
and fault; but yet may we assoyle it if we take heed. We say that making and
creating are referred to natures or substances, and that all natures and
substances are good; and therefore that God who is good, is the author and
Creator of them. On the contrary part, we say that evil is neither a nature
nor a substance, but an income or accident which is fallen into natures and
substances; It is (say I) a bereuing or diminishing of the good qualities which
things ought naturally to have. This evil has not any being in it self;
neither can have any being but in the thing that is good. It is not an effect,
but a default; nor a production, but a corruption. And therefore to speak
properly, we must not seek whence comes the doing of evil, but whence
comes the undoing of good. As for example, Wine is of Gods creating, and it
is good. Now this good substance falling to decay, that is to say, to abate or
diminish of his virtue, becomes Uineger. Whereupon no man asks who made the
substance that is become sharp, for it is the selfsame that it was before; but
they ask whence comes the sharpnes or eagerness, that is to say, the
alteration that is befalne to the substance. If thou say that it comes of the
foresaid evil Beginner the author of all evil, as the good Beginner is the
author of all goodness: forasmuch as evil is nothing else but a default, want
or failing of good; it is the souereine or chief default or failing, as the
good is the souereine or chief being. And if it be the chief default, then is
it not any more. For the default or failing of a thing, is a tending of the
thing to notbeing any more the same that it was: and the failing of all, is a
tending to the utter vnbeing or notbeing of the whole.

Moreover, the said evil Beginner, which works not but in the substance that
is made or created by another, could do nothing if the good Beginner wrought
not first; and so should he have the Commencement of his power depending upon
another than himself, which is a thing repugnant to a Godhead. And if you ask
what is then the cause thereof: Nothing being ^ negative, canseth nothing which
is the privative.
I tell you it is the very nothing it self; that is to wit, that God
almighty, to show us that he made all of nothing, has left a certain
inclination in his Creatures, whereby they tend naturally to nothing, that is
to say, to change and corruption, unless they be vphild by his power, who
having all in himself, abides alonly unchangeable and free from all
passions. As in respect then that things be, they be of God; but as in respect
that they corrupt and tend to notbeing that which they were before; that comes
of the said notbeing, whereof they were created. And so they be good, as in
respect of their bare being; and evil as in respect that they forgo their
formal being, that is to say, their goodness: Good on the behalf of the
[souereine] Good, the father of all substances; Evil as on the behalf of the
Nothing: And soothly neither by nature nor by justice ought they to be made
equal with the unchangeable Being of their Creator. And this is to be seen
alike in all things. An Apple rotteth, and a man dies. The Apple and the man,
that is to say, the natures of them are Gods Creatures. As for the rottenness
and the sickness, they be but abatements and defaults of the good nature that
was in either of them from the good Creator. Man again becomes a Sinner, and
hereunto he needs no new creation. It is a vanishing away of the good
nature, which loses her taste. And therefore S. Austine says, that the Latins
term an evil man Nequam, and an euillnesse Nequitiam, that is to say,
Naughty and Naughtiness. Now, like as of rightnought there needs no
beginner; so also is there none to be sought of naughtiness or evil. And by
yt means there remains unto us but only one God the beginner and author of
all things, as we have defined him already before. Plato, Plotin, Plato, in
his Timaeus. Plotin, in Enn. 1. lib. 8.
and other great Philosophers of all Sexts, are of opinion that Evil is not a
thing of itself, nor can be imagined but in the absence of all goodness, as a
deprivation of the good which ought to be naturally in every thing: Trisinegist
in Asclepio. Simplicius upon Epictetus.
That evil is a kind of notbeing, and has no abiding but in the good, whereof
it is a default or diminishing. That the cause thereof is in the very matter
whereof God created things, which matter they termed the very vnbeing, that is
to say, in very trothe no being atall, whereof the Creatures reteyne still a
certain inclination, whereby they may fall away from their goodness: And that
in the very Soul of man, the evil that is there is a kind of darkness, for
want of looking up to ye light of the souereyne mind which should inlighten
it; and through suffering it self too be carried too much away to the
material things which are nothing. But now that we have done with nature, it
is good time to see what the wysest men will teach us concerning the only one
God.

The third Chapter.
That the Wisdom of the world has acknowledged one only God.
SOme man will say unto me, if in the world, if in the things contained in
the world, if in man himself, it be so lively painted out that there is but
only one God; whereof then comes the multitude of Gods among men, yea and
among those whom the world counted wysest? I will not prove here that all
those Gods were either dead men or Devils: for that shall be handled more
materially in another place. But it shall suffice for this present, to show
the universality of consent in this point, and that even those which through
custom did celebrate the plurality of Gods, did yet notwithstanding believe
that there is but only one true God: Which thing I will first maynteyne by the
wise men which lived from age to age. Mercurius Trismegistus, who (if the
books which are fathered upon him be his in deed, as in truth they be
very ancient) is the founder of them all, teaches euerywhere, That there is
but one GOD: That one is the root of all things, and that without that one,
nothing has been of all things that are: That the same one is called the only
good and the goodness it self, which has universal power of creating all
things: That it is impossible that there should be many makers: That in Heaven
he has planted immortality, in earth, interchaunge, and universally, life and
moving: That unto him alone belongs the name of Father and of Good; and that
without blasphemy those titles cannot be attributed either to Angels, to
Feends, or to men, or to any of al those whom men do call Gods as in respect of
honor and not of nature. He calls him father of the world, the Creator, the
Beginning, the Glory, the Nature, the End, the Necessity, the Renewer of all
things, the worker of all powers, and the power of all works, the only holy,
the only unbegotten, the only everlasting, the Lord of euerlastingnesse, and
the euerlastingnesse it self; the only one, and by whom there is but only
one world; alone, and himself alonly all; namelesse, and more excellent than
al names. Unto him alone will he have us to offer up our prayers, our Praises,
and our Sacrifices, and never to call upon any other than him.

I would feign know whether it be possible for us to say any thing, either
more, or better for the setting forth of the said unity? In deed in some
places he speaks of Gods in the plural number, as when he calls the world
a God, and the Heaven with the Planets which rule the Heaven, Gods: but that is
after the same manner which he sometimes calls man himself a God,
notwithstanding that noman can doubt of his birth and death, which are things
clean contrary to the true Godhead. Mercurins Trismegistus, in his Poemander.
Chap. 3. 8. 10. 11. 12. And in his Asclepius. Chap. 2. 6. 8. 9.
The Stars (says he, speaking of the Creation) were nombred according to the
Gods that dwell in them. And in an other place he says, There are two sorts of
Gods, the one wandering, and the other fixed. But in the times going before, he
had said that God is the beginner of them, That he made them, That he is the
Father and only good, unto whom nothing is to be compared, either of the
things beneath, or the things above. Also he says further, That the world is a
second God, and a sensible God: and that Man is a third God, by reason of the
immortal Soul which is in him: but yet he calls them Children, Impes and
Creatures of the only one God, and most commonly Shadows and Images of him;
neither is it his meaning to attribute so much unto them, as only one spark of
goodness, or power to make the least thing that is. To be short, he sets
down some Gods as principal, some as mean, and other some as
vndergouernours: But the conclusion of his matter is, that the souereine
dominion belongs to God the souereine Lord of them all, upon whom alonly they
depend, and from whom they proceed, who alonly is called Father and Lord, and
whatsoever holyer name can be given, who made both men and Gods, yea and men
(says he) much better and more excellent then all the Gods. And as at the
beginning of his work he had prayed unto him alone; so thanketh and praises
he him alone in the end: which thing I thought good to set out at length,
because many Philosophers have drawn their skill and knowledge out of his
fountain.

Pythagoras speaks of God in these terms: Alleged by Cicero, Plutarke,
Clemens of Alexandria, and Cyrillus.
God is but one; not as some think, without government of the world, but all
in all. He is the orderer of all Ages, the light of all powers, the Original
of al things, the Cresset of Heaven, the Father, Mind, Quickener, and Mouer of
all. Moreover, he calls him The infinite power from whence al other powers
flow; which cannot be verified but of him alone. Philolaus Philo the Jew: and
Iamblichus of the Sect of Pythagoras.
a disciple of his says, That there is but only one God, the Prince and
Guyder of all things, who is always singular, immovable, like himself, and
unlike all other things. Also Architas says, that he esteems no man wife,
but him which reduces all things unto one selfsame Original, that is to wit,
unto God, who is the beginning, end, and middle of all things. And Hierocles
Hierocles against the Atheists.
one of the same Sect, says, that the same is he whom they call by the name of
Zena and Dia, the Father and maker of all things, because all things have their
life and being of him. Uerely (by the report of Eudorus as he is alleged by
Simplicius Simplicius in his Phis.
) they called him the founder of matter. And had we the hooks of Numenius,
Numenius concerning the Good.
we perceive well by the things which we read and here there, that we should
find them manifest and plain. Now, all these had this doctrine both from
Nature and from the School of Pherecydes the Syrian the Master of Pythagoras,
unto whom Aristotle Arist. 14. Metaph. Cap. 4.
attributes it in his Metaphisicks. Empedocles the successor of Pythagoras,
celebrated none other but this only one, as appears by these Uerses of his.
Aristo le alleges them in his first Philosophy and in his book of the World.


All things that are, or ever were, or shall hereafter be,
Both man and woman, Beast and Bird, Fish, Worm, Herb, Grass, and Tree,
And every other thing, yea even the ancient Gods each one
Whom we so highly honor here, come all of one alone.
Parmenides and Melissus taught the same; Aristo. 1. Phis: cap. 10. lib. 3.
Simply. lib. 1. Phis.
and so did their Schoolemaister Xenophanes the Colophonian, as we be credibly
informed by the Uerses of Parmenides rehearsed by Simplicius; in the which
Uerses he calls him the Unbegotten, the whole, the only one, not which has
bin or shall be, but which everlastingly is all together and all of himself. To
be short, of the like opinion were Thales, Anaxagoras, Timeus of Locres, Acmon,
Euclide, Archoeuetus, and others of the auncientest Philosopher. And Aristotle
witnesses in many places, that it was the common Doctrine of the men of old
time; The which Zeno hild so straightly, that to deny the Unity of God, and to
deny the Godhead it self, he thought to be all one. And the cause of so
saying among the ancient Philosophers, was not their only reading thereof in
the writings of some that went before them, (as we might do now); but also
their reading thereof both in the World and in themselves. But let us come to
the chief Sects of the Philosophers.

Socrates the Schoolemaister of Plato, Academicks.
confessed only one God, and (as Aulus Gellius and Apuleius report) was
condemned to drink Poison, for teaching that the Gods which were worshipped in
his time were but vanity: And for that in scorn of them he was wont to swear
by an Oak, by a Goat, and by a Dog; as who would say there was no more
Godhead in the one than in the other. Yet notwithstanding, he was the man whom
Apollo by his Oracle deemed to be the wisest of all Greece; thereby confessing
that he himself was no God. His Disciple Plato delivers a rule in few
words, Plato in his 13. Epistle to King Denis.
whereby to discern his meaning. When I write in good earnest (says he) you
shall know it hereby, that I begin my letters with only one God: and when I
write otherwise, I begin them with many Gods. Uerely his ordinary manner of
speeches were not, If it please the Gods, with the help of the Gods, and such
like: but if it please God, by the help and guyding of God, God knows it,
Such a man is the cause thereof next unto God, and such other like. Whereas he
affirms al other things not to be in very deed: He calls God, the Father
of the whole World, the Beer, that is to say, he who only is or has being;
the selfbred, who also made ye Heaven, the Earth, the Sun, the Moon, the
times and seasons, and all other things both heavenly and earthly, high and
low, and whatsoever else is. In other places he calls him the Beginning, the
Middle, and the End; by whom, for whom, and about whom all things are; Plato in
Timoeus, in his 10. book of his Commonweal, and in his Epistle to Dion,
Hermias, and Coricus. (...).
the Gouerner of all that ever is and shall be; the very Goodness, and the
Pattern of all goodness; the King of all wighte indewed with reason and mind;
of whom all things have their Being, and which is of more excellency then the
word Being. And the names and titles which he gives unto the true God, are
commonly given him under the name of Jupiter, and he thinks that they be not
to be communicated unto any other. In deed sometimes he suffers himself to
be carried away to the common manner of speaking, perhaps for fear of the like
end that his Schoolemaister had, and he does it expressly in his book of
Laws, Plato in his book of Laws, and in his book intyled Epinomis.
which was to be published to the people. For there and in diverse other
places, he calls the heavenly We call them Angels.
Spirits by the name of Gods: but yet he makes God speaking to them as to his
Creatures; naming them Gods begotten and made by him; and him on the contrary
part the Father and God of Gods. Also he honoreth Heaven with the same name,
because of the substantialnes thereof: and likewise the Stars, by reason of
the perpetuity of their course: And it may be yt in that respect the Greeks
called them Of the word Thein, which signifies to Run.
(...), Gods. Howheit, he adds that they be visible Gods, and that the
Heaven was made by [the only one inuisible] God, That it has none other
immortality, than such as he has given unto it, and that he has placed the
Stars in the Sky for the measuring of times, seasons and hours, appoynting
unto every of them his Circuit. Plato in his Timoeus and Laertius in Platoes
life.
As touching me^, he shows well enough what he believed of them, by his
declaring of their Genealogy: that is to say, their mortality; to wit, that
he acknowledged in the^ some shadow of the Godhead, but that the very essence
or substance thereof was in the only true God.

All the Platomists have followed the said doctrine, bringing it so much the
more to light, as they themselves have drawn nearer to our time. Damascius
says; Damascius. (...).
The one brings forth all things; The one ought to be honored by silence:
The one (like the Sun) is seen dimly a far of, and the nearer the more
dimly, and hard at hand takes away the sight of all things. Iamblichus
surnamed the Divine, Iamblichus in his book of the Sect of Pythagoras.
acknowledged every where a divine cause, which is the beginning, end, and
middle of all things: That there is one God the master of all, at whose hand
welfare is to be sought: That the end of all Contemplation is to ame at one,
and to withdraw from multitude unto unity: And that the same one or unity is
God, the Ground and of all truth, happiness, and substance, yea and of all
other Grounds themselves. He says in deed, (and his books are so full of it)
That there are both Gods and Fee^des; and of them he makes diverse degrees,
as, good and bad, Iamblichus in his book of Mysteries. Chap 1. 3. 5. 12. 16.
17. 39.
high and low, and so forth. But yet for all that, he always acknowledges
one chief, whom he calls the only one God, which has vin before all that
is, and is the Fountain and Root of all that first understands or is first
understood, that is to say of all forms, shapes or Patterns [conceiued or
conceiuable in mind or imagination,] Suffizing to himself and Father of
himself; the begetter of the Souls of the other Gods, according to the
Patterns conceived in his own mind; who is not only the chief Being, but
also the superessentiall Being, [that is to say, a Being which far
surmounteth, (...).
passes, and excels all Beeings:] nor simply Good, but the very Good and
Goodness it self: Insomuch that he calls all the other Gods Severed
essences, (...).
Goodnesses derived, and Minds sparkling forth from the Godhead of the
Supersubstantial God, [that is to say, of the God whose substance surpasses
and excels all manner of substances:] which Gods understand not any thing but
by beholding the said One, nor are any better than dealers forth of certain
gifts which they have from him. And Theodore the Platomist adds, that all of
them pray carnestly ot the first, and draw from him which is of himself; and
that otherwise they should go to naught.

Proclus, Proclusin Platos Divinity.
(after the manner of the Platomists, which was for the most part to be very
Superstitious) turns himself ofttymes aside to many Gods: but yet his
resolution is this in express words. Who is he (says he) that is King of all,
the only God separated from all, and the producer of all things out of
himself, which turns all ends unto himself, and is the end of ends, the
first cause of operatio^s, (...).
the author of all that ever is good and beautiful, the inlightener of all
things with his light? If thou believe Plato, he can neither be uttered nor
understood. And anon after, Then is it this first simplicity which is the
King; (...).
the Souereintie and Superexcellencie of all things, incomprehensible, not to
be matched with any other thing, uniform, going beyond al causes, the Creator
of the substance of the Gods which has some form of goodness. All things go
after him and stick unto him: for he produces and perfecteth al things that
are subject to understanding, like as the Sun does to al things that are
subject to sense. To be short, it is the unutterable cause which Plato teaches
us under two names in his Commonweal, calling it the very Goodness it self,
and the fountain of truth, which unites the understanding to the things that
are understood. (...)
And in his Parmenides, The One or Unity whereupon all the divine Unities are
grounded, and which is the Original of all that is, and of all that as yet is
not. In his book of the Soul and of the Spirit, Proclus in his book of the
Soul and the Spirit cap. 32. 42. 53.
he teaches us the way to atteyne from many multitudes to this
supersubstantiall Unity, which he calls the Nature grounded in eteruitie,
the life that lives and quickens, the waking understanding, the welspring of
all welfare, the infinite both in continewance and in power, and yet
notwithstanding without quantity, and so forth. Nevertheless, he attributes
much to Angels and Feendes according to Art Magic, which the Platomists did
greatly affect in those days: howbeit in such sort, as he continually
follows this rule of his so often repeated in his books, That all things are
from the true God who is hidden; Many Gods (says Proclus) is Godlesnesse.
and that the second degree of Gods, that is to say the Angels and Feendes,
are from the very selfsame: and (to be short) that to believe any mo Gods than
one, and to believe none at all, are both one thing.

Simplicius says: Simplicins yp^ the Epictetus of Arrian.
Whatsoever is beautiful, comes of the first and chief beauty: All truth
comes of Gods truth: And all beginnings must needs be reduced to one
beginning; which must not be a particular beginning as the rest are, but a
beginning surpassing al other beginnings, and mounting far above them, and
gathering them all into himself, yea, and giving the dignity of beginning to
all beginnings, accordingly as is convenient for every of their natures. Also,
The Good (says he) is the Welspring and Original of al things. (...)
It produces all things of it self, both the first, the middlemost, and the
last. The one Goodness, brings forth many Goodnesses; The one Unity, many
Unities; The one Beginning, many Beginnings. Now, as for Unity, Beginning,
Good, and God; they be all but one thing. For God is the first cause of all,
and all particular Beginnings or Grounds, are fast settled and grounded in him.
He is the Cause of Causes, the God of Gods, and the Goodness of Goodnesses.

Porphyrius Porphyrius in his z. book of Abstinence, and in his book of
Occasions. chap. 21.
acknowledged the one GOD, who alone is every where, and yet in no one place;
who fills al places, and yet is contained in no place; by whom all things
are, both which are and which are not. This God does he call the Father, which
reigns in all: and he teaches us to sacrifize our Souls unto him in
silence, and with chaste thoughts. On the other side, he acknowledges the other
Gods as his Creatures and Servants, some visible, and some unvisible: unto whom
he allows a material service, far differing from the service of the true
God.

As touching Plotin Porphyrius in the life of Plotin.
his Schoolemaister, surnamed the Divine, whom the Oracle of Apollo (as is
reported by Porphyrius himself) didregister in the number of the wise men of
this world, and in the number of the Gods in the other world: Plotin in his
first Enneade lib. 8. Chap. 2. Enneade 6. lib. 4. cap 1 2. 3. 4. and in the
whole 6. book, and in the 3. Enne: lib. 8.
He that would allege the things which he has spoken divinely concerning the
unity of the one God, should be feign to set down his whole treatises
undiminished. The Sum is, That there is one Beginner of all things, who has
all thiugs and is all things and is all things, whose having of the^ is as
though he had them not, because his possessing of them is not as of things that
were another man's; and his being them is as though he were them not, because he
is neither all things, nor any thing among things, but the power of all things.
That this Beginner dwells in himself, is sufficient of himself, and of
himself brings forth all manner of Essences, Souls, and siues, as being
more than Essence, and all life. That by his Unity he produces multitude,
which could be no multitude, unless he abode One. As touching the vndergods,
he says that they neither be nor can be happy of themselves, but only by
the same mean that men can become happy; namely, by beholding the light of
understanding, which is GOD, through their parttaking whereof they abide in
blessedness. Yea, he affirms that the Soul of the whole world surmized by
the Platomists, is not happy but by that means: namely, by beholding the
light which created it, like as the Moon shines not, but by the ouershining
of the Sun upon her. That was the very opinion of the Platonists as well old
as new concerning the only one God, Augustine: de Ciuitate Dei. lib. 10. cap.
2.
notwithstanding that of all Philosophers they were most given to the serving
and seeking out of the bodilesse Spirits, whom we call Angels and Devils, and
whom they called Gods and Fee^ds.

Now let us come to the Peripatetickes, The Peripateecks.
and begin at Aristotle Platoes Disciple, who notwithstanding was vnreligious
in many places, in not yielding unto God his due glory, after the manner of
these supersticious folk, who are ouerliberal in bestowing it upon others: and
yet even in him shall we find this selfsame truth. Aristotle leads us by
many mouings, Aristotle in his Metaphisiks, and in the first book of his
Natural Philosophy.
unto oue first mouer, whom he declares to be infinite, without beginning and
without end. From thence a man may step further: for that which is infinite
can be but one, because (as I have said before) the infiniteness of one
restreyneth the power of all others. Afterward he defines him to be Living,
Inunortall, and Everlasting. And again. [he names him] he only possessor of
wisdom, the Beginner of all Causes, and such like: None of all which things
can be attributed to any mo than only one. Aristotle in his book of Heaven.
Yet notwithstanding, he sets certain Godheads in the Heaven, in the
Stars, and in the Sun and Moon; unto which Godheads he alsotteth the
gouermne^t of those things, and terms them heavenly Mynds, First substances,
unchangeable and vnpassible, which (in his opinion) cannot wexe old, because
they be above the first Mouable, and consequently above time. Yea, and Common
custom, with the force of Love carried him so far, as to set up Images unto
Juno and Jupiter, under the name of Saviors, for the life of Nicanor, and to
do Sacrifize to a woman whom he loved, as the Athenians did unto Ceres. But
yet in his Abridgement of Philosophy, which he dedicated in his old age unto
Alexander, his final doctrine is this. Aristotle in his book of the world,
which Iustine the Martyr affirms to have bin named his Abridgemeut of
Philosophy. (...).
This world (says he) wherein all things are orderly disposed, is mainteyned
by God; and the highest thing that is in it, is that it is Gods dwelling place.
No nature is sufficient of it self to endure, if it be not assisted by his
tuition. He is the Father of Gods and Men, the breeder and Mainteyner of all
the things whereof this world is composed; and yet for all that, he enters not
into them, but his power and providence ouersitting them from above, atteyne
unto all things, move the Heaven the Sun and the Moon, Preserve the things
on earth, and make all and every thing to do according to their nature. He
likeneth him to the great King of Persia, who from out of his privy Chamber
governed his whole Empire by his power and officers; saving (says he) that the
one is God infinite in power, and the other a very bace and feeble wight. He
says moreover, that all the names which are attributed to the Gods, are but
devices to experesse the powers of the only one God the Prince and Father of
all. And therefore it is more behofefull to send the Readers to the reading of
that whole treatise of his throughout, than to set in any more thereof here,
because they shall there see a wonderful eloquence matched with this goodly
divinity.

That which the first and most divine ( says his disciple Theophrastus
Theophrastus in his Metaphisiks. (...).
) will have all things to be exceeding good; and it may be also, that he is
above the reach of all knowledge and vnserachable, Again, There is (says he)
One divine beginner of all things, whereby they have their being and
continuance. But in his book of Sauors he passes further, and says that God
created all things of nothing. Theophrastus in his book of Savors.
But to create of nothing, presupposes an infinite power; and again, that
power presupposes an unity.

Alexander of Aphrodise Alexander of Aphrodise in his book of Providence, and
Cyrill against Julian the Apostata.
in his book of Arouidence written to the Emperor Antonine, attributes
Providence over all things unto one only God, which can do whatsoever he
lists, as appears by all his whole discourse. And he was of such renown
among all the Aristotelians, that they called themselves Alexandrians after his
name. To be short, the most part of the Interpreters and Disiciples of
Aristotle, found it so needful to acknowledge one only Beginner, and so
absurd to maintain any mo than one; that to the intent they might not confess
any such absurdity in their Master, they do by all means possible excuse
whatsoever might in his works be construed to the contrary.

As touching the Stoiks The Stoiks.
of auncientest time, we have no more than is gathered into the writings of
their adversaries; who do all attribute unto them [the maintenance of] the
unity and infiniteness of GOD, according to this which Aristotle reports of
Zeno; namely that there must needs be but one God, for else there should be no
God at all, because it behooves him to be singularly good and also almighty,
which were utterly impossible if there were any mo than one.

Also Simplicius reports of Cleanthes, that in his Iambick verses he prayed
God to voutsafe to guide him by his cause, which guides all things in order,
the which cause he calls destiny and the cause of cause. But the two chief
among them whose doctrine we have in writing, will easily make us to credit all
the residue.

Epictetus Epictetus in Arrianus.
the Stoik (whose words Proclus, Simplicius, and even Lucian himself held for
Oracles;) speaks of only one God. The first thing (says he) that is to be
learned, is, that there is but one God, and that he provides for all things,
and that from him neither deed nor thought can be hidden. He teaches us to
resort unto him in our distresses, to acknowled him for our Master and Father,
to lift up our eyes unto him alone if we will get out of the Quamyre of our
sins, to seek our felicity there, and to call upon him in all things both
great and small. Of all the Gods that were in time past, he speaks not a
word: but surely he says that if we call upon the only one God, he will
inform us of all things by his Angels.

As for Seneca, Seneca every where.
he never speaks otherwise. What does God (says he) to such as behold him?
He causes his works not to be without witness. And again, To serve God
(says he) is to Reign. God exercises us with afflictions to try man's
nature: and he requires no more but that we should pray to him. These
ordinary speeches of his, show that he thought there was but one God. Seneca
in his Book of the happylyfe, and in his Treatise of Comfort.
But he proceeds yet f^rther. From things discovered (says he) we must
proceed to things undiscovered, and seek out him that is auncienter than the
world, of whom the Stars proceed. And in the end he concludes, that the
World and all that is contained therein, is the work of God. Also he casseth
him the Fou^der, Maker, and Creator of the World, and the Spirit which is shed
forth upon all things both great and small. Seneca in his natural Questions,
and in his books of Benefiting.
And in his Questions: It is he (says he) whom the Hetruscanes or Tuscans
mean by the names of Jupiter, Guardian, Governor, and Lord of the whole world.
If thou call him Destiny, thou shall not deceive thyselfe; for all things
depend upon him, and from him comes the causes of all causes. If thou call him
Providence, thou say well; for by his direction does the World hold on his
course without swaruing, and utter forth his Actions. If thou call him Nature,
thou do not amiss: for he it is of whom all things are bred, and by whose
Spirit we live. To be short, will thou call him the World? In very deed he is
the whole which thou see, and he is in all the parts thereof, bearing up both
the whole World and all that is thereof. By this sentence we may also show,
that by the term Nature the Philosophers meant none other than God himself,
accordingly as Seneca says in another place, that God and Nature are both one,
like as Annoeus and Seneca be both one man. And whereas he says that God may
be called the World; Aristotle calls him (...) that is to say, All the whole.
it is all one with that which he says in another place: namely, GOD is
whatsoever thou see, and whatsoever thou see not: That is to say, whereas
thou can not see him in his proper being, thou see him in his works. For
in other places also he defines him to a Mind and Wisdom without body,
which cannot be seen but in understanding. Now, of all the former things by
him repeated in many places, none can be verified of any mo than one. For he
that makes all, governs all, and is all, leaves nothing for any other to
make, govern, or be, otherwise than from himself. But he speaks yet more
expressly, saying; Seneca in his book of sodeine death, and in his
exhortations alleged by Lactantius. lib. 1. cap. 5.
Thou considrest not the authority and majesty of thy Judge, the Governor of
the World, the God of Heaven and of all Gods. All the Godheads which we worship
every man by himself, depend wholly upon him. And again; When he had laid the
foundations of this goodly Mass, although he had spread out his power
throughout the body thereof: yet notwithstanding he made Gods to be officers
of his kingdom, to the end that every thing should have his guide. Now, this
is after the same manner that the holy Scripture speaks of the Angels. So
then, he is not only God the excellentest of all Gods; but also their very
Father, Author, and Maker.

Let us yet further add Cicero and Plutarch, who have of every Sect taken what
they thought good. Both of them speak ordinarily but of one God, the author
and gouerner of all things, unto whom they attribute all things, and in that
ordinary style is their word Nature, which surmounteth the custom of their
time; but yet does their doctrine express much more here. Cicero treating of
this matter in his book intytuled Of the nature of the Gods, acknowledges one
souereine GOD, whom he calls the God of Gods, and that is the difference
which he makes. The Nature of the Gods Cicero in his book of the Nature of
the Gods.
(says he) is neither mighty nor excellent; for it is subject to the
selfsame (beit Nature or Necessity) which rules the Heaven, the Earth, and
the Sea. But there is not any thing so excellent as God, who rules the World,
and is not subject to Nature, but commands Nature it self. And he is full
of the like sentences.

As for Plutarke, Plutarke in his treatise of Isis and Osyris of Oracles that
are ceased: Of calmness of Mind: Against ignorant Princes:
he suffers himself to raunge oueroften into fables; but yet in good earnest
he speaks thus. Let us not woorship the Elements, the Heaven, the Sun, the
Moon, and so forth: for they be but Lookingglasses for us, wherein to
consider the cunning of him that ordained all things; and all the World is but
his Temple. Again: Wherefore does Plato call God, the Father and Maker of all?
He calls him the Father of the begotten Gods, and of men, like as Homere also
does: but he calls him the Creator of the things that have no life nor
Reason. Of Platonicall Questions: Against the Stoiks: Against Epicures: What is
meant by this Greek word (...). ei.
And therefore (says he in another place) he made the World as a Common house
both to Men and Gods. Yea, (says he further) Although there were many more such
Worlds as this is; yet notwithstanding the one only God should govern them
all. Now this true God, whom he calls the great God, the great Workemayster,
the Sea of Beauty, the Ground of all good things, and the true Being, of whom
alone it can be said: Thou art, and not thou have bin or shall be; is he whom
he means by the name of Jupiter, saying: That of the Gods, one is called
Liberal, another Gentle, and a third the Dryuer away of evil; but the great
Jupiter is in Heaven, who has care universally of all things. Thus ye see then
how all the Philosophers of all times, of all Sects, and of all Nations have
agreed in one God: which is the thing that ye learned Varro Varro, as he is
alleged by S. Austin in the City of God. lib. 4. cap. 9. 11 and lib. 7. cap.
54. 9. 23.
noted very well; namely, that although the Teachers of the Heathen named many
Gods and Goddesses: yet notwithstanding they comprehended them all under one,
which was Jupiter, of whom the residue were but powers and functions: And this
Jupiter, is he whom such folk worshipped under another name, as worshipped the
only one God without Images; and he says that so God ought to be worshipped.
And to that purpose alleges he these verses of the right learned Poet
Valerius Soranus. The love almighty is the King of Kings and God of Gods,
One God, and all, the Father both and Moother of the Gods.


But now it is time to come to the ancient Poets, Poets.
which were also Philosophers, and who by their feynings opened the gap to the
plurality of Gods. Among these the first that we meet with is Orpheus, whom
Iustine Justin in his book of Monarchy. Justin to the Gentyles. Athenagoras
in his Treatise concerning the Resurection. The Recantation of Orpheus who is
called the Author of the plurality of Gods.
calls the first Author of them, the first giver of names unto them, and the
first blazer of their Pedegrees. But yet there is a Recantation of his in his
Hymn unto Musaeus, which is called his Testament, that is to say, his last
doctrine, whereunto he would have men to stick. Lift up thine eyes (says he)
to only maker of the World; He is but one, bred of himself: and of that one
are all things. He is all in all, he sees all and is seen of none. He only
gives both welfare and woeful tears and war. He sits in Heaven governing
all things; with his feet he touches the Earth, and with his right hand the
utmost shores of the Sea He makes the Mountains, Rivers and deep Sea to
quake, and so forth. And in another place he calls him the Firstborne, the
Great, the Apparent, who has created an incorruptible house for them that are
immortal. Clemens in his Protreptik to the Gentiles.
Also under the name of Zeus or Jupiter, he says of him as follows.

Look up to that same only King, which did the world create.
Who being only one, selfbred, all other things begat.
And being with them all, unseen of any mortal wight,
Beholds all things; giving Man now wealth and hearts delight,
Now woeful war: For sure there is none other King but he.
I see him not, because the Clouds a covert to him be.
And in the eye of mortal man there is but mortal sight,
Too weak too see the lightfull Jove that rules all with right.
For sitting in the brazen Heaven aloft in Throne of gold,
He makes the earth his footstool, and with either hand does hold
The utmost of the Ocean waves: and at his presens quake
Both Mountains huge, and hideous Seas, and eke the Siygian Lake.
And anon after again. The endless Sky and stately Heavens, and all things
else beside,
Did once within the Thundering Jove close hoorded up abide.
The blessed Gods and Goddesses whose being is for ay,
And all things past or yet to come within Jove's bow^lles lay.
From Jove's wide womb did all things come; Jove is both first and last;
Beginning, Mids, and End is Jove; From Jove are all things past.
Jove laid foundation of the Earth, and of the starry Sky.
Jove reigns King; The selfsame Jove of all things far and ny
The Father and the Author is. One power, one God is he;
Alonly Great, one Lord of all. This royal Mass which we
Behold, and all the things that are contained in the same,
As Fire and Water, Earth and Air, and Titans golden flame
That shines by Day, and droopy Night, and every other thing
Are placed in the goodly House of Jove the heavenly King.
Phocilides Phocylides,
follows him in these words. There is but only one God, mighty, wise and
happy. And again, Honor the only God. Also, All of them are mortal men, God
reigns over their souls. And Theognis (who is of the same time) speaks not
any otherwise. Homere Theognis. Homer.
(whom Pythagoras reports to be punished in Hell for making Fables of the
Gods) cannot make a notabler difference between the true GOD and all the rest
of the Gods whom men worshipped in this time; than when he says, That if
they were all hanged at a Cheyne beneath; he would pull them up spite of their
teeth: and also that he makes them all too quake under him: and that
whenever there is any greater deed talked of, he speaks always but of one
God in the singular number. Also Hesiodus Hesiodus.
who described ye pedegrees of the Gods, shows his heleef sufficiently in
this only one verse written to his brother. Both Gods and Mortal Men, from
one self race descend. That is to say, All the Gods are created by the only
one God.

Likewise Sophocles Sophocles in Cyrillus against Julian the Apostaia.
says thus. Certesse of Gods there is no mo but one,
Who made the Heavens, and eeke the earth so round,
The dreadful Sea which cleaps the same about,
And blustering Winds which rayze the Waves aloft.
But we fond men through folly gone astray,
Even to the hurt and damning of our souls,
Have set up Idols made of Wood and Stone,
Thinking like fools, by means of honoring them
To^ give full well too God his honor due.
Euripides Euripides Clemeus in his
goes yet further, saying. Thou Neptune, and thou Jupiter, and all
You other Gods, so wicked are you all,
That if due Justice unto you were done,
Both Heaven and Temples should be empty soon.
And yet in defacing the false Gods, he ceasseth not to commend the only
true God in many places.

Aratus Aratus. Iouis genus sumus
in the same place which is alleged by S. Paul, attributes all to one
Jupiter, whom he would have to be honored without ceassing.

As touching the Latins, Ovid Ovid.
in his Metamorphosis attributes the Creation of the World and of all things
therein, unto the only one God. And Virgill Virgil in his fourth book of
Husbandry and euerywhere else.
does ordinarily call him the King of Gods and Men; and he describes him
sheading forth his power to the uttermost coasts of Heaven and Earth, and
with his virtue quickening the World, and all that is therein.

But forasmuch as Scoeuola Scaeuola, as he is alleged by S. Austin in the
City of God lib. 3. Cap. 27.
the Highpreest of the Romans distinguished the Gods of old time into three
sorts, that is to wit, Philosophical, Poetical, and Civil; and we have
seen how the Philosophers and Poets, (notwithstanding their own Wyndlases and
fables, and the infinite superstitions of their times,) do meet one another
in the only one GOD: let us see consequently what the Civil sort will say
unto us, that is to say, what has bin believed, not only by the learned sort
of all Nations, but also by the very Nations themselves. The consent of People.
Soothly so incredible has the vanity of men bin since their turning aside
from the true way, that all Nations have let them selves run looce after such
absurdities as we would not believe, if we saw not the like still at this
day. Some worshipped the Heaven, the Plants, and the Stars like silly souls
which at their first coming into a Kings Court, do think that the first gay
apparelled man whom they meet with is the King. Some made Gods of the Goods
which God gave them. Some worshipped the Beasts which were for their benefit.
And finally they made Gods, not only of themselves, but also of their
Spears, Sheelds and Swoordes, and builded Temples to their own Passions, as
unto Fearefulnes, Hardines and such others; yea and even unto things so filthy
and loathsome, as a man may be ashamed and abashed to hear spoken of.
Nevertheless, the costomable use of such things made folk too have no regard
of them, and the most spiritual sort of them were so possessed with Ambition,
that it filled all their minds to the full. Yet notwithstanding, when they
were once awaked, and fell a little to the bethinking themselves as of a thing
in very deed against Nature, they were ashamed of their doings, yea and even
of themselves. In the City of God. lib. 4. cap. 24.
Why Sir, (answered they to Saint Austin? Think you that our Forefathers were
so foolish and blind, as to believe that Bacchus, Ceres, Pan, and such others
were Gods? It is not possible. Nay, they believed but in the only one GOD,
whose gifts and functions they honored under diverse names; and whatsoever is
more, is but Superstition. Truly the Egyptians (as we read) did honor
Devils, Men, Beasts, Serpents, and Plants: and to be short, every thing was
to them a GOD. But as touching the true GOD, they described him in their holy
Carects as a Pilot alone governing a Ship. And all their divinity (as is to be
seen in Iamblichus, Iamblichus concerning the Mysteries of the Egiptians. cap.
37. 39.
) was referred unto only one God. Insomuch that the people of I hebais in
AEgipt, rejected all the said absurdities of many Gods, saying that there was
none other God but only he whom they called C^ef, which was never borne, nor
could ever dye, Plutarke in his treatise of Isis and Osyris.
that is to say the Everlasting. Also in Say a City of AEgipt, the Image of
Pallas, that is to say of Wisdom, had his Inscription: I am all that has bin,
is, or ever shall be, and there was never yet any mortal man that uncovered my
face. And Proclus adds thereto, And the Fruits that I have brought forth is
the Son, as who would say, It is the Wisdom whereby God works, which is
the Goddesseworker. Now if even among the AEgiptians the opinion of the one
only God was not quenched: much more reason have we to deem, that it was not
quenched among other nations.

In the Laws of the twelve Tables were written these words: Cicero in his
second book of Laws. Deos adeunto cast: opes amouento: si secus faxint, Deus
ipse vindex erit: that i^ Go to God chastely: remove away riches: If any do
otherwise God himself will punish him. Tertullian in his Defense.
Let Men come to the Gods chastely. Let Pomp be removed away: If they do
otherwise, God himself (that is to say, Jupiter whom only they called the
most gracious and most mighty) will revenge it. Yet notwithstanding, it is
certain that afterward Rome became the very Sinckpan of all the Idolatries of
the world: for in winning of Nations, they wan also their Superstitions. But
could all this wype out in them the print of Nature? Nay, contrariwise,
Tertullian speaking of the Heathen of his time, says thus: As wholly as their
Souls are brought in bondage to false Gods, yet when they awake as a dronken
man out of his sleep, they name but one God, and the speech of every man is,
as it pleases GOD. They call upon him as their Judge, saying; God sees it, I
refer my self to God, God requite it me. O record of a Soul by nature
Christian! To be short, in uttering those words, they look up to Heaven, and
not to the Capitol: for they know that Heaven is the Seat of the living God.
Lactantius Lactantius. lib. 2. cap. 1.
who came a good while after, says the like. When they swear, (says he) when
they wish, when they give thanks; they name neither Jupiter, nor Gods in the
plural number, but the only one God: so greatly does Nature constreyne them
to acknowledge the truth. If there come an Alarm, or if they be threatened
with war; they do after the same manner: But as soon as the danger is past,
by and by they run to the Temples of many Gods, whereas notwithstanding they
called but the one God to their succor. And in very truth, if we consider the
natural motions which we have in our afflictions; they part not our hearts into
diverse prayers at once, but do put us in mind of only one God, and to offer
our prayers up unto him.

Now, forasmuch as Nature, Man's wisdom, and the voice of all people, do in
all Languages commend, woorship, and confess one only God: It remains for
us to see whether we may not gather the like, even by the very confession of
the false Gods themselves, Lactantius lib. 1 Chap. 6. Iustine in his
Apology. The Cracles of the Sibylles.
which have gone about to deface his name by all means. It is a case disputed
among the learned, by what Spirit the Sybilles spoke, because it is not
inconvenient that God should compel the very Deuels to set soorth his praises.
Howsoever the case stand, they speak but of only one God, saying.

There is but only one true God, right great, and everlasting,
Almighty, and invisible, which sees every thing,
But cannot be beheld himself of any fleshly man.
Also they cry out against the false Gods, and exhort men to beat down
their Altars, accounting them happy which give themselves to the glorifying of
the only one God. But let us here Apollo himself. Being asked at Colophon by
one Theophilus whether there was a God or no, and what he is: He answered in
21. Greek verses rehearsed by Lactantius, Lactan. lib. 1. cap. 6.
whereof I will hold me contented with the latter three, which are to be
englished thus.

The selfebred, bred without the help of Moother,
Wise of himself, whose name no wight can tell,
Does dwell in fire beyond all reach of thought:
Of whom we Angels are the smallest part.
The rest of these Uerses commend and set forth the Majesty of the great God,
but these suffize for this matter. Here the Feend does what he can to magnify
himself, saying that he is an Angel and a little portion of God, but yet he
acknowledges him as his Souereine. Porphyrius Porphyrius in his tenth book of
the praises of Philosophy.
the great enemy of Christians, rehearses many other like. The same Apollo
being asked how GOD was to be worshipped, answered in 22. Uerses, calling him
the everlasting Father, the Walker upon the Heaven of Heavens, the Fashioner or
framer of substances, the father of all things, the father of all wights both
mortal and immortal. And on the other side he calls all others his
Children, his Servants, his Messengers, and the Heraults or blazers abroad of
his praises. In another answer comprised in ten Uerses, he calls him the
burning Flame, the Welspring and Original of all things, the author of life,
and so forth; and afterward he concludes, I am but Phoebus; more of me ye
get not at my hand;
It is as little in my mind as I can understand.


Being asked at another time by the Pausanias.
Founder of Constantinople, whether he should resist an enemy of his or no; he
answered thus: Apollo is not of that mind; beware
How thou do deal; he is too strong for thee.
For God it is that makes him undertake
This enterprise, and does the same maynteyne,
Even God I tell thee under whom both Heaven
And Earth and Sea and every thing therein,
And Phoebus eke and Hell it self does quake.


Proclus Proclus upon Timaeus.
says, that the Oracles acknowledged the great God the Welspring of the
fountain of all things. And for an example he alleges this Oracle of four
Uerses; From God springs the generation of all matter; from the same ground
rises the finenesse of the fire, and the Globes of the World, and whatsoever
else is bred, and so forth. That is the answer of Apollo the God so greatly
renowned among the Heathen, when he was asked what God was. And being urged to
tell what he himself was, and how he would be called, he said: Call me the
Feend that knows all and is right sage and wise. And at another time he says
thus.

We Feends which haunt both Sea and Land through all the world so wide,
Do tremble at the whip of God which all the world does guide.
These foresaid Oracles are reported by Porphyrius, Proclus, and other Heathen
men, whereof some be rehearsed also by Lactantius: which may suffize to show
how the very Devils do believe one God, and quake at him. But I hope I shall
be pardoned for handling this matter a little at the largest, because the
consent of all men in that behalf which I have already proved, is contrary to
the opinion of many men. And therefore ye see here how the World, Men, and the
Deuilles themselves cry out with the holy Scripture, Hearken O Israel,
Deuter. 6. Psalm. 85.
the Lord thy God is but one God, the God of Gods, who only works wonders,
and has not his like among the Gods. And that is the thing which I have gone
about to prove in these last two Chapters.

The fourth Chapter.
What it is that we can comprehend concerning God.
NOW, albeit that the least things which are in Nature and in our selves, do
sufficiently show us that there is but one GOD: Yet notwithstanding all Nature
is not able to teach us what that God is, neither is man, in nature able to
comprehend any thing of him: and the reason thereof is evident in both twain.
In Man, because the greater can never be comprehended by the lesser, Man cannot
comprehend God.
neither can Man have any thing in understanding, which has not first been in
his senses, as from whence proceeds unto him the beginning of all natural
knowledge: And he neither sees nor perceives God in himself, but only by his
effects. In Nature, because it is a thing wrought by God, and no work or effect
how great so ever it be, can perfectly express the cause or worker thereof.
Man is able to discourse after a sort, of the things that are less than
himself, as of Beasts, Plants, and Stones. And yet if he will enter into
their substaunces; he must needs stop short, and is constreyued to stay upon
the histories of them, confessing his knowledge to be but ignorance. If he
come to himself, to know his own Soul by the power of his Soul: by and by
he is at his wits end: For the manner of his discourse is but to proceed from
kind to kind, and to pass from one reason to another. But on the contrary
part, his mind sees not it self, but only turns into it self, leaving not
any thing empty without it self whereunto to extend, no more than a Circle
does. And yet notwithstanding, every thing is equal to it self, and
measurable by it self. What shall we then think that Man can do, if he
advance himself to the considering of Gods nature; seeing that the least
Creatures that are do put him to his trumpe? That is the very thing which has
made the ignorant sort to ouershoote themselves so far, as to counterfect God
by a shape like themselves: which thing the very Beasts (says Xenophanes)
would have done, if they had bin Paynters, as which cannot ordinarily conceive
any greater thing than themselves. Ye see then how Man is of himself too far
unable to conceive such a Greatness. Again, if we consider the effects, a man
planteth, buyldeth, paynteth, and weaueth a thousand diverse works: and we
think it not strange that the brute Beasts conceive not thereby what Man
is, howbeit that there is always some proportion of understanding between
Creature and Creature; but between the Creature and the Creator there is none
at all. Nay, there is yet this more, that a man shall see and feel the works
of another man, and he shall know from whence he takes his stuff, after what
manner he matcheth things together, and what Art he has observed: But shall he
for all that, know what the Soul or Mind of that man is? No; nor yet his own
Soul. For his doings come nothing near to that which he is, no not so near
as the heat which the Sun sheadeth into us from above, approaches near to
the natural power that is in the Sun; the which notwithstanding we durst
not take upon us to describe, if we had never felt it otherwise than in a
Prison. But if thou could have entered into the mind of that man at the
making of his work, Cicero in his book of the Nature of the Gods.
thou should have seen it far more beautiful there: and all that ever he
could do or thou say, is always far less than his Conceyt; and yet the same
Conceyt of his is but as a spark of the Mind, whereof the same work is a
part. Plotinus Enn. 6. lib. 8. cap 11 Galen in his 9. book upon the Decrees of
Hippocrates. Although it appear by certain demonstration, that it is a divine
workmayster that has procreated us: yet can we not by any wit or reason
conceive, neither what his substance is, nor how he made us. For we must
consider that it is a far other thing, to show that a certain Providence
made us: than to know the substance, either of our own Soul, or of him that
made us.
Now then, if thou being a man, can not conceive the mind of a man by his
doings, though thou bear the like mind about thee thy self; and if his doings
(of what sort so ever they be) come far short of that which he himself is:
dare thou be so bold as to describe God by his works what he is, and to
dispute of his substance? And if thou can not conceive him by his works;
how will thou then conceive him, seeing thou can not behold him otherwise? To
this purpose we have the common History of Simonides, who being asked by Hiero
King of Syracuse what God is; demanded one days respit to give answer, and
afterward two, and then four, and in the end confessed that the more he
thought thereon, the less he understood thereof; and yet he was the man which
taught very well, that God was the very wisdom it self. Xenophon, Plato,
Plotin and others say that he is a thing which cannot be found, nor ought to
be sought. To be short, all the Philosophers cry in one voice with David,
Pesuit tenebras latibulum suum, Defec^ in A^rijs tuis Domine.
Lord, thou have made darkness thy Covert, Lord I am wearied even in thine
outter Courts. Yet notwithstanding, whereas men are not able to atteyne to
Gods substance; they have gone about to betoken it by the excellentest names
that they could devise, as we have seen in the last Chapter. They considered
yt forasmuch as all things have their being from him, he himself was the
souereine Being; and that to be so, it behooved him to be ever, and therefore
they called him the Everlasting. And that to have being without life; is
nothing: and that he which gives life to all, must needs be all life: and
therefore they call him the living God. And again, that life without
understanding is dead, and understanding without power is imperfect; and that
he which gives both of them to all, must needs have the^ in himself for all:
and therefore they call him Mind and Might, attributing unto him the perfect
knowledge and infinite power of all things. Finally, forasmuch as to Be, to
Live, to Understand, and to be mighty, the higher that they be, are so much
the less to be esteemed, if good also abound not on all parts: because men on
the other side receive so many good turns at his hand, they call him Good,
exceeding good, and the goodness it self; assuring themselves that no other
name does so peculiarly fit him as that. Yet notwithstanding neither that, nor
any thing else that we can imagine more, can come near him by infinite
distance. Let us attribute unto him the highest degree of all perfections that
can be, (as in very deed he must needs have them at the highest pitch, seeing
that there is not any that has measured them unto him:) yet do we attribute
unto him but imperfection. For if any of them be finite, then is he not
infinite, as we ought to conceive him to be: and infinite it cannot be, because
the one of them should by the infiniteness thereof shut up the other within
bounds. (...).
Therefore it behooves us to conceive a most single singleness, which
nevertheless in one perfection comprehends al perfectio^s, as the root of
them; which seems a thing contrary to man's understanding: that is to wit,
that his Providence is no more Providence than Justice, nor his Justice more
Justice than mercy, nor his knowledge more knowledge then life, nor his life
more life than single being: To be short, that his being is such a being as is
wholly and alonly all, I mean altogether deed, Mercurius Trismegistus in his
Poemander. cap. 2. and 6.
altogether form, altogether perfection and so forth. And that is the thing
which God himself teaches us, in that being asked his name by Moses, he
answered him, I am that I am: Ehjch asher ehjeh.
which name the Jews had in such reverence, that the very Priests themselves
(as they say) named it not but at the great Feasts. And yet in the judgment
of Plotine, that name is not sufficient for him. Plotiri. Ennead. 7. lib. 7.
cap. 38.
Also we call him the good, and yet is that too little for him; for Good is the
good of goodness, as heat is the heat of hotnes. But God is the goodness it
self; and whatsoever is good, is of him. Yet notwithstanding, the very word
Goodness is not sufficient; for goodness has his being in some substance. But in
God there cannot any thing be conceived, which is not substantially, yea and
more than substantially substance. Again, when we say, he sees, he knows,
he understands; these things have relation to time; and he that made time is
without the reach of time. Also when we say, he is here, or he is there,
it is all one; for he that made all places is not contained in any place. And
therefore Tiismegistus says very well, Mercurius in his Poema^der. Prouer. 30.
v. 4.
That he is better and mightier then any name can express. And Salamon cries
out with admiration, what is his name? As who would say, man is not able to
utter or conceive any word yt does properly fit him, neither in Nownes nor in
Uerbes nor in complet speech, because man is an essence subject to time, place
and accidents, which cannot pass beyond it self. Now then, what is the
uttermost point that all our sine conceits can reach unto? (...) says Porph.
(...) says Porph. (...). in praepositionibus. Dennis in his book of the names
of God.
Uerily the most in effect that we can know concerning his being, is that we
can understand nothing at al thereof. Insomuch that whatsoever we say thereof
affirmatively, whether we term it Scothnesse or Wisdom, or Kingdom, or
Unity, or Godhead, or any thing else which we mean thereby, it can not fit
him. Finally, we can no more name him than comprehend him, how high so ever we
think we mount up. And therefore we must with Trismegistus call upon him in
silence; and say unto him with David, Lord, the best praise that I can give
unto thee is silence.

Now seeing we cannot know what God is, but by not knowing it, it stands us
on hand to know what he is not, which is no small help for us to know him
after a sort. Wherein we must follow a clean contrary rule. (...). Tibi
silentium laus. What God is not.
For as we have said, that of all the things that are spoken and affirmed of
Gods essence or substance, none fitteth him, being taken strictly: so
whatsoever is spoken thereof negatiuely, shall be found true, being taken after
the same manner: Insomuch that that man may be said to be most skillful in
that behalf, which knows most Negatiues or Remotions (as they term them.)
To make this point yet clearer, nature has taught us by the diverse mouings
which we see here beneath, that there is a GOD which is the first mouer of the
whole world. And by the same reason, we say that he himself is immovable,
Immovable.
that is to say, remoueth not at all. For we see that the nature of him which
maueth, insomuch as he moves, is to be and to be settled in rest. Even our
Soul (as in respect of the body) is immovable, notwithstanding that it cause
and procure all the mouings of the body: and the mo things that a man intends
to move, the more it behooves him to have his mind settled. Forasmuch as God is
evermore doing, he is ever at rest, and he has not his resting in another but
in him self, or rather is his own rest himself. And therefore the ancient
Philosophers called him (...), 1. Phisik. 3. (...).
that is to say, the immovable and steadfast, to put a difference between him
and the heaven, the Planets, and the Stars, which are subject to moving, and
whom the ignorance of folk has called Gods. Herevppon we say also that he is
unchangeable: for the change of a thing in it self, as a kind of moving which
te^deth out of it self. (...). Out of the verses of Parmenides reported by
Simplicius. Unchangeable.
As for example, He that desires or coueteth, desires or coueteth ye thing
which hehath not. But God is one, and al together; neither is it possible for
him to receive being from any other: for nothing is changed but by some other
thing, which in some respect is more mightier tha^ it, as Wood is changed by
Fire. But al things have their power and force from God alone. Therefore by this
term Unchangeable, we deny him to be like the immortal souls, which admit
such passions as we perceive, or also to the very bodilesse Spirits, whom we
call Angels, and the Philosophers call Gods; who be not unchangeable, saving so
far forth as they rest in ye beholding of him which cannot be changed. And
it makes nothing against the matter, that we see so diverse changes in all
things. For it is one thing to change ones self, and another thing to will yt
there should be a change; like as it is one thing to move ones self, and
another thing to will yt there be a moving. The Sun makes many diverse
changes in the things which we see here beneath, he makes things green, he
makes things yellow, he rypeneth things, he withers things and so forth, and
yet notwithstanding he changes no whit of his heat; and had he also a mind
(as some suppose him to have,) he might also will al these chaunges without
changing himself. So also may God, and much better. He without altering his own
being, wills and makes all the changes in the beings of things: and yet it is
as certain yt he is unchangeable, and that if he were not so ye whole
chaungeable nature should perish; as it is certain that if he were not
immovable, all moving should utterly cease. Now out of these two negatiues we
draw a third, namely yt he has neither beginning nor end, which thing we call
Euerlastingnes. Everlasting.
For the beginning and ending of all things, proceeds of moving and change:
and therefore he that is not subject to the^, can have neither beginning nor
end. Moreover, Time is but a measure of moving, wherein there is both a
forenesse and an afternesse. He therefore which is not subject to moving, is
not subject to time, and he which is not subject to time, has not his being by
continuance of succession from one moving to another. And so Gods being is
altogether at once, which is the peculiar property of euerlastingnes. And
whereas we say, he has bin, and he shall be; it is as much to say as there was
never any time when he was not, neither shall it ever come to pass that he
shall cease to be.

Again, Mere Act.
being everlasting he is not subject to any passive possibility; that is to
say, look whatsoever he is, he is the same actually and in very deed, and he
cannot become any other thing than he is already. For, were there any passive
possibility in him as from himself, then should there be a change in him;
and if it were from elsewhere, then should there be a moving from possibility
to deed, or to doing; and he is not subject to any of them both. Erom
Possibility into deed.
Furthermore, Euerlastingnesse cannot be in way of possibility, but only
actually and in very deed. For every manner of deed being simply taken is
before the possibility thereof, as the cause is before his effect, forasmuch as
the possibility is (as ye would say) quickened by the deed. As for example,
from a grain to an Herb, A grain may become an herb, and a kernel a tree:
which they be not so long as they continue a grain and a kernel. Vnmateriall.
and from a kernel to a Tree by the power of the Sun. But as for
Euerlastingnesse, it can abide neither forenesse nor afternesse; and therefore
look whatsoever it can be, it is the same all at once, and actually or in
very deed, and ever. Whereupon it follows also immediately, that God is
neither matter nor material: for the property of matter is to be merely
passive; that is to say, capable of diverse forms or shapes, and such as may in
possibility receive, being it self altogether naked and such as the
Philosophers describe it to be. By these conclusions we come to another, which
is, that God God is single and uncompounded.
is not compounded. For whatsoever is so, we say is of later time than the
things whereof it is compounded. But God is everlasting, and unto him nothing
can be new. Again, Compounding is a knitting of many things into one; and ere
those things could be united in very deed, it behooved the^ to be first in
possibility; that is to say, to be capable thereof. Now, as for God, he is
not a thing in possibility (which is an imperfect being) but altogether
actually and in very deed.

Moreover, we say that God made all things, and knows all things. Now, if he
had in him the nature of any of them, the same would trouble the natures of the
rest, as we see that the tongue of a sick man that is sick of an Agewe, is
unable to judge of the taste of things, because it is furred by a choleric
humor; and the eye which has any matter therein, can see nothing. It follows
then that too make and too know all things, God must needs be very single,
and not holding any thing at al in him. And the more single he is, the more is
he capable of the innumerable multitudes of things; like as the eye is then
most capable of all colors and the ear of all voices; when [in themselues]
the one is least troubled with noyzes and the other with colors. Whereupon it
follows that seeing he is not compounded, he cannot be a body: Bodylesse.
Numenius (...).
for all bodies are contained within bounds, and have parts, which thing most
people have known well enough as Numenius the Pythagorian reports. Place is
to be considered, either as a thing created, or as a conteyner of a thing
placed. This way God is nowhere: the other way he is every where. So is he both
every where, and no where. No where by limitation or poynting down of place,
and every where by filling all places.
And not being a body, he cannot be in place, neither wholly nor partly. By
reason whereof, we may say in strict speech, that he is no where, that is to
say, that no part of him is limited within any place to be poynted at.
Notwithstanding, like as he made all things by the power of his being; so does
the same power enter into all things, fill all things and conteyne all things.
And forasmuch as the same is vndiuidable, it is whole in all, and whole in
every part: and so likewise is he himself; that is to say, he is euerywhere,
whole throughout, in whom all things have their being, howbeit that he is not
determinatly or definitely in any thing. We have an image hereof in our own
mind, which yet notwithstanding is but a vain shadow. For, in as much as all
the things which we conceive are less than we; they be in the mind without
intermingling of the mind with them, and the mind after a certain fashion
touches them all, although it be not comprehended in any of them. Now, if all
these things be in our mind, because they be entered into it by our senses: how
much more shall all essences be in God and he in all of them, seeing that all
of them proceed from him, and that his only conceyuing of them has brought
them forth? Now then, let us not imagine any intermingling in this behalf.
The light of the Sun continues entierly throughout; it cannot be divided
intoo parts, nor shet up in any place, nor severed from the welspring thereof:
it sheadeth it self into all places, it fills all places, and it is present
with all things which we see, (I speak after the manner of the Divines) in
essence, in power, and in presence. The Air is lightened with the presence
thereof, and darkened with the absence, and we perceive both twain of them;
and yet for all that, it intermingleth not it self with the Air, ne leaves any
whit of it self into it. And shall we presume to think less of the light
which is not to be conceived but in understanding; considering that we see
the like with our eyes? Or shall we think it strange that GOD should be
both every where and nowhere, considering how we see that from a body there
isseweth such a bodilesse thing, as without touching any of them, lighteneth
them all? And if a light shine in all things that shine; shall not the
souereine essence be in all things that are? And seeing that things could not
have bin made unless Gods power (which is his very essence) had bin present
with all things and with every of them; shall any thing let him from being
present with all things still? Now, like as the light of the Sun has diverse
effects through the disposition of men's eyes, and of the sheerenesse of things,
and the diversities of the substances whereon it lights: so is Gods presence
diverse too diverse things, and yet is it without any diversity in it self. He
is (says S. Austin S. Austin upon the Psalms.
) in himself, as the beginning and the end: to the World, as the Author and
governor thereof: to his Church, as a father in his House: to our Souls, as a
Bridegroom in his Chamber: to the Rightuous, as a Helper and defender: to the
Reprobates, as a trembling and terror. No man flees from him but to him, from
his rigor to his goodness, and so forth. For what place shall he meet with
(says he) where he shall not find they presence? The selfsame presence which
was present at the making of all things, 1. Phisic. 2. etc. (...).
is present with every thing to preserve them all: and yet is it nevertheless
absent from all things and from every thing, as it was at the time that there
were no things at all; because none of them conteyneth it or any part of it,
but it conteyneth all things.

But we must pass yet one step further. God (say we) is present euerywhere.
Then is he infinite, Infinite.
and yet is he not contained in any place, for he is not a body. It follows
therefore that he is not infinite in body, Infinite, not by stretching or
streyning out, but by sheading in.
but in Spirit; nor in quantity, but in goodness and power, and better if
better may be said. Wherefore, let us not imagine him to be a huge or massy
lump, as the ignorant sort do. The massinesse of things is that (as we see)
which makes them unable to do things. Contrariwise, the more spiritual a
thing is, the more active it is. He then which is the action of al powers, must
needs be a Spirit of infinite power, and yet notwithstanding exempted from
all quantity, (which properly is but a weakness or want of power) yea, and
yet in such sort infinite, as all the infiniteness thereof be comprehended
within bounds as to himself, that is to say, so as he finish or bound
himself, because he neither is nor has any thing without himself. Thus have
we by reason (and we may also have it by the Deuilles in the forealledged
Oracles, and likewise by all the Philosophers) that GOD is vnmoouable,
unchangeable, beginninglesse, endless, single, bodylesse, and infinite; all
which are terms whereby we declare, not what he is, but only what he is not;
not to make us to conceive him, but to keep us from deceyuing our selves by
our own vain conceytes. And of all these Negatiues we conceive but one
affirmative, as we did at the first; namely, that God is his own being, as he
himself faith unto Moses; insomuch that he is of himself, and all things are
of him, and he cannot be aught else than he is; insomuch also that it is all one
with him to be great and mighty, as merely and simply to be; which is as
much to say as that we must (as much as we can) conceive him to be good
without quality, great without quantity, everlasting without time, euerywhere
present without place, and so forth. And to conclude this Chapter, whereas we
cannot comprehend God in his very being, we will indeuer to come near to the
knowledge of him three ways by considering his effects; howbeit in such sort
as that we must think infinitely of him, above and beyond the things which
seem greatest unto us in the perfections which we perceive to be in all
things; as, goodness, truth, wisdom, Justice, life, unity, and such like;
and yet conceyuing him (if we can) to be but one only perfection comprehe^ding
all perfections in one, and yet every of them infinitely above the highest
degree of perfection that we can imagine. And finally as in respect of the
imperfections which are in all things, (as chaungeablenesse, weakness,
materialnesse, and such like,) by conceyuing them to be more infinitely far
of from his nature, than we can set them of in our understanding. But when we
have or shall have taken never so much pains in that behalf, yet the
uttermost that we shall have learned, is but only not to be ignorant of our
own want of knowledge. And therefore, to the intent we lose not our selves in
seeking him, the surest way for us is to p^ssesse him by loving serving and
woorshipping him; the which thing he of his love toward us grant us to do.

Amen.
The fifth Chapter.
That in the only one Essence or Substance of God there are three persons
which we call the Trinity.
LET us presume yet a little further, not by rash inquisitiuenes of man, but by
the merciful guyding of God, who has voutsafed to utter himself unto us in
his Scriptures: and let us see whether reason will help us to mainteyne and
prove the things which she of her self could never have found out. For,
reason is after a sort in like case toward God, as our eye is toward the
Sun. Neither the Sun nor any thing under the Sun, can well be seen
without the Sun: likewise neither God nor any thing belonging to God can be
seen without God, how good eyesight or myndsight so ever we have. But when
the Sun shines, then our eye sees the things which it saw not before, and
judges of them at his ease, notwithstanding that the eye be but the same it
was before, and have but the same power of sight which it had before, without
receiving any new increase thereof. Likewise, when GOD voutsafeth to utter any
doctrine unto us, the selfsame reason which otherwise could never have
perceived it, does then see it, and discourse it, and allow of it, without
receiving any new power ability or change in it self. We have concluded by
reason, that God is a most single essence: And we believe by discovery from
heaven, that in the same most single essence are three persons or Inbeings.
Reason of it self could never have atteyned to the finding thereof: for we
cannot distinguish things unless we conceive them; and yet nevertheless,
reason will serve us to prove it.

First of all, The begetting of the Son, or of the second Person
we have already acknowledged by Gods effects or doings, that there is in him
a working nature or power, (I must be feign to speak in the speech of man
seeing that the divine speech is unknown to us) which is the beginner and
mouer of al things. And in every of his works, we see a singular cunning; and
in the knitting of all, both great and small together, we see a wonderful
order, as I have discoursed heretofore; and we see there is neither order nor
cunning where there is no understanding. It follows therefore that the
souereine understanding is in God from whom this great order and cunning
proceed. Again, albeit that of the things which are in this world, some
understand, and some understand not; yet notwithstanding, all of them are
appointed to some certain end and mark, as the Sun to make the day and to
heat; the Moon to lighten the night, and all the Planets and Stars to mark
out the Seasons; and so forth of all other things. N^ne of them stumbleth in
his way, none steppeth aside from his end^: and yet notwithstanding, the most
part of them could not prescribe it to themselves. For the beginner of all ends
is understanding, and in the most of these there is no understanding. Needs
must it be therefore, that God the maker of them did also appoint them their
ends, and consequently that he had understanding for them. Now, the innumerable
multitude of things, and the linking of their ends one to another as they now
be, do show that al of them have their beginning from one selfsame
understanding. Then must it needs be, that this common author of their being,
that is to say, the souereine being, must also be the souereine understanding,
seeing he imparteth the effects of understanding to so many things which have
it not. Moreover, the things which have understanding are the disposers and
orderers of the other things, and not contrariwise. Man buyldeth, planteth,
reareth up Cattle, and makes his commodity of all of them together. Of men
themselves, the skilfullest make Laws, and take upon them to rule others. To
be short, the things which have no understanding do naturally serve as
instruments to those which have it; and the thing which has the less of it,
serves that which has the more of it; and no part in nature deals to the
contrary. And (as we have proved by all the Philosophers themselves) it is God
that created all things that have understanding, as well those which are not
tied to bodies, as those which have bodies; allotting to them their offices and
ends, and so consequently he is the very beginner and end of them himself.

Then once again, so far forth as we can describe this understanding by the
outward effects thereof, it must needs be in God a most excellent ability (if
it may be so named) by direction whereof he executes most wisely the active
or inworking virtue power and nature which we mark in all things in this
world, howbeit, so as the chief working of them does abide and rest still in
him. I have proved heretofore that God is infinite: which being so; nothing can
be imagined in him, which is not infinite likewise: for otherwise he should be
as well finite as infinite both together. And infinite he were not, if he could
understand or know that to day which he understood not before. Needs then must
it be, that he from al eternity understands and knows the things which
have bin, which are, and which shall be; the whole, and the parts; the
generalles, the specialles, and the particulars; the originalles, the
proceedings, and the aftercommings; the doings, sayings, and thoughts of men;
and so forth, ^o as this understanding in God is everlastingly infinite.

Again, understanding is an inworking which abides and remains in the
party which has it, and passes not into any outward thing. For, when we
understand the course of the Sun, we become the more skilful thereof in our
selves; but as for the Sun, he is nothing altered thereby. Also I have told
you already, that God is most single, and that there is not any thing in him
which is not his very essence or being. Whereupon it follows, that God not
only has understanding, but also that his understanding is his very essence
[that is to say, he is the very understanding it self.] Now then, let us see
what it is that this understanding begets. I have told you that God is a
mere doing, and that whatsoever he does, he does it from everlasting; and that
on the other side being most single, there is nothing in him which is not a
dooer. Whereupon it follows that this understanding is everlastingly occupied
in doing. And wherein then is it occupied? What is the thing that it works
upon? Surely it can meet with nothing but it self. God then conceived and
understood himself; and it must needs be that he understood himself, seeing
that the chiefest wisdom is to know ones self, whereof he could not fail.
Therefore it was of necessity, that this understanding of God, should yield a
reflection back again to it self, as a face does in a Lookingglasse, and as
our mind does when it sets it self to the considering of it own proper
nature; and that it should conceive and beget in it self a perfect image of it
own self, which image is the same thing which in the Trinity we call the
Son, the Word, or the Speech; namely, the lively and perfect image and
wisdom of the Father. Now, this understanding is actually everlasting, [that
is to say, everlasting in ^eede] and everlastingly actual, [that is to say,
everlastingly doing,] and therefore we say that the second person which it
begets is also everlasting: and God in his understanding had not conceived
any thing that is less than himself; for it is equal with him. And whereas we
comprehend not our selves; that comes of the darkness and lumpishnesse of
our flesh, which makes us unlike our selves. We say then that the Son is
equal to the Father, and the image of the Father. But yet moreover, the being
of the Father and his understanding are both one: and his being or essence
(being understood of it self) is none other thing than the being of the
Son, who is bred and begotten by the Fathers understanding or mynding of
himself. Whereupon we conclude again, that the essence of the Father is the
essence of the Son, [that is to say, that look whatsoever the Father is, the
Son is the same;] so as they differ not but by way of relation: and
consequently that they be Coeternall, Coequall, and Coessentiall, [that is to
say, of one selfessame everlasting continuance, of one selfsame state
condition and degree, and of one selfsame substance or being;] which is the
thing that we be taught in the Church. This second person for diverse respects
is betokened, by diverse names. He is ordinarily called the Son, because he is
a Conception of the understanding which is in God, and a perfect resemblance of
him. And here we have to consider, that according to the diversities of
natures; the manner of breedings or begettings do vary also. For every life
(if I may so speak) begets or breeds a Son, issue or offspring in it
self before it send it out; and the excellenter that the life is, the more
inward to it is that which proceeds or is bred thereof. Hereupon some have
supposed the Fire to be a living wight, because it breeds or begets
another fire like it self. But howsoever the case stand, like as the Elements
are naturally the bacest things in degree, so has Fire the bacest manner of
breeding or begetting; as which is not able to do it but out of it self, and
by the applying of some outward matter to him. The Plant conceyueth moisture in
it self, which springs forth into bud, from bud into flower, and from
flower into fruit; which fruit being ripe falls to ye ground, and there
brings forth another Plant. Now, this second Plant lived in the first Plant
ere it lived in it self; and all living wights do live, move and feel in
their Dammes bellies, before they come forth; which is yet a more inward manner
of breeding and begetting than the other. The sensitive life conceyueth an
imagination which hoordeth up it self in the memory: but as it proceeds
from the Senses and sensible things; so does it depart out of it self. The
reasonable life has his conceptions and breedings yet more inward than all the
rest. For it has his reflection back to it self; and we commonly term the
doings or actions thereof by the name of Conceptions or Conceyts, after which
manner the lear^ed sort do call their books their Children. But yet there is
this more in this matter; namely, that in men this conceyuing proceeds of
imagination, which is an outward thing unto it, because nothing can enter into
the understanding of man but by the Senses; and moreover, for that the thing
which is minded or understood, and ye mind or understanding it self, are not
both one in us. But forasmuch as only God is altogeter life, and his life is
altogether understanding, which is the highest degree of life; he has his
manner of conceyuing and begetting most inward of all. Why the second Person is
called the Son, the Word, Speech, Wisdom. etc.
For, he conceyueth in himself and of himself, and his conceyuing is a
begetting, and this begetting abides still in himself, because his
understanding can never any where meet with any thing but that which he
himself is. And that is the second person whom we call the Son, and unto
whom that name does so much the more properly agree, because his resembling of
him is more perfect, and his begetting or Sonneship (if I may so term it) is
more inward, than all the breedings and begettings which we commonly see, or
than any other that we can imagine. Also we call him Logos, which some translate
Word or Speech, and othersome Reason. Either of those significa^ious is
ordinary to the word Logos, and agreeable to that which is ntended to be
signified thereby, so far forth as divine things can be expressed by the
speech of man. Look in the 12. Chapter of Mercurius trimegistus Poemander.
When we call him Speech or Word, it is according to the doctrine of the
Philosophers, who have marked that there is in man a dubble Speech; the one in
the mind, which they call the inward Speech, which we conceive before we utter
it; and the other the sounding image thereof, which is uttered by our mouth and
is termed the Speech of the Uoyce; either of both the which we perceive at
every word that we intend to pronounce: which thing those folk might yet much
better observe, which had never learned any Language, because they should not
cease to have those inward Conceyts in themselves [though they could not
speake] For the wit or understanding does by and by conceive an inward
Speech upon the thing which is offered unto it, Rapid^ quadam Corusca^ione
perfundit animum. that is to say, it sheadeth through the mind with a certain
swift glistering.
and begets or breeds that conceyt in our mind as it were by a suddein
flash of Lightning, and afterward our mind utters it more at leisure by the
voice, the which voice (notwithstanding) is unable to represent or express ye
inward Speech perfectly: insomuch that we see many men have a great number of
goodly conceyts in their mynds, which they be not able to express; and that in
expressing them either by word or by writing, they mislike their own doings,
because they be far inferior to the things which they had conceived in
their mynds. Now, the speech of the mind is very Reason it self: Vox pr^f^rt,
Animus ratiocinatur, Mentis (...) is to say^ the voice utters, the mind
reasons or deba^eth, and so Reason is the very word or (...) Mind.
and look what the speech of the mind reasons and debateth, that does the
voice utter, and either of them is the image of the next that went before. For
look what proportion is between the voice or Speech of the mouth, and the
Speech of the mind; the like proportion is between the Speech of the mind, and
the Speech of the understanding. The voice has need of air, and is divided
into parts, and requires ^eysure: The Mind in deed is vndiuidable, but yet
has it need of time to pass from one conclusion or reason to another. But as
for ye understanding, it accomplisheth his action or working in less than a
moment, and with one only act does so fill the Reason and mind, that it is
constreyned to make many acts of one. And this diversity may every man mark
in himself, notwithstanding that all these acts seem to be done together like
Thunder and Lightning. Now then, the said Conception or Conceyt which Gods
understanding has conceived everlastingly in himself, we call Speech or
Word; which is the perfect image of his understanding, and Gods understanding,
is God himself. Also we call it Reason, because Reason is as ye would say the
Daughter, Speech or word of the understanding, and we say that by the same
Speech or word, God made al things. For, as the Craftsman makes his work by
the pattern which he had erst conceived in his mind, which pattern is his
inward word: so God made the World and all that is therein, by that said Speech
of his as by his inward skill or art. For he being but one, conceyueth all
things by conceyuing himself. To be short, we call him also the Wisdom of
the Father, yea, and even merely and simply wisdom. For, Wisdom (even in
man) is nothing else but a hauiour proceeding of diverse Conceyts or inward
speeches, whereby our mind is perfected in the knowledge of high things. Now,
God is the heyghth of all heyghthes, and by the conceyuing of himself he
knows himself. But yet we must take this withal, that the thing which is a
hauiour in us, is essence in him, [that is to say, that he is the very things
themselves which we obtey^e to have by means,] and that he himself is the
ground of his own wisdom, whereas the true wisdom of men, has not any
other ground than God. Now then, can there be any greater wisdom in God,
than to know himself? And is not that knowledge bred of understanding?

Let us come to the third person. The proceeding of the holy Ghost, or third
person.
We have acknowledged heretofore, that in the most single essence of God, there
is a workfull power, ability, or nature, matched with an understanding,
according whereuto the said virtue or power executes his actions. Now, in the
selfsame essence, should there not also be a Will besides the said
understanding? If we consider all the things in the world, we shall find in
them a kind of Will, tending to the several welfare of every of them: and the
more understanding they have, the more will also have they; becasue that the
more their welfare is known unto them, the more also is it desired; and the
more it is desired, the more also is their will uniform, and the less parted.
I omit the senseless things, as Plants, Herbs, and Stones, which have
certain natural inclinations, sufficiently marked by the fear^hing out of
their natures. But yet it cannot be denied, but that the Beasts have a
sensitive appetite to follow the thing which their Sense takes hold of to be
good for them. Men also do run with all their hearts after the thing which
they suppose to be good for them, whether it be honor, riches or pleasure.
And the more they know it or think themselves to know it, the more do they
yield their will unto it: and the more they hold and possess thereof, the more
is their heart settled thereupon. Only their understanding being bewitched by
vanity, is deceytfully driven to choose the evil for the good; by means
whereof, the will which ought to be discreet and full of wit and understanding,
is forced of necessity to degenerate into fleshly and beastly lust. The
Angels likewise (as say the Philosophers) have also a will, and much more
simply one and more lively than ours. And as by their understanding they know
the very good it self, that is to wit God; so have they their will ever settled
on him alone, without turning it aside to any of all the great multitude of
objects whereon we be wont to set our mynds. Now, shall not he himself have a
will, who has given will to al living things and imprinted it in them? And he
that has imparted so many benefits to all things, to some mo and to some
less; has not he (say I) bestowed those benefits upon them willingly? And
he with the beholding of whom ye blesseddest Spirits do feed their wills,
has not he the pleasure of contenting himself thoroughly with him self, seeing
he knows himself perfectly? And what else is this pleasure, than will
fulfilled, yea even filled to the full with the true Good which suffices to
himself, which is the only peculiar thing whereon the very will rests in
deed? Again, the nature of will is to apply all abilities to their actions.
To no purpose have we hearing, if we lift not to hear; to no purpose have we
sight, if we list not to see; to no purpose have we ability to do things,
if we li^t not to do them. And this appears daily in all our doings, which
never come to effect, till they be quickened and put forth by the will. But we
see that God has applied his power to the doing of many things, yea of things
infinite and infinitely diverse. Therefore it follows that he listed to do
them, and that he listed to make one thing to one end and another to another,
and one of them for another, and finally all for himself, and so consequently
that he has a will. And this will (so far as we be able to discern it by
the effects) is a certain ability whereby he applies his workfull power, when,
where, and how he thinks good; guyding and performing it according to his
own mind, howbeit that the chief act thereof is performed within it self.
Nevertheless, this is spoken always after the manner of men. For if we have
much a do to discern the difference between the abilities of Will and
Understanding in our own Souls, by reason of the linking of them together:
much more reason is it that in this essence of God which is most single, and
infinitely more one than ours, we should deem all these things to be but one
in him, notwithstanding that they differ in certain respects. God
understands, but I have told you, that to be and to understand is all one in
him. Also God wills or lists; but too will and too understand are likewise
both one in him: and so all three come into one essence [that is, be all one
thing.] The reason hereof is very evident: namely, that willing or listing of
is no more an action that passes into the outward thing, than Understanding
is; but abides still in the Willer. For by our listing of a thing, we may
perceive some alteration in our selves; but ye thing it self that is listed or
willed feels nothing thereof. Now, I have proved heretofore, that whatsoever
is or rests in God, is his very being; and moreover, God wills not any
thing but as in respect that he understands it; for the known good is the
ground of his will, and he understands not but by his essence, [that is to
say, for that he is the very understanding it self.] It follows then, that
in God, his Will is his very essence as well as his understanding; insomuch
that he is both Power, Understanding, and Will all in one.

But let us see now what proceeds of GOD by his Will. I have said before, that
God is mere Action, and moreover, that he is most single: therefore he is still
doing from all eternity, and so likewise is whatsoever else we consider in his
essence. Now, there we have found an Understanding, by the Inworking whereof he
knows himself; and also a Will, whereby he cannot but will himself, seeing he
knows himself. And this Understanding, by a certain Reflection of it self
upon it self, has begotten us a second person, whom we call the Son and the
Wisdom of the father. This will then which works everlastingly, having
likewise none other thing to work upon but it self, does also by his working
strike back upon himself, and delight it self in the infinite good which it
knows there, and so sheadeth out it self wholly to the loving thereof; and
by this action it brings us forth a third person (if I may so term it) whom
we call Gods Spirit and the holy Ghost, that is to wit, the mutual kindness
and louingnesse of the Father and of the Son; of the Father the understander,
toward the Son conceived and begotten by his understanding: and of the Son
back again toward the Father, acknowledging all that he has and all that he
is to be of the Father. And this said Will is the essence of God himself, and
consequently eternally active, and actiuely eternal. For, in the everlasting
all things are everlasting; and in a mere act, all things are act; and of such
can nothing proceed which shall not be like them. Needs therefore must this
Spirit, this Louingnesse, or this goodwill, be also actually everlasting.
Moreover, the will extends as far as the understanding: for (as I have said
before) will and understanding are both one in God; and understanding does
perfectly comprehend the thing that is understood, namely the thing that is
beloved, that is to wit God himself. The will then does by his action (which
is love and liking) extend it self as far as God himself; and so the third
Person is equal to the second and the first. And yet does this third Person
proceed of the will, and the will is Gods essence, and of that essence can
nothing proceed which is not his essence. Therefore he is not only coeternall
and coequall, but also coessentiall. Again, we see that in us, there goes
always some act of the understanding before the act of our will; for ye cause
why we will things, is that we think we understand them; and we desire them
for the good which we perceive in them; and the love of a thing cannot be in
the lover thereof, but upon his knowing of the thing loved; neither is will
any thing else than appetite, bred of understanding. The third Person therefore
proceeds from the first, not only by the will, but also by the understanding,
and by the knowledge which the understanding breeds. And because it
proceeds of two, and not by way of resemblance, but by act of Will; we term
him Proceeding and not Begotten; which is in effect the reason of all that is
taught us in the Church concerning that matter. Notwithstanding, whereas we
say that the action of Understanding goes before the action of Will; our
meaning is not to imagine any going before or coming after in these persons;
but only to lay forth this proceeding by the order of Nature, which we could
not have done so well by the truth of the matter: as if we should say, that
the Son is considered before the holy Ghost, in like manner as ye knowing of a
thing goes before the desire of it, because that if they could have had any
beginning, the Son had bin foremost in that case.

As touching names, we call him most commonly the holy Ghost. Holy, because
there is nothing in God which is not pure and holy; Why the holy Ghost is
called Love. etc.
whereby he is discerned from al other Spirits: and Ghost or Spirit, because we
commonly call those things Spirits, the beginning of whose moving is unknown
to us; (...).
as the Wyndes, whose beginning is unknown unto us: the breathing of the
Heartstrings, which proceeds from an inward beginning that is hidden from us;
and such other things: and to be short, because that in all things which have
life, the inward force proceeds from some kind of will by a certain
Spirit. Now, as for love, it is nothing else but a certain covert forewardnesse
or foorthgoing of the will toward the thing that is loved; insomuch that the
very benefit which we receive by his love, is a secret and insensible through
breathing, which works in us, and yet we cannot well perceive from whence it
comes. Again, we call him also Love and Charity, because all the actions
of will are in love and wellyking as in their root, in like manner as all the
doings of Gods Understanding, mee^e altogether in his wisdom. For, whereas
we desire the thing which we want, or be glad of the thing which we have; the
cause thereof is that we love it or like well of it. Likewise also, whereas we
fear a thing, or loathe it; that comes of a hatred, which can have no place
in God, whose will nothing is able to withstand. Therefore as we have God of
God (that is to wit, the Son of the Father) by the everlasting inworking of
his Understanding; so also have we God of God again (that is to wit, the holy
Ghost or love of them both) by the ioyntworking of the Understanding and Will
together. Whereupon we conclude three distinct persons or Inbeings in one
essence; not to exclude the singleness thereof which it behooves us to hold
still; but to express the diversity thereof after a sort, which ought not to
be unknown; namely the power of the Father, the wisdom of the Son, and
the goodness of their love; for whom, by whom, and in whom, Of whom, by whom,
and in whom.
it has pleased the said only one unspeakable essence to create and to love
all things.

But there is yet more, namely, that as there are three Inbeings or Persons
Three Persons and no mo.
in this essence; so also there can be no mo but three: which thing may be
made evident by the same reason. Whosoever denies that there is Understanding and
Will in God as we have seen before, must also deny that he has made any
thing, or that he does any thing: for all the things which we see here below,
are marked both with the one and with the other. Likewise, he that confesses
that all things are in him, (according to their preaching unto us) must needs
also confess the Son and the holy Ghost, to be the wisdom and the love;
for they be but actions of those two, which cannot be without their action;
neither can action be everlastingly any where else than in God himself. Now, as
we can not imagine God without his actions; so can we not consider any other
than those to abide in him, nor consequently any other Underbeings that
proceed from thence; whereupon we say also, that a fourth person cannot be
admitted. As for example, we say he is the Creator, and we say true; and in so
saying we find also a relation to the Creatures. But this power of Creating
proceeds from the power which is in the Father, and is not an action that
abides still within him, but passes directly into the thing created, which in
respect of the Creator, is as nothing in comparison of infiniteness, whereof
it cannot have the pre-eminence. Also we say he is a Savior: and that is all
one with the other. For his being a Savior, is by his Son, as we shall see
hereafter; and moreover, it is an action that passes into the thing saved, and
abides not in God alone. Therefore it makes not to the stablishing of a
fourth person or inbeing; for then it ought to be Coessentiall. To be short,
all Gods operations do either proceed from within him, and abide still in the
worker and in their first ground; or else they proceed from without, and pass
into the outward effect. That work or action which proceeds from within, can
be of none other essence than the thiug from whence it comes: for in GOD
there is nothing but essence, and in that esseuce can nothing abide but the
essence it self. That which proceeds from without, is always of a sundry
essence, as are the Creatures and works of God, which come nothing nere the
essence of the Creator. The thing which does the work without, is Gods power,
howbeit accompanied with his understanding and will. And the thing that does
the work within, is his understanding and will and nothing else, as we may
discern in our selves, who are but a very slender image thereof. And like as
in beholding a painted Table, or in reading the verses of a Poet, we imagine
not therefore that there was a peculiar and immediate ability of paynting or
versifying in the mind or souereyne part of their Soul; but we refer those
skilles and al other like, unto Wit and Will: even so and much more according
to reason, of all the works and doings which we see done by Gods power, we
cannot gather any other persons or inbeings in him, than those which proceed
immediately of his Understanding and Will; and alonly those and none other can
be Coessentiall in him. Now, Understanding and Will in GOD, are essence; and
his essence is merely one and most single. And moreover, the Word or Speech
conceyueth not another Speech, but turns wholly unto the Father; neither does
the Spirit conceive another love than the love of those two; but rests and
reposeth it self altogether in them. So then, there can but one only word or
speech proceed by the understanding, nor but only one Love proceed by the
Will; neither can any other proceed of that Word and that Love. And so there
remain unto us the only three persons of the Father, the Son, and the holy
Ghost; by the which two, the Father governs and loves all things, because he
himself alone is all things.

Now, as we have read in nature that there is but one God, as a thing which we
find written even in the least creatures: Traces of the Trinity in the World
and in Man.
so may we now perceive the evident footsteps of the chree inbeings or persons
in one e^sence, as a mark of the worker that made them, in some more and in
some less, according to their dignity; which yet notwithstanding are such, as
we could not well perceine them, until the doctrine thereof was revealed unto
us, no more than we can understand the letters of Cyphering, which we can
neither read nor decypher, unless we have some knowledge of ye matter which
they import, from other folks hands, or by conjecture, or by some other way.
We find an Unity in all things, yea even in those which have but only being.
For all things are inasmuch as they be one: and whenever they cease to be
that one, they consequently cease also to be. Again, we see in them a form
or shape, and that is the mark of that witfull action (that is to say, of the
everlasting Word or Conceyt whereby God made them) which has bred us the
essential form or shape, and all other manner of forms and shapes. Also we
see an inclination or disposition, in some more apparent than in othersome; in
some to mount aloft, as in fire; in some to sincke down toward the Center, as
in a Stone; and in all, to hold themselves united in their matter and form.
This is the mark of the workfull Will, wherein God has voutsafed to stoop
unto them; and of the union which proceeds thereof, wherein he loves,
vpholdeth, and preserves all things. But even in some of the things of this
bacest sort, there appears not only a trace, but almost an image thereof.
For, the Sun breeds or begets his own beams, which the Poets do call
the very son of the Sun: and from them two proceeds the light, which
imparteth it self to all things here beneath; and yet is not the one of them
before the other; for neither is the Sun before his beams, nor the Sun or
his beams before the light, otherwise than in consideration of order and
relation, that is to wit, as in respect that the beams are begotten and the
light is proceeding; which is an apparent image of the Coeternitie. Likewise in
Waters, we have the head of them in the earth, and the Spring boiling out of
it, The welhead, the Spring, and the stream.
and the stream which is made of them both and sheadeth it self out far of
from thence. It is but one selfsame continual and inseperable essence, which
has neither forenesse nor afternesse, save only in order and not in time, that
is to say, according to our considering of it, having respect to causes, and
not according to truth. For, the Welhead is not a head, but in respect of the
Spring; nor the Spring a Spring, but in respect of the Welhead; nor the Stream
a Stream, but in respect of them both; and so all three be but one Water, and
cannot almost be considered one without another, howbeit that the one is not
the other. It is an express mark of the original relations and persons
Coessentiall in the only one essence of God. The like is to be said of Fire,
which ingendreth fire, and has in it both heat and brightness inseperable.
Also there are other examples to be found of such as list to seek them out.
In Herbs and Plants there is a root, which yields a slip, stock or
ympe, and the same ympe grows afterward into a Tree. It cannot well be named
or deemed to be a root, but that therewith it has also engendered an ympe or
stock; for in that respect is it called a root, and so is the one as soon as
the other. Also there is a sap which passes from the one to the other,
joining, knitting, and uniting them together by one common life, without the
which life, neither the root should be a root, nor the slip a slip, and so
in effect they be altogether, the one as soon as the other. Moreover, among
all living wights, every of them ingendreth after his own kind and form; of
whom one is an ingendrer and another is engendered; among men, a father and a
son; and by and by through knowledge, there proceeds a natural love and
affection from the one to the other, which knitteth and linketh them together.
All these are traces, footsteps, and images, (howbeit with the grossest) of
that high mystery; and also I have told you before, that no effect does fully
resemble his cause, and much less that cause which in all respects is most
infinite.

Notwithstanding, in man's Soul, (when I say Soul, I mean there the highest
power thereof) the image and likeness of the Trinity is yet much more lively
and more express. For first there is in it a Nature and ability of working,
and as it were a mere act, whereby it lives and gives life, and is it self
in continual working. The Latins call it Men's [that is to say Mynd] and we
call it also the reasonable Soul, the which we may liken to the Father. This
Mind breeds an understanding or Wit, by the which we understand and discern,
not only other things, but also our selves; and again by understanding we
come to will, through the which we love other things, and most of them for our
own sakes. These three powers are very distinct in us: for we work not
always by Wit, not always by Will, and yet our mind works continually.
Moreover, oftentimes we will the thing which we understand not, and we
understand the thing which we will not. And therefore to will and to
understand are not both one. Nevertheless this Working, Understanding and
Willing, are not three lives or three Souls in us, but one life and Soul, and
that so streitly united in once essence, that even in the selfsame instant that
our mind does a thing, it also vnderstaudeth the reason why it wills it or
wills it not, in which work both our inworking power and also our wit and
our will do concur all together. Yet notwithstanding, this image is far
from the thing it self. For these three powers are several in the essence of
our Soul; and how nearly so ever they be united together, yet is not the one
the other; But in God who is most singly one, Being is Understanding, and
understanding is will, as I have said before. And again, by Gods understanding
and by his will there proceed from him two Inbeings, by reasons whereof he
myndeth and loves himself, and in himself all things. As for our Soul there
can no such thing proceed from it by the wit or the will, because although
they be both in it, yet they take their grounds from without themselves,
insomuch that it can neither understand nor love, unless the abilities thereof
be set aworking by some outward thing. And which more is, the more it
understands it self, the more does it streine it self to understand and
know another than it self: and the more it loves it self through true
knowledge of it self, the more does it seek contentment by loving another,
which other it cannot love but by hating it self; that is to wit, it streyneth
it self too behold and love God, and to know and love it self but only for
his sake, to whom alonly it belongs to understand all things in himself,
and to love all things of himself. But now it is high time henceforth to see
what antiquity will say to us concerning this matter, the which it will be
better for us to reserve to the next Chapter following. And as touching the
questions that may be made by the curious sort upon this point, we answer
them at one word; Let them tell us how they themselves are bred and begotten,
and then let them ask us of the begetting of the Son of God: Let them tell
us the nature of the spirit that beats in their Pulses; and the^ let them be
inquisitiue at our hands for the proceeding of the holy Ghost. And if they must
be feign to keep silence in so common matters, which they daily see and feel
in themselves; let them give us leave to be ignorant in many things, which are
such (as says Empedocles) as no eye has seen, nor ear heard, nor wit of man
can conceive.

The vj. Chapter.
That the Philosophy of old time consents to this doctrine of the Trinity.
SUrely (as I have said before) this doctrine is not bred of man's brain, though
it be painted there after some sort; but was verily inspyred into our
forefathers from above, who (as says Plato Plato in his Philebus.
) were better than we, and nerer also unto God. And in good sooth we see an
infallible argument thereof, in that the elder the world grows, the more do
men's doctrines grow to perfection and knowledge. But contrariwise, the further
that this has gone from the former ages, the more has it bin found darkened,
Plato. lib. 3. of his Commonweal: and lib. 10. and 12. of Laws.
and has nowhere bin so lightsome as at the welspring thereof; until that by
the birth of the true daysonne in deed, it received greater light than ever it
had before. And therefore when Plato, yea and Aristotle Aristo. lib. 1. of
Heaven. and lib. 12. of his Metaphisiks. Plotin often. etc.
himself speak of the Godhead, of the Creation of the World, and of other
like Mysteries; they be feign to allege the ancient report, and the record of
antiquity descended from hand to hand, as ye surest staff to stand by in
matters that exceed the capacity of man. Which thing they express ordinarily
by these speeches, According to the old Saw, The Chaldies heard speak of the
Trinite. Zoroast^es. Plutarke in his treatise of Isis and Osyris. Pliny and
Aristotle bear witness that he wrote many books.
as the auncientest reports go, As our forefathers and Elde^s say, and such
like. Among these men of the auncientest sort, the first that we meet with is
Zoroastres, whom Plutarke reports to have lived certain thousands of years
before ye wars of Troy. Nevertheless, by report of the best Authors, he
descended of Cham, and was vanquished by Nynus King of the Assyrians. Of him
came the Magies, that is to say the Wisemen of Chaldey, and from them sprung up
the like in Persia, who had in their custody the Registers of the Kings of
those days, and wrate their deeds, and had the ordering of matters perteining
to Religion. And now mark what we find in their sayings gathered by men of old
time, which are commonly called Logia, that is to say Oracles. The father
(says Zoroaftres) did perfect all things, and gave them to a second Mind whom
all mankind takes for the first. And Pletho Gemistus (...). Pletho Gemistus.
a Platonist says, that by this second Mind, he means a second God which
succeeds the Father, and has his begetting of the Father; and that men have
taken him for the first, because God created the World by him, howbeit that the
Father created the myndly shapes, and gave the government of them to this
second Mind. (...).
Ye see then here is a second person begotten of the Father. Proclus rehearses
the same, saying; This Mind having alone taken the flower of Understanding from
the power of the Father, possesses the understanding and power to deal forth
his Fathers understanding or mind to all Originalles and all Beginnings of
things. Then has he his being and his understanding from the Father, and all
other things have them from him. But the things which are found in his
Commentary upon the Parmenides of Plato are wonderful.

For the better yielding of the sense whereof, Proclus lib. 2. and 3. upon
Platoes Parmenides.
I will translate it into Prose, notwithstanding yt it be written in verse in
the Greek. The Mind of the Father (says he) being settled by determinate
purpose, did shed forth shapes of all sorts; which issued all from one
selfsame fountain, because the devise and end were both of the Father. But
yet were they divided by a Fire of understanding, and (as it were by destiny)
distributed into other understandings. For before the making of this
sundry-shaped world, God had conceived an incorruptible pattern thereof, as a
world subject only to mind and understanding: In the mould whereof this present
World being stamped, became full of al those shapes, of the which there is but
one only gracious Fountain.

And again in another place he says as follows.

That is to say, The love of God being a fyrie bond, issued first from his
understanding, and clothed it self with fire to temper the conueyances of the
watersprings, by spreading his heat upon the same. These are their accustomed
obscurities; wherein (notwithstanding) it is clearly enough uttered, that there
is a Father, a Son, and a Love that linketh them together: and moreover, that
the said begotten Mind or Understanding is he by whom God framed the World, and
that from him proceeds the divine Love, as I have said heretofore. In another
place they say that the said Fatherly Mind has sowed and planted in our
Souls, a certain resemblance of the said begotten understanding, and that our
wills be not acceptable unto him, until we awake out of forgetfulness, and
bethink our selves again of the (...).
pure fatherly mark which is in us. And again, that the same Understanding,
being of (...).
power to beget or breed of it self, did (by considering) cast a fyrie bond
of Love upon all things, whereby they be continued for ever. But it is enough
for us that in the sayings before alleged, we have a brief Sum of the
divinity of the Magies, who held three beginnings, whom (as we read in other
places) they called Oromases, Mitris, and Ariminis, [that is to say] God, Mind,
and Soul. And surely we should wonder at them much more, if we had their
whole books, as we have but pieces of them remaining. Now, the Magies were
first in Chaldye, and we read in Moses how highly Balaam was esteemed, in
that he was thought able to bless Nations and Armies. And these Chaldies are
the same of whom the Oracle of Apollo answered, That only they and the Hebrews
had wisdom parted betwixt them.

(...).
All wisdom certesse parted is between
The Chaldies and the Hebrews as is seen.
Mercurius Trismegistus Mercury. The Egiptians
(as we have seen in the third Chapter) acknowledged but only one God, who
cannot well be named but by two names, to wit, Good, and Father. And because
the same God is indewed with understanding, sometimes he calls him (...),
howbeit that most commonly he makes a difference between the Father and the
Understanding which he calls Mind likewise. Which thing appears in this
saying of his, I am Poemander, (...). Of the selfebeing in his Poemander. cap.
2.
the Feeder of Men, and the understanding of the Beer which is of himself. But
behold here records as clear as can be. God (says he) who is also Mind, and
Life, and Light, and Male-f^male; begat or bred Logon the Speech or Word,
which is another Mind, and the workmayster of all things; and with that Speech,
another which is the fyrie God and the Spirit of the Godhead. (...), etc.
Lo here a Mind begotten of a Mind, Understanding of Understanding, and Light
of Light; and besides that, moreover a Spirit. And again, This Speech that
proceeds from GOD being altogether perfect, and fruitful, and Workmistresse
of all things, lights upon the water and makes it fruitful. It is the same
thing that is spoken of in Moses, where God says, And the waters immediately
brought forth. To be short, unto this holy speech (as he terms it) he
attributes the begetting, ingendring and spreading forth of al things from
offspring to offspring, as is to be seen. (...).
But here is yet more: I thy God (says God) am Light and Mind, of more
antiquity than the nature of moisture that is issued from the shadow. And this
lightsome Speech which proceeds from the mind, is the Son of God. That
which hears and sees in thee, is the word of the Lord; and the Mind is God
the Father; Mercury alleged by Cyrillus. lib. 1. against Julian. and in his
Poemander cap. 1. (...).
these differ not one from another; and as for their union, it is the union of
life, etc. And again: This Speech being the workman of God the Lord of the
whole World, has chief power next him, and is uncreated, infinite, proceeding
from him, the Commander of all things which he made, the perfect and natural
firstborne Son of the most perfect. To be short, he calls him ye myndly
speech, everlasting, unchangeable, incorruptible, vnincreasing, vndecreasing,
alonly like him, and firstbeknowne after God; and moreover his only Son, his
well-beloved Son, the Son of the most holy, whose name (...) be named by
mouth of man. And is not this as much as to call him Coessentiall, Coeternal,
and the Creator of all things? Merc. 1. (...). Austin in the Prayer of Five
Heresies. Mercury in his Esculapius. Chap. 3. and 7.
And what more can we say thereof?

Of the third parson he speaks more dackly. Al kind of things in this World
(says he) are quickened by a Spirit; One Spirit fills all things; the World
nourishes the bodies, and the Spirit the Souls; and this Spirit as a tool or
instrument, is subject to the will of God. But here is yet somewhat more. All
things (says he) have need of this Spirit; it bears them up, it nourishes
them, it quickens them, according to every of their capacities: it proceeds
from a holy fountain, and is the mainteyner of all living things and of all
Spirits. Here ye see the reason why we call him the holy Ghost, namely,
because he proceeds from the fountain which is the very holiness it self.
And least we should think him to be a Creature, Mercury in his holy Sermon in
his Poemander. cap. 3.
There was (says he) an infinite shadow in the Deep, whereon was the water,
and a fine understanding Spirit was in that confuzed mass through the power of
God. From thence there flourished a certain holy brightness, which out of the
Sand and the moist nature brought forth the Elements and all things else. Also
the Gods themselves which dwell in the Stars, took their place by the
direction and appointment of this Spirit of God. Thus then he was present at
the creation of things; and it is the same spirit whereof it is said in the
Bible, Genesis 1.
That the spirit of the Lord houered upon the outside of the deep. But in some
places he matcheth all three persons together. O life (says he) save that life
which is in me. Mercury in his Poemander. cap. 13.
O light and God the Spirit inlighten me wholly. O worker which bear thy
Spirit about, let thy word govern me. Lord, thou art the only one God.
Again, (...). Cyrillus against Tulgentius.
there was (says he) a light of understanding, before the light of
understanding, and there was ever a mind of the lightfull Mind, and besides
those, there was not any thing else than the union of them by one Spirit
upholding all things: without which there is neither God nor Angel, nor other
Substance: For he is Lord, Father, and God of all, and in him and under him
are al things. And having said so (says Suydas Suidas in his Mercury. (...).
) he adds this prayer. I adjure thee o Heaven the wise work of the great
God; I adjure thee o voice which God uttered first when he founded the world; I
adjure thee by the only begotten Speech, and by the Father who conteyneth all
things, etc. There is no man but he would wonder to see in this author the
very words of S. John: and yet notwithstanding his books were translated by
the Platonists long time before the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. And it is
no maruayle though we find sayings of his in diverse places which are not
written in his Poemander, considering that he wrote six and thirty thousand,
five hundred, and five and twenty Uolumes, that is to say Rolls of Paper, as
Iamblichus Iamblichus in his 39. Chap. of Mysteries.
reports. And it is said that this Trismegistus otherwise called Theut, is
the same that taught the AEgiptians to read, and which invented them Geometry
and Astronomy, which divided AEgipt into parts, which left his forewarning
against ouerflowings written in two Pillars, Plato in his Phedon and Philebus.
Eusebius of Demonstration
(which Proclus reports to have been standing still in his time;) and to be
short, which had been reputed and honored as a God among them. And it may be,
that the treble outcry which the AEgiptians made in calling upon the first
Beginner, whom they termed the darkness beyond all knowledge, like too the
Ensoph of the Hebrews, Iamblichus Chapt. 1. Produs upon Plato. Damascius the
Platonist.
and the Night of the Orpheus, was still remaining unto them, of his divinity.
Thus have you seen how Zoroastres and Mercury have answered unto us, the one
for the Persians and Chaldeans, and the other for the AEgiptians. For in
matters of Wisdom, the wise ought to be believed for the whole Nation.

Now let us come to the Greeks. The ancient Greeks.
Orpheus Orpheus.
which is the auncientest of them all, as soon as he begins to speak of
these mysteries, does first and foremost shut all Heathenish folk out of the
doors, and then says thus: (...). And again. (...), etc.
Let thine eye be upon the word of God, and start not away from it, for that is
it that made the world, and is immortal, and (according to the old saying) is
perfect of it self, and the perfecter of all things, and it cannot be seen
but with the mind. And afterward, I adjure thee O Heaven (says he) the wise
work of the great God, I adjure thee thou voice of the father which he spoke
first, and so forth. For this (as appears before) was a prayer which he had
learned of Mercury; from whom also proceeded the common mystery of the Poets,
That Pallas was bred of Jupiters brain. The same man says that the first
Moother of things was wisdom, and afterward delightful love. Clemens lib. 5
Strom. Orph. (...).
And in his Argonawte he calls this love, most ancient, most perfect in it
self, and the bringer forth and disposer of all things.

(...),
(...).
Whereupon Pherecydes Pherecydes in Proclus.
also says, That God intending too make the world, changed himself into
love. And Iamblichus says that Pythagoras had the Philosophy of Orpheus
always before his eyes; Orph. in Argonaut.
and therefore it is not for us to wonder, though he attributed the creation
of al things to Wisdom, and (as Proclus reports) commended three Gods
together in one, as Plato does. Howsoever the case stand, Aristotle Aristotle
in his first book of Heaven.
says, that they fathered all their perfection upon three. And Parmenides did
set down Love as a first beginner; insomuch that in disputing in Plato,
Parmenides in his Cosmogoni^ ailedged by Plutarke.
he leaves us there an evident mark of the three Inbeeings or Persons as
Plotine notes; but we shall see it laid forth more plainly hereafter by
Numenius the Pythagorist. Zeno the father of the Stolks, (...).
acknowledged the word to be God, and also the Spirit of Jupiter. And Alcinous
reports that Socrates and Plato taught that God is a mind, and that in the
sauie there is a certain (...), which Inshape as in respect of God, is the
knowledge which God has of himself; and in respect of the world, is the
Pattern or Mauld thereof; and in respect of it self, is very essence. Plotin.
Ennead. 4. lib. 1. Chap. 8. Zeno the stoik Aleinous concerning the Doctrine of
Plato.
This in few words centeyneth much matter, that is to wit, the one essence
which God begets by the con^idering or knowing of himself, according to the
pattern whereof he has builded the world. But yet Plato himself speaks
more plainly in his Epinomis. Every Star (says he) keeps his course
according to the order which (ho logos) the Word has set, which word he
calls Most divine. Plato in his Epinomis.
In his book of Commonweal he calls him the begotten Son of the Good,
most like unto him (...) all things, (...).
ye Good (says he) being as the (...) that shines in the sky; and the
begotten Son being as the power of the Sun whereby we see [that is to say,
as ye light.] Also in his Epistle to Hermius, Erastus, and Coriscus, he
charge them with an oath to read it often, Plato in his sixth book of
Commonweal.
and at the least, two of them together, saying: Call upon God the Prince of
al things, that are and shall be, and the Lord the Father of that Prince and of
that Cause, of whom if we seek the knowledge aright, (...). Plato in his
Epistle to Hermias, Erastus, and Coriscus. Plato unto Dennis the Tyrant. (...)
we have as much s^ill as can be given to blessed men. Then is there a Lord
and Cause of all things, and moreover a father of the same Lord. But anto King
Dennis who had asked of him the nature of God, he sets down all the three
parsons. The nature of the first (says he) is to be spoken of in Riddlewise,
to the intent that if any mischaunce befall the Letter by Sea or by Land, the
reading thereof may be as good as no reading at all. Thus then stands the case.
All things are at commandment of the King of the whole world, and all things
are for his sake, and he is the cause of the beauty that is in them; And about
the second are the second things, and about the third are the third, and so
forth. Now these (as he himself says) are Riddies to Dennis the Tyrant unto
whom he wrote, and my e^pounding of them of the three I^beeings or Persons in
the Godhead, is by the consent of all the Platonists, who have made long
Commentaries upon those words, agreeing all in this point, that by these
three Kings he means the Good, the understanding, and the Soul of the
World. And Origene Origin in his 6. book against C^lsus.
against Celsus alleges certain other places of Plato to the same purpose;
the which I leave, for avoiding of tediousnes. But this doctrine which being
revealed from above, came from hand to hand unto Aristotle, (who lived about
three hundred years before the coming of Christ (seems to have decayed in
him; who intending to overthrow all the Philosophers that went before him,
corrupted their doctrine diverse ways. And therewithal he gave him self more
to the seeking and searching of Natural things, than to the mynding of the
Author of them. Yet notwithstanding, In his first book of Philosophy.
he fathereth the cause of all things upon a certain Understanding, Also in
his book of the World.
which he calls Noun, yt is to say Mind, In his first book of Heaven.
acknowledging the same to be infinite in God; and also upon a Free will
whereby he disposes all things; whereupon in the last Chapter I coucluded a
second and a third person. Insomuch that in a certain place he says
plainly, that God is to be honored according to the number of three, and that
the same is after a sort the Law of Nature.

Now, for as much as this doctrine is not bred of man's brain; if it be
demanded whence all the Philosophers took it; we shall find that the
Greeks had it from out of AEgipt. Orpheus witnesses in his Argonawts, that to
seek the Mysteries (that is to say the Religion) of the AEgiptians, he went as
far as Memphis, visiting all the Cities upon the River Nyle.

Through out the land of AEgipt I have gone Orpheus in h^^ Argonawts.

To Memphis and the Cities euerychone
That worship Apis or be seated by
The River Nyle whose stream does swell so hy.
Also Pythagoras visited the AEgiptians, Arabians and Chaldeans, yea, and went
into Iewry also, and dwelt a long time at Mount Carmel (as Strabo says:
Cicero. Iamblichus. Porphyrius.
) insomuch that the Priests of that Country showed Strabo still the iourneyes
and walks of him there. Clemens in the first book of his Stromars.
Now, in AEgipt he was the Disciple of one Sonchedie the chief Prophet of the
AEgiptians, and of one Nazarie an Assyrian (as Alexander reports in his book
of Pythagorasis discourses) whom some (miscounting the time) thought to be
Ezechiel. And Hermippus Out of Alexander and Hermippus.
a Pythagorist writes that Pythagoras learned many things out of the law of
Moses. Also the said AEgiptian Priest vpbrayded Solon, that the Greeks were
Babes, and knew nothing of Antiquity. Plato in his Timaeus.
And Solon (as says Proclus Proclus upon Timaeus.
) was Disciple in Says a City of AEgipt, to one Patanit, or (as Plutarke
Plutarke in his Treatise of Isis and Osyris.
says) to one Sonchis; in Heliople, to one Oeclapie; and in Sebenitie, to one
Etimon. Plato was the Disciple of one Sechnuphis of Heliople in AEgipt; and
Eudoxus the Guidian was the Disciple of one Conuphis; all which Maysterteachers
issewed out of the School of the great Trismegistus aforenamed. Plato in his
Epinomis, Cratylus, and Phil.
To be short, Plato confesses in many places, that knowledge came to the
Greeks by those whom they commonly called the barbarus people. As touching
Zoroastres and Trismegistus, Iustine and Manethon alleged by Josephus against
Appion.
the one was an Hebrewe, and the other, an AEgiptian. And at the same time the
Hebrews were conversant with the AEgiptians, as is to be seen even in the
Heathen Authors. Whereby it appears that the original fountain of this
doctrine was to be found among them; which is the thing that we have to prove
as now. I mean not to gather hither a great sort of Texts of the Bible,
wherein mention is made as well of the second person as of the third, of which
sort are these, Psalm. 2.
Thou art my Son, Proverb. 8.
this day have I begotten thee. Genesis 1.
The Lord (says Wisdom) possessed me in the beginning of his ways; before
the depths was I conceived. etc. Also concerning the holy Ghost, Esaias. 53.
The Spirit of the Lord walked upon the waters. The Spirit of Wisdom is
gentle: And it is an ordinary speech among the Prophets to say, Esaias. 61.
The Spirit of the Lord was upon me. And in this next saying are two of them
together, or rather all three. Psalm. 33.
The Heavens were spread out by the word of the Lord, and all the power of them
by the Spirit of his mouth. For they be so alleged and expounded in infinite
books, howbeit that the Jews at this day do labor as much as they can, to
turn them to another sense.

But let us see what their own Doctors have left us in express words, The
Jews themselves do prove the Trinity.
(for ye most part) culled by themselves out of written books, before that ye
coming of our Lord Jesus Christ had made yt docttrine suspected. In their
Zohar which is one of their Books of greatest authority, Rabbi Simeon, the
son of Iohai, cites Rabbi Ibba expou^ding this text of Deuteronomie, Hearken
o Israel, The Everlasting our God is one God. The Hebrewe stands thus,
Jehovah Echad Jehovah Eloh enu. By ye first Jehovah which is ye peculiar name
of God not to be communicated to any other, Rabbi Ibba says he means the
Father the Prince of al. By Eloh enu that is to say our God, he means the
Son the Fountain of all knowledge. And by the second Jehovah he means the
holy Ghost proceeding from them both, who is the measurer of the voice. And he
calls him One, because he is vndiuidable; and this Secret (says he) shall
not be revealed before the coming of the Messiah. The same Rabbi Simeon R.
Simeon ben Iohai expounding the 6. of Esaias.
expou^ding these words of Esaias, Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Hosts; says,
Holy is the Father, Holy is the Son, and Holy also is the holy Ghost. In so
much that this Author who is so mystical among them, does in other places call
them the Three Mirrours, Lights, and Souerein fathers, which have neither
beginning nor end, and are the name and substance to the Root of all Roots.
And Rabbi Ionathas in many Copies of his Chaldey Paraphrase, says the same.
And therefore no marvel though the Thalmudists of old time commanded men to
say that Uerse twice a day, and that some observe it still at this day. Upon
these words of the 50. Psalm, Psalm. 50. and the Midra^ch upon the same.
El elohim Jehovah dibber, that is to say, The Lord of Lords the Everlasting
has spoken: The ordinary Commentary says also, that by the said repetition
the Prophet means the three Middoth Properties whereby God created the world.
According whereunto Rabbi Moses Hadarsan R. Moses Hadarsan upon the 42. of
Genesis Midrasch Cobeleth chap. 4.
says that he created by his word; And Rabbi Simeon says he created by the
breath of his mouth. And this saying of ye Preacher, That a threefold Cord is
not so soon broken, is expounded by the same gloss, (I examine not whether
filthy or no) that the inisterie of the Trinity in the one God is not easy to
be expressed. Now these three Properties, (which the Hebrews call Panim, the
Greeks (...), and we and the Latins call Persons) are betokened by diverse
names among the men of old time, but yet they iumpe all in one, according as
they understood them, some more clearly than other some. Rabbi Isha^ ben
Schola upon the last verses of the 111. and 112. Psalms.
Some name them the Beginning, the Wisdom, and the Fear of Love of God: and
they say that this Wisdom is Meensoph, as the Cabalists term it, that is to
say, of the infinite and most inward understanding of God, who beholds
himself in himself, for so do they expound it. Which is the selfsame thing
that I spoke of in the former Chapter, namely that God begets his Son or
Wisdom by his mynding of himself. Othersome call him Spirit, Word, and Voice:
as Rabbi Azariell R. Azariel in his Commentary or treatise of Holiness.
does in these words following. The Spirit brings forth the Word and the
Voice, but not by opening the Lips, or by speech of the tongue, or by
breathing after the manner of man; And these three be one Spirit, to wit one
God, as we read (says he) in the book of the creating of man in these
terms: Iepher haije^sirab.
One Spirit rightly living, blessed be he and his name, who lives for ever
and ever, Spirit, Word, and Voice, that is to say, One holy Ghost and two
Spirits of that Spirit. Now this book of the Creation which he alleges, is
one Rabbi Abraham's a very ancient Cabalist; Nevertheless it is of so great
authority among them, that they father it even upon the Patriarch Abraham
himself. And that which he says agrees wholly to that which we say; for the
mind conceyueth the inward speech, and of the mind and of breath proceeds the
voice. These three (says Rabbi Hamay R. Hamay in his Treatise of Speculation.
Hagnij ^n.
) being one, have such a proportionable respect one toward another, as that
the one, the Uniter, and the thing United are but one point, to wit, the Lord
of the whole world. Rabbi Isaac R. Ishaac upon the book of the Creation.
upon the book of the Creation makes three nomberings, (which he terms the
Lofty one) in the Ensoph, that is to say, in the Infinite, that is to wit
Garlond, Wisdom, and understanding. And to betoken them, Rabby Assee Cether
chochnah binah. Rabbi Assee.
says that the custom was to mark them in all ages after this manner with
three Iods Jehovah: which is as much to say as the Beeer, or He that is. To be
short, what diversity soever there is in ye names, they al agree in the three
Inbeeings or Persons. And it is no marvel though they could not so well
express them as we can now. Rabbi Joseph In his book intytled, Schaguar orah.
that is to say, The Gate of Light.
the Castilian, having learned it out of the auncientest writers, says thus:
The light of the Soul of the Messiah, is the living God; and the living God is
the fountain of the living waters; and the Soul of the Messiah is the River
or Stream of lyse. And in another place, None but the Messiah (says he)
knows God fully, because he is the light of God and the light of the
Gentiles, and therefore he knows God, and God is known by him. Now when as
they say that he knows GOD fully, they grant him to be God; for who can
comprehend God but GOD himself? And it is the selfsame thing which I spoke of
when I said light of light, and when in comparing the Son to the Father, I
lykened him as a stream to the fountain, and the Sun beams to the Sun.
Also we shall see in place convenient, that by the Soul of the Messiah, they
meant The Word: and it is a wonderful thing that all the names of God in
Hebrewe (saving only the name of his Essence or single being) have the
plural termination, notwithstanding that they be joined with a verb of the
singular number, (whereof the ancient Jews do yield the same reason that we
do:) and that a great sort of the Texts of the old Testament which we allege
for the proof of the Trinity, are expounded by them in the selfsame sense,
howbeit that the Talumdists since the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, have
taken great pain to wrest them to another meaning.

Rabbi Judas Nagid whom they commonly called the Saint and Prophet, speaks
most plainly of all. Whereupon it is to be understood, The Epistle of the
Secrets of R Nehumia the Son of Hacana.
that men were forbidden to utter the uncommunicable name of God, (that is to
wit Iehoua,) save only in the days of attonementmaking; and in sted thereof
they were commanded to use the name of Twelve letters, for the other before
mentioned has but four. And being asked what the name of Twelve letters was,
he answered that it was Father, Son, and holy Ghost. Also being demanded
what the name of Two and forty letters was; he answered, The Father is God,
the Son is God, and the holy Ghost is God, three in one, and one in three.
This is to be seen even in Saint Math. chap. 1. ver. 20. where the Angel
says to Joseph, that Mary was with child by the holy Ghost: for otherwise it
had bin to no purpose to have spoken of the holy Ghost, of who^ they had not
heard any speaking before.
Now then, it was a doctrine received from hand to hand in the Schools of the
Jews, as we see by the long continuance thereof in the succession of their
Cabale. And therefore the contention of the Jews and of the Rabbynes was not
(to speak properly) in withstanding the doctrine of the three Persons in the
Essence of God; but in the applying thereof, namely to the incarnation of the
Word, which in their eye was very far unbeseeming the Majesty of God.

Let us go to Philo the Jew who wrate in Greek, and we shall find him like
in all points from leaf to leaf. God (says he) is the souereine begetter,
and next to him, is the Word of God. Also, The same is also in the Preaching of
John the Baptist, Chapter 3. verse 20. He shall baptize ye with the holy Ghost
and with Fire. And in diverse other places. And in very deed the name of the
holy Ghost is rife among all the Rabbines. Philo in his Treatise upon the six
Days. In his treatise, That Dreams are of God. In his book of the World. In
his book of the remouings of Abraham.
There are two Firsts; the one is Gods word, and the other is God who is before
the Word; and the same Word is the beginning and the end (...) of his good
pleasure, intent, or will. And in another place, Like as a City (says he)
whereof the platform is yet but set down in the mind of the Builder, has no
place elsewhere than in the Builder: So this world had not any being elsewhere
than in the Word of God which ordained all things. For what other place could
conteyne the operations of God, yea or even the simplest of his conceived
patterns? Therefore to speak plainly, The World in understanding, is the Word
or Conceyt of God that made it. And this is not the opinion of me only, but
also of Moses himself. And to conclude, he calls him the Pattern of all
Patterns, and the Mould wherein all things were cast. And in an other place,
This World (says he) is Gods younger Son; but as for the elder Son, he
cannot be comprehended but in understanding. For he it is who by prerogative
of eldership abides with the Father. Now, this is word for word the same thing
that S. John says, And the Word was with God. And again, The Word is the
place, the Temple, and the dwelling house of God, because the Word is the only
thing that can conteyne him. And that is the thing which I said, namely, that
GOD comprehending himself by his understanding, begat the Son or the Word
equal to himself, because he conceyueth not any thing less than himself.
And to show the greatness of this Word, he could scarce tell what names to
give it. Philo in the Allegories of the law, in his Books of of Dreams, of
Tyllage, of the fiery sword, of the Heir of Heavenly things, of the evil that
lays snares for the good, etc.
He calls it the Book wherein the essences of all things that are in ye
whole world are written and printed; the perfect Pattern of the World; the
Daysonne, that is to be seen but only of the Mind; the Prince of the Angels;
the Firstborne of God; the Shepherd of his flock; the chief Hyghpriest of
the World; the Manna of men's Souls; the Wisdom of God; the perfect Image of
the Highest; and the Organe or Iustrument whereby God (being moved thereto of
his own goodness) created the World. And to be short, he calls him the
Firstbeginner, Lightfulnesse, or altogether light, God, and the Beeer that is
of himself. All these are such things as more cannot be attributed to God
himself: (...).
and he could not have said more expressly, that the Word is Coeternall and
Coessentiall with the Father, that is to say, of one selfsame substance and
of one selfsame euerlastingnesse with the Father. Nevertheless, he adds yet
further, That this Word has in it the se^des of all things; That he has
distributed to every of them their several natures; and that he is the
invincible bond of the whole world and of al things therein. So then, he is (if
I may so term him) the material, efficient, and formal cause of all things.
Philo in his books concerning the Heir of Heavenly things, of the mo^esty of
Women, and of the word, etc.
And unto whom can that be attributed but unto God? Again, There are (says
he) Two Speeches or words; the one being as an Original deed, is above us;
and the other being as an Exemplification or Copy thereof, is within us. And
Moses (says he) calls the same the Image of God; and this other which is
our understanding, he calls a later Copy thereof. And the said first Speech
(says he in his book of the World) is the express print or stamp of God,
(...), that is to say, as a print printed in Wax,
and everlasting as God him self is. And what more says S. John, or the
Apostle to the Hebrews? And in all those places, (which are worthy to be read
throughout,) he uses S. John's own term (namely Logos) to signify the said
Speech, or Word.

Of the holy Ghost he speaks more darkly, because the Hebrews (as we shall
see hereafter) amed chiefly at the Word or second Person. But it is enough for
us to have seen, that this fountain abode sufficiently clear among the
Hebrews, till the coming of Christ (for Philo lived under the Emperors
Tiberius and Caligula) though the streams thereof were as good as dried up
among the Gentiles; verily because the Messiah was to be borne among the
Hebrews, of the belief in whom, this doctrine was to be the groundworke. For
as soon as Christ was come into the World, it took light of him again, as at
the day sun which inlighteneth not only the half compass where on he
shines, but also even a part of that which sees him not. For this doctrine
was not only received in the Church, but also embraced of all the great
Philosophers that came after, notwithstanding that in all other things, they
were deadly enemies to the Christians.

Numenius, the excellentest of all the Pythagorians, The later Pythagorians and
Academiks. Numenius in his book of the Good. Look Eusebius and Cyrillus. lib.
8.
(of whom Porphyrie reports Plotinus to have made so great account, that he
wrate a hundred books of Commentaries upon him) says these words. He that
will know the first and second GOD, must well distinguish, and above all
things he must well settle his mind; and then having called upon GOD, he may
open the treasure of his thoughts. And therefore let us begin thus. God (I mean
the first who is in himself,) is single, throughout co^pacted, and one in
himself, and in no part diuidable. Also the second and third God is one: but
yet you must consider, that the First is the father of him that is the worker
of all things. [Now ye must understand, The Reader must understand, that by
three gods they mean three Inbeeings, as they themselves do declare it.
that] whereas we say, the Frst, Second, and Third Person; it is their manner
to say, the First, Second, and Third God, which thing you must mark here at
once for all the residue following. And whereas he says that the first of them
is the Father, and that he is single, and that they be but one; it is not to
be doubted but that he makes them all one Essence, so as the second holds
of the first, as the Light holds of the Sun. Again, The first God (says
he) is free from all work, but the second is the maker which commands
Heaven: and therefore are there two lives, the one from the first, and the other
from the second; the one occupied about things subject to understanding, and
the other about things subject both to understanding and sense. And moreover,
by reason of the moving which goes before in the second, there is also a
sending which goes before in the first; and so there is a certain ioynt-mouing
from whence the healthful order of the World is spread forth universally.
(...),
Now, whereas he speaks of moving, it is after the manner of the Platonists,
who (metaphorically) do mean, that to be understood or known is to move, and
to understand or know is to be moved, because they wanted words to express
these deep matters. And in the same sense do we read in the Scripture, that
the Son is sent of the Father. And again, God the worker or maker (says he)
is the beginner of Begetting; (...).
and God the Good is the beginner of Being: and the Second is the lively
exppresser of the First, as Begetting is an Image of Being. And in another
place he says, That this Worker being the Son, is known to all men by
reason of the creating of the World; but as for the first Spirit, which is the
Father, he is unknown unto them. And surely (considering their manner of
speaking) he could not have said more plainly, That the Son is the Image of
the Father, that he has his being in him, that he is one with him, and that by
him the Father made all things. And it is agreeable to that which Proclus
witnesses of him, who reports of this Numenius, that he woorshipped three
Gods; of whom he calls the first the Father, the second the Maker, and the
third the Work proceeding from them both. Wherein we ought not so much to
seek into the default, as to commend the good that is therein. Besides this,
it is good to mark here once for all, that these men which speak unto us here
of three Gods, are the same which confessed unto us hertofore, that there is
but only one God. Whereupon it follows that those three be but three Inbeings
or Persons, This Plotinus lived under the Emperor Galien about the year of on
Lord 25 or. Plotin. Enn. 5, lib. 1.
in one Essence.

Plotinus, who was very well studied in the books of Numenius, steppeth yet
further into the matter. And first of all, he has made a Book expressly and
purposely of the three chief Inbeings, whereof I will set down here a
certain brief Sum. There are (says he) three chief Inbeings, the One or
the Good, the Understanding or Wit, Of the three souerein or chief persons
or Inbeings.
and the Soul of the World. And of these three it is not for any man to
speak, without praying unto God, (...). To the intent the Reader think not any
obscurity in this or other that follow, he must remember that to the first
Inbeeing, (that is to say, Person) the Philosophers give the names of the One,
The Mind, the Good, the Father, and the Begetter: unto the second person, the
names of Beeer or he that is, wit or understanding, the Beautiful, and
sometimes Speech, word, Reason, wisdom, Son, and the begotten: and unto the
third person, the names of Love, Will, Power, and the Soul of the World: and
sometimes, the second world, etc.
and without settling his mind before unto quietness. And if it be demanded how
one of them begets another; it is to be considered that we speak of
everlasting things, and therefore we must not imagine any temporal begetting.
For this begetting which we speak of here, imports and betokens but
only cause and order. How comes it to pass (says he) that this
Vnderstnding is begotten of the One? Surely it obteyneth not his being by
means of any assent, commaundment, or moving of the One; but it is a light
shed forth euerywhere, streaming from the One as brightness from the Sun,
and begotten of the One, howbeit without any moving of the One. For all things,
as in respect of their continuing of their nature, do necessarily yield out of
their own essence and present power, a cetteyne nature that depends upon
them, which is a very Image and countershape of the power from whence it
proceeds. As for example, Fire yields heat, and Snow cold: and Herbs
yield chiefly sents or sauors. And al things when they be in their perfection,
engender somewhat. That then which is everlastingly perfect, does everlastingly
beget, yea and it begets a perfect and everlasting thing, howbeit that the
thing begotten is less than the begetter. And what shall we say then of the
most perfect? That nothing proceeds from him? Nay rather, that the greatest
next him proceeds of him? Now, the greatest and chiefest next unto the One,
is the Understanding; the which has need alonly of the One, but the One has
no need of it. Needs then must it be, that that thing which is begotten of
that which is better than Understanding, must be the Understanding it self.
And this Understanding, being the very Word of GOD and the Image of GOD,
beholds God, and is unseparably joined with God, and cannot be separated from
him otherwise than respectively, for that the one of them is not the other.
Uerely after the same manner that we affirm the Father to be one person and
the Son another, In respect of this Third, they call the First the Amiable,
and in respect of the Second, they call him the Mind, as shall be seen by
examples.
and yet neither of them both to be any other essence than the other. But let
us see how God begets this Understanding, this Wit, or this Word. It is
(says he) by the super abundance of himself. And therefore this begotten
Understanding must needs reteyne much of the begetter in him, and have almost
like resemblance unto him, as the light has unto the Sun, howbeit so as the
begetter is not the very understanding it self: (...). Another person and not
another thing.
that is to say, they must differ respectively and not essentially; which
expresses his former speech where he said (...) after another manner. And how
then shall he (says he) beget him? Even by a certain turning back of the
begotten to behold the begetter, and this beholding is nothing else but the
mynding or understanding, of the good. And like as the One is but One, so the
understanding thereof is all things. For by being bred of the First Beginner,
it knows all things, and brings forth all things that are: namely, all
Beauty of shapes, yea and all the Gods that are to be discerned by insight
of Mind. These words of his are repeated infinite times, and therefore I will
forbear to rehearse them here any more.

As touching the third Inbeing, Plotin Enn. 5. lib. 2. and. lib. 3. Chap. 85.
and Ernead. 3. lib. 9. Cap. vlt.
whom he calls the Soul of the World, thus says he thereof. Like as the
Understanding, is the begotten issew, Word and Image of God or of the one; so
is the Soul of the World the issew, Word and Image of the Understanding, and
is as a certain Reason engendered of the Understanding, The understanding of
the Good.
the substance whereof consists in contemplation; and the same Reason is as
the light of the Understanding and depends thereupon. And as there is no
mean between the One, and the Understanding; so is there no mean between
the Understanding and this Soul of the World: but the difference is only this,
that the one of them is as the very heat which is in fire it self, and the
other is as the heat which Fire communicates or imparteth unto other things
[by heating them with his heat.] And that is the same thing which we affirm
when we say, That the holy Ghost proceeds from the father by the Son,
calling him the Gift of God, because that by him (who is his Love) he
voutsafeth to impart himself to us here beneath. But we shall discern his
meaning yet better by the effects which he attributes unto him. This Soul
(says he) has breathed life into all living things in the Air, in the Sea,
and on the Land. It rules the Sun, the Stars and the Heaven; It has
quickened the Matter which erst was nothing and utterly full of darkness; and
all this has it done by the only will of it self. It is all throughout all,
like to the Father, as well in that it is but one, as in that it extends it
self into all places. And he concludes thus: And thus far extends the
Godhead. In deed he speaks not so distinctly thereof, as Gregory
Nazianzene; but yet forasmuch as he says that they be all three eternal, of
one selfsame substance, and differing only in this, that the one of them is
not the other, the same may well be gathered of his sayings. In the residue of
his book he proves that the same was the opinion of Plato, Parmenides, and
Anaxagoras. And because the inward man (as he terms it,) is the Image of God;
he takes proof of the three Inbeings, from the consideration of our Soul,
wherein there is a Mind, a Reason and a Life; which three be (notwithstanding)
all but one Soul. Nevertheless, he expresses the manner of the said begetting
in diverse other places. The One (says he) begets the understanding, of the
abundance of himself. Plotinus Enn. 5. lib. 2. and lib. 3 Chap. 5. 6. 7. 12.
and lib 4. Chap. 2.
And the understanding is the Beeer, yea and the very being of the Beeer (mark
those words for all that follows) and turns back again to him, and is
filled with him. And his conclusion is, that the Mynder, the Mynding and the
Minded, are in the Godhead all one thing; and that this Mynding, which is the
first and most excellent act of the Godhead, is essential, that is to say, the
very substance or being of the Godhead, because that all the actions of the
Godhead are the very Godhead or God himself. Now, by the Mynder, he means
the One or the First person; and by the Minded or Beeer he means the Second;
and consequently that they be Coessentiall, [that is to say, both one selfsame
thing, which is GOD.] Again,* There is (faith he) a dubble kind of Mynding:
For a man myndeth, either another, or himself. Now, he that myndeth himself,
has not a several being from that thing which he myndeth, but being both in
one, he beholds himself in himself, and so becomes two parties, which yet
notwithstanding be both but one thing still. Now therefore there remains no
more but to conclude, that the Begetter and the Begotten, Plotin. Enn. 5. lib.
5. Chapter 3. and lib. 6. Chapter 1. and lib. 8. chapter 12. and Enn. 3. lib. 8. cap. 7. 8.
10.
the Mynder and the Minded are both together, and also both one selfsame thing;
and that if they be both one selfsame thing, the one of them is not better
than the other. Whereupon it follows, that whereas he said heretofore that The
One is better than the Understanding (which he calls here the Minded,) he
meant it but in way of relation, and not in way of being. For in another place
he says again, He that is the very Living himself, is not the Minded, but we
call him the Mynder. And although they differ one from another, yet
notwithstanding it is not possible for them to be disseuered. Only they may
be discerned in understanding, the one from the other, because the one of them
is not the other; which manner of discerning is no impediment but that they
remain both one thing still. For only God is both the party that is conceived
in Mind or Understanding, and also the party that conceyueth him. Insomuch
that when we say, that the Mynder beholds the forms or Patterns of things;
Plotin. Enn. 5. lib. 9. Chap. 1.
we mean not that he looks at them in another, but that he possesses them
in himself, by having in himself the party that is minded. Or rather were it
amiss to say, that the same which is minded is the very Mynder himself in his
unity and settled state; and that the nature of the Minded which is behild, is
an act that isseweth from him that Myndeth, which act consists in beholding
or mynding him, and in beholding him becomes one selfsame thing with him?
Again he says in a^ other place; To be and to understand, are both one thing
[in God:] and if any thing proceed thereof inwardly, yet is it no whit
diminished thereby, because the Mynder and the Minded are both one same thing.
For the beholding of ones self in his self, is nothing but himself: But yet
must there needs be always both a selfesamenesse and also an othernesse. Now
then, let us conclude thus; that these two Inbeings or Persons, namely, The
Minded and the Mynder, are both one thing; and therefore that they differ not
but only in way of relation: And that forasmuch as there must needs be ever
both a selfesamenesse and also an othernesse, Plotin. Enn. 6. lib. 7. chapter 39.
and lib. 7.
(If I may so term them) the selfesamenesse is in the Essence or being, The
same in one respect, and another in another respect; or, all one in one
respect, and diverse in another respect.
because that from God there proceeds nothing but God; and the othernesse is
in the Inbeings or Persons, as in respect that the one is the begetter and the
other is the begotten.

Moreover, this Plotinus calls the begetter the Father, and the begotten the
Son, after the same manner that we do. Certesse (says he) the understanding
is beautiful, and the most beautiful of all, (and therefore in diverse other
places he terms him the Beautiful, (as he termed the First the Good) and
sits in clear light and brightness, Plotin. Enn. 5. lib. 5. cap. 12.
and conteyneth in him the nature of all things that are. As for this World of
ours, although it be beautiful, yet it is scarce an image or shadow of him;
but the world that is above, is set in the very light itself, where there is
nothing that is void of understanding, nor nothing dark, but every where is
led a most blessed life. Now, like as he that beholds the Sky and the
Stars, falls by and by to seeking the author of this World: So he that
considers and commends the World that is not to be discerned but in
understanding, does likewise seek the author thereof, namely who he is that
begat that World, and where and how he begat that Son, that understanding,
that Child so bright and beautiful, even that Son full of the Father. As for
the souerein father he is neither the understanding, nor the Son, nor the
Child, but a Mind higher tha^ Understanding and Child. And next unto him is the
Understanding or Child, who needs both understanding and nourishment, and is
next to him that has need of nothing. And yet for all this, (...).
the Son has the very fullness of understanding, because he has it
immediately and at the first hand. But as for him that is the higher (that is to
wit the Father;) he has no need of him: for then should the Son be the very
good it self. So say we also that the Son has all fullness, howbeit of the
Father, and that the Father has all fullness, but of himself: and that the
Father is not the Son or the Word, but that the Son or the Word is of the
Father. And in another place he says, What shall a man have gained by seeing
or beholding God? That he shall have seen God begetting a Son, and in that
Son al things, and yet holding him still in him without pain after his
conceyuing of him, of whom this World (as beautiful as we see it to be) is but
an Image: In which sort a painted Table is after a manner a portreyture of the
mind of him that made it. I said moreover that this Son is the Wisdom of
the Father; Plotin. Enn. 5. lib. 8. Chap. 5.
the like whereof Plotinus also says unto us. All things (says he) that are
done either by Art or by Nature, are done by Wisdom. If they be done by
Art, from Art we come to Nature, and of Nature again we demand from whence
she has it: (...).
whereby we finally come to a Mind, and then are we to seek whether the Mind
have begotten Wisdom: And if that be granted, we will inquire yet further,
whereof? And if they say it begets it of it self: That cannot be, unless
the Mind be the very Wisdom it self. Wisdom therefore shall be the Essence,
and the very Essence shall be Wisdom, and the worthiness of the Essence shall be
Wisdom. And therefore every Essence that wants Wisdom, is in deed an
Essence as in respect that Wisdom made it: but forasmuch as it has no
Wisdom in it self, it is no true Essence in deed. Now, the ordinary
teaching of Plotine is, (...).
to call the Understanding or second Person the very Beeer in deed, or the very
true Essence; and the first person a thing higher than Understanding or
Essence. Whereupon it should follow, that with him, Wisdom and true Essence
are both one: that is to say, that the second person is Wisdom. To the same
purpose also he says, Plotin in his book of Inshapes.
that the said Mind possesses all things in his homebred Wisdom: Enn. 3.
lib. 9. Chap. 2.
That all shapes are but beams and effects thereof: and that the same is the
truth, yea and King of truth; which is a name that the Scripture also
attributes to the second person.

As touching the third person, whom he calls the Soul of the World, Plotin.
Enn. 6. lib. 8. 8. Chap. 13. 15. 27.
he seems in his other books to lay us a foundation of a better opinion.
For, God (says he) has wrought, and he wrought not unwillingly: and therefore
there is a will in GOD. Now surely he whose power is answerable to his will,
should by and by become the better. God then who is the good it self [than the
which nothing can be better,] fills his own will to the full, so as he is
the thing that he lists to be, and lifts to be that which he is, and his
will is his very Essence. This will again, is his act or operation, and that
act is his very substance. And so God sets down himself in this act of
Being. And this is in a manner all one with the things which I spoke in the
former Chapter: namely, that God by his will produces a third person, that is
to say, the love of himself by delighting in himself. And in another place,
This same GOD (says he) is both the lonely and love: and this Love is the love
of himself: for of himself and in himself is he altogether beautiful. And
whereas he is said to be altogether with himself; it could not be so, unless
that both the thing which is and also the person which is together therewith,
were both one selfsame thing. Plotin Enn. 3. lib. 8. Chap. 10.
Now, if the together beer, (for I must be feign to use that word) and the
thing together wherewith he is, be both one; and likewise the desirer and the
thing desired be one also; Surely the desire and the Essence must also needs
be one selfsame thing. And this desire of the Mind is the Love it self, whom
we call the holy Ghost, which proceeds by the Will, and so by the foresaid
reasons is proved to be Coessentiall. Plotin. Enn. 3. lib. 9. Chap. 1.
And this desire (says he in another place) is in the Mind, which always
desires and always posseth the first. This Love then proceeds not alonly
from the first person, but also from the second, according to his former
teaching concerning the Soul of the World, which is, that it proceeds from
the first person by the second. And thus have we the three Persons or Iubeings
acknowledged and laid forth by Plotinus, whom I have alleged somewhat the
more at length, because he auowweth it to be a very ancient doctrine, and that
he had learned it of his predecessors Numenius, Seuerus, Cronius, Gaius,
Atticus, Longinus, and Philarchaeus, Cyril against Julian lib 8. Porphyrius in
the life of Plot^^us.
and did afterward teach it to his Discipies, (who esteemed him as a God,) as
we shall see hereafter in their writings.

Iamblichus Plotinus against the Gnostiks. Enn. 2. lib. 9. Chap. 1. Iamblicus
of the sect of the Pythagorists, and in his book of the Mysteries of the
Egyptians. Chap. 37. and 39.
says plainly that God made the World by his divine Word, but he plays the
Philosopher more profoundly in this behalf. The first God (says he) being
before the Beeer, and alone; is the father of a first God whom he begets, and
yet nevertheless abides still in the solenesse of his unity: which thing
far exceeds all ability of understanding. This is the Original pattern
of him that is called both Father to him self and Son to himself, and is the
Father of one alone, and God verily good in deed. Now, when he says that he
is father to himself, and father to a second; therein he distinguishes the
persons. And whereas he says that notwithstanding this begetting, yet he
abides one still: he shows that there is no separating of the essences. And
he speaks there after the opinion received among the Divines of AEgipt.

But let us hear Porphirie, Porphirie in his 4. book of (...) Philosophers.
(to whom Plotinus committed the ouerlooking of his books,) the best learned
of all the Philosophers as says Saint Austin, Cyrill. against Julian. lib. 1.
and yet nevertheless the sworn enemy of Christenfolke. In his History of
the Philosophers, these are his words: Plato taught (says he) that of the
Good, (that is to say of the first person) is begotten an understanding, by a
manner unknown to men; (...).
and that the same understanding is all whole next unto himself. In this
understanding are all things that truly are, and all the Essences of all
things that have being. It is the first beautiful, and beautiful of it
self, and has the grace of beauty of himself, and before all worlds
proceeded from God as from his cause, selfeborne and father of himself. And
this proceeding of his, was not as ye would say by Gods moving of himself to
the begetting of him; but by his own proceeding of himself from God, and by
his issewing of him self. I say by proceeding, howbeit not at any beginning of
time: (for there was not yet any time,) and time is nothing in comparison of
him; But this Mind is without time and only everlasting. Yet notwithstanding,
as the first God is always one, and alone although he have made all things,
because nothing can match or compare with him: so also is this Understanding or
Mind everlasting, alone, without time, the time of things that are in time, and
yet always abiding in the unity of his own substance. Of a truth he could
not have said more plainly, that the Son is the Son eternally, and of the
fathers ow^e substance.

Again, expounding that foresaid so greatly renowned place of Platoes Episte,
Cyrill against Julian. lib. 1.
The Essence of God (says he) extends even unto three Inbeeings; For there
is the highest GOD or the good; and next him, the Second, who is the
workmayster of all things; and lastly the third, who is Soul of the World: for
the Godhead extends even unto the Soul. And that is the thing that Plato
me^t in speaking of three Kings: for although all things depend upon these
three: yet is their depending, first upon the first God, secondly upon the God
that isseweth of him, and thirdly upon the third that proceeds from him. Now,
in that he raungeth them in order thus one under another; he seems to play
the Arrian. And yet is that very much in a Heathen man. But whereas he
acknowledges one selfsame essence; he shows that the diversity is only in
the functions, and in the order of causes, which is one step beyond the
Arrians. Also S. Austin says that he did put the third person as a mean
between the other two, after which manner we also do call him the band and
union of them two, notwithstanding that Plotine do put him under the
Understanding. But in his book of the chief Fathers or first Authors of
things, Proclus Porphyrius in his book of the chief fathers, alleged by
Proclus.
sets down his opinion yet more plainly: saying, that there is an
everlasting or eternal Mind, and yet notwithstanding, that before the same
there is a Foreeternall or former everlasting, unto whom the everlasting
sticks, because the Foreeuerlasting is beyond all: and that in the
everlasting being, there is a second and a third: and that betwne the
Foreeuerlasting and the Everlasting, Eternity rests in the midst. (...)
Now, forasmuch (...) Eternities are alike equal, this forenesse and
afternesse which are attributed to the persons, is not in respect of time, but
(as Plotine says) in respect of Nature, and (as ye would say) inconsideration
of cause.

Proclus the Disciple of Iamblichus says that the aun^^ent Platonists did set
down three Beginners (whom we call Persons.) Of the which, the first, they
called the One, The second (namely the said Understanding) they called the one
many, and [the third, that is to wit] the Soul [of the world,] they called the
One and many. But it is best for us to hear what he himself says. The Essence
or understanding (says he) for among the Platonists both are one) is said
first of all, Proclus in Platoes Divinity.
to have his being, of the Good, and to be about the same Good, and to be
filled with the light of truth which proceeds from it, and to be partaker
thereof by the union which it has therewith, and is most divine, because it
depends originally upon the Good. Here ye see now a second person, Light of
Light, having his fullness from the first, And whereas he says of the first
light that it is most divine; it is because he knows not by what words to
express the prehem^nence of the Father. In another place he says that this
understanding, (that is to say the Soul) is become One with the Good, (...).
that is to say, with the Father. And also that by his inyndly Inworking he is
the very eternity it self, saving that he depends upon the Unity; (...).
and that he is like unto the One: and that the Soul or third person is like
to the mind, from whence it proceeds. But here is yet a more evident thing.
The most part (says he) do set down three Beginnings, the Good, the
Understanding or the Beeer, and the Soul. The first principal and
uncommunicable, is the One, who is before and beyond all things. Next unto him
is the one Unity, which has his being about the said first substance, and
abounds by participation of him that is the One first of all. And this
Inbeing is more then Substantial, (...)
and the first of all the Inbeeings in the Trinity that is to be conceived in
understanding. And seeing that these two namely the One and the Understanding
be in the first rank of the Trinity, the first as the Begetter, the second
as the Begotten, the first as the Perfecter, the second as the Perfected: there
must needs be a mean power betwixt them, whereby and wherewith the one may
yield being and perfection to the understanding or Beeer. For this proceeding
of the Beeer from the One, and likewise the turning back of the Beeer unto the
One, (...).
is done by a certain power or might, and so there is a Trinity; which is the
full number of things belonging to a Mind, so as this Trinity is Unity or
Oneness, Power or Might, and Understanding of Mind. (...).
The One is the Producer or yeelderforth, the Understanding is the thing
produced or yeeldedfoorth, and the Power or Might depending upon the One, is
also linked to the Understanding or Beeer And this Trinity is the Unity or
Oneness, the Beeer or Understanding, and the Behavior of them both, whereby
the Unity is the Unity of the Understanding, and the Understanding is the
understanding of the Unity or One. Whereby Plato shows that the Father is
the Father of the Understanding, and the Understanding is the Son of the
Father, and that the Might or Power is covertly comprised between them both.
Now soothly, considering that he was a professed enemy to us Christians, and
therefore eschewed to use our terms; he could not have spoken better, nor have
said more plainly that the three Inbeings or Persons differ only by way of
relation, so as there is a Father, a Son, and a Behavior of the^ both, which
we would have called the Love, the Union, or the kindness of them, that is to
wit the holy Ghost.

Amelius the Disciple of Plotine, Amelius a Platonist.
( as Proclus reports) makes also three kings or three Understandings:
namely, the Beeer, the Hauer, and the Seeer: the first, the real
Understanding, the second the Understanding from the first, and the third the
Understa^ding in the second. Whom Theodorus imitating, has termed them, the
substantial Understanding, the Vnderstandable substance, and the Fountain of
Souls. Nevertheless, as great an enemy as Amelius was to the Christians, yet
notwithstanding after many florishes and fetches about, in the end speaking of
the second Person he yields to that which S. John speaks of him in his
Gospel. (...).
Surely (says he) this is the Word that was from everlasting, by whom all
things that are, were made, as Heraclitus supposed. And before God (says he)
it is the very same Word which that barbarus fellow (for so did he term S.
John) auowcheth to have bin with God at the beginning in the ordering and
disposing of things when they were confused, and to be God, by whom all things
were absolutely made, and in whom they be living and of whom they have their
life and being; and that the same Word clothing it self with Man's flesh,
Cyril. against Julian. lib. 8. Austin in the City of God. lib. 10.
appeared a Man, and yet left not to show the Majesty of his nature. Insomuch
that after he had bin put to death, he took his Godhead to him again, and was
very GOD as he had bin before ere he came down into Body, Flesh, and Man.
Another Platonist speaking to the same effect, said that the (...) of S. John's
Gospel was worthy to be graued every where in letters of Gold. Thus ye see
that the Greek Philosophy as well before as after the coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ, agrees with our Divinity.

As touching the Latins, The Latin Philosophers. Chalcidius upon Platoes
Timeus.
they fell to Philosophy somewhat late^ but yet as little as we have of their
doings, they digress not from the others. Chalcidius who wrate upon Platoes
limaeus, has these words: The Souereyne and (...) God, is the Original of all
things; next unto whom is his Providence as a second God, who gives the law
as well for the temporal as for the eternal life. And furthermore, there is a
third substance as a second Understanding, which is the keeper of the said
eternal Law. The highest God commands, the second orders, and the third
utters or publishes. Now the Souls do the Law, and the Law is the very
Destiny it self. And a little before he says, that the said Providence, which
he sets in the second place, is the everlasting Understanding of God, which
is an everlasting act, and a resembler of his goodness, because he is always
turned toward him that is the very Good it self. Also Macrobius Macrobius
upon the Dream of Scipio. God and Mind begotten of God.
says, that Platoes opinion concerning the one chief God and the one
Understanding bred and borne of him, is no falile at all, but a thing certain,
howbeit that he could not otherwise express it than by examples of the
Daysonne and such other things. And surely if we had the books of Varro, and
other great Clerks, it is possible that we should find much more to this
purpose. Thus then ye see how the Platonists are all of one opinion and mind in
the doctrine of the Trinity, wherein some of them saw more and some less;
some affirm the premises whereof our conclusions ensewe, and othersome
conclude the same expressly with us.

The Aristotelians have no voice here, because they stand all in commenting
upon Aristotle, who gave himself more to the liberal Arts and the searching
of Nature, than to looking up to God the maker of all things. Yet
notwithstanding, Auicen Auicen.
rejected it not: insomuch that he says that the first Mind yields forth a
second Mind, and the second a third; but he waded no deeper into the matter.

Let us add here the confessions of the very Deuilles, The Oracles of
Diuelles. Sybill.
who either by means of the revelations thereof which have bin made unto us, or
by reason of their falling from above, have had some knowledge thereof^ (...).
Soothly it is always a pleasure to hear them yield record to the truth even
spite of their hearts. We read that one Thulis reigned in old time in AEgipt,
who wexing proud, asked Serapis the chief Idol of the AEgiptians, (adiuring
him strongly that he should not deceive him) who he was that had reigned afors
him and who should reign after him, and also who was mightier or greater than
he. To whom Serapis answered in these four, Uerses.

First God, and next the Word, and then their Spright;
Which three be one and join in one all three.
Their force is endless; get thee hence frail wight, Suidas in the life of
Thulis

The man of life unknown excels thee.
Also Apollo being demanded concerning the true Religion, answered in ten
Uerses thus.

Unhappy Priest, demand not me the last
And meanest Feend, concerning that divine
Degetter, and the dear and only Son
Of that ren^wmed King, nor of his Spirit
Containing all things plenteously throughout,
Hills, Brooks, Sea, Land, Hell, Air, and lightsome Fire.
Now woe is me, for from this house of mine
That Spirit will me drive within a while,
So as this Temple where men's destynies
Are now foretold, shall stand all desolate.
Being asked another time (as says Porphirius,) Porphirius as he is alleged
by S. Austin in his ninth book of the City of God. Cha. 23.
whether was the better of the Word or the Law; he answered likewise in verse,
That men ought to believe in God the begetter, and in the King that was before
all things, under whom quaketh both Heaven and Earth, Sea and Hell, yea and the
very Gods themselves, whose Law is the Father that is honored by the Hebrews.
And these Oracles were wont to be sung in Uerse, to the intent that all men
should remember them the better as Plutarch reports. Now I have bin the
longer in this Chapter, because most men think this doctrine so repugnant to
man's Reason, that Philosophy could never allow of it; not considering that it
is another matter to conceive a thing, than to prove or allow it when it is
conceived. And therefore as well for this Chapter as for that which went before,
let us conclude, both by reason added to Gods revealing, and by the traces
thereof in the World, and by the Image thereof shining forth in our selves,
and by the Confession of all the ancient Divines, and by the very depositious
of the Deuilles themselves; that in the only one Essence or substance of God,
there is a Father, a Son, and a holy Ghost; the Father everlastingly
begetting the Son, and the Spirit everlastingly proceeding from them both^
the Son begotten by the Mind, and the Spirit proceeding by the Will: which is
the thing that we had here to declare. And let this handling of that matter
concerning Gods essence be taken as done by way of prevention, howbeit that it
depend most properly upon the revelation of our Scriptures, which being proved
will consequently yield proof to this point also. There may be some
perchance which will desire yet more apparent proofs: but let them consider
that we speak of things which surmount both the arguments of Logike and also
Demonstration. For, inasmuch as Demonstrations are made by the Causes, the
Cause of all Causes can have no Demonstration. But if any be so wilful as to
stand in their own opinion against the truth which all the World proves and
al Ages acknowledge: let them take the pain to set down their Reasons in
writing; and men shall see how they be but either bare Denyalles, or Gesses, or
simple distrusts or misbeleefs of the things which they understand not, and
that they be unable to wey against so grave and large Reasons and Records, as
I have set down heretofore. And therefore, the glory thereof be unto God.

Amen.
The vij. Chapter.
That the World had a beginning.
LEt us now retire back again from this bottomless gulf; for the thing that
is impossible to be sounded is impossible to be known. And seeing that our
eysight cannot abide the brightness of so great a light; let it content us to
behold it in the shadow. Now, this sensible world wherein we dwell, is (as
the Platonists term it) the shadow of the world that is subject to
understanding: for certesse it cannot be called an Image thereof, no more than
the buylding of a Maystermason is the Image of his mind. And yet for all the
greatness, beauty, and light which we see therein, I cannot tell whether the
word shadow do thoroughly fit it or no, considering that shadows have some
measure in respect of their bodies, but between finite and infinite is no
proportionable resemblance at all. We that are here in the world, do wonder
at it, and we would think we did amiss if we should believe that any thing
is better or more beautiful than that. For our flesh and complexions are
proportioned after the Elements thereof, and to the things which it brings
forth, as our eyes unto the light thereof, and all our senses too the sensible
nature thereof: and those which are of the world seek but only to content the
sensuality that is in them. But as we have a Mind, so also let us believe that
the same is not without his object or matter to rest upon. And as the
senseless things serve the things that have sense; so let us make the sensible
things to serve the Mind, and the Mind it self to serve him by whom it is and
understands. My meaning is, that we should not wonder at the world for the
worlds sake it self, but rather at the woorkemaister and author of the world.
For it were too manifest a childishnes to wonder at a portraiture made by a
Peinter, and not to wonder much more at the Peynter himself.

Now the first consideration that offers it self to the beholder of this
work, is whether it has had a beginning or no: a question which were
perchance unnecessary in this behalf, if every man would consult with his
own Reason, whereunto nothing is more repuguant, than to think an eternity
to be in things which we not only perceive with our senses, but also do see
to perish. Howbeit forasmuch as the world speaks (says the Psalmist) both in
all Languages and to all Nations: let us examine it, both whole together, and
according to the several parts thereof. The world it self tells us that it
had a beginning.
For it may be that the worldlings (if they distrust their own record) will at
leastwise admit that which the world it self shall depose thereof. Let us then
examine the Elements all together: they pass from one into another; the Earth
into Water, the Water into Air, and Air into Water again, and so forth. Now
this intercourse cannot be made but in time, and time is a measuring of moving,
and where measure is, there can be no eternity. Let us examine the^ severally:
The Earth has his seasons, after Springtime comes Summer, after Summer
succeeds Harvest, and after Harvest follows Winter. The Sea has his
continual ebbing and flowing, which goes increasing and decreasing by
certain measures. Diverse Rivers, and especially Nyle, have their increasings
at certain seasons, and to a certain measure of Cubits. The Air also has
his Winds, which do one while clear it and another while trubble it: and the
same Winds do reign by turns, blowing sometime from the East, and sometime
from the West; sometime from the North and sometime from the South. And upon
them depends Rain and fair wether, Storms and Calmes. These interchaunges
which are wrought by turns cannot be without beginning. For where order is,
there is a formernesse and an afternesse, and all change is a kind of moving,
insomuch that the alterations which are made successively one after another,
must of necessity have had a beginning at some point or other; on the Land, by
some one of the Seasons; on the Sea, by ebbing and flowing; and in the Air, by
North or by South; and so forth. For if they began not at any one point, then
could they not hold out unto an other point. The Land then by his Seasons, the
Air by his chaunges, and the Sea by his Tides, cease not to cry out and to
preach unto all that have ears to hear, that there is no euerlastingnesse in
them, but that they have had a beginning all of them. Again, when we consider
that the Earth receives his Seasons from the Sun, the Sea his Tides from the
Moon, and the Air his Winds from an outward power that is unseen: ought we
not to seek the beginning thereof above and not beneath, without them and not
within them, seeing that nothing here below has moving of it self? And if
the Elements which are accounted for the very grounds and beginnings of things,
acknowledge a beginning of their mouings; ought we not to acknowledge ye same
in all other things? Again, if we consider how this Moon which makes the
Tides in the Sea, has no light but from the Sun which makes the Seasons on
the Earth; do we not conclude by and by, that the Seasons of the Earth, and
the Tides of the Sea, and the continnall chaunges, mouings, and (as ye would
say) backebreathings of the Elements, have one common beginning? But it may be
that these mouings have place but only under the Moon, and not in that fifth
Quintessence of the Heaven, the substantialnesse and eternity whereof
Aristotle does so highly commend. Nay, what if the higher we mount up, they
proclayme their beginning still the louder? What if the thing which we most
chiefly wonder at in the Heaven, be most repugnant to eternity? The Sun
makes there his natural course in the Zodiac between the two Tropicks or
Turnepoynts, so as the Zodiac is as it were his race, and the Tropicks are
his utmost listes, both the which are so distinguished by degrees and minutes,
that he cannot pass one hearebredth beyond them. The points of his two stops
are his utmost bounds, the which so soon as he comes at, by and by he
turns head back again. Must he not the^ needs have had a place to set out
from, seeing he has a place whereat to stop? Every four and twenty hours
he is carried from East to West by the moving of the Sky: and like as by his
natural moving he makes the Summer and the Winter; so by this violent moving
he makes Day and Night. Can such succession of times and Seasons be made
otherwise than in time, or rather be any other thing than time? The Moon
likewise finisheth her course every Month: we see how she changes, grows,
becomes full, and waneth. Every Planet has his prefixed time and his
ordinary course. To be short, men see the rising and the going down of the
Stars, and likewise their appearing and their tarying out of sight: and the
very Heaven it self which with himself caryeth all the rest about, does it
not but by moving. Now whatsoever is moved, is moved in time; and all goings
or wheelings about, must needs begin at some one point; like as in the drawing
of a Circle, the one shanke. of the Compasses is set fast in some place, and
the other shanke is carried round about. What follows the^, but that the
moving of the Heaven and of all the things which the Heaven bears and caryeth
about, has had a beginning? Then let us not wonder at the brightness and
light thereof as Aristotle did; for that bewrays the matter so much the more
apparently, in that it has not that light but by distribution of moving; nor
at his perpetual moving, for that shows the more his streyt service whereto
he is subject; nor at his Constancy, for that is necessity; nor at his huge
greatness, for he is so much the more hugely bowed down. Surely the Sky is
as the great wheel of a Clock, which shows the Planets, the Signs, the
hours, and the Tides, every one in their time, and that which seems to be
his chief wonder, proves him to be subject to time, yea and to be the very
instrument of time. Now, seeing he is an instrument, there is a Worker that
puts him to use, a Clockkeeper that rules him, a Mind that was the first
procurer of his moving. For every instrument, how mouable so ever it be, is but
a dead thing so far forth as it is but an instrument, if it have not life
and moving from some other thing than it it self. An objection.
Yea, but (will some man say) the Heaven goes about continually; and in so
many worlds and ages as have bin, we perceive no alteration at all. Wretched
man that thou art! Thy Heart and thy Lights also have a continual moving, and
never lie still; and thou, with all the wit thou have, can neither increase
it nor restreine it. The Physicians themselves feel it, but can find no cause
of it. The Philosophers ouertyre themselves in seeking it, and yet can thou
not tell the end and the beginning thereof. Do not thou things thy self
which men as thou art do deem to be without end, as strange Milles and
Trindles, and such other kind of selfmouings, of whose beginnings not even
Children are ignorant? And yet under color that the great wheel of Heaven
has now of long time turned about without ceasing, will thou be so childish or
so bli^d, as to believe that it has turned so from everlasting? O man, the
same workmayster which has set up the Clock of thy heart for half a score
years, has also set up this huge engine of the Skies for certain thousands
of years. Great are his Circuits and small are thine; and yet when thou have
accounted them thoroughly, they come both to one.

Let us come to the things that have life and fe^ce. The Pla^ts shoot forth
into branches, and bear both bud and fruit: but yet either the plant
springs of the kernel, or the kernel of the plant, and both of the^
proceed of a maker. Of living wights, some bring forth their young ones alive,
and some lay Eggs, and we know which is engendered of which: but whether the
Egg come of the Hen, or the Hen of the Egg; it must needs be confessed that
the one of them had a beginning. But I will leave this vain disputing whether
of them was the first; which question the holy scripture will discuss in one
word. Yea and nature it self also will discuss it, which requires to have
the first things brought forth in their perfect being. For it is enough for
our purpose, that they may find themselves convicted of a beginning throughout
all things. And I pray you, if they cannot tell whether the moving of their
Heart or of their Loongs, began first with shutting or with opening, at the
thrusting of the breath forth, or at the drawing of it in; (whereof
notwithstanding they cannot but know that there was a beginning:) ought they
to be admitted to deny that things had a beginning, because it might be douted
at which point they began?

Now if the Dumb and speechelesse things ^ry out so loud, and the things that
are void of reason conclude so reasonably; shall only man whom God has endued
both with speech and reason, Man had a beginning.
be either so dishonest as to hold his peace, or so shameless as to resist?
Soothly as touching our bodies, we know the beginning of them; and our so
curious searching out of Pedegrees, makes us too confess it whether we will
or no. And if any thing in the world might have any true pretense or lykelyhod
to boast of an eternity; our Souls might do it, which without moving
themselves do do cause a thousand things to remove. They mount up unto
Heaven, and go down to the deep, without shifting their place. They hoord up
the whole world in the storehouse of their memory, without combering of any
room there. They pack up all times past present and to come together, without
passing from one too another. To be short, they conceive and conteyne all
things, and after a sort even themselves also. And yet shall we be so bold as
too say they be eternal without beginning? Nay, how can that be, since we see
that they profit and learn, yea and oftentimes also appayre and forget, from
age to age, and from day to day? How (I say) can that be, since we see that they
pass from ignorance to knowledge, from darkness to light, from gladness to
sadness, and from hope to despair; and that not by years, but even in
minutes and moments? And (which more is) we see them receive great trouble and
alteration by and for the things that are mutable and transitory, which
flourish in the morning, and are withered and parched as in an Oven at night.
Now, to be altered and changed, imports a moving, and he that grants a
moving, grants also a beginning; and to be moved by things mutable, shows
an over great inconstancy of nature, which is a thing tootoo contrary unto
eternity. To be short, how can yt thing be eternal or everlasting, which
cannot so much as by any imagination resemble aught that this word eternity
betokens? And yet this soul of ours is the thing which in man joins Heaven
and Earth together, marketh the chaunges in things above, and for the most part
works them in the things beneath, carrying up a handful of dust above the
skies, and after a sort bringing down Heaven unto the Earth. Much more reason
then is it that neither in the Heaven, nor in the Earth, nor in all the
Harmony of the whole world which we so greatly wonder at, there should not be
any approaching at al unto eternity.

Some man perchance will say unto me, An objection.
that in the parts of the World there is no eternity, but yet there may be in
the whole. Nay, how can a Whole be eternal, which is composed of brittle and
temporal parts? And what call they the Whole, but the huge frame of Heaven,
whose moving proves that it had a beginning? Again, some other will perhaps
say, there is a beginning of moving in the world, as well in the whole as in
the parts thereof; but yet it does not therefore follow, that it had beginning
of being. Nay, if the being thereof was everlastingly before the moving thereof;
how could it be called in Latin Mundus and in Greek Cosmos, that is to say, A
goodly or beautiful order, seeing that for the most part, Order depends
upon moving? For, take from the Heavens their turning about, and from the
Sun his course, and set them fast in some place where you list; and you shall
make the one half of the Earth blind, and the whole Earth either scorched with
his continual presence, or desert and vninhabitable by his absence: and ye
shall make the Sea for the most part vnsayleable, and the Air unfruitful or
intemperate. Therefore it will follow at the least, that the World has not
bin inhabited everlastingly, nor the Plants thereof bin eternal, nor the
living Creatures (no not even Mankind) bin without beginning. Surely I wot not
what eyes these Philosophers had, who had lever to eternise ye Stones, Rocks,
and Mountains, than themselves for whom those things were made. And again, to
what purpose served the Sun and the Moon at that time? Wherefore served
Air, wherefore served Sea, when nothing did yet live, see, and breathe? It
remains then that before moving, it was but a confused heap, mass or lump of
things without shape, and that in process of time (as some say) a certain
Soul wound it self into it, and gave shape to that body, and afterward life,
moving and fence to the parts thereof, according as he had made every of them
capable to receive: insomuch that the world is nothing else but that confused
heap now orderly disposed, indewed with soul and life, so as of that soul
and confused lump together, there is now made one perfect living wight. A
proper imagination surely, and meet for a very Beast, to father his so orderly
essence upon the shapelessenesse of a Chaos, that is to say, of confusednesse
removed away; rather than upon the wisdom and power of a quickening Spirit.
But seeing that this Chaos could not receive either shape or order, but by the
said Soul; if they be both eternal, how met they together in one point, being
of so contrary natures, the one to shape and the other to be shaped? If it were
by adventure, how did yt Soul by adventure so set things in order, and how
happens it that it has not since that time put them out of order again? Or
if it were by advise; of whom should that advise be but of a Superior? And who
is that Superior, but God? Again, either this Soul was tied really and in
very deed to this body of the world from all eternity; or else it did but
only pearce through it by his power, as seemed best of the own freewill. If
it were tied, specially to such a confused mass; by who^ but by force of a
higher power? And then what else could that confused Chaos be to him, but an
everlasting grave? And what else also were that to say, than that the said Chaos
was as a shapelesse Child yet newly begotten and scarce set together in the
moothers womb, which within a few days after, by the infusion of a Soul
begins to have shape, moving, and sense; and afterward in his due time is
borne, and being grown up decays again, and so ends, as our bodies do?
Or if a Soul pierced into it and went through it by a freewil and power; (let
us not strive about terms; for a Soul is so named in respect of a body
whereto it is tied) the same is the living GOD, who at his pleasure gave it
both shape, life, and moving. But I will show hereafter, that he not only gave
the World his shape, but also created the very matter stuff and substance
thereof. But it suffiseth me at this time to wrest from them, that he is the
maker and shaper thereof.

Let us yet more clearly set forth the original of the World. I ask what the
world is of it self? If it move not, it forgoeth both his order and his
beauty, as I said before. And if it move, it shows it self incapable of
eternity. The linking of things together.
But there is yet more. These lower spaces of the world are the harbrough of
living creatures, and specially of man, who knows how to take benefit
thereof. The temperatenesse of the air serves for him; and yet the air can
not be tempered nor the Earth lighted, without the Son and the Moon:
Neither can the Sun and the Moon give light and temperatnesse without
moving. The Moon has no light but of the Sun; neither can the Sun yield
it either to the Moon or too the Earth, but by the moving of the Heaven: and
the great Compass of the Heaven going about, is the very thing which we call
the World, not esteeming these lower parts (as in respect of their matter)
otherwise than as the dregs of the whole. And whereas the Elements serve man,
and the Planets serve the Elements, yea and the Planets them selves serve one
another: do they not show that they be one for another? And if they be one for
another; is not one of them in consideration before another; as the end before
the things that tend unto the end, according to this common rule, that the Mind
The inwoorking of the Mind begins at the end.
begins his work at the end thereof? Now then, if the turning about of the
Heaven serve to show the Planets, and they to yield light to the Earth and to
all things thereon: does it not serve for the Earth? And if it serve the Earth;
I pray you is that done by appointment of the Earth, or rather by appointment
of some one that commands both Heaven and Earth? Again, seeing that the
end is in consideration before the things that tend thereto: shall this
consideration be in the things themselves, or rather in some Spirit that
orders them? Soothly, in the things themselves it cannot be: for if they have
understanding, they have also will; and the will intends rather to command
than to obey, and unto freedom rather than bondage: and if they have no
understanding, then know they neither end nor beginning. Moreover, forasmuch
as they be diverse, and of contrary natures; they should ame at diverse ends,
whereas now they ame all at one end. Nay, which more is, how should the Sun
and the Moon, the Heaven and the Earth have met everlastingly in matching
their dealings so iumpe together, the one in giving light, and the other in
taking it? In what point, by what covenant, and under what date was this done,
seeing it depends altogether upon moving, which is not to be done but in
time? It remains then, that the said consideration was done by a Spirit that
commands al things alike, and that he puts them in subjection one to
another as seems best to himself, for so much as he is mighty to keep them
in obedience, and wise to guide them to their peculiar ends, and all their ends
unto his own end; and he that thinks otherwise thinks that a Lute is in
tune of it own accord. Or if he say that this Spirit is a Soul enclosed in
the whole, he does fondly incorporate the Spirit of the Luteplayer in the Lute
it self, and likewise the buylder in the buylding. In effect it is all one as
if a Child that is borne and brought up in a house, should think the house to
be eternal or else made of it self, because he had not seen it made: or as if
a man that had bin cast out newly borne in a desert Island, and there nursed up
by a Wolf as Romulus was; should imagine himself to be bred out of the Earth
in one night like a Mushrom. For, to believe that the World is eternal, and
that the race of Mankind is bred of it self without a maker, is all one
thing, and spring both of one error. Do not the two Sexes of Male and Female
in all living things overthrow the said eternity? For how should they be
everlastingly the one for the other, seeing they be so diverse? Again, have
they bin everlastingly but two, or everlastingly mo than two? If but two, where
are those two become, seeing that eternity imports immortality, and a
beginninglesse forebeing from everlasting infers an endless afterbeing or
continuance to everlasting? And if they were many: see ye not still the
selfsame absurdities? And if ye say they be made everlasting by succession of
time; what (I pray you is death) but a token that they were borne? What is life
(I speak of this our life) but a continuance of death? and what is succession,
but a prolonging of time? Thus then ye see how that as well by the parts of the
World, and by the whole World it self, as also by the agreement of the whole
with his parts, and of the parts among themselves; we be evidently taught that
the fraine of the World had both a workmayster and a beginning. But now some
man will ask us when it began? And that is the point which we have to treat of
next.

The viij. Chapter.
When the World had his beginning.
SOothly, it is not for me to stand here disproouing the doubts of the
Accounters of times; for ye ods of some years, yea or of some whole hundreds of
years, is not to be accounted of between eternity and a beginning. But if we
have an eye to the proceeding of this lower World: we shall evidently perceive,
that like a Child it has had his ages, his chaunges, and his full points,
restes or stoppes; so as it has by little and little grown, bin peopled, and
replenished; and that (to be short) whereas the world supposes that it shall
endure for ever, it does but resemble an old Dotarde, which (be he never so
forworne and drooping for age,) yet thinks himself still to have one year
more to live. But I have already sufficiently proved, that both Heaven and
Earth have had a beginning; and also that seeing the one of them is for the
other, they had the same at one self same time, and both of them from one self
same ground. And therefore look what shall be declared of the earth, shall also
be declared of the heaven: and forasmuch as the earth serves for the use of
living creatures, and specially of man; look what beginning we shall prove of
man, the like shall we have proved of the disposition of the earth. For to
what purpose were the Heaven being imbowed about these lower parts like a
Uault; or to what purpose were the earth being as a flower or plancher to go
upon; if there were no inhabiter at all upon earth? Surely if the World were
without beginning, The Original of Sciences. Lucr: Carus: This nature and
reason of things was lately fo^d out, and I may self was one of the first that
did stumble upon it, and am able to turn it into my native language. ^^d
Persius says, It came hither after the time that my Countrymen began to taste
of Pepper and Dates.
it should also have bin inhabited from without beginning, and no people should
be of more antiquity tha^ other: Or at leastwise how ancient so ever it were,
yet should no new thing be found therein. But if even the oldest and
auncientest things of all, be but new; ought it not to be a sure argument
unto us, of the newness thereof? What thing I pray you can we pick out in
this world, for an example of antiquity?

Let us begin at the Liberal Sciences; and we shall read of the first
commings up of them all. Philosophy, which consists in the searching out of
natural things, is of so late continuance, that before the time of Pythagoras,
the very name thereof was not known. The Romans counted it for folly long
time after that. And Lucrece the Epicure sings in his time, that the nature
of things was found out but late before. Also Seneca who came long after him,
says that from the first coming up of Philosophy to his time, there were not
full a thousand years. Socrates is said to have bin the first that brought it
from study to practice, drawing it (as they said) from Heaven to Earth, and
from Cities to houses and persons: Austin. lib. 18. of the City of God, Cha.
37. Cicero: Iamblicus: Porphyrius.
that is to say, by teaching men to know themselves and to govern both
themselves and others. And that is not above two thousand years ago at the
most: For he was since the time of Esdras, who is yt last Historiographer of
the Bible. And whatsoever knowledge they had thereof, they had it (as I said
before) from the AEgiptians, Orpheus in his Argonauts.
and the AEgiptians had it from the Hebrews and Chaldeans. For Pythagoras
learned his skill of Sonchedie, and of the Jews; Proclus upon Timeus. Plutark
in his Isis and Osiris. Iamblicus in his book of Mysteries. Chap. 1.
Plato, of Sechnuphis; Eudoxus, of Conuphis; and all they, of the Disciples of
Trismegistus; and Trismegistus, (as appears by his books) learned of
(Moses.) To be short, Clearchus the Peripatetick says, he saw the Jew of
whom Aristotle himself learned his Philosophy. Also Iamblichus makes mention
of Mercuries Pillars, wherein Pythagoras and Plato had read his Doctrine:
Clemens Alexandrin. in his book of Stromats alleging Alexander, Hermippus,
and Clearchus, Porphyrius alleged by Ensebius. lib. 11.
And Porphyrius witnesses that all the Philosophy of the Greeks which they
boast of with so many words, came up at the least a thousand years after
Moses. Now if the study of Wisdom be so late in the world; how late is
Wisdom it self? And if Greece were so lateward therein; where shall the
antiquity thereof be found among the Gentiles?

Some man will say that in as much as Socrates drew men from Heaven to Earth;
Astrology ought to be of more antiquity: and I willingly agree thereto: for
when a man looks up to Heaven, he sets his first thoughts upon that place.
But how many years shall we gain by that? If Thales Laertius in the life of
Thales.
were the first that taught it to the Greeks, (as they themselves say:) we
know both by the very Greek authors and by Thales Thales in his Epistle to
Pherecydes in Clemens Alexa^d: Pliny. lib. 5. 6.
himself, yt he had it of the AEgiptians, and the AEgiptians of the Chaldeans,
who are in very deed the Authors thereof, insomuch yt the word Chaldean is
ordinarily put for an Astrologer. And if we say with Pliny, yt Jupiter Belus
was the Author thereof; if the same Belus was the first of that name, then was
it about the time of Abraham. And if the Phenicians were the founders thereof,
as it is said in another place: what were they else but the Hebrews? Again, I
pray you what was the Astrology of those folk? By the report of Pliny,
Pliny. lib. 2. Plutark in the life of Niceas. Quintilian. lib. 1.
Thales was the first among the Greeks, and Sulpitius Gallus among the Romans
that observed the Eclipses of the Sun and Moon. Insomuch that their Armies
(as Plutarche and Quintilian report) were dismayed at the sight of them; so as
the one of them did let pass the next three days, and the other did let pass
all the rest of that Moon, ere they durst enterprise or go in hand with any
thing. Nay: it was counted high Treason toward God to allege any natural
cause thereof. Anaxagoras was put in Prison for it, and Pericles had much ado
to get him released. Protagoras was banished Athens for it; and the
Mathematicals were utterly condemned for it. And what more do the sauagest
people of the world our poor Americans? It was attributed unto Thales, that
he was the first that observed the North Star; and to Pythagoras, that the
morning star and the evening star be both one, and that the Zodiac goes a
Skiew, and girdeth the World about like a Girdle: and unto Solon (as says
Proclus) that the Moon finisheth her course in thirty days. Afterward came
Archimedes, who gathered the observations of many things, and thereof made the
Sphere. Yet notwithstanding, all these are but little entraunces; for the great
Speculation of the Planets came long time after. What shall we say to this,
that the very account of the year was uncertain and confuzed in the country
of Europe, until the time of Julius Caesar, and so remains still unto this
day in the greater half of the world? Insomuch that until a three hundred
years before the birth of our Lord Jesus Christ, Censorius concerning Christ's
birthday. Cap. 9. Varro.
the Greeks and Romans had not yet any Quadrant, nor any Clock, Dyall, or
distinction of hours.

As touching Arithmetike and Geometry, Arithmetik and Geometry. Plato in his
Epinomis.
which were taught so precysely unto children in Platoes time, it is well
known that the authors of the notablest grounds of those arts, are
Pythagoras, Eudoxus, and Euclides (who gathered them out of the writers of old
time) and certain others. And they which father the finding of them upon
Trismegistus, could not have led us more directly unto Moses.

But forasmuch as man is naturally more careful of his health and commodity,
The Original of Crafts, Trades and Arts. Varro in his fifth book and first
Chapter of Husbandry.
than curious of the Stars, it may be that his Trades, Crafts and Arts,
are of more antiquity than his Sciences. Surely as touching handicrafts, Varro
a great searcher of antiquities witnesses, that all the Handicraftes were
invented within the space of a thousand years reckened back from his time. And
let not the Greeks brag any more, For even in their Histories we find the
first invention or finding out of Fire, which is the ground and beginning (if I
may so term it) of the most part of Handicrafts. And forasmuch as there are
which have written particularly of the fynding out of every of them: I send the
Reader unto them.

But let us speak of Leachecraft which contains Phisik and Surgerie,
Leachecraft which comprehends Phisik and Surgerie.
the Art which is so necessary for all mankind. Do we not see how it
breeds, and from day to day grows and increases of sicknesses and Wounds,
yea and even of the death of men? Diodorus attributes it too the Egyptians,
and Moses in Genesis makes some mention of Pharaos Physicians. Others do
father it upon Esculapius, and some upon Arabus the son of Apollo: but what
manner of Physic was that? If we follow the words of Moses, they were
rather Imbalmers of Dead bodies, than Physicians of sick person. And
Esculapius (as says Cicero Cicero in his book of the nature of the Gods.
) was esteemed as a God for teaching to pull out Teeth, and to loozen the
Belly. Also Podalirius and Machaon his successors, meddled not but with outward
Cures. To be short, Herodotus He o lotus. lib. 1.
says, that one was a Leache for the Eye, another for the Head, and a third
for the Feet; and that when they were at their wits end, they laid the
diseased person in a place of resort, to try there upon him the receyt, of
whosoever came first: and that was a kind of Lechecraft, which as yet had
neither Head nor Tail. Also the brute beasts taught men diverse Herbs and
remedies by little and little, and some men did put them in proof upon others,
unto the which Herbs they left their names; insomuch that in the end one
Hippocrates and certain others made a collection of all those things, and so
of many men's experiences was made an art, and that Art has been enriched
from time to time, and more peradventure in our age than ever it was before.
Howsoever the case stand, it is certain that the first Physician that was
seen in Rome was one Archagatus, who about a sixscore years before the coming
of Christ, in the Consu^ship of Lucius AEmilius Paulus, and Marcus Liuius, was
made free of the City; after whom diverse other Greek Physicians came thi^her
by heaps, but they were by and by driven away again by Cato the Censor, as
Hangmen or Tormenters sent by the Greeks to murder the Barbarians (for so did
the Greeks call all other Nations besides themselves) rather than Physicians
to heal the diseazed: and that was, because that in all cases without
discretion, they used launcing and searing to all Sores. Now since we see the
Sciences and Arts grow after that manner from Observation to Observation, and
from Principle to Principle, and to be so newly come up among the Nations of
greatest renown and learning; shall we doubt to conclude that it was so among
the ruder nations likewise?

Let us come to Laws; The original or government.
for even the barbarousest people had of them: and it may be that seeing man
is borne too society and fellowship, they had greater care to set an order
among themselves by good Laws, than to mark the order of the Skies or the
disposition of their own bodies. But does not the Law written, lead us
forthwith to the Law unwritten? And do not the great volumes of Laws which
we turn over now adays, lead us to the pieces of Trebonian; and Trebonian,
to the Sceuolaes and Affricanes; and these again to the Laws of the Twelve
Tables? And I pray you what else be the twelve Tables, but the infancy of the
Roman Laws, which being very simple rudiments of Civil government, like
those which are to be found at this day among the most barborests Nations, we
through a foolish zeal of antiquity do wonder at in the ancient Romans,
and despise them in the ancient Almanes, Thuringians, Burgonions, Salians, and
Ripuaries, who notwithstanding had them far better than the Romans? (...)
Cap. 21.
But what antiquity can be said to be in them, seeing their continuance has
not bin past a four hundred years before the coming of Christ, as the Roman
Histories themselves inform us? Pomponius of of the first coming up of the
Law.
Again, do not the twelve Tables send us back to the Grecians? And of whom
had the Greeks them, but of Draco and Solon as in respect of the Athenians,
who lived in the time of Cyrus King of Persia; and of Lycurgus as in respect of
the Lacedaemonians, who lived about the end of the Empire of Assiria? And what
else is all this houge Depth of Antiquity whereof the Greeks make so great
boast, but late newness among ye Jews? Moreover Plutarke says that Solon and
Lycurgus Plutark in the lives of Solon and Lycurgus, and in his treatise of his
and Osyris.
had been in Egypt to seek Laws, and that there for all their bragging of
antiquity, they were skorned as young Children. The AEgiptians also had their
Laws of Mercury, and Mercury doubtless had them from the Pattern of Moses,
whom Diodorus witnesses to have bin the first Law maker of all. Iustine the
Martyr alleges Diodorus in his exhortation.
To be short, what shall we say, seeing that (as Josephus noceth against
Appion) the very name of Law was unknown among the Greeks in the time of
Homere?

But it may be that there have been Kings time without mind: for they were as a
living Law, Josephus against Appion
and their determinations were turned into Laws. Let us mark then, that from
the great Monarks we come to the Kings of several Nations, and from them to
vnderkings of Provinces and of Shyres, and afterward to Kings of Towns,
Cities, and Uillages, and finally to Kings of Households which were the Fathers
and Masters of houses, and were the ^ldest erauncient est of them; and these
do send us to the one common stock (that is to say, the one common beginning)
of them all. And when was that? Surely Iustine the History writer witnesses,
Iustine in his first book.
that the Kings which were before Ninus King of the Assyrians, were but
particular Judges of controversies which rose between folk of any one Town,
or City, or household, and that the said Ninus was the first King of whom any
Historiographers have, written. Plini, lib. 7. Merodotus. lib. 2.
And Herodotus says that the Egyptians had the first Kings. And he that will
mount up any higher, must do it by the holy Scripture, which teaches us that
Nembrod was the first that brake the said fatherly order of Household
government, wherein every father reigned over chose that descended of him,
without any other prerogative than of age, which sort of Gouerners Manetho
calls Shepherdkings, (...)
saying that they had been a thousand years before the wars of Troy. For as
for the Greeks and Romans, either they were not as yet at all, or else surely
they lived with Acornes like the People whom we at this day call Savages.

But let us see if at leastwise the Gods of the Heathen have any antiquity:
The original o^ the Heathen Gods.
for in as much as the essential shape of man is to acknowledge a certain
Godhead, it is lykely yt nothing should be of grerter antiquity than that. And
in very deed Nations have been found both without Laws and without Kings: but
without Gods and without some sort of Religion, there was never any found. But
what shall we say if men have been borne before Gods, yea and also do live
still after them? Let us not buzie our brains about the first coming up of
the petigods as well of the Romans as of the Greeks, who had more of them than
they had of Shyres, Cities, Towns, and Houses; nor yet about their Pedegrees
which are sufficiently described by their own seruers and worshippers the
Idolaters themselves: but let us go to the very root of them. What is to be
said of the first Saturn, who is called the father of them all? Of what time
is he? Soothly if we believe the notablest Storywriters among the Greeks, and
the Epitaphe of Osyris reported by Diodorus the Sicilian Saturn, (I mean not
the Saturn of the Greeks, but ye auncientest of all yt Saturnes) is none
other tha^ Cham the son of Noe, neither is Osyris any other tha^ Misraim the
youngest son of Cham, And those which would make Saturn auncientest, say
he was but Noe himself. I forbear to say what Berosus and others of the like
stamp report of him, because I hold them for fabling and forged authors. As
touching Jupiter, if ye mean him that was surnamed Belus, that is to say Ball
or Master; he was the Son of Nembrod, which Memrod was also called Saturn,
which was a common name to the auncientest persons of great Houses. And if he
were that Jupiter which was surnamed Chammon or Hammon; he was the same Cham
or Chamases the Son of Noe, which was worshipped in Lybya: for it is certain
that he took his ioyrney thither. For as for Jupiter of Crete or Candy, and
Saturn his Father, which were worshipped among the Greeks after the example
of the other Jupiter and Saturn which were of far more antiquity: they were
but a little while before the wars of Troy, and long after the time of Moses.
What manner of antiquity then is that, which passes not the space of three
thousand years? And should the Greeks have come by the knowledge thereof, if
it had not bin written by others than themselves? But this point shall be
handled more at large in another place.

What shall we say of Traffic between Nations, and of bargayning between
man and man, Traffik of Merchandyse, and bargayning, buying and selling.
seeing that from Coin of gold we must come to Coin of silver, from Coin of
silver to Coin of brass, and from Coin of brass to Coin of iron, yea even
among the Romans themselves? And again, from Money stamped and coined, to
Money by weight and measure without stamp, from weight to exchange of wares
and of one thing for another, and from exchange to that blessed comonnesse of
al things which was in the first ages of the world? Nay, the greater half of
the world continues still the said exchange, even unto this day; and some
Nations had never had any skill thereof as yet, if the Nauigations of our time
had not taught it them. And as for Navigations it self, Navigations. Pliny lib.
7.
which is as the sinews of Traffic and Merchaundise; if we believe Pliny,
the first Ship that ever was set a flote, was upon the red Sea; and the
first Ship that ever came into Greece, came from the Coast of AEgipt. And if
we credit Strabo, Strabo. lib. 16.
the Tyrians were the first that excelled in Navigations, insomuch that some men
make them the first authors thereof. Tibullus Ele^ia. 7.
For, as touching the Nauigations of Ulysses, they passed not out of the
Midland Sea. And what else was it (if it were a true Story) but a floting of a
Uessell at the pleasure of the wind, without keeping of any certain course or
direction? For it is certain that the voyage which he had to make, is
ordinarily done nowadayes in less than six or seven days. And does all this
lead us any further than to that little Country which on ye one side is That
is to say the Land of Canaan. Berosus alleged by Josephus against Appion.
bounded with AEgipt, and on the other side with the redd Sea? And do not the
Stories of that Country direct us to the Ark of Noah? For what else was that
Arc but a Ship, as the true Berosi^s does in deed call it: And whereas
Moses tells us that anon after the Flud, such and such of Noes offspring
inhabited the Isles; is it not as much to say, as that the example of the Arc
had imboldened them to venture upon the Sea?

But forasmuch as Traffic seems to serve for living wealthily, Feeding.
and simple living went before living wealthily: I pray you how long is it ago
(may we think) since men lived by Acornes? From the delicates of Apitius, we
come to honest howshold fare; and from such howshold fare, to poor
labouringmans fare: that is to say, from deyntinesse to thriftinesse, and so
forth from thriftinesse to brutishness, at such time as men waited for the
falling of Acornes and Mast from the Trees like Swine. To be short, from
Cities and Towns, we come to houses dispersed; from houses, to Sheds; from
Sheds to Tents; and from Tents to the life of the people called the Nomads or
Grazyers. I mean not here the Americanes, nor yet the barbarous people of old
time; but even the very Greeks and Romans themselves? We know the first
finding out of Corn, of Meal, and of Ploughes. Pliny. lib. 7. and Diodorus.
lib. 1. 2. 6.
If it were Triptolemus, who taught it to the Greeks; he was the son of
Ceres: Or if it were Ceres; it was the Goddess of AEgipt the wife of Osyris.
And what was this Osyris (to speak of his most antiquity,) but Misraim the
graundchild of Noe? Pliny says that before the Persian wars, there was no
common Baker in Rome. The first Cherries that came in Rome, were brought
thither by Lucullus. When the Galls came into Italy, there were no Uynes in
all Gallia: insomuch that the word which signifies Wine as well in Greek as
in Latin, is strange to them both, and is borrowed of the Hebrewe word Iaijn.
The Earth has bin manured by little and little, and even yet it is scarsly
half inhabited. And at one word, our deifying of the first founders of Corn,
of Wine, of Tillage, of Fuel, and of Baking, as of personages of great account
above us all; does well convince us of our former rudeness. And yet we mock
at the silly barbarous people [of the Newfound Lands,] for terming us folk
fallen from Heaven, when they see our great Ships: whereas notwithstanding it
is not yet full two thousand years ago, since we were worse than they.

But we should not have known those things (will some man say) unless they
had bin put in writing; and therefore Histories The first coming up of
Histories.
are of more antiquity than all the things that we have spoken of. Be it so.
But yet let us repair from the Histories of the Romans to the yearly
Registers of their Hyghpriests, and we shall find that the Roman Writers are
of much later time than the Greeks, and the Greeks of much later time than
the Babylonians. For their greatest antiquity is but from ye reign of the
Persians. And Phericydes the Assyrian, whom they report to have bin the first
that wrate in prose, was welnere eight hundred years after Moses. Pliny.
lib. 7. Apuleius in his Florishes.
The Roman History flourished not, until such time as their Commonweal began
to droope: and the beginning thereof is nothing thing else but a Musterbooke of
names, and a recou^ting of Sheelds fallen from Heaven, and of Lances trimmed
with flowers. The Greek Histories began at the Empire of the Persians: And
Plutarke Plutark in the l^fe of Theseus.
(who was a diligent searcher thereof,) says expressly that beyond Thebes,
the Country was nothing but Sand, and a wast Wilderness vnapprochable, a
frozen Seacoast, or scorched Countries, such as men paynt in the uttermost
parts of Mappes, that is to say, either vain fables or dark ignorance. And
yet for all this, what else is the life of Theseus than a heap of fond fables,
or what euidentnesse or certeyntie is there in the Greek Histories, before the
fowerscorthe Olympiade, that is to say, before the reign of Darius, Censorinus.
seeing there was not yet any skill used in marking out the time either of the
wars of the Medes, or of the wars of Peloponnesus? Varro the best learned
of the Latins, intending to make an History of the World, could well skill to
divide it into three parts. The first, concerning that age which was from the
beginning of the world unto the Flud; the second, from the Flud unto the first
Olimpiad, which falls out about the time of the building of Rome; and the
third, from the first Olimpiad, unto his own time. But as he calls this
later age Historical; so calls he the second age fabulous, because he found
not any certeyntie thereof, neither in the Original Registers and Records of
the Romans, nor in the Histories of the Greeks. To be short, to begin his
History at the furthest end, he makes his enteraunce at the reign of the
Scyonians, which was the very selfsame time that Ninus began his reign, even
the same Ninus which made war against Zoroastres, which was about yt time of
Abraham. The same Varro Varro in his third book of Husbandry unto Pto:
accounts Thebes for the auncientest City of all Greece, as builded by
Ogyges, whereupon the Greeks called all ancient things Ogygians; and by his
reckoning it was not past two thousand and one hundred years before his own
time. Trogus Pompeius begins his History at the bottom of al antiquity
that remained in remembrance; and that is but at Ninus, who (by report of
Diodorus Diodorus. lib. 3.
) was the first that found any Historiographer to write of his doings. The same
Diodorus says that the greatest antiquity of Greece is but from the time of
Iuachus, who lived in the time of Amoses King of AEgipt, that is to say (as
Appion confesses) in the very time of Moses. Clemens Alexandr. in his first
book of S^om:
And intending to have begun his Story at the beginning of the world, he
begins at the wars of Troy: and he says in his Preface, that his Story
conteyneth not above a thousand one hundred thirty and eight years, which
fell out (says he) in the reign of Julius Caesar, in the time that he was
making war against the Galls; that is to say, less than twelve hundred
years before the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. Also the goodly History of
Atticus, whereof Cicero commends the diligence so greatly, contains but
seven hundred years. Which thing Macrobius observing, comes to conclude with
us. Who doubts (says he) whether the World had a beginning or no, yea even a
few years since, seeing that the very Histories of the Greeks do scarsly
conteyne the doings of two thousand years? For before the reign of Ninus, who
is reported to have bin the father of Semiramis, there is not any thing to be
found in writing. Yea and Lucrece himself (as great an Epicure and despiser of
God as he was) is constreined to yield thereunto, when he sees that the
uttermost bound which all Histories (be they never so ancient) do atteynt
unto, is but the destruction of Troy. For thus says he.

Now if that no beginning was of Heaven and Earth at all, Lucretius the Roman
Poet.

But that they everlasting were, and so continue shall:
How ^aps i^ that of former things no Poets had delight
Before the woeful wars of Troy and Thebes for to wright?
Yea, but the Registers of the Chaldees (will some man say) are of more
antiquity. For (as Cicero reports) they make their vaunt that they have the
natiuities of Childred noted and set down in writing (from nativity to
nativity) for above the space of three and forty thousand years before the
reign of the great Alexander. And that is true. But (as it has bin very well
marked) when they speak after their Schoolemaner, they mean always (as
witnesses Diodorus Diodorus. lib. 8. 1.
) the month year, that is to say, every month to be a year: which account
being reckoned back from the time of Alexander, hitteth just upon the
creation of the World, according to the account of the years set down by
Moses. Likewise when the Iberians say they have had the use of Letters and of
writing by the space of six thousand years ago; they speak after the manner
of their own accounting of the year, which was but four months to a year.
And in good sooth Porphirius himself will serve for a good witness in that
behalf, who says that the observations of the Chaldees which Callisthenes
sent from Babylon into Greece in the time of Alexander, passed not above a
thousand and nine hundred years. As for the observations of Hipparchus, (which
Ptolomie uses) they draw much nearer unto our times; for they reach not
beyond the time of Nabugodo^ozer. To be short, from our Indictions we mount up
to the Stories of the Romans, and from them to the yearly Registers of their
Priests, and so to the Calenders of their Feasts and Holidaies, and finally
to the time of their driving of the nail into the wall of the Temple of
Minerua, which was done always yearly in the Month of September, to the
intent that the number of the years should not be forgotten. From thence we
proceed to the Greek Olimpiads, the one half of which time is altogether
fabulous; Pliny lib. 7. Herodotus. lib. 5.
and beyond the first Olimpiade, there is nothing but a thick Cloud of
ignorance, even in the lightsomest places of all Greece. Varro in his first
book of Analogy. Crates the Greek Philosopher demau^ding why the Greeks
declined not the names of their letters saying (...) as well as they said (...)
was answered by the Greeks themselves, that it was because those names of
their letters are not Greek but barbarus. Lucane. lib. 3. Eupolemus in his
book of the Kings of Judah alleged by Clemens of Alexandria in his fowrth
book.
In which darkness we have nothing to direct us, if we follow not Moses, who
cites the book of the Lords wars, and leads us safely even to our first
original beginning. And how should the Histories of the Gentiles be of any
antiquity, when there was not yet any reading or writing: From Printing, we
step up unto books of written hand; from the Paper which we have now, we come
to Parchment; from Parchment, to the Paper of AEgipt, which was invented in the
time of Alexander; from that, unto Tables of Lead and Wax; and finally to the
Leaves and Barks of diverse Trees. From writing we go consequently to reading,
and so to the invention of Letters: which Letters the Greeks taught unto the
Latins, and the Phenicians to the Greeks, (who had not any skill of them at
the time of the wars at Troy, as the very names of them do well bewray) and
the Jews taught them to the Phenicians. For in very deed what are the
Phenicians, in account of all Cosmographers, but inhabiters of the Seacoast of
Palestine or Iewrie? And so the saying of Ewpolemus a very ancient writer of
Histories, is found true: namely, that Moses was the first teacher of
Gr^^^mer, that is to say, of the Art of Reading; (notwithstanding ^^at Philo
do father it upon Abraham;) and that the Phenician ^ad it of the Jews, and
the Greeks of the Phenicians; in r^spect whereof Letters were in old time
called Phenicians.

Phenicians were the first (if trust be given to Fame)
That durst express the voice in shapes that might preserve the (...).
Here I cannot forbear to give Pliny a little nippe. Let^^^ (says he) have
bin from everlasting. And why so? For (says h^ the Letters of the AEgiptians
had their first coming up about a fifteeue years before the reign of Ninus.
But Epigenes a grave Author says, that in Babylone certain observations of
Stars were written in Tyles or Brickes a Seuenhundred and twenty years
before: And Berosus and Critodemus (which speak with the least) do say
fowerhundred and fowerscore years. O extreme blockishnes! he concludes the
eternity of letters, upon that whereby they be proved to be but late come up.
Now then, seeing we find the original coming up of Arts, of Laws and
Government, of Traffic and Merchaundise, of soode and of very Letters; that
is to say, both of ^iuing well, and of living after any sort; should we rather
grant an everlasting ignorance in man, than a kind of youthfulness which has
learned things according to the growths thereof in ages? And seeing that the
Sciences, Arts, Honors, and Deinties of the life it self do prove us a
beginning thereof: is there any man either skillful or unskillful, great or
little, Philosopher or Handicrafts man, Laborer or Follower of the worldly
vanities; that w^ any more be so bold as to stand in contention that the
world is without beginning? What shall we then as now conclude of all this
discourse? First that the invention of all things is of so late time, that it
is of sufficient force too make all men believe, (of what trade or profession
so ever they be) that it is but a while ago since the world began. And
secondly that the said inventions gathering together into one time, do lead
us to some one certain Country as to a Center, where mankind has first
sprung up, and afterward spread it self abroad as to the outermost parts of
all the Circle. This time is the same space that was betwixt Moses and the
universal Flud: And the Country is the same where mankind did first multiply
after their coming out of the Arc: that is to wit, all the Coast from Mount
Taurus along by Mesopotamia, Syria and Phenice, unto Egypt; wherein we
comprehend the land of Palestine or Iewrie as the middle thereof, which by the
ancient Greek and Latin Historiographers, (who were vnskifull in Geographie)
is diversely accounted and allotted to the greater Countries that lie round
about it, accordingly as it bordereth upon them; one while to Syria, another
while to AEgipt; some time to Phenicia, and some time to Araby the desert. And
therefore as touching time and antiquity, it is good reason that we should
believe the Histories of those Nations, and not of the Greeks or of the
Latins, who are but young babes in respect of the others; especially seeing that
we would think it a thing worthy to be laughed at, if a man should stand to
the judgment of the stories of Iewrie in the matters of the Greeks. But now
let us hear their contradictions.

If the world be fo new (say they) where of comes it that it is so well
replenished and full of people? Objections.
Nay rather, if it be without beginning, or of so great antiquity as thou
surmizest; how happens it that it has not always been known? whereof comes
it that it is even yet so slenderly peopled? how comes it too pass that it is
not thoroughly inhabited in all places, or at leastwise in the best places of
the world, where even in our time are found both Isles and main Lands well
habitable, and yet uninhabited? It is not past a hundred years ago, The World
scarce known in old time.
since we knew nothing at all of more then the better half of the world. We
were but at the entrance of the earth, and we thought our selves to have bin
come to the full knowledge of Geographie. We thought our selves to have known
the uttermost Coasts of the world, when as we had not yet passed the
Southcircle which divides ye world in twain. Read the Nauigations of the
Portingales and Spaniards.
And yet notwitstanding, he that had spoken otherwise, should have been counted
of most men for a fool. Yea and even yet still at this day, we know nothing of
yt main Land of the South, and but very little of the North. It is not past
two hundred years ago, since the Swedians sent the first inhabiters into the
country of Groneland: and both Scotland and Ireland (being in our part of the
world) are yet still half barbarus. Ye shall read in Caesar's Commentaries,
that in his time Germany was a continual Forest, wherein a man might have
gone 50. days journey ere he could see any end of it, and that the people
thereof were savage and beastly, sacrifysing their own Children to their
Gods. He seems here to speak of the Cannibals or the people of Brasilie.
It was long time after ere the Romans durst adventure over far in that
Country. Whereby it appears that all the ancient Towns and Cities which
stand upon the Rivers of Rhyne and Danowe, toward France and Italy, did
serve rather for a Bank or a Iettie against the ouerflowing of the Germans,
than for Fortresses to assail them withal. Even in the time of Tacitus, what
were the people on the Sea coast of Germany? What were the Saxons in the time
of Charles the great? And a feawe hundred years ago, what were the Low
Countries of Germany, which at this day be the florishingest people of all
Ewrope? The same is to be said of Ingland in Caesar's time; and likewise of
France, Italy, and Spain, if we mount a little higher. For seeing that Room
is the oldest city of the Latins; how happens it that Alexander (who sought
new worlds to conquer) knew it not by the statelynesse thereof? how happens
it yt he knew as little also of the Frenchmen and Spaniards, of whom all the
ancient Histories speak either nothing at all, or else with wonderful
ignorance? And what shall we say of Ephorus, whom men account the diligentest
Historiographer of them all? As great a Country as Spain or Iberia is; he
writes thereof in such sort, as if it were but only one town. Also what was
Greece before the time of Orpheus and Amphion, who (as Thucidides Thucidides in
his first book.
reports) drew the Greeks out o^ their Forests and Fennes, about the time
of the wars at Troy? And where learned Orpheus Orpheus in his Argonauts.
to lay away his own savageness, but in Egypt? The holy Bible it self when
it speaks of the Greeks and of the lesser Asia, speaks of them as of
Islands, that is to say, as of Countries that were furthest of from the
knowledge of that time. Thus do ye see the latenesse of the Western Nations;
whom I call so, as in respect of the rest of the whole world, and of the Center
and middle point thereof, which I have taken too be from Mount Taurus unto
Syria.

Now let us see the Eastern Nations also. The Country of India beyond the
River Ganges, was unknown in the time of Alexander, who notwithstanding had
cast the platform of his Conquest, on that side of the world. And his Pylots
which went to seek new Worlds, passed not beyond the Island of Sumatra then
called Taprobane, which is under the Equinoctial and Easterly a great way of
from the Molucques. Herodotus, lib. 4.
And when it was told the Romans that a Ship was found which by the
commandment of Necho King of Egypt had sailed about all the Coast of
Affrike, they took it for a fable: and therefore much less did they ever come
at Iaua the less or Iaua the more, or at the firm Land which is next unto
them. To be short, they did not ordinarily pass the Streytes of Gibraltar; by
reason whereof their greatest Philosophers could less skill of the nature and
course of the Tides, than the meanest Seamen or Sailer of our time. Now then
what is to be said of Pliny with his Dogheaded men, his Oneeyed men, his
Longeares, his Centaures, his Pygmees, and his Cyclopes, seeing that in all the
Country where he planteth them, we find Men, Cities, and Kingdoms, no less
whit flourishing than the same wherein he himself was; and as for any
lykelyhod of that which he writes of those things, we find none at all? As
touching the Southcountryes and the Northcountryes, that is to wit, beyond the
Circles of the two Poles: The four Empyres which have been so renowned, never
heard speaking of them but at randon, and much less extended them selves so
far; in so much that even we our selves know but a little of them, which
Tempest and Shipwrecke has taught unto us.

What win we then by this discourse? Uerely that the World was not known of
all those great Empyres, and much less of them that lived under their
subjection. And that it was not peopled all at once, but that as folk
ouerswarmed in a place, and chanced to hit upon a man that was aduentrus, they
spread themselves further and further under his guyding, into the Countries next
unto them. And (to be short) that the nearer any Countries were to our foresaid
Center, the sooner were they inhabited, made civil, and manured: which thing
appears more plainly even by the very genealogy of the World. The proceedi^g
or growing foreward of the World.
Therefore let us take our Center to be either the top of Mount Taurus where
it is called Caucasus, and where Stories report the Ark of Noah to have rested;
or else the plain of Sennaar, where Moses says that the Languages were
confounded, and folk dispersed abroad; or else some place of Mesopotamia, (for
it skilleth little in respect of the world) and by considering the auncientest
Estates, we shall find the States of Assyria, of Syria, of AEgipt, and of
Persia to have bin nerest to our Center, and that the State of Assyria was the
greatest of them all, and yet in very truth but small in comparison of the
States that succeeded it. From yt Assyrians, the Monarchy came to the
Persians; from the Persians, to the Greeks; from the Greeks, to the Latins;
from the Latins, to the Frenchmen; and from the Frenchmen to the Almanes,
accordingly as Countries multiplied their habitations, and that their people
growing in Civility, matched their force with wisdom? And Spain which
heretofore was counted the uttermost part of ye World, is now become ye first
discouerer of the new World. But let us go on with the East parts: from the
Persians we go to the Indians, and from the Eastindians to the Westindians,
so long until we come to their uttermost Coast, which is the selfsame place
where the Spaniards found their first landing. And surely if two folk should
keep on their way continually, the one on the one side and the other on the
other (that is to say, the one Eastward and the other Westward:) in the end
they should meet both together, if there were firm land all the way for them
to go upon. And in very deed, like as Ireland, a part of Scotland, Laplond, and
Groneland, being the uttermost parts of our side of the World, are as good as
savage: so also be the uttermost inhabiters of the Westindies; namely Canada,
Baccalea, Brasilie, and Petagon, which are descended of the Eastindies. And
contrariwise like as in our Countries, the more they tend toward the Center
which I have taken, the mo tokens have they of their antiquity; as, France mo
than Germany; Italy mo than France; Greece mo than Italy; AEgipt mo than
Greece; and so forth of the rest: So the Spaniards, who in their first
Conquests found but Cotages and Bogges; did at their entering further into the
Land, find goodly Cities well inhabited, orderly distinction of Commons and
Nobility, Ministers of Justice and men of War, Trades and Handycraftes well
governed, Histories of their doings, wonderful antiquities, Towers passing the
Pyramyds of AEgipt, and whatsoever else the world has counted wonderful. And
out of doubt the nearer they come to the Center of that part, the more shall
they find still. For there is no man ignorant nowadayes what goodly great
Cities and flourishing Kingdoms, An History of the Realm of China.
have within these few years bin discovered in the Westindies: And where it
comes to face the Eastindia with the Sea betwixt them both; there we see the
great Empire of China, so beautiful, so flourishing, and so well governed in all
respects; that the ciuilest time of all the Roman Empire, may well seem unto
us to have been barbarous in comparison of that. It is in effect all one as
though the Western Indians making Conquests upon us as we have done upon them,
should have arrived at the first in Ireland, Scotland, or Groneland; for as
little could they have said of us, as we of them. And whereas it may be
replied, that although the people there be rude, yet notwithstanding it has
evermore bin peopled: Let it be added thereunto, that in following the Coasts,
men have found many Countries even yet unpeopled. And also that even in the
best peopled places of all their Conquestes, they have not found the tenth part
of so much people as the Country being manured were able to bear; whereas on
the contrary part, in our Countries the Nati^ns do pester one another. And
whereas our very uttermost borders are more frequented then theirs; the cause
thereof is, that ours be much nearer the Center which I set down, then theirs
be; as the Cosmographers do easly perceive. Whereupon it has come to pass,
that the people which have been spread abroad from our Center unto the
uttermost Coasts of the frosen Sea, finding them selves more multiplied than
their Lands were able to mainteyne, and being not able to go any further for
the Sea that hemmed the^ in; have rebounded back again upon the next
Countries, as namely the Cymbrians upon the Almanes and Romans, and afterward
the Goths upon Italy and France, the Humes upon Pannoye, the Vandales upon
Spain, and lastly the Turks and Tartarians upon all Europe. Which thing has
not happened upon the other part of the World, because of the large scope of
their Country, which eniptyeth the Eastern Indya nito ye Western; The
Western into new Spain; new Spain into Brasilie; and Brasilie into the
Southern land, whereof not so much as the Seacoast is yet known. Neither
befell it so unto us in the first ages, because our part of the World was not
yet sufficiently peopled to ebb back again: but it befell chiefly a little
before or a little after the coming of Jesus Christ, that is to wit, toward
the perfect age of the World. To be short, were there never so much people,
yet were it no wonder to him that would take the peynes to account what only
one offspring might amount unto in one hundred years, and how many one man
might see to come of himself in his own lifetyme; which in another hundred
year might increase into an infinite multitude. The Empyres have always
extended their largeness toward the North and the South, but yet more
Northerly than Southerly, because the Center which I take, is still before
toward the North, and in the temperatest Clymate of our half Globe, that is
to wit, toward the 35. and 40. degreees (or thereabouts) of the Equinoctial
line, which divides yt World even in the midst; which thing I desire the
Readers to mark advisedly. And truly Iseland (which in old time was called
Thule,) was known in the time of great Alexander, notwithstanding that it be
situate about 68. degrees North; whereas yet for all that, the greatest part of
Afric was unknown to them, and the uttermost reach of their knowledge was
the I Will of Taprobane, which nevertheless are but under the Equinoctial: so
far of were they from atteyning to ye Southpole. To be short, the Coast of
Afric or Barbary and of Spain, was peopled by the Phenecians, whom we read
to have bin long time Lords of the Sea. And the Commonweal of Carthage, which
was so highly renowned and reached so far of, was an ympe of Tyrus the chief
City of Phenecia, which bordered upon Iewrie. For Tyrus sent thither the one
half of their people; whereupon it was called Carthago, that is to say, the
half town. And the first people that dwelled there, Strabo. lib. 3. Plutark
in the life of Scipio.
went into that Country by a narrow piece of dry land called Catabathmos,
which is a falling ground that joins Palestine unto AEgipt, as remained yet
still to be read in the time of the Hystoriographer Procopius, upon a Pillar
in Tingie a City of Afric, set there by the inhabitants of Chanaan which had
fled away from the sight of Joshua. And in good sooth, as appears by many
sentences of S. Austins, the Punicke tongue was but a kind of several
propriety of the Hebrew.

Some persist yet still in demanding, The Histories of Affricke.
from whence the Southland, the Country of Brasilie, the Land of Perow and
such others could be peopled? And whence I pray you was Affricke peopled, for
the replenishing whereof thou can not but know that inhabitants were sent
thither both by Sea and by Land? Afric was peopled first by the foresaid
narrow piece of dry Land cassed Catabathmos, and afterward refreshed again by
the streyghts of Gibraltar. And the Southland was peopled on the one side by
the I Will of Taprobane, and on the other side by the streyghts of Magellan which
do butt there upon Brasilie. And Perow likewise was peopled by the narrow
point of land called Darien, by the which way Brasilie also was peopled. At
such time as the Spaniards entered first into that great Nesse which conteyneth
both Brasilie and Perow, they thought it to have bin an Island. In like manner,
if the Perouians had landed in Afric by the Athlantick Sea, and had fennd so
long a side as the side of Afric is that stretches unto the red Sea, so as
they being wearied with following it as the Romans were, had made the like
question: we would then have mocked at them because we know the passage
whereby men came thither: and they have like occasion to mock us, because they
know theirs. But yet again, from whence came the people which are spread
abroad from the Land that is called new Spain by the straight of Daryen?
Proc^ede on yet a little further, and thou shall find Cathay and Indya joining
to that Land; and Groneland facing it on the Northside; and the straight of
Anian on the West side, which is almost as near within the view of it as
Spain is unto Afric by ye streyghts of Gibraltare. And I pray you what more
marvel is it that they should have passed by that straight, than that the
Latins passed into Sicilie by the Fare of Messana, or that the Vandales passed
into Afric and ye Sarzins into Spain by the said streygh^s of Gibraltare?
But the mischief is, that nothing can suffize us for proof of the truth; but
for witness against it, we admit both Ignorance, Heresay, and Doubts, and the
very least suspicions or surmizes that ca^ come in our mind. For I pray you
what can be more childish, (or rather as Varro says in his Eumenides) more
worthy of Hell; than to say that men sprung up in a Country as Beetes and
Rapes do? After that manner were the Athenians called Aborigenes, that is to
say, Homebred or bred in that place: and in token thereof they wore a
Grassehopper in their Cappe or Bonet: Aristides in his Pautheuaik,
insomuch that Aristides to flatter them withal, told them that their
Territory was the first that ever bore men; and yet for all that, there had
bin whole Realms of men in Syria, before there were any me^ in Greece. The
Latins also would vaunt themselves of the same: but Dennis of Halycarnassus and
Porcius Cato acknowledge them to have come out of Achaia. Ask the Savages, and
they will say the very same that these Sages say: for they know neither one
thing nor other, further than their own remembrance can reach.

But go to Moses, and he will tell you the Originalles of the first Nations,
and the Genealogy of the whole World. And the names of them remaining from
thence unto us, will put the matter out of all doubt to a man of understanding.
For of Noe by his eldest Son Iaphet, issewed the Gomerians or Cymbryans, the
Medes, the Ionians who were the first inhabiters of Greece, the Twiscons
Duchmen or Almanes, the Italians, and the Dodoneans: namely of Gomer, Maday,
Iauan, Aschenes, Elisa, and Dodanim. By Cham there issewed the Chananites, the
AEgiptians, the Libyans, the Sabeans, and so forth; who retained the names of
his Children, that is to wit, of Chanaan, Misraim, Lud, Saba, and so forth:
For Misraim in Hebrewe betokens AEgipt. By Sem there descended the Elamites
and Persians, the Assyrians, the Chasdeans or Chaldees, yt Lydians, the
Aramites or Syrians, the people of Ophir and others; that is to wit, of Elam,
Arphaxad, Lud, Aram, Ophir, and others. And these names were written and
recorded by Moses, before those Nations were of any reputation, and they
remain yet still among the Hebrews at this day. Now look in what measure
these fathers of houses increased their Children, so did every of them spread
out his branches a far of, insomuch that the offspring of that stock did
cover and ouershadow the whole earth, and the Ark of Noah did after a manner
sail over the whole world.

But here is an Objection which seems stronger. An Objection of Fluddes taken
out of Plato.
These reasons (say they) do bring us up to the Flood; but as ye Flud brought
mankind to that small number, whereby the World was by little and little
renewed again: So may it be that there were other former Fluds, that had done
the like before; so as this latter Flud was rather a renewing of the World, than
a first beginning thereof. And to this purpose they will allege this saying of
Plato in his Timaeus, that the ouerflowings of waters and the burnings by fire,
do from time to time refresh the World, and destroy the rememberance of the
former ages, and also of all Arts, Sciences, and other Inventions. This is
worthy of some examination. Surely of Burnings either universal or any thing
great in respect of the whole world, there is no mention found in any Story.
Also of any other general Flud, than that which we take to be the first, and
last, there is as little to be found, unless they will apply that name to the
ouerflowings of Rivers in some final quarter, or to the winning of the Sea by
force of his breaking into some Country a League or twain, which can nothing
serve to this purpose. And if their alleging of it in that behalf be
unfeignedly and in good earnest as I believe it is; well might they fare for
their confession. For then will I ask them whether this Flud were universal,
or particular but to some one Country. If it were particular; how comes it
to pass that all Nations confess it to be universal? And how comes it to
pass also that the Countries which had no part thereof, have no incling
thereof either in memory or in writing? Or if it were universal; did any men
escape from it, or no? If none escaped, how then come we to the knowledge of
it? And whence are we also, but of a new Creation? And he that was able to
create us again, why was he not able to create us also before? If some escaped,
as all of us do consent that there did: why believe we them not as well in the
things that went before the Flud, as we believe them concerning the Flud it
self? And who be those that escaped but Noe and his issew, who lead us to
the first beginning both of the World and of men? For in all the Histories of
the Heathen, what find we thereof worth the alleging? Again, I demand
whether this said Flud and others which they pretend to have abolished the
rememberance of the former times, befell by chance or by providence? If by
chance; was it not possible, that of so many which may perchance have bin
either from everlasting or of very old time, perchance not so much as any one
should have escaped? Or if by Providence; by whose providence should it be but
by Gods? or who could have power to undo and confound this work, but only he
that made it? And what warrant have thou that he destroyed it more than once,
seeing thou art enforced to grant that he made it but once? Nay, it may be
that it befell through some Conjunction of the Stars. And who told them so?
And if they know so much thereof, let them tell us what Stars. I omit to
tell them that such Conjunctions (as they themselves teach) threaten not the
whole World, but some small part thereof. After this manner did the Astrologers
say, that in the year 1524. there should meet the like Conjunction as was at
the general Flud, by reason whereof the whole earth should be covered with
water: and yet as (Viues says) a fayrer year was never seen. To be short,
all things will go for payment with these folk, saving the truth.

But see here their last Ankerhold. How happens it (says Auerrhois The
objection of Auerrhoes.
) that God forbore so long, and where had he that new device of making the
world? Silly soul that thou art! which gloriest in asking Questions whereas
skill consists in answering. Thou will needs prove the world by thy reasons
to be without beginning: and yet in three words which thou have spoken, thou
show yt thou know not what eternity or euerlastingnes is. In eternity
(friend mine) there is neither length nor shortness of time: the everlasting
providence is not tied to new casualtie. Consider that thou art a man. The
Plants cannot judge of Sense; the Beasts cannot judge of the drift of Reason;
neither can thou which art s^biect to time, judge of eternity which is
without time. For if even thy little Babe which is in time, cannot conceive what
time is: how shall he that is but in time, understand the euerlastingnes of
the everlasting? After that manner the brute beasts (if they had speech) would
decipher the reach of thy wit according to their own imagination. And thou
would mock at them if they should go about to describe what thy memory
is, which joins past, present, and to come all in one. And how think thou
thy self able to judge of eternity, which alterest with the Winds, with the
Moons, and with the seasons of the year; every day, every hour, and every
minute? Ask thou why God forbore so long time? Nay rather, ask why God
listed to make the time it self; for in one vndeuidable moment is eternity
joined both too ye beginning and to the end of time. Learn this also, that
where there is any bound orend, there is no long time. The long time of a
Worm, is a mooneth; of an Ant, a year; of a Horse, thirty years; of a man, a
hundred years; of all mankind, certain thousands of years; of time it self,
a certain space of time; and the terming of any of all their times long, is in
respect of the long continuance of their life in time; but unto him that made
time, nothing indureth less while than time. Put the case that the world have
lasted a hundred thousand years, or (if ye will) tenhundred thousand, what
shall ye gain by that? That the world shall have been of the greater
antiquity. But in respect of whom? of God, or of thy self? of a Woorme, or of
a Spirit? of eternity, or of time? And what is all that in comparison of
infiniteness? Is not yt Question all one still? Whence is this device? whence
is this chance? as well in a hundred; as in a thousand, and as well in a
thousand as a thousand thousand? Yet was the device and purpose eternal,
notwithstanding that the execution thereof be in time, insomuch that he has
brought forth time, and time is measure of moving, and moving proves a
beginning, and the beginning which it takes is ever new. Thou then which by a
moving have a beginning proved unto thee, give over thy surmised eternity and
confess a newness of time, for nothing is newer than time. With like reason
mist thou demand why God made the World rather here than elsewhere. For these
distinctions of time and place were created and brought forth together at one
instant with the World, so as they be neither without it nor before it. He that
is without time and without place, made both time and place; and if he had bin
subject to time and place, as thou imaginest; he could not have made either
place or time. Yea, but what did he then (say thou) before the world and
out of the world? Once again amend thy plea. For in God there is neither before
nor after, within nor without. But surely it is a goodly question, and
welbeseeming a great wit. Before thy Clock or thy building was made, thou
did not cease to live and to delight thy self in the perfectness of
thine Art; and afterward thy building added nothing unto thee, but thou unto
thy building. Thou would have bin ashamed to have asked of Scipio what he
did at home in his house in the Country, after he had given over the affairs
of the Commonweal and the warre^: and he would have answered thee yt he was
never less idle than when he was idle, nor less alone than when he was alone.
And yet thou think that it stood God greatly on hand to make this goodly
place of yt world for thee, and to harber such blasphemers as thou art therein,
as if he could not have forborne thee, or lived without thy company. God did
the same thing without the world, which he does still with the world: that is
to wit, he is happy in himself. The world has nothing at all augmented his
felicity or happiness. But to the intent (as y^ would say) to shed forth his
happiness out of himself; it liked him to create the world. Yea, but why did
he it no sooner? What a number of faults are here in one speech? Thou will
needs be privy to the cause of Gods will in all things, and yet is Gods will
the cause of the causes of all things. By eternity thou had not bin able
to have known his power; for the Majesty thereof would have made the dark;
and it is so bright that thou could have seen less, than thou could see
now if thou were lodged in ye body of the Sun. Now he makes thee to perceive
his power, by the creation of the world; his eternity, by comparison of time;
and his glorious brightness, by the shadow thereof. By eternity, thou
could not have known his wisdom; for thou would have deemed all things
as wise as he, seeing they had bin as everlasting as he. And what wisdom had
remained in him, if all things had bin of necessity, and nothing at his own
choice and liberty? But now thou see his wisdom in the Stones, in the
Herbs, in the dumb creatures, yea and even in the workmanship of thy self.
Thou see it in the order, in the succession, and in the breeding of all
things. Thou gasest at it in the greatest things, and thou wonderest at it in
the smallest; as much in the Fly and the Ant, as in the whole Cope of heaven:
whereas the eternity of things would have caused thee to have attributed
Godhead to the Skies, the Stars, the Earth, the Rocks, the Mountains, and
in effect to all things rather than thy self, as they did which were taught so
to do. Also by this eternity thou could not have conceived his goodness,
because thou would have thought that GOD had had as much need of the World,
as the World had of him. Thou should not have known thy self to be any
more beholden to him, than to the fire for heating thee or to the Sun for
giving thee light, because they should no more be either fire or Sun, if
they forwent that nature. But he shows thee by the creation, both that he
himself is ever, and that thou have had thy being since the time that it
pleased him to create thee: that he without thee is eternal; and that thou
without his goodness had never bin that little which thou art: and to be
short, that he is not tied to any need or necessity as Aristotle's God is,
(which could not refuse to drive yt Mill, but was tied to it whether he would
or no:) but that his doing of things is altogether of his own infinite
goodness, wherethrough he voutsafeth to impart himself unto others, by making
the thing to be which was not; yea and by making the thing happy, which of it
self could not so much as be. Now, had man any will or skill to acknowledge
the power, wisdom, and goodnesse^ of his God? [I think not.] Then was it for
thy benefit and not for his own, that he made not the World either of greater
antiquity, or eternal. For had he made it eternal; (let us so speak seeing
ye will have it so,) thou would have made a God of it, and thou can not
even now forbear the doing thereof. And had he made it of more antiquity;
thou would have made it an occasion to forget thy God; and for all the
newness thereof, yet will thou not bear it in thy mind. Then seek not the
cause thereof in his power. The cause thereof is in thy^e own infirmity: Nay,
the cause thereof is in his goodness, in that he intends to succor thine
ignorance. And so, notwithstanding al their objections, we shall by this means
hold still our conclusion, to wit, That the World is but of late continuance;
That it had a beginning; and that concerning the time of the first beginning
thereof; and concerning the continuance thereof unto our days, we ought to
believe ye books of Moses above all.

The ix. Chapter.
That the wisdom of the World has acknowledged the Creation of the World.
Since we have seen with what consent yt whole harmony of the World chaunteth
the Creation thereof and the praise of the Creator; now it follows that we see
what the wisdom of the world has believed in that behalf: wherein we have to
consider the selfsame thing which we considered in the doctrine of the three
Persons; that is to wit, that the nearer we come to the welhead thereof, the
more clerer we find it: yea and it is also a schoolepoynt of Platoes teaching,
That in these high matters of the Godhead, of the Creation of the world, and of
such other like, we must give credit (as unto a kind of Demonstration,) to the
sayings of men of most antiquity, as folk that were better and nearer to God
than we. Here I should begin at Moses, as the auncientest of all writers, and
whom all the Heathen Authors do honor and wonder at in their writings^ And
the very first word of his book simply set down in these terms, In the
beginning God created Heaven and Earth; ought to be unto us as a maximee of
Euclyde, which in those days men were ashamed to call in question. The men of
most antiquity believed the Creation of the world.
But to the intent we confound not the word of God with the word of man,
forasmuch as the folk with whom we have to deal, are such as refuse those
whom they cannot accuse: let us overcome them rather by their own Doctors.
Certeynly whosoever will take the pain to co^ferre Mercurius Mercury in his
Poemander.
Trismegistus with Moses, shall reap thereby most singular contentation. In
Genesis Moses describes the Creation of the World; and so does Mercury
likewise in his Poemander. Moses espyeth darkness upon the Waters: And
Mercury sees a dreadful shadow houering on the moist nature, and the same
moist nature as it were brooded by ye word of God, Moses says that GOD spoke,
and forthwith things were made: and Mercury acknowledges and brings in
Gods word shining, whereby he created the light and made the World and all
that is therein. Moses parts the nature of moisture into twain, the one
mounting aloft which he calls Heaven, and the other remaining beneath which
he calls Sea: And Mercury sees a light fire which he calls Ether
mounting up as it were out of the bowelles of the moist nature, and likewise an
air casting it self between the water and the elementarie fire, which is
nothing else but a more clear and subtle air. The Sea and Land (says Moses)
were mingled together until God had spoken; and then by and by either of them
took his place by himself. After the same manner Mercury says that those two
Elements lying erst mingled together, severed themselves asunder at the
speaking of the spiritual word which inuyroned them about. What more? God (say
both of them) created the Stars and the Planets. Mercury in his Poemander,
the. 1. and 3. cap.
At the voice of his word, the Earth, the Air, and the Water, brought forth
Beasts, Birds, and Fishes. Last of all, God created man after his own Image,
and delivered all his works into his hand to use them. Is not this a setting
down nor only of one selfsame sense, but also of the selfsame terms and
words? But when as Mercury adds afterward, that God cries out unto his
works by his holy word, saying, Bring ye forth fruit, grow, and increase: may
it not seem unto us that we hear Moses himself speaking? Mercury alleged
by Cyrillus in his second book against Julian the Renegate. Mercury in his
holy Sermon.
And as for the small differences which are in him concerning the seven
Circles, the Zones, and such other things; they serve greatly to the
manifestation of the truth; namely, that this manner of Mercuries writing, is
not a bare borrowing or translating out of Moses; but rather a tradition
conveyed to the AEgiptians from the Father to the Son. In another place he
says that God by his holy, spiritual and mighty working word, commanded the
day son to be, and it was done: that the Sea and Land should be severed
asunder; that the Stars should be created; and that Herbs should grow up
every one with his seed, by force of the same word. Also that the World is
but an alteration, a moving, a generating and a corrupting of things, and that
it cannot be called good. These are conclusions clean contrary to eternity or
euerlastingnesse. But forasmuch as [if I should set down all his sayings which
he has to that purpose,] I should be feign to copy him almost whole out: it
is better for me to desire the Readers to go to the very place it self.

Orpheus the auncientest of the Greeks, Orpheus in his Argonawtes.
had bin in AEgipt as he himself skyth, and there he learned, That there is
but one God, and that The Air, the Heaven, the Sea, the Earth, and Hell
With all the t^^^gs that in them all do dwell,
were harberd in his ^reast from all eternity. And also that The running
streams, the Ocean, Gods and Men,
Things present, things to come lay all at ease
In that wide lap of his: and that within
His belly large the bond lay lapped up
Which holds all this great huge work together.
And afterward he adds further, These things which yet lay hidden all
Within the treasure of his breast,
He into open light did call,
Creating as he deemed best
This stately stage, whereon to show
His noble doings on a row.


And what else is this; than that God did everlastingly hold the world hiddeny,
(as the Apostle says) in the Treasury of his infinite wisdom: Or (as Dennis
says) in the Closet of his purpose and will; and afterward brought it forth
in time when it pleased him? And in another place, I sing (says he) of the
dark confusion, (...)
I mean the confusion that was in the beginning, how it was disfigured in
diverse natures, and how the Heaven, the Sea and the Land were made. And what
more? I sing (says he) of Love, even of the Love that is perfect of it self,
of more antiquity than all these things; and of all things which the same has
brought forth, and set in order, yea of time it self. I have already
heretofore declared what he means by this Love: namely, the goodwill of GOD;
and that also do even some of the Hebrews mean by the Spirit which Moses
speaks of. Orpheus in his Argonawtes.
To be short, he says that he himself made a book of the Creation of the
world, which was a common argument among the Poets of that time, as Empedocles,
Hesiodus, Parmenides, and such others, which were all Philosophers. And in many
places he reduces all things to Water and to a certain Mud as to their
original, which thing agrees well enough to the deep of Moses. The like is
done by Homer and Hesiodus, which came after him. For, Hesiodus Hesiodus in his
book of works and Days, and in his Genealogy of the Gods.
makes description, not only of the Creating of ^ world and of the parts
thereof; but also of the Chaos or confusion and of the Gods themselves. And
when Homer intends to curse a man, I would (says he) that thou might
return to Water and Earth: that is to say, I would thou were not any more, as
the time has been that thou wast not. To be short, Sophocles, AEschylus, and
the very Comedywriters speak after the same manner: and for proof of them all,
Ewripides shall suffize, who was the least religious of them all. The time has
been (says he) that Heaven and Earth were but a lump: but after that they
were separated, they engendered all things, and brought to light the Trees, the
Birds, the Beasts of the field, the Fishes, and Men them selves. For as for
others, they speak more to the purpose, as Aratus, who says that God has set
the Stars in the Sky to distinguish the Seasons of the year: that he
created all things: that men are his offspring: that by the signs of Heaven he
meant to give them warning of the chaunges of the Air, and of Tempests. And the
voice of these Poets is to be considered as the opinion of the people to whom
they sung their uerses. Plutark in his book of the opinions of the
Philosophers.


Now let us go on with the ancient Philosophers. Pythagoras (by the report of
Plutarke) says yt the World was begotten of God, of it own nature
corruptible, because it was sensible and bodily; but yet that it is not
corrupted, because it is vphild and mainteyned by his providence. The same
thing does also Diogenes Laertius witness. And whereas Varro Varro in his
second book of Husbandry.
says that Pythagoras acknowledged not any beginning of living Wights:
Architas his Disciple shall mainteyne the contrary for his Master: For his
words are these: Iamblichus one of the sect of Pythagoras, cyting Architas.
Of all living Wights man is bred most wise of capacity to consider things,
and to atteyne to knowledge, and to judge of them all. For GOD has printed in
him the fullness of all Reason. And like as God has made him the instrument of
all Voices, Sounds, Names and vtterances; so also has he made him the
instrument of all understandings and conceyts, which is the workmanship of
wisdom: And even for that cause (says he) do I think that man is of Gods
creating, and has received his instruments and abilities at his hand. Thales
Laertius in the life of Thales.
one of the seven Sages hild opinion, that all things had their beginning of
Water, and that GOD created all things thereof, who is alonly unbegotten, and
has not any end or any beginning. Plutark in his banquet.
And again, The World (says he) is most excellently beautiful, for it is the
work of God. Also being asked whether was first of the Day or the Night; he
answered that the Night was sooner by one day: as if he had meant to say, that
before God had created the light, it must needs be confessed that out of him
there was nothing but darkness. Now this Philosopher also as well as the rest
had gone to School in AEgipt.

Timeus of Locres terms Time the Image of eternity, and says that it took
his beginning from the creating of Heaven and Earth, and that God created the
very Soul of the World before the World it self, both in possibility and in
time. To be short, Plutarke affirms that all the natural Philosophers of
old time, hild opinion that the begetting or creating of the World began at the
Earth as at the Center thereof: and that E^pedocles says that the finest kind
of AEr which they call Ether, was the first part thereof that was drawn up on
high. And Anaxagoras is reported by Simplicius, to affirm that God (whom he
calls Mind or Understanding) created the Heaven, the Earth, the Sun and the
Stars; and scarsly is there any one to be found, which teaches that time is
without beginning.

Some of Platoes latter Disciples, (as namely Proclus writing against the
Christians) would needs bear their Master down, that he believed the world
to have had no beginning. But if we may believe Aristotle, Aristole in his
eightth book of natural Philosophy. Epicurus in Cicero.
who was a scholar of his a two and twenty years; he taught that the world
was created; and it is one of the chief Principles wherein they most disagree.
Philo who was as another Plato, says that Plato had learned it of Hesiodus.
And Plutarch Plutark in the Opinions of the Philosophers, and in the creation
of the Soul.
who shows himself to have perused him thoroughly leaf by leaf, speaks of
him in these words. There are (says he) some studyers of Plato, which by
racking his words, indeuer by all means to make him deny the creation of the
World and of the Soul, and to confess the euerlastingnesse of time,
notwithstanding that in so doing they bereeue him of that most excellent
treatise of his concerning the Gods, against the despysers and skorners of
whom in his time he wrate. And what needs any thing to be alleged for proof
thereof, seeing that his whole book of Timeus is nothing else but an express
treatise of the Creation of the World? The same thing also does Aphrodisius
Aphrodisius as he is alleged by Simplicius upon the books of Heaven.
witness concerning Plato. In his book intytled Athlantick, he terms the
world a thing Longago created. In his matters of State he says that the world
was settled and founded by God, and that it co^teyneth store of good things, and
that the trouble somenesse which it has, is but a Remnant or Remaynder of the
former confusion. Also Socrates in his book of Commonweal, terms it (...)
(...).
A Godhead begotten or created. And which of the ancient writers did ever
doubt, that Plato taught not the Creation of the World, considering that he
has made descriptions, both of all the parts thereof, and of the Gods
themselves? And also that he says that the world was created corruptible of it
self, but yet abode immortal and incorruptible through the grace of God which
vpholdeth it? But let us examine the racking which Proclus offers unto him.
Plato (says he) affirms in his Commonweal, that whatsoever has a beginning
has also an end: Now the World, as he says in his Timeus, shall have no end:
Therefore it follows that it had no beginning. If another man should reason
after that manner against Proclus, Proclus would laugh him to skorne: for he
shifteth the terms: and yet our Souls which he concludes to be without end,
fail not to have had a beginning. But though we were never so well contented to
let him pass: yet does Plato assoyle him in one word. The world (says he) is
corruptible of it self, for every thing that is compounded, may also be
dissolved: but it is not Gods will that it should be corrupted. And mine
ordinance (says the everlasting) is of more power to make thee to continue,
than thine own Nature is to make thee to perish. Plato in his commonweal.
The which thing he speaks yet more shortly in another place, saying that the
world has received an Immortality at the hand of the workmayster which made
it. (...).
Now then, seeing that by Nature it may perish; surely by Nature it had a
beginning: and the power that has preserved it from perishing, is the very
same that made it to be. Proclus adds: Plato propounds a Question (says
he) whether the World was created after the pattern of a thing forecreated, or
of a thing without beginning. Therefore he dowted whether it were eternal or
no. What a conclusion was this for a great Philosopher? I ask whether men be
bred of themselves or created of another; therefore I uphold that they be bred
of themselves: as who would lay that in disputing, it were not an ordinary
matter to set down both the Contraries, for the affirming of ye one and the
denying of the other. Again, if it were begotten or created after ye example
of a thing aforecreated, could it be beginninglesse, seeing that the pattern
thereof had a beginning? And if it were created after the example of a thing
uncreated, can it come to pass that it should be everlasting, seeing that it
is not the very pattern it self? No: but as I have said before, we admit
horned arguments against the truth, whereas in defense of the truth the
perfectest demonstrations suffize us not. Also in another book intytled of a
String he says thus: Plato in his book of Laws says that Commonweales and
Arts have infinite times bin utterly destroyed by Waterfluds and Burnings, and
therefore that men cannot certainly say from what time men have first grown
into Commonweales: Ergo, he believed that the World had no beginning. Nay, he
says these things in his Timeus, which is the book whereof thou can not
dowt, but that he treats there expressly of the Creation of the World. And
he repeateth the same again in his book of Commonwealematters, having said
before, that God created Heaven and Earth, the Stars and Gods. Now then,
seeing it is one selfsame Author that speaks these things, and in one
selfsame place, and one immediately after another: is it not certain that he
meant not to match clean contrary doctrines together? What is to be said then,
but that he spoke there after the manner of the common multitude, who (as
Aristotle says) do call the things infinite, which they be not able to
number? Or as Moses himself speaks, who calls the things eternal,
everlasting or endless, which are of very long continuance, notwithstanding
that he make a book expressly of the Creation of all things? But in deed it
was a surmize of the auncientnesse of the World, which Plato (as it should
seem) had brought home out of AEgipt, accordingly as the report of Solon
sufficiently declares, who tells him that the AEgiptians had Registers of
nine thousand years, that is to say (as Plutarke interprets it) nine thousand
Moons.

But let us come to Aristotle, Agenist Aristotle's Eterniti.
to whom this opinion does properly belong. For although some of his Scholars
being ashamed on his behalf, would feign bear him on hand that he was of
another opinion, or at leastwise that he hild it as a doubtful point; yet
notwithstanding his sentences in that case are too certain, too clear, and too
manifest, Aristotle in his. 1. 3. and 8. books of natural Philosophy; In his
first book of the Heavens. and in his first book of the breed of living
things.
for them to go about to cloak his opinion. But seeing he was so bold as to
remove the former bound fettled by the authority and belief of all that went
before him: needs must it be that he had very express terms, and very
certain Demonstratio^s. And I pray you let us see what manner a ones they be?
From the mouings that are here beneath, he leads us to the mouings that are
above, and from them to a first mouer. Hitherto he is well. But afterward he
will have this first mouer to move everlastingly, and therefore that time
should be everlasting also. Neither the ground nor ye consequence of this
argument are aughtworth. How will ye prove that the first mouer moves
eternally? Nay contrariwise, moving argeweth a beginning. For in moving there
is a certain point from whence the moving is made, unto another point whereto
it tends: and even according to Aristotle's own doctrine, forenesse,
afternesse, and continuance of time do follow forenesse, afternesse, and
continuance of moving: and that implies a manifest contrariety to the
definition of moving from place to place. And that time should be
beginninglesse, what else is it to say, than that time is not time, and (as ye
would say) an implying of contradiction in the very word it self? For what else
is time according to Aristotle himself, than the number of moving by forenesse
and afternesse, by past and to come. And if it be a number, where is the
infiniteness thereof become? And if there be before and after, where is the
eternity thereof? In another place he says, that moving is eternal because
time is eternal; and that the cause why time is so, is that it is always
joined to that which is past. I pray you what a childishness is this? By the
same reason I may say that the moving of a Mill, or the stirring of any living
wight is eternal: for in those cases every instant follows immediately in the
neck of that which is past, no less than in the moving of time; and yet we
be not ignorant that they have a beginning. But like as there is a certain
first forthsetting in those, so is there also in the moving of the Heaven, who
is the breeder of time. And Algazel Algazel.
answers Auerrhois very well upon this point; That look what a point or
prick is in things that hold on whole unbroken of; the same is an instant or
moment in things that immediately or continually succeed one after another: and
that as a point or prick is the beginning of a line, so an instant is the
beginning of time: and Auerrhois could not disprove this reason, otherwise than
by flowring him for it. He replyeth yet again, and says; Yea but if the World
had a beginning, how shall the maker thereof be void of alteration? To such a
question as this is, me thinks he himself should answer thus: That the
alleging of an inconvenience assoyleth not the question. But good Sir
Philosopher! By your seeking to bring us to this inconvenience, you grant at
leastwise that God created Nature. And is it not a strange oversight in you,
that you will needs tie him to the laws of Nature, which is the maker of
Nature? and measure the power and liberty of the Clockmaker, by the subjection
of the Clock unto him? Art thou not ashamed to yield less pre-eminence to
GOD, than thy King whom thou exemptest from subjection to his laws, because he
is the maker of the laws? I pray thee what a thing were it, if thou should
undertake but only to measure Nature by thine own wit? What a number of times
have thou found thy wit to stumble at the least things? How often have thou
found it against thy self? Now, if Nature go beyond the reach of thy wit, how
far shall the very maker of nature outgoe it? Thou can not shift thy place
without removing; and therefore thou deemest the like of God. But consider at
leastwise that they Soul or Mind not being limited within any place, is the
place of a thousand things, and that a thousand things are the place thereof.
Again, thy Soul cannot conceive any thing, without passing from contemplation
to action: no nor abide in contemplation, without change. Now thy desire is to
have GOD like thy self in this behalf. But if thou will not yield thy self to
other men's reasons; at leastwise yield thy self to thine own reasons. For
whereas thou say, that beyond the Heaven Aristotle in his first book of
Heaven* cap. 9.
there is neither emptiness nor time; but that whatsoever is there, is
exempted from all manner of time, moving, change, and passibilitie; and that in
that universal eteruitie all things do lead a most happy and welcontented
life: dare thou say less of God, whom thou thy self do place far above
all those things? The very brute Beasts would babble after that manner of the
nature of thy Soul, yea and more to the purpose too. For whereas there is no
comparison between God and thee; they yet have a thing that does somewhat
resemble thee* For thou chaungest in doing, because thy doing is another thing
than thy being; and the thing that thou amost at is out of thy self; which
thing cannot change for thee, and therefore thou art feign to change for it.
Also thou chaungest in beholding; for the thing which thou beholdest, and thou
which beholdest it, are two: and to be short, in beholding, thou do after a
sort suffer at the thing which thou beholdest, and in doing, thou suffer at
the thing which thou do: but unto him which is the maker of al things, to be
and to behold, to behold and to do, to do and to will are all one thing. For
even in willing a thing he has done it, and his willing thereof is after a
certain and determinate manner, (I use humane words for the uttering of my
meaning). To be short, unto him that beholds all things in himself, nothing
can spring up that shall be new. Let us now put the case, that the
forealledged inconvenience be most to purpose; and let us see at leastwise if
thou can skill to avoid it in thine own opinion. If God (say thou) do
make any thing new, he must needs change his mind. And yet thou say
therewithal, that in all things which are done here beneath by natural
causes, Proclus concerning the Influence of the first cause.
there is a certain influence of God, at leastwise of the universal influence
under the which thou put all things. So speak thou, so speaks
Auerrhois, so speaks Proclus and the rest of you thereof. Now, seeing that
GOD does every day a thousand new things here beneath; I demand of thee
whether he does them upon new devise, or upon everlasting forepurpose? If he
do them upon new devise, thou stumblest at that which thou would eschew:
for (by thy reckoning) God does that which he did not before, namely, in
sheading forth his influence anewe, and in producing (by that influence) the
thing that was not before. Or if he do them upon everlasting forepurpose; then
confessest thou that which thou meanest to deny; to wit, that God determined
everlastingly to make or do things by his power, and that according to that
determination, he gives to every thing in their times, whatsoever he had
foreallotted them of his goodness. For what difference make thou in the case
between one Plant, and all Plants? between the Plant that is new sprung up
to day, and the Plant that was withered a thousand years ago? between the
whole World, and the least thing contained therein; if thou be feign too admit
a new device, as well for the least thing as for the greatest? Nay thou have
devised thee a God that is turned about upon his Wheel, a God that has but a
little more wit than thy self, and a little more strength than thy self: and
yet such are thy speeches of him sometime, that I cannot tell whither thou
would be contented to be likened to him or no.

Let us see his other Reasons. All the ancient Philosophers (says he) saving
Plato, believed that time is without beginning. A strange case, that he which
takes so great pleasure in controlling all men that went before him, will now
needs sheeld himself under them! But I have already proved that that saying
of his is false. And again what greater contraries can there be, than time and
eternity? Also, The Heaven (says he) is a divine body, incorruptible, the
dwelling place of the Gods, wherein there has not any corruption bin seen
that can be remembered: Ergo it is eternal. But how will he prove this
Divinity, and this Quintessence of his? Whence will he prove this
incorruptible nature? What will he answer to this saying of his own, that the
Gods and Godheads dwell above Heaven, and utterly without the compass or
reach of time? Is not this a setting down of that thing for a ground, which
is the thing that rests to be proved, and (to speak after his own manner) a
craving of the principle? But if we believe Plutarke, who affirms that
Aristotle held opinion that the Heaven is a mingled nature of heat and
moisture together; shall it not be corruptible of it self as well as the
grounds are whereof it is composed? he adds that the ancient Greeks called
it Ether [as ye would say Ayrun] because it ronneth about continually. (...).
Plato in his Cratilus. (...).
And what will he answer to Plato, who says that the Heaven or Sky is
called Ether, of his brightness, in which respect also he calls the Star
of Mars, Aithon. Also what will he answer to all the former Philosophers, who
are of opinion that the Sky is as Cristall composed of Water? And finally what
is this Running about: but a departing from one place to another? Soothly great
reasons to maynteine eternity; for if a man do but breathe upon them they
vanish into smoke. And therefore Plotin in his book of the World, Plotin in his
book of the world.
and Damascius in expounding Aristotle's book of the Sky, Damascius upon the
books of the Sky
and Proclus in his second book upon Platoes Iimeus, have very well noted,
that for the proving of the eternity, Aristotle has set down many things
which need none other disproofe than bare denial, and which would be as hard
for him to prove, as to prove the eternity it self. What is to be thought
then, if even by the propositions of Aristotle Proclus in his second book upon
Timeus. Aristotle against Aristotle.
himself and of his Scholars, we prove against him and his Scholars, that
the World had a beginning? The World (say they) is eternal, and yet as
eternal as it is, it depends upon God. In that point they all agrae. The
disagreement among them is in this, that some of them make the depending
thereof upon God to be as upon an efficient cause, and some as upon a final
cause, and every of them draws Aristotle to his side as much as he can. Now,
if it depend upon GOD, as an effect depends upon his efficient cause; who
sees not that an effect is after his cause, and that there went a working
power before the effect distinguished essentially from the cause thereof. And
where is the^ this goodly ground of theirs become, that the World is eternal
because no foreworking power went before it? As in way of end.
Or if it depend upon God as the final cause thereof, that is to say, if it
were for him and not from him; so as it was not a thing of his making, but a
thing that he could not conveniently forbear: wheresoever an end is intended,
is there not also a forecast? And where forecast is, can chance and necessity
bear there any sway? And if God had no need of the World, was it not at his
choice whether it should be or no? And being at his choice, can it be
beginninglesse, seeing that the being thereof depends upon another than it
self? Again, if the World depend upon God as upon the end thereof; the
working power which they themselves require in the creation of all things,
shall either have gone before it or not. If it must needs have gone before it;
then was it not from everlasting; for this word forego being a betokener of
time, excludes ye world from eternity or euerlastingnesse. Or if there needed
not any foreworking power to have gone before the world, but that it be simply
an issewe proceeding from the force of the cause; why should it not proceed as
well in time as from everlasting, seeing that the said force or power is
directed by Reason and by Will? And why then hold they this principle, That the
World cannot be of creation, because that if it were so, some cause must needs
have gone before it? Again, whence has the Sky his beginning of moving, but
from an Instant? And whatsoever could be never so little a while without
moving, why might it not be without moving a longer while, seeing that the
respect is all one, both of eternity unto all times, and of infiniteness unto
all places? Therefore whereas Aristotle says that the World (notwithstanding
that it is eternal) depends upon God; he grants consequently that it is
not eternal. Secondly, contrary to the teaching of all that went before him, he
delivers us three first grounds; namely, Matter, Substance, or Stuff, form,
shape, or fashion, and Privation, Want, or berea^ing; and his Schools are so
greatly delighted therewith, that there is nothing else to be heard spoken of in
them. But if these be the first beginnings or grounds of things; where is then
their eternity? And if they keep a circuit in going round about; how can it
be that they had not a beginning? Also how can a substance be imagined to be
without form, shape, or fashion; or form, shape, or fashion to be without a
substance; seeing that even mishapennesse it self is a kind of shape, and also
that a shape is nothing else than the form or fashion of a substance? Moreover,
what greater absurdity can there be, than to make that a beginning of being,
which has by it self no being at all, nor can have any being but in another
thing, as if a man would make blindness to be the beginner of sight, or
darkness the beginner of light? Again, seeing that neither substance nor
shape have of themselves any being at all: how can they cause other things to
be? Or how comes it to pass yt two things which have had no being at all, do
meet together in one essence or being; but by virtue of the souereine Beeer,
who has willed and determined that it should be so? And if his willing or
determining be the cause of the being of them; who is he that did set or
appoint him the term wherein to do them? But to excuse one untruth, a man
tells a thousand; and to shift of one error, he falls into ten thousand: and
yet it cannot be eschewed, but that the truth will sparkle out of the
Contrariety of untruths, as fire sparkles out of the knocking of one
Flints^^one against another. Aristotle in his problemes Sect. 10. Probl: 64.
In his book of Problemes (which seem notwithstanding to be of many men's
gathering,) he says concerning the ingendring of living things, that the small
things, as Woormes, Cutfoules, and such other, are engendered by the ordinary
alterations of the time, the greater by the greater alterations as things that
have need of great ^^^ginnings or grounds; and that there has in time past
bin such an alteration, as of it self has engendered them, yea even the
notablest living things and man himself, Sect. 10. Probl. 15.
supplying therein both the room of the efficient cause, and also of the
material, both at once. And it may be that that is the cause why Va^ro says
that Aristotle believed that there was no beginning of living things, or that
living things have been from ever without beginning. Also in another place he
says, that there was such an alteration at the same time that living things
were first brought forth; and that if it behoue Nature to bring forth any mo
of them, there must be such another alteration going before, namely, by a rare
Conjunction of some Stars. Aristotle in his third book of the breeding of
living wyghts. Lucrece: The Wombes of the Earth grew fit for roots.
And in another place he says further, that if Man and other living wights had
a beginning; it was either in egg, in seed, or in woorme, and so forth. What
a number of Monsters are here for the stablishing of one Monstar, and yet he
has not alleged any thing which is not against himself. The lesser
Conjunctions (says he) do breed the smaller living things, the mean breed
the mean, and the great ones breed the great. Well, be it so. Yet these
Conjunctions meet not but by the course of the Stars; and that course is a
moving, and every moving has a beginning: and therefore it follows that
wights had a beginning. Again, if the moving of the Sky and of the Stars be
everlastingly; the Co^iunctions thereof are everlastingly also, as Aristotle
himself concludes; Aristotle in his xjj. book of Metaphisiks Chap. 7.
and so on the contrary. For if it have turned about from everlasting, the
Conjunctions have likewise incountred from everlasting. But everlastingly they
could not encounter: for the small ones, the mean ones, and the great ones are
not all at once together, but they come severally one after another with the
space of certain hundred years, and with diverse reuolutions betwixt them:
whereas if they were eternal, none of them could go or come before another.
Therefore it follows that there is a beginner of living wights, and a
beginner of the goings about of the Sky and of all the whole order which we
see: And that is even God himself.

How much better had Aristotle done, Aristotle in his second book of
Generation and Corruption. Cap. 10. and in his books of Comonweale.
if he had hild himself to that which he says well in other places; namely,
that forasmuch as most things cannot have a perpetual continuance in the
particular, that is to say in themselves, by reason of being too far distant
from their beginning: therefore God has continued them by the spreading forth
of their kind; and to that end has made them male and female and ordained
copulation betwixt them. For if we make the living things without beginning,
do we not make them to be everlasting? And if we ground their beginnings upon
some reuolutions of the Skies; can those Reuolutions be everlasting? Also, how
shall they have been brought forth, in full growth, or young, seeing that at
the bringing forth of al things, the things are tender and imperfect? And if
the things be not everlasting, where then is the everlasting moving of the
Heaven: that is to say, where is Aristotle's eternity become? The same
follows also of that which he says in another place; namely that he which
did first gather men together, was ye author of very great good. For in
acknowledging that there was a time wherein folk lived like the men of
Brasilie, or like the wandering Nomades; he acknowledges also an infancy of
the World. For else what should let that men have not been either everlastingly
dispersed, or else everlastingly united together? And how comes it to pass O
Aristotle, that there have not been Aristotle's from everlasting? Again, who
shall choose out the very instant in eternity for the breeding and bringing
forth of any thing perticularly, but he that is the Lord of eternity it self?

Aristotle in his Moralles commends godliness, and be highteth blessedness
to them that follow it; teaching us that it consists in Contemplation. Now,
seeing that this Contemplation or beholding is the mean to make us blessed; it
must needs be the beholding of a thing that is right blesfull: but blesfull
it cannot be, if it consist in these inferior things which are base and
subject to so many miseries and turmoyles: Therefore he means the
Contemplation which is the beholding of the only one God. Also in other places
he says that our Souls are of a divine nature, that they be immortal, that
they come into us from without, and that they be (after a sort) a kin to the
Gods: and his Disciples would be offended at him that should say, that their
Master dowted of the immortality of the Soul. And whereto is all this, if
the World be eternal? If it be eternal; either our Souls also be eternal,
that is to say without beginning, or else they be not eternal. If they be; how
happens it that they have imprisoned themselves in these our bodies? Or if
they be so imprisoned at the appointment of an other: who shall that other be
but God? And if God appoint or allot them to this new state in time certain;
who has made one eternity subject to another? And what is then become of this
Maximee of theirs, that the World is eternal because God makes not any thing
there a new? Moreover, if they be everlasting; who has made them
proportionable to their bodies; that is to wit, infinite Souls to infinite
Bodies? And the^ what becomes again of this other Rule of theirs, that Nature
cannot abide any infiniteness? Or if they be everlasting and yet of some
certain number, going and coming into new bodies by course: is not that the
opinion of Pythagoras, which Aristotle does so greatly mislike? And if our
Souls at their departing out of our bodies, do go to the enjoying of the
blessed immortality; does it not follow, that from after the passingouer of
that reuolutio^, men must move without Soul, dispute without reason, and judge
without mind; yea and that even Aristotle himself speaks and reasons
without wit? To be short, what hooteth it to be godly or religious, if our
Souls acknowledge no better thing than themselves? What avails it to look
for the blessed Contemplation, if they be perfectly blessed of themselves? But
perfectly blessed they be, if they be eternal. And whereto then serves the
rewarding of them with immortal life; if they have the eternity or
immortality already? What else then is his upholding of the world to be
eternal, than a turning of ye whole world vpside down? But there are (says
Aristotle) Godliness, Blessedness, and Immortality: then does it follow that
our Souls are not eternal. And if they be not eternal; then have they a
beginning; and that beginning have they, either of God, or of the world. Of the
world they have it not: for (as I have said) were the world eternal, the
Conuersions or turnings about thereof should be eternal too, and consequently
so should our Souls be also, as which should be bred of their power. But now
are all things mortal that are engendered by those Conuersions, as Aristotle
himself grants. But we put the case that they have an original
notwithstanding that they be immortal. Therefore it remains that the same is
from God. Now, they could not proceed from God as beams of his substance: for
all of ye Philosophers uphold that he is a single and undivided substance,
united in it self and most perfectly one: but we be subject to alteration, to
ignorance, to evil affections and such other things. It remains therefore
(and otherwise it cannot be) that our Souls are the work of Gods power. Now,
if our Souls (which after a sort do comprehend the World and all things
therein) be the effects of Gods power, which through his goodness utters it
self when he lists: shall not the world it self and the senseless and
transitory things which serve us, yea and our bodies also which are but the
Cotes or Instruments of our souls be so in likewise? Now then, let Aristotle's
Disciples choose whether they will give over the eternity of the world, or the
immortality of their Souls: the everlasting turning about of a wheel, or the
immortal settlednesse of blessed state: for both of them together cannot stand.

But surely his Disciple Theophrastus Theophrast in his book of Sents, Sauors,
or Smelles.
seems to have perceived these inconveniences and contradictions well, when
he proceeds so far as to say that God created the world, yea even of
nothing. And so does Algazel the Saracen against Auerrhois, unto whom he says,
that God for the creating of the world needed neither stuff nor new
aduisement, but that like a most perfect workman, having all things in a
readiness, he took his own leisure for the performance of his work when it
pleased him. And yet it seems that Aristotle toward the end of his life
repented him of that doctrine: insomuch that in his book of the world, he
says that GOD is the breeder and preserver of all things in the world after
what manner soever it be. And even in his Metaphisicks, having rejected the
opinions of many men concerning these things; he says thus. (...).
He that says that GOD or the souereyne Mind is the Cause and Author not only
of living things, but also of Nature it self and of the World, and of all the
order therein; seems to speak discreetly and well advisedly; and they that
speak otherwise, speak unadvisedly. And they that are of the former opinion,
have very well set down that Cause for the ground of all things that are, as
the which is such a beginning as gives moving to all things. And in his book
of Wonders, (if it be his) he speaks yet more evidently: saying, that
naturally the Sea should cover the Earth as higher than it; but that God has
caused the Sea to withdraw it self, that the Earth might be uncovered for the
use of man and of other living wights. And this is in effect a commingbacke to
the opinion of his predecessors, from the which he would so feign have departed
before. Howsoever the case stand, all the ancient Philosophers do either
conclude the Creation of the world with us, or else yield us arguments into our
hands wherewith to conclude it against themselves. To be short, when Aristotle
who was the first that stepped out of the high way, says that the world is
without beginning, he seems to be Aristotle no more; he does so often
gainsay himself and offend against his own rules. And where he chances to
say that the world was created, he seems to be minded to yield himself to us.
And where the case concerns not (at leastwise expressly) the one nor the
other: he leaves us many Conclusions, which do quite overthrow and destroy
the said opinion of his, and make him whether he will or no, to conclude on our
side.

The Latins The Latins.
fell to Philosophy somewhat later than ye Greeks; by reason whereof they had
the more cause to ouershoote themselves in the case of Eternity: but yet we
see that the most part of them followed the opinion of Plato. That man (says
Cicero Cicero in his first book of Invention, and in his first book of the
Orator.
) that first gathered together men before dispersed, was surely a great
Personage. And ( as says Pythagoras) so was he which did first give names to
things, and which first comprised within a certain number of letters, the
sounds of man's voice which seemed to be infinite, and which marked the Courses
and proceedings of the wandering Planets, and which first found out Corn,
Cloth, building, defenses against wild Beasts, and the rest of the things that
make our lives the more civil. What else is this than an acknowledging of a
beginning? For if me^ were from everlasting, did they not from everlasting
speak? Did they not from everlasting give names to things? Could they not
invent every thing from everlasting. Yes: and therefore he concludes, We be not
created by haphazard; but surely there was a certain Might or Power which had
a care of Mankind, and which would not have begotten him to fall into the
mischief of endless death, after he has outworne the great and innumerable
adversities and toils of this world. Now, if we were created, and that there
be a souereyne power which has had care of Mankind; surely then has there
been a beginning, seeing that the said power had a care of us, either when as
yet we were not at al, Cicero in his second book of the Nature of the Gods.
or after the time that we were. And in another place he says, That God
created and furnished man, and that it was his will that he should have the
souereyntie of all other things. That the world, the Sea, the Land, and all
other things obey Gods tokens. And if a^ any time he bring in an Epicure
alleging such worshipful reasons as this, With what engines and edgetooles
did your God buyld the World, Cicero in his Laws.
and such other; either he sends him away with such answer as he deserves;
or else by holding his peace, shows sufficiently that he deserves no answer
at all.

Varro Varro.
the best learned of the Latins, makes an universal History divided into
three times. The first (as I have ^ayd already) is from the Creation of the
world, unto the first Olimpiade. This man being a man of great reading, found
the Creation of ye world to have been but late before, yea and so late, that he
joined it immediately to the time of the first Olimpiade. Likewise Seneca Seneca
in his first book of the happy life. Chap. 31 and 32. and in the first book
of his natural Questions: and in his Epistles. Macrobius lib. 1. Saturnalium.
Virgil. Ovid. Lucretius the Poet.
found all things to be new, and acknowledges in many places that God created
the whole world, and man peculyarly to serve him. And ever since the beginning
of the World (says he) unto this day we be guyded by the intercourses of
days and nights, and so forth. Macrobius passes yet further, and says that
the world cannot be of any long antiquity, considering that the furthest
knowledge that is to be had thereof, reaches not beyond two thousand years.
As touching the Poets, whose speeches do for the most part represent unto us
the opinion that was admitted among the common people: Virgill is full of
excellent sentences to that purpose; and Ovid has made a book expressly of
that matter. And even Lucrece also who professes ungodliness, says that
beyond the Wars of Troy and Thebes, there was not any jot remaining to
rememberance; than by the which, he could not better have declared the World to
be but young, howbeit that (after the manner of his own sect,) he fathereth that
thing upon chance, which all the wise men ascribe to the everlasting
providence. Pliny Pliny.
is the only* man whom I wonder at, that being so curious a searcher of Nature,
he could not conceive that which is printed in every part of it, and which
every man might of himself learn by his own reading therein. He makes a long
Calendar of the first inuenters of things, as of Letters, of Houses, of
Apparel, and of very Bread. Pliny. lib. 7.
He reckons up the Companies that have fleeted from place to place for the
peopling and replenishing of Countries. And can there be a greater proof of
newness than that? Plin. lib. 2.
Sometimes he says that the Earth is become weary, and sometimes that it is
wexed barreine in yielding of fruit and Mettalles, because it grows old.
But in one place he says expressly, that men's bodies by little and little
become of smaller stature by reason of the witherednesse of ye world which
wexeth old. And is not this a reporting of the Sky to be like a wheel,
which gathers heat and chafeth with rolling and whirling about? And what
improteth this wexing old, but that it had also (as ye would say) a birthtyme?
What means the wearing thereof away, but that it had erst been new? What is
meant by the chafing of it, but that the temperature thereof is altered? For if
the World be eternal; why is not the wheel thereof eternally in one heat,
and men eternally of small stature? Or if at leastwise it be of very ancient
continuance; why were not men become Pygmees long ago? And if the contrary be
to be seen in Nature; what remains but to confess that the World is but of
late beginning? The Stoiks.
To be short, the Stoikes (as Varro witnesses of Zeno) taught that the world
was created of God, and that it should perish. The Platonists The Platonists
affirm that it is created and mortal, but yet is sustained from perishing,
by God. The Epicures The Epicures.
grant that it had a beginning, howbeit by haphazard and not by providence.
The Peripateticks The Peripatetiks.
say in their conclusions, that it is without beginning; and in their premises
they utterly deny it. The greatest despisers of God, as Pliny Pliny.
and such other like, do write in their Prefaces, That the world is an
everlasting God; and throughout the whole treatises of their books, they unsay
it again. Now then, after so many grave witnesses, and after the co^fessions
of the parties them selves, is there yet any of these pretensed naturalistes to
be found, which dares think the contrary still?

But now since the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ into the earth, The
opinions of the Platonistes.
this doctrine has been received throughout the world, so as the thing which
had aforetymes been disputable among the Heathen, is now admitted as an article
of faith, welnere among all nations and sects on the earth. It may be that the
miracles which were seen then in Heaven, in Earth, in the Sea, upon men, and
upon the very Feends, made the world to perceive that there was a Creator of
the world. For who could doubt that the creating of a new Star, the
restoring of a deadman to life, or only the making of a blindman* to see, was
not the work of an infinite power, yea even as well as the buylding of the
world; considering that between being and not being, between life and
death, between the having of a thing and the nothauing, the distance is
infinite? And it may be that the signs which we have seen from Heaven in our
time, do serve to make the blasphemers upon earth inexcusable. But whereof
soever it came, the very Philosophers themselves began to make a grounded
principle thereof: insomuch that ye Greeks, Persians and Arabians, and likewise
afterward the Turks and Mahometists, did put it into their belief as a thing
out of all controversy. To be short, there is not at this day any civil or
well ordered* people, which have not their Chronicles and Histories of times,
begun always at the Creation of the world, wherein they do all hold of
Moses, and agree all with us Christians, saving in the controversy of some
few years.

Of all the Philosophers, only the Platonists continued in estimation: and all
men rejected the newfound opinions of Aristotle, and they stood at defiance,
rather with the Gnostics than with the Christians. Saint Austin says
concerning the Philosophers of his time, that their opinion was, that God was
before the World, howbeit not in time, but in order and by way of vndersetting
only: like as if a foot (says he) were ever in one place, the print thereof
should also be ever there. Unto whom it may be answered in one word, that like
as ability and intent of going went before the going it self, both in the man
and in the foot; so in God also, the power and intent of creating, went before
the Creation. But it is best to hear their own words. Plotin in his book of
the World, finds himself not a little graueled in this case, and he makes
very little account of all Aristotle's supposalles. Plotin. Ennead: 2. lib. 1.
cap. 1. and. 2.
If we say (says he) that the Sky is everlasting as in respect of the whole
body thereof: how can that be, seeing that the living Creatures dye, and the
Elements pass from one into another, and that (as Plato affirms) the Sky it
self is in continual wheeling? If we say that the Elements and the living
wights continue their perpetuities in their kynds: why does the Heaven continue
his perpetuity rather in number and particularitie? If the cause thereof be,
that nothing can slip out of it because it co^teyneth all things: how can
that reason agree to the Stars and Planets, which do not conteyne al things
as the Heaven or Sky does, and yet we affirm them to be everlasting? And if
nothing impeach it without; what should let that something may not impeach it
within, seeing that all living wights do naturally perish through the
distempera^ce of their parts, notwithstanding that they live even while they
be a dissoluing? And what inseweth hereof, but that both sorts of bodies, as
well Celestial as terrestrial, do perish? yea and both Heaven and Earth
likewise, saving that the Celestial endure a longer time, and perish more
slowly than the Earthly? Certeynly (says he) if we took this word eternity
(as well in the whole world as in the parts thereof,) not to betoken an
euerlastingnesse [that is to say, a perpetuity or continuance without
beginning or end,] but only a difference of continuance; there would be the
less doubtfulnesse in the matter. But all shall be out of doubt, if we father
the same eternity upon the will of GOD, which of it self is able enough to
uphold the World; for so shall things have their continuance according to his
pleasure, some in their kinds, and some particularly in themselves. Now, if
the World were eternal; were it not impossible that it should be otherwise
than it is? But if it have this being from the will of GOD; is it not
discharged of that necessity? And what shall then become of this saying of his,
which he sets down in diverse other places, namely that the World is of
necessity, because it would behoue a second Nature to accompany the first;
unless we understand it to be spoken of the necessity that is conditional,
and not of the necessity that is absolute as they term it. Again, the same
will which made the World to be, and has given continuance to the parts
thereof, some after one sort and some after another, and has disposed of them
as it listed it self; shall it not also have made them when it listed it self?
Whosoever then ^aith, that the being of the world, as well in the whole as in
the parts, depends upon the will of God, takes from the world all
necessity of being. And he that says that there is no necessity that it
should have bin from everlasting, (let us use those words for want of other,)
says therewithal that it is not everlasting.

In his book of Eternity and of Time, Plotinus Ennead. 3. lib. 2. Chap. 2.
he says that eternity and time differ in this respect, that eternity is
verifyed but of the everlasting nature, and time is to be verified of the
things that are created: So as eternity, is and abides in God alone, whom he
calls the World that is to be conceived but in mind or understanding; and
time abides in the world that is subject to the senses: adding nevertheless,
that the world (to speak properly) was not made in time; after which manner we
also do say that it was not made in time but together with the time. But when
he has deliberatly scanned all the definitions of time made by the former
Philosophers, and has searched all the corners of his wit too find out the
best; in the end he^ concludes thus. We must needs come back (says he)
too the said first nature, which I affirmed heretofore to be in eternity, I
mean the immovable nature, which is wholly all at once the infinite and
endless life, and which consists whole in one, and tends unto one. But as
yet there was no time at all, (...).
or at leastwise it was not among the Natures that consist in understanding,
but was to come afterward, by a certain manner and kind of posterioritie. Now
then if a man will understand, how time proceeded first from the higher Natures
which rested in themselves; good cause shall he have to call the Muses too his
help, for the uttering thereof: For it may be that the Muses also were as then.
Therefore let us say thus; Before such time as Forenesse issued forth and had
need of afternesse; Time, (which as then was not,) rested in God with the
residew of all things that now are. But a certain nature bent to many doings,
that is to wit the Soul of the world, being desirous to have more than the
present, began to move it self, and so from thence immediately issewed time,
which passes on continualy and is never the selfsame. And we beholding the
length thereof, have imagined time to be the image of eternity. And what is
meant by all this contemplation, but that a certain Soul or mind proceeding
from God, that is to wit the Spirit of God, did move and carry the world
about. That with that moving and of that moving, time was bred and brought
forth? That before that moving, there was a settled state or rest, as
eternity before time? And that (as he himself says there) Time and Heaven
were made both at once, and eternity was before them both.

As touching that it is demanded what God did before the World: does not
Plotinus himself furnish us with sufficient answer, in that he says that God
not woorking at all but resting in himself, does and performs very great
things? And is not the like concluded by the godly doctrine of Gods providence,
whereof he treats in books expressly bearing that title? for if it be
possible for the World to be eternal as well as God: where then can there be
any providence? For what else is Providence, than the will of God uttered
forth with Reazon, and orderly dispozed by understanding? And if Gods will be
required: where is then the necessity of being, which in other places he
attributes too the world? Also where is this saying of his become, that our
Souls are immortal? and that some of them are eternal and before all time?
And likewise this; (...).
that before God had created the world and breathed a soul into it; it was but
a dead corse, a mingle-mangle of earth and water, a dark matter; a thing of
nothing, and (at a word) such a thing as even the Gods themselves were
abashed at it: and that after that God had shed this Soul into the world, both
life and moving were thereby breathed into the Stars, Planets, and Living
wyghts. For seeing that from notbeing, notliuing, and notmouing, there is an
infinite distance to being living and moving: Does it not follow also that
there is infinite odds between him that is, lives, and moves, that is to say
God; and the thing that wayteth to have being life and moving at his hand, that
is to wit the forementioned Chaos. And what is it that has bou^ded or filled
up this distance, but only the will of him who only is? And if will were the
dooer thereof; then was it not of necessity: And if it was not of necessity;
then where is the eternity thereof?

Porphyrius disputing of the Mind or Understanding, the which he terms the
beginning, ground, or welspring of the World; says that it was bred of God
from everlasting, by a certain eternal or beginninglesse breeding, even such
a one as was before all eternity. It was not bred in time (says he) for as yet
there was no time at all: and after that time was made, the world can scar^ly
be said in very deed to be, if it be compared with the foresaid Understanding
or Mind. This is all one with the saying of Trismegistus in a certain place,
where he calls this mind, the true, everlasting, and first borne Son of
God; and this world Gods younger Son: the one begotten of his very nature,
and the other of his will.

Proclus Porphyrius.
and Simplicius keep a great coil in mayntenance of the eternity of the
world, and have made books thereof against Philoponus: but all their reasons
are sufficiently refuted, by the things which I have discoursed against
Aristotle. But seeing they maynteyne Gods Providence and the immortality of the
Soul, do they not reject eternity whither they will or no? And whereas
Proclus writing against such as vpheld that there be infinite worlds without
number, says that such infinitenes is against reason and knowledge; and that
the admitting thereof excludes God, and abandoneth all things to fortune: why
should he rather admi^ infiniteness of time in this one world than
infiniteness of number in many, specially seeing he allows Gods providence?
And whereas Simplicius condemns those to hell which believe no^ the Providence
upon the Reasons of Epictetus: does he not consequently condemn the
defenders of the eternity of the world too the same punishment? And when
Auerrhoes himself says that it is our dewtie to magnify God by prayer and
sacrifize, and that it is planted even in nature to offer sacrifize; is he not
contrary to himself? for to what end reverence we God, if we be nothing
beholden to him? nevertheless my alleging of these things is not as though I
knew not well that the Platonists, yea and even these aformentioned
philosophers also, do call the world everlasting and unbegotten: but to show
that the very surest of them have wauered in this opinion: insomuch that they
have left us principles contrary to their conclusions: and after all their
long skirmishes, they find no rest but in our Camp. And soothly the most part
of them be driven to acknowledge certain Degrees of eternity. Whereof the
first should be, that which is measured by the continewance of that which is
evermore of it self, and becomes neither the longer for aught that is to
come, nor yet the shorter for aught that is past; and that is it which is to be
ascribed alonly unto God. The second as the measure of such things as have a
fixed and being stable, and yet have also a certain succession in their
operations, of which sort are the understanding spirits or Angels; and this is
properly called Aynesse. The third as the measuring of durablenesse continued
by forenesse and afternesse, having a beginning but not an end, and this they
call Time, attributing it properly to the World. And what else is this than to
speak that thing by circumstance, which we utter in one word? For to what
purpose call they a thing eternal or everlasting, if by the terms Eternal and
Everlasting, they mean temporal? After which manner the Emperor Justinian
Justinian in the preface to his Digests.
speaking improperly of his own Laws, said he hoped that they should be
eternal and everlasting.

As tou^hing the opinion of Epictetus the Stoik and of Plutarke, no man can
doubt except he quite and clean disanull their books. GOD (says Epictetus)
has ordained that there should be Wiinter and Summer, good seasons and bad:
he has given to the Earth both fruitfulnes and barrennes; and his disposing of
things so by contraries, is to mainteyne the harmony of the whole. He has
brought us into the world, given us bodies and members, and assigned us
heritages and fellowheires. It is he that has made both the sight and the
colors, and neither sight nor colors were aught worth, if it were not for the
light; and therefore has he also made the light. Thus from point to point he
leads us to this conclusion, that GOD made the World and all that is therein.
Plurarke says thus: Plutark in his Psychogonie.
If God were not the maker of all things, then should he be restreyned in some
things, and so were he not Lord of all: But he is to be acknowledged for Lord
of all, and therefore of consequence he is the maker of them all. Galen in his
third book of the use of the Parts of men's bodies.
And here might a great number of the forealledged sentences of the selfsame
Authors be alleged again.

But what shall we say if Galien (who in common account is the most heathenish
of al writers,) after he has thoroughly ripped up both man and the world it
self, be in the end constreyned too come back to the same point? I make here
(says he in his book of the use of parts) a true Hymn in the honor of our
Maker. Whose service I believe verily consists not in the sacrifising of
hundreds of Oxen unto him, or in burning great heaps of Frankincense before
him; but in acknowledging the greatness of his wisdom, Power, and goodness,
and in making the same known unto others. For whereas of his own free will
he has voutsafed to garnish and beawtifie all things in the best manner that
could be, and has not envied so great a benefit to any thing; I hold it for
a proof of perfect goodness: and so far praised be his goodness. Again, to
have found out the means how to adorn things so richly, shows a sovereign
Wisdom, and to have brought to pass and perfected all that ever he had
forepurposed, betokens an incomparable might and power. Gal. lib. 11. and 17.
And in his seventeenth book, who so considers (says he) the composing and
knitting together of every living thing, shall find that it caryeth in it a
proof of the Creators wisdom. And seeing that in the mids of that Puddle of
humors each living wight has a Soul dwelling, endued with so great force and
virtue: he ought of reason the more to wonder at the greatness and excellency
of the Mind that dwells in heaven. Galen in his book of the breeding of
Children.
And who is he (had he said before) which looking but only upon the Skin of a
thing, woondereth not at the cunning of the Creator? Yet notwithstanding he
dissembleth not that he had tried by all means to find some reason of the
composing of living wights, and that he would rather have fathered the doing
thereof upon nature, then upon the very author of nature. But yet for all
that, Galen in his fifteenth book of the use of Parts.
in the end he concludes thus. I confess (says he) that I know not what the
Soul is, nothwithstanding that I have sought very narrowly for it, neither can
I yield a reason how the Babe is formed in the Mothers Womb. Well do I see
that in that case there is very great Wisdom; and therefore I am of that
opinion that it is not for any man too meddle with the searching out of it, but
that it ought to suffice us that our Creator has willed it to be after that
fashion. For shall we presume to seek a reason of the doing of that thing,
which (without making of an Anatomy) we should never know to have been done?
It is all one as if he should say, that Nature whereat we wonder so much, is
nothing else but whatsoever it pleases God to command.

And now what remains more but to hear Apollo (that is to say, the very
Devil himself) who being prayed to say an Hymn to the great God, begins
it with this verse.

Which made the first Man and called him Adam: which verse Iustine the Martyr
affirms to have be^e commonly soong in his time.

After the confession of wickedness it self, if we list also to hear the
confession of Ignorance, there is not at this day so brutish a Nation, which
either by reading it in the great letters of the Heavens, or by tradition from
their predecessors, retain not the opinion that the world was created,
howbeeit that the case does stand with them as it does with the diversity of
Portratures drawn out, the first from the lynely pattern it self, the second
from that first, a third from the second, and so foorthon until the last
counterfeit reteyne scarce any feature at all of the first original pattern. Of
the Nations which we call Savage or Wyld, some affirm themselves to keep and
reverence the places where they furmyse too have bin the original of the Sea,
of the Son, of the Moon, of the first man and of the first woman, etc.
Othersome hold opinion that there came one from the North into their country
which heighthened the Ualleyes and leueled the Hills, and replenished their
Country with Men and Women whom he had created, and that the same party gives
them fruits of all sorts abundantly. Who (whenever they provoke him too
wrath,) will change their good soil into barrein land, and take from them the
fatness of the heaven. May ye not see clearly here the creation of the world,
the sin of man, and the curse which God has given to the earth for man's
sake? And as for the party whom they speak of, it is a mingling of the story
of the Creation, with the story of some party that first brought people from
the North into those Countries too inhabit them even long time after, joining
the creation of the world with the peopling of Countries, as things not far
diverse, accordingly as is done in diverse Histories. And I pray you how many
even of our Neighbournations that inhabit the uttermost borders of the world,
could even at this day answer more fitly too that question?

Now seeing that the World and all the parts thereof do sing out the
creation; seeing the wisdom of the world teaches it, ungodliness (even whither
it will or no) a^oweth it, Ignorance sees it, and all together in all ages
both taught, auowed, and perceived it: may not we with the allowance even of
the blockishest and of the wickeddest, pronounce this definitive sentence, That
the World had a beginning, and that it had it at such time as it pleased God
the Creator thereof? But there remains yet one point to be discussed; namely,
whereof God created the World: and that is matter enough for another Chapter.

The x. Chapter.
That GOD created the World of nothing; that is to say, without any matter or
stuff whereof to make it.
I Cannot tell whether I may wonder more at the good insight of the ancient
Philosophers in the knowledge of many natural things, or at their blindness
in the knowledge of the author of them, in that they set it down for a
definitive sentence, That nothing in all the world is made of naught, and
therefore that the great workmayster himself could not make any thing without
matter or stuff whereof. For in effect it is a measuring of the builder and
his building both by one rule or skantling, and an aba^ing of the power which
they themselves confess to be infinite, unto the state of our infirmity. God
(say they) cannot make any thing without matter whereof. And why? Because a
Mason cannot make any buylding without stuff whereof. As who would say there
were a more absurd kind of reasoning in Logic, than to conclude from the
finite to the infinite, from the mightlesse to the almighty, from the
transitory to the everlasting. Nay rather thou should reason thus. Man, who
is less than a Worm in comparison of ye highest, draws gold out of the
Rock, or out of the dust of the earth: Of the same earth or stone he makes
such cloth, wyre, and leaves of gold foil, as no man would deem to have come
of so gross a matter. Of the green Herb he draws out white flower for his
sustenance: of the stalks of Flax and Hemp, he draws out thread to make
cloth of: of rags he makes Paper to write on: and of the excrements of the
little Silkworme he draws out a great ^eale of Silkcloath. Again, he
turkyneth some one rude and rough kind of stuff into a hundred thousand
fashions: of the least things he makes very great things, and by the
excellency of his wit draws most excellent things out of that where the most
part of men (notwithstanding that they be men as well as he) found not ne
perceived not any thing at all: as for example, out of the F^^^t, fire to warm
him: out of the barreyne Fern and vile Seaweede, glistering Glass: out of a
Shelfish that the Sea casts up, Purple to make Ornaments of. To be short,
after a certain manner, he makes somewhat of nothing. Now, seeing that the
weakness of mortal men can do so much, shall not the mighty power of the
everlasting, be able to do much more? And seeing that a thing of naught is
able to do so much, shall any thing be impossible to the maker of all things?
But although this which I have said might suffize the discreet, yet
notwithstanding let us discuss more largely this matter concerning matter or
stuff.

Soothly if God needed matter or stuff to work upon; either he himself made
it, or else it was eternally of it self as well as he. If he made it, he made
it of nothing: for in seeking the matter of matter, ye shall proceed to
infinite; and so have I the thing I would have. If it were from everlasting,
then were there two eternalles together; which is a thing repugnant to all
reason and contrary to it self. For nothing can be more contrary to
eternity, than to say that there is a matter or stuff which attends or
wayteth to have his shape form or fashion at some workmaster hand; or that
there is an eternal thing which has not any other life or being, than such as
another eternal thing has voutsafed to give unto it. For let us see I pray
you what manner of thing they imagine this matter to be? He that grau^teth God
to be former, fashioner, or giver of shape; does therewith confess him to be
the Creator.
They will have it ot be a thing without shape, but yet a receiver of all
shapes: and they will have shape to be without matter wherein to be, but yet
as a mould wherein to fashion all matters; so as the matter should have no
being at all, but by reason of the shape or form, as of the giver of being
thereto. But how can matter be without form, seeing that even deformity it
self is a kind of form? Or how can matter be alone by it self, seeing that
form is the thing that gives being unto it? Now then, to say that matter is
without form, is all one as to say that it is and is not; which were the
saying of a madman.

Yea (say they); but how is it possible for somewhat to be made of nothing,
since there is an infinite distance betwixt somewhat and nothing? Nay, I say
rather, what is it which is not finite, in respect of him that is infinite? I
mean in respect of him whom thou thy self aff^rmest to have bounded the
selfsame matter which thou do take and teach to be infinite? But if thou
listest to consider it, thou shall perceive that thou confessest a thing no
less incredible to thine own sense, than is the same which thou reiectest by
thy sense. For when thou imaginest a matter without form, and a form without
matter, thou speak things that destroy one another. But whereas I say that
God created the World of nothing, that is to say without having any thing
whereof to make it: in deed I say a thing that is wonderful, howbeit which
has not any rep^gnancie in it self. Now, there is great difference between
speaking above reason, and against reason. For truth and man's reason are not
enclosed within the like and selfsame bounds. But forasmuch as thou have
granted that God is the author and worker of Nature, I would feign know how
thou can be so bold to deny, that he has put life and moving where none
were before, and that he has made both sight and light, hearing and sounds,
speech and understanding, where erst was more than death, more than blindness,
more than dumbness, and more than dullness; that is to say, more than the bare
privation or bereuing of those things ^onsidering that neither to be nor ever
to have been, are much more wa^ts than simply not to be. Now, between living
and not living, seeing and not seeing, and so forth, there is an infinite
distance as well as there is between being and not being, which distance can
not be filled up but by an infinite power: and look where an infinite power
is, it is alike mighty toward all things. Therefore it follows that since
thou attributest unto him the making of thy sight, of thy life, and of thine
understanding; thou can not deny him the creation of the things that have
light, life, and understanding in them. Which if thou grant in one thing,
needs must thou grant it alike in all. For to give life, and to give being;
to give form or shape, and to give matter; and to give them to one thing, and
to give them to all things; are all works of one selfsame power, how diverse
soever of degrees of them seem unto thee at the first sight. He therefore that
confesses God to be the former or giver of shape, does also confess him to
be the creator of all things. Nay, I say more, that when thou termest God the
souereine or highest being, (as Aristotle Aristotle in his second book of
things ^bo^e na^^^re.
does) or him that essentially and in very deed is, (as Plato does): thou
say (though unwittingly) that he is the Creator, that is to say, the author
of the being of all things.

If we look into nature, the thing that holds the first place in things of
order, is commonly the cause of all the things that fall under it. Among hot
things, some be hotter than some; but yet fire, which holds the highest
degree in heat, is the cause of heat in all things, and sheadeth it self
into all without diminishing of it self, and by imparting it self to them is
still increased: insomuch that the striking of a Flint inforceth the
castingforth of a thousand sparks, whereof every one were enough to set the
whole World on fire. In light some things, one light lights another, and by
imparting makes it self after a sort infinite: and the Sun which is as the
fountain of light, extends and spreads it self out infinitely without
disseuering, and after a manner creates light where was nothing but darkness.
Also in human affairs, Kings impart their dignities to Princes, Princes to
their Uassalles, and Uassalles to their Subjects: and when they give any man a
quality which he had not before, they term him their Creature, as having made
him somewhat of nothing, in respect of the quality wherewith he was indewed
before. To be short, sents or sauors are shed forth, and Sciences are taught
from one to another, and from one to infinite: yea and even diseases, which are
nothing else but corruptions, inge^der one of another without diminishing
themselves. Now, as for Heat, Light, Savor, Science, and Dignity; they be
but qualities, termed by the degrees of first, second, and third qualities; yea
and moreover dead, senseless, and liuelesse: and yet notwithstanding, look
which of these qualities holds ye first place, the same does naturally bring
forth all the rest, without diminishing it self. And shall we then think it
strange that God, (who is the Being, which even by their own confession
holds the chief and first place of all Beeings, or rather alonly can in very
deed be said to be) should by his being bring fooith all other beings?

Yea say they; for we see not any thing brought again to nothing, and
therefore needs must they have been created of something. Nay, if worldly
things should return to nothing, considering how transitory and fleeting they
be already, how short a time could the world endure; or rather how long ago
had it come to an end? But it was Gods will that it should continue. And
therefore thou should rather say thus: I see that the Trees, and the
greatest Beasts, yea and men themselves do spring as it were of nothing, and
are resolved again into as good as nothing. I see them multiplye, live, and do
wonders. Of one selfsame seed I see spring both flowers, leaves, and fruit,
and of another, the wonderfulnesse of eyes, the substantialnesse of bones, and
the finesse of vital spirits. Again, I see all these things vanish away I
wot not how, so as there remains nothing of them but a handful of dust. And
shall I now be so blockish as to say, that he which of so little and in so
little has made so many wondrous things that were not before, could not make
the little it self? Or that he which created the life the sense and the
moving, could not create a drop of water, a blast of air, and a handful of
earth? Nay, I will reason thus rather: That if God were not able to create the
very matter of matter it self, surely he could neither give form or shape to
the matter, nor create such things of the matter. Yes will they say: for it
appears that all things return as it were into one common matter, whether
we follow the ancient Philosophers which reduce them to the Elements, or
that we follow the late writers which reduce them into Oil, Salt, Water,
etc. Be it so: and then ought thou to conclude thereupon, that seeing there
is but one matter, there is also but one God; unto whose power thou ought
not to deem any thing impossible, seeing that of that one thing he makes so
many things, not only diverse, but also contrary. For he that of one selfsame
thing makes both fire and water, does he less than he which makes that one
thing it self?

What will thou say then if I make thee to see that there is not that thing
which has not in it self a peculiar creation, or a property created, The
particular Creation of all things.
which cannot be attributed to the matter whereof it consists, but is a
greater thing than the matter it self, without the which, neither the matter,
nor the elements, nor all the things that thou drawest out of them were any
thing at all? And since thou will needs play the Philosopher before thou do
believe; I demand of thee whether things in their nature have their being
from matter or from form? If from matter: why is a Plant rather a Plant than a
metal, seeing that (by thine own saying) matter being but one, is no more one
thing than another, ne inclyned to one thing more than to another, nor bounded
within any one particular substance otherwise than by form or fashion? And
forasmuch as thou have taken so great pains in resolving or bringing things
back again into their first matter; whence comes it that thy extractions or
the things which thou drawest out of it, have so diverse or contrary operations,
if besides the matter it self there be not another substance which gives them
theirs?

If things have their being from form; I demand again whether form be a
substance or no. If it be not a substance, how can that which is not a
substance make a substance, and how may an accident or income make an
essential difference, and cause life, sense, and moving to be where they were
not before? And if it be a substance (as most Philosophers teach in express
words) yea and a very perfect substance, as which perfecteth the matter and
makes it to be that which it is named to be: must it not needs follow, that
he which gave this form shape or fashion to the matter, created a substance
which was not before, yea and a much more excellent substance than the matter
which thou surmisest to have been before it? Now, why should not he that was
able to create the better, be also able to create the lesser good? Rightly
therefore does Aphrodiseus Aphrodisaeus in his first book of the Soul.
in his book of the Soul say, that the form shape or fashion which the
Craftsman gives to his work, is no more a substance than the art, craft, or
cunning whereby he gives it: but that ye form which Nature gives, is no
less a substance than Nature it self is. Let us proceed further. Of the
Mettalles, thou esteemest Gold and Silver: of the Herbs, thou esteemest some
for food, and some for Physic: of the Beasts, thou esteemest some to eat,
and some to serve thee: of men, (which yet notwithstanding make all but one
kind) thou admittest and acceptest some for one purpose and some for an other.
Now, if thy esteeming of them be for the matter whereof they consist; how is
that matter but one? Or if it be for the form, as in respect whereof Gold is
not the same that Lead is; is not that form a substance? And if it be a
substance; shall it not follow that he which gave that shape form or fashion
to the matter, is also the Creator of the matter it self? And seeing there is
such difference of Mettalles, Herbs, Beasts, and Men; does it not follow
that there are as many diversities of Creation? And whereas he has created all
these diversities of substances, would thou make him to fail in that one
the bacest of all? What shall I say to it, that some one thing shall have
diverse powers, virtues and operations in diverse parts thereof; so as it shall be
cold without and hot within, white in the outside and red in the substance,
cold in the leaf and hot in the root, laxatiue in the pith and costiffe in
the bark? As for example, the rynde of the Orrendge is hot, and the meat
within it is cold; the leaves of flowers of the wyld Vine do cool, and the
inner part of them does burn. Physicians report that the Lungs of a Hare
heals folk that are shortwinded; that the blood of him breaks the Stone,
and that the hear of him stauncheth blood. Have not these diverse parts diverse
forms, besides the universal form of the thing whereof they be the parts?
And are not these diverse forms as many diverse substaunces, and consequently as
many Creations? The Adamant or Lodestone draws iron to him, and shows
continually the Northpole, and yet is disappoynted of his force by Garlic.
The Amber also draws all light things unto it; Hors^yes laid to a man's heel
make blisters in his bladder; Agaricke purges Fleagme, Rhubarb Choler, and
Elleborus Melancholy. If these operations come of the matter alone, tell me
how that may be. And why be not the same operations common to all things? Or
if (as thou say) they come of a secret property; does it not then come of
the substantial form, seeing that nothing can be said to be that which it
is, or to have any peculiar property, but by reason of the substantial form?
Thou will perchance say, that it is the mingling of the Elements together that
gives form or shape. Nay: for if it be that mingling, where is then the
foresaid common matter become? and what mingling together or what m^dley or
mixture can be made of one selfsame thing? And if thy meaning be that the
foresaid matter is a diverse composiding of the Elements together; then is thy
matter a* form compounded of diverse forms. For wherein do the Elements (being
so contrary) differ one from another, but in their essential forms? And if it
be a mixture or Composition, where is then the eternity thereof? Moreover,
we see that in Plants, Beasts, and Men, the Compositio^ that is made of the
mixture of the elements, abides even when they be cut down or killed. For put
a block into the fire, and the moisture that was in it when it grew a Tree
boyleth out with the heat, the air thereof steameth up into smoke, the fiery
matter thereof burns out in an oily substance, and the earthly parts
thereof falls down into as^hes. And in all living wights as well as in man,
the outward lump (which thou will have to be composed of the mixture of the
Elements,) remains whole after they be dead. But as for the Soul whereby the
things have their life, sense, and reason; which Soul is the peculiar form
both of Trees, Beasts and Men each after their kind: that appears no more
when the thing is once dead. And therefore it follows, that besides the
matter (which is liuelesse) and the mixture of the Elements, there is also a
substantial form, which makes ye thing to be a Tree, a Beast, or a Man; and
without the which it is not a Tree but a block, nor a Beast or a Man, but a
dead Carkesse or Carrion. Furthermore, when a Tree is dead, there remain still
certain virtues both in the bark, and in the wood, and in the leaves thereof;
which virtues are not only diverse, but also sometime contraries, and those
virtues proceed not of the matter, but of the substantial form. Whereof it
follows, that besides the form of the Plant which fades by the death of the
Plant it self, there are also other forms peculiar to every part thereof,
which abide after that the form of the whole Plant is perished. Now, if the
mixture of the Elements cannot make the form whereby the vpperkyndes differ
one from another, as the senseless things from the things that have sense; and
the things that have but only sense, from the things that have reason too; can
it make the difference that is between the vnderkynds that are comprehended
under every of the vpperkynds; or between the particulars that belong to every
vnderking; or between the several parts that are in every particular? If the
mixture of the Elements (say I) make not a Tree to live, that is to say to be
a Tree; shall it make it to heal, both some certain diseases, and also some
certain parts of it, some certain parts of man? And if it make not a Beast to
have sense, that is to say to be a Beast: can it make it to be a Lion, an
Elephant, or a Stagge? And if it make not a man to have life, sense, and
moving; can it make him to speak, and to reason, one of one thing and another
of another, each man according to his several inclynation? But how should the
Elements give life, which they themselves have not? or free moving, they
themselves being carried up and down whether they will or no? or also sense,
being themselves but the objects of our senses? Then must we conclude that the
difference of the vpperkynds from the vnderkynds, of the vnderkynds from the
Particulars, and of their parts one from another, consists not in the matter
whereof they be made, but in their form; and that the same form is the
peculiar substance of every thing; and that look how many sundry sorts of
forms there are, so many sundry sorts of creations there have been, all
proceeding from the power of the Former or giver of them. And so, he that
attributes unto God the forming or fashioning of the World, must whether he
will or no attribute unto him the power of creating it also. For without
creating of a new substance (what matter soever ye presuppose to have been
before) he had not created the World in such sort as it is. And he that was able
to create any one of the^, was able to create them all. For like might and
power is requisite to the creating of an Emet as of an Elephant, of a Ponde as
of the Sea, of a piece of the world as of the whole world.

They proceed on still with their Chimere. The Peripatetiks.
God (say they) draws the form out of the Ability of the matter. Let us
examine this doterie yet further. Ability (says Aristotle) is the beginning
of moving and of change. Also there are (say his Disciples) two sorts of
Ability: the one which works the said beginning in the other, and that is
God; and the other which suffers the moving and change at the others hand,
and that is matter or stuff, which by the moving wrought into it by the other,
receives his perfection which is termed Form. Now, I demand whether this
passive Ability of the matter, be a quality or a substance. They dare not
say it is a substance; for were it a substance, then even by their own
doctrine it were a form also: and wheresoever is a form, there is also an
act, and that is more than an ability: but matter (as they say) is a mere
ability. And if they say it is a Quality, (as Aristotle himself affirms):
then follows it that God draws a substance out of the quality of an
accident. Now, he that draws the very Essence or being of things out of the
passive ability of an other, can much more draw it out of his own active
ability or workfull power. For shall he be barraine of himself, which makes a
quality (yea and less than a simple quality) fruitful in bringing forth so
many things? And seeing that Quality and Substance and all the highest kynds
of Contraries be (as they teach) further differing one from another than fire
from water; and also that quality and accident are nothing of themselves:
shall it not follow that God is able to create substances of nothing? Surely it
is the saying of Trismegistus in many places, that God created the World and
all that is therein; and man with all his parts by his most fruitful word: and
also that the will of God was the breeder of the Elements. Pythagoras and all
the old Divines affirm, that God or the only One is the beginner of al things,
yea even of the first matter, as Simplicius Simplicius upon the naturals.
reports in alleging the record of Eudorus. And Syrian the Master of
Simplicius says, that in that behalf Plato followed Archenetus and Brotinus,
Syrian upon the Supernaturals.
which agreeed with Pythagoras. And in very deed he tells us, that to speak
properly, Matter is no Essence at al, nor can be conceived otherwise than by a
bastard reason, that is to wit by imagining it void of al shape, and
consequently also void of all being.

As touching Aristotle, he makes matter to be the first beginning of all
things. But if he believed the world to have bin beginninglesse according to
his own teaching; where is this beginning become? Also he disprooueth the
Chaos with very lively reasons; and to escape that, he holds himself to the
eternity, which is quite and clean against him. But howsoever the case stand,
it is fully agreed upon among his most approved interpreters, yt these names of
Matter, Form, and Privation, serve not too bet^ken things truly being the
same whereof they pretend the names; but only are invented to teach their
scho^lers, after what manner things are bred and corrupted, by putting of one
shape and putting on another? And whereas he says that the power of all life
seems to be partaker of some divine thing, and better than the Elements; and
that the Soul of man has his being from without, Aristotle in his second
book of the breed of living things. chap. 3.
and not from the elements or from matter as the body has: And that all
Souls are forms, and all forms are substances: Does he not make God to be
the creater of substances, yea and of better substances than the elements?
Ageine, when he says that the knitting parts that is to wit the bones, the
skin, the Sinews and such like may be made of the mixing together of the
elements, and that the vnknitting parts as the Head, Aristotle in his 4^ book
of Meteores, Chap. 10.
the Leg, the Arm, and so forth cannot be so made, but are made by nature and
heavenly skill; insomuch that the proper essence and form of the knitters,
proceeds neither of heat nor of cold, of moisture nor of drythe: Does he
not acknowledge in every several part a several form and substance which
comes from some other where, than of the matter or of the mixture of the
elements? Aristotle in his second book of the breed of living wights, toward
the end.
And since he says in another place, that it were possible to have such a
conjunction of the heavenly bodies, as might produce not only an efficient
cause, but also even matter it self for the creating and bringing forth of
living things, yea and of mankind also: why should he have thought it
incredible, that GOD who dwells very far above such Conjunctions, should
be able to do ye like? Arist. in his probl. sect. 10. probl. 64.
Also we see that Theophrast the greatest Clark of all his Disciples, finds
himself so graueled in his book of Sauors or Sents, by reason of the
particular natures of things, that he bursteth out into express words, and
says that God created all things of nothing. Aphr. probl. 1.
And Algazel the Arabian disputing against Auerrhoes, says that the cause of
all things, did also make matter it self. Also Aphrodiseus declares in his
problemes, that the philosophers were feign to refer the effects and virtues
of many things, to some other thing than to ye Elements. And if they could not
father them upon the Elements, how could they father them upon matter or
stuff, seeing that the Elements have power and force to do, whereas matter has
ability but only to suffer or to be wrought upon. And if they could not
father them upon matter; upon what else should they father them than upon
God, who has created both the property and the substance of them together?

The Platonists The Platonists
that wrate since the coming of Christ, have given liberty too their own
brains, to gad out into a thousand imaginations. But whereas Plotin Plotin in
his book of Contemplation and of the One.
tells us that Gods actions and effects, are contemplations which imprint in
nature the seeds of all things: he teaches us too thrust far from us such
brutish questions as these; namely, Of what kind of stuff did God frame the
world? And with what tools did he it? which are further of from the nature of
the Godhead, than our doings are from mere contemplations. For what else is
contemplation (according to their own docttine) than to be wholly severed from
matter? He speaks often of the first matter, but how does he descrybe it? He
says that the very matter it self which is joined too the form has not any
true being, and he terms it The being of a Notbeeing, that is to say, a
thing, that in deed is not; and that does he too distinguish these
transitory natures from the very Being of God, which he terms The
Supersubstantiall Being. But as for the first matter, he calls it The very
Notbeeing that is too say an imaginatiue thing which has not any being at all
in deed; as if ye would say (as he himself adds) a certain vnshapednesse,
which is the cause of all mishapennesse, the cheef default or want; which is
the cause of all the defaults or wants that are in partic^lar things; the very
evil, which is the original of all evils; and to be short, a thing that can
neither be known nor imagined, otherwise than we imagine what Darkness is by
the knowledge of light; namely an utter absence of all light.

Yea, but (will some man say) Although it be not an Essence, yet ought it at
the least to be a Quality; and by his terming of it an Evil he seems after
a sort to make it a quality. Plotin in his 1. book Enne. 2. Whence evil
comes.
Nay; like as (says he) when we call the first of all Beeings by the name of
Goodness, we mean not that that Goodness is in him a Quality, but a very
substance, yea and more than a substance: So when we call Matter by the name
of Evil, our meaning is not that it is a Quality or has any Quality in it;
But that it is no Quality ne has Quality in it: For had it any Quality in
it, then should it be a Substance, and consequently a shape or form too; but
it is not any form at all. Ennea. 2. lib. 4.
That in effect is the sum of his book concerning evil and the original
thereof. In his book of Matter, he declares that there was a matter, (for he
would not else have made books thereof in vain;) but yet he says that the
same was neither essence, quality, nor quantity, nor had any essence,
quality or quantity in it; ne differed any whit from privation, saving in
this respect, that privation is verifyed as in respect of some subject or
substance that is bereft of some thing that is peculiar or incident unto it,
whereas Matter is an universal and utter want of all things, that is to say a
thing far worse than privation. And yet for all this, he will not have it to
be utterly nothing at all, but as a wast or empty space, a thing without
bounds, a being without being. And what or where the^ shall that be? At length
he finds it in the world that is to be conceived but only in understanding,
that is to say in God, in whom he will have it to abide as a form or pattern
of the universal mass of all things. What a raunging is here abroad to fall
always into one selfsame path again? Might he not with more ease have
confessed plainly, that God is both the formal and the material cause of all
things, that is to say, the Creator former and shaper of all things by his
wisdom and power? Plo^n in his book of Providence, and Enn^d. 6. lib. 1.
Chapt. 17.
Again, whereas in other places he tells us, that Matter being it self no
essence at all, cannot be the cause of the particular beings of so many sundry
things; nor having no life, be the cause of life, but that both life and
being are breathed into all things from without, even from the souereyne mind:
does he not iumpe with us, which say that GOD created all substances of
nothing? And if he could create that which was, and give unto it both being and
life: could he not also forbear the thing that was not, that is to say matter?
Atticus and his adherents would needs bear Plato down by reason of certain
sentences of his Timeus and of his Commonwealematters misunderstood, that
matter was eternal as well as God, howbeit that the same being void of reason,
was brought unto reason by him that is the very reason it self. With these
fellows we our selves shall not need to deal, but only hear Porphyrius
Porphyrie upon Timaeus.
disprouing them after this manner. If neither God (says he) be of Matter, nor
Matter of God, but both of them be Beginnings alike; whereof then comes it
that there is so great ods betwixt them, since we hold opinion that God is Good
and the very worker or Doer, and contrariwise that Matter is Evil, and but
only a Sufferer? The cause of this difference cannot proceed from the one to
the other, at leastwise if our saying be true: namely, that the one of them is
not of the other. And much less proceeds it of any third, considering that
we acknowledge not any higher cause: which being admitted, it follows that
these two so disagreeable Beginnings met and matched together by chance, and
consequently that all things are tossed and tumbled together by Fortune.
Again, If God (says he) be apt to the beautifying and orderly disposing of
Matter; and Matter be apt to receive beauty and orderlines at Gods hand; I
demand from whence this mutual aptness and disposition comes? For
considering that they be so disagreeing and so full contrary one to another;
surely they could never have agreed of themselves, but must of necessity have
had a Third to make the attoneme^t betwixt them. Now I am sure you will not say
that there was any third to command them: Neither will I believe, that they
fell to greement by adventure. To be short, seeing that Matter is not
sufficient of it self to be in happy state, but needs Gods help thereunto;
but God is of himself abundantly sufficient, both to be, and to be happy: who
sees not that GOD is of more excellency than Matter, and that Matter is not
of it self so much as able to be? For were it able to be, it were also able
to be happy. And therefore it is not to be denied, but that he whom we
confess to have perfected Matter, was also the very first maker and Creator of
Matter. But how could he make it of nothing? Let us hear once again what the
said Porphyrie says unto this point. Handycrafts (says he) have need of
instruments or tools. For their working is outwa^^^, and they have not their
matter or stuff at commaundment. But the natural Powers as more perfect, and
being within things, do perform all their doings by their only being. After
that sort the Soul by his essential life, does nourish, grow, engender,
breathe, feel, and so forth. So likewise the Imagination, by the only one
Inworking of it self, gives diverse qualities and mouings to the body, all at
one instant. So also the bodilesse Spirits themselves, (as the Divines report)
do work wondrous things by their imaginations, without instrument or action.
Much rather therefore shall the workemayster of the whole world who is a Mind,
give substance to the whole by his own only being, that is to wit, to this
diuidable world, himself being vndiuidable. For why should it be thought
strange, that a thing which is without a body, should produce things that
have bodies, considering that of a very small seed there grows so great a
Beast, composed of so many, so great, and so differing parts? For though the
seed be little, the reason of the seed cannot be small, seeing it works
so great things: neither on the other side can it be great, forasmuch as it
utters and shows it self even in the smallest percelles. Now, this reason
of the seed needs matter to work upon, but so does not the Reason of God;
for he needs not any thing, but makes and frames all things; and
notwithstanding that he bring forth and moves all things, yet abides he
still in his own proper nature. Now, when as the sorest and learneddest enemy
that ever Christians had, acknowledges this doctrine in good faith and in so
express words who dares open his lips any more against it? Dare the
Epicures with their motes do it? How can they allege any reason for them
selves, being by their own opinion made by haphazard at adventure without
reason? Or shall the natural Philosophers do it, with their temperings and
mixtures? First let them examine their Master Galene, concerning the things
which I have alleged out of him in the former Chapter: and if that will not
suffize them, they shall hear him yet again in this Chapter. Certesse as it
cannot be denied, but that as he labors by all means possible, to father
the causes of all things upon the Elements, and upon the mixture of them
together: so is he driven at every turn, to acknowledge somewhat in them which
he is ashamed to father upon them. In discoursing how the babe is formed in the
moothers womb, he finds himself turmoyled with many opinions. Galen in his
book of the fashioning of infants in their moothers womb.
But yet in the end, Soothly (concludes he) I see so great a wisdom, and so
mighty a Power, that I cannot think that the Soul which is in the child that
is begotten, makes the shape thereof, considering that it is altogether void
of reason; but rather that it is formed by that which we call Nature. In his
book of the tempering of things, a place that served best for the exalting of
the powers of the Elements to the uttermost; In his second book of Temperings.
he very sharply reproves those which father the cause of the forming of the
parts of the bodies of living things, upon the qualities of the Elements.
Notwithstanding (says he) that these Qualities be but instruments, and that
there be another that is the framer or fashioner of things. In his book of
the opinions of Plato and Hippocrates, he makes the vital spirit to be the
excellentest of all things that have a body: and yet for all that, he will not
have it to be either the substance or the dwelling place, but only the
instrument of the Soul. And in his book of Flesshes he proceeds further,
and says that in treating of Leachcraft he spoke often according to the common
opinion: but that if it came to the point of uttering the opinion that he
himslfe hild, he declared that both man and Beast have their beginning from
above, and that their Souls are from Heaven, and finally that the Soul
proceeds neither from the qualities of the Elements, nor from any of all the
things that we see here beneath. Now, if the Soul of man, or of the very
Beasts, proceed not of the Elements: how should it possibly proceed of the
Matter? And if it proceed not of the Matter, must it not needs proceed of the
form, or rather must it not needs be the very form it self? And what else is
so excellent a form, than an excellent substance? And from whence is that (by
his own saying) but from a former fashioner or shaper? And what else shall that
former be, than a Creator, seeing that even shaping, is a creating of a
substance?

Now therefore, let us conclude for this Chapter, both by vnsoluble reasons,
and by the testimonies as well of our enemies as of our friends; that God both
was able to create and also did in deed create the World of nothing, that is
to say, by his own only power, without the help of any thing whereof to make
it. And (to comprehend in few words whatsoever I have treated of heretofore)
that GOD of his own goodness wisdom and power, did make, shape, and create
the World: that is to say, That (if a man may so say) he is the efficient
formal and material cause thereof, without that he needed either help,
pattern, or stuff to make it withal. And now let us consequently see the
final cause: that is to wit, how and to what end he guydeth it: which shall
serve for the next Chapter following.

The xj. Chapter.
That God governs the World and all things therein by his Providence.
ARistotle was wont to say, that the diversity of Questions ought also to
have diversity of Answers. Some (says he) do ask whether Fire be hot: and
these must be made to perceive it by touching it; for their sense is sufficient
to shape the^ an answer. Some demand whether their father and moother be to be
honored; and such are not worthy to be disputed with, but rather to be rebuked
right sharply. And others desire to have it proved to them by apparent reasons,
that there is a Providence which rules the world. Such kind of folk (says
he) should be answered by a whippe or a hangman, and not by a Philosopher. His
meaning was in few words, that there is not any thing so sensible and
natural, nor any thing whereof the feeling is so fresh in our senses, or so
deeply printed in our nature, as Gods providence over the world: and that we
ought to think it more sure, than the things which we feel with our hands,
or than the things whereof our own Conscience conuicteth us. For in that he
ordeyneth a greater punishment for him that doubts of Gods providence, than
for him that resists sense and nature; he does us to understand, that the
fault is intolerable, as ye which is either a manifest guyle, or at leastwise
an ouergrosse ignorance, Ignorance next cousin unto Guyle.
which the Lawyers affirm to be next ^owsen to guyle. And in very deed, if
the denying that there is any God, be a belying of a man's own senses, and of
his own nature, and of all the whole world it self, as I have said before: I
cannot say but that the granting that there is a God, and yet notwithstanding
to deny him the government of things, is more intolerable than the other;
considering how great injury is offered unto him in confessing him after such
a sort, as to attribute unto him eyes without sight, ears without hearing,
might without mind, mind without reason, will without goodness, yea and a
Godhead without properties peculiar to a Godhead: In respect whereof the
ancient Philosophers called the Godhead it self (...), that is to ^ay God or
Providence, becaue the one cannot be imagined without the other. And therefore
in their judgment, as much an Atheist was he that denied Gods providence, as
he that denied the Godhead it self. I demand of any man which confesses that
there is GOD, I say even of the sauagest of them all, whereby he knows it?
He will answer, by the orderly conueyance of things which he sees both above
and beneath; by the order which they keep without failing, and by the tending
of so innumerable contrarieties to one mark; the Heaven heating the Earth, the
Air moystening it, the Earth bringing forth Herbs, the Beasts feeding
upon the same, and all serving for the use of man. It is all one therefore as
if he should say, that he knows him by his Providence, and by the
interlinking of all things together which he has marked in them all. Again,
he will say he has perceived, in Mettalles, (as ye would say) certain wombes
which nourish them and bring them forth; in Plants, a certain virtue which
draws their nourishment from the earth, and with very good proportion
distributeth the same abroad from branch to branch, and from leaf to leaf;
and which (as though it had a kind of understanding of the own mortality)
brings forth a seed at such time as the decay thereof approaches: and in
Beasts also, that one member does for another, and every of them for the
whole; a desire to increase their kind; Doogges to give suck; and a skillful
care to nourish and preserve their young ones: And he has considered that none
of all this could be so laid for aforehand by it self, and therefore that
there was some other thing above them. Thus must it needs be, that he is led
again by the consideration of the providence, to the knowing of God. Now, if
the providence which we have marked, do make us to say that there is a GOD by
mounting up from the effects to the causes of them; does it not follow that
Providence is the peculiar effect of God, and that he which denies that,
denies the Godhead it self, forasmuch as the Godhead is not to be known but
by the Providence?

If God have no care of the world, I ask of thee whether it be for that he
cannot, or for that he will not? If he cannot, how can thou say he is
almighty? Or how can thou say he is infinite, seeing thou know the bounds
of his power? Again, how can thou call him wise, since it is the property of
wisdom to guide things to some certain end, and not to leave any thing
subject to fortune? And seeing that his power and wisdom have extended to all
things for the creating of them, who shall keep them from extending to al
things for the ordering and mainteyning of them? Besides this, the Plant has
no reason to guide it self, nor to preserve it self against that which is to
come, and yet notwithstanding thou see there a mind which furnishes out all
the parts thereof, and a wisdom which watches over it against that which is
to come. The Beast also has no more reason than the Plant, though it both
feel and move. Yet is there an Inwit in it which the Beast knows not of,
which Inwit concocteth, digesteth, and distributeth that which the beast has
eaten, and disperseth it forth into his parts by just proportion, watching for
it when it sleeps, and thinking upon it when it thinks not thereon. It
perceives (I wo^e not how) that it has need of Earth, of Air, or of Nest to
lay the young ones in: it provides aforehand for the time to come, and shiftety
countries according to the seasons of the year, cho^sing them out naturally,
without failing at any time. In all these things there shines forth a
certain providence, which yet for all that, the beast neither knows nor
conceiueth. Thou thy self which art indewed with reason, have a forecast, and
by that forecast do the things which other wights do by nature, or rather
which nature (that is to say the foreordinance of the Creator does for them,)
the more whereof thou have, the more also do thou provide aforehand. For as
little a worm as thou art, thou inuentest a thousand trades and arts, which
are euerichone of them so many points of wisdom, and consequently as many
prouidences. As much as thou can, thou make all things to stoop to thy
lur^, thou applyest the rain and the drought, the heat and the cold, to thine
own commodity: thou turnest the doings of thy neighbors, of the City and of
thy Commonweal to thine own profit and honor: yea and if it were possible,
thou would apply the heaven, the earth, the sea, and oftentimes even God
himself to thine own benifite. Now then who provides for the Plants and for
the brute beasts in whom thou see so great providence though they themselves
have none at all, but only he which made them? Or who directs the Arrowe to
the mark, the Arrowe (I say) which sees not the mark, but the Archer who
has eyes for it? And cannot he provide for all, which gives providence to
all? And he that gives it thee in such sort as thou the^ by make al things
to stoop to thy Lure, whereas yet notwithstanding thou made them not, and of
whom thou scarsly know the names, is not he able to govern every one of
them according to their nature, and too direct them, yea and thee too, unto the
end that he has purposed, seeing he has made them? Again, if God be not able
to provide for things, and to direct them to their end, how say we that he
surmounteth all that ever we can imagine, since we cannot deny, but that he
which prouides aforehand is of more ability than he that cannot. And if we
can imagine any thing to be greater then he, why should not we our selves be
that thing? And if even in man, the ability of providing be better then the
inability, seeing we uphold that whatsoever is excellent in our selves, (which
yet notwithstanding is but in measure and by perticipation,) the same is
infinitely and originally in God: Why do we not grant that God by his
infinite wisdom can direct all things to his end, as well as every thing can
by their particular wisdom which he has printed therein, provide for the
things which the nature thereof requires? Too be short, seeing that
Providence What Providence is.
is nothing else but a wise guyding of things to their end, and that every
reasonable mind that woorketh, begins his work for some end, and that God
(as I have said before) the workemaister of all things, has (or to say more
truly) is the souereine mind, All working of an understanding mind is to some
end.
equal to his own power: does it not follow that God in creating the world,
did purpose an end? And what other could that end be, than himself and his
own glory, considering that the end whereunto a thing tends, cannot be less
good than that which tends unto it? and again that as far as his power
extends in ability to create the world at the beginning, so far does his
wisdom extend in ability to guide and direct it to that end? And seeing that
the beginner and the end of things (the Archer (I mean) and the mark that he
shootes at) are both one, that is to wit God himself: can any thing cross him
or encounter him by the way, to hinder his atteyning thereunto? Well then thou
see now, that thou can not deny GOD the government of the world, under
pretense that he is unable.

But you will say, that he will not voutsafe to have a care thereof. How come
you I pray you to be so privy to his will? Has nature taught you? Nay, thou
see, in the Plants a certain inclination to nourish all their parts; in
beasts, a charishnesse to bring up their young; in men, a desire to provide for
their children and household; and in all folks a regard to the mayntenaunce of
the things which they have either made or manured. And him that does otherwise
thou esteemest to be, not a barbarous person or a wild beast, but a very
block or a stone. Now then shall not he which has given such inclination to
all things, yea even to the very senseless creatures by his touching of them,
shall not he himself (I say) have it for them all? Dare thou bereeue him of
that which thou take to be a praise to thy self? or dare thou father that
upon him, which thou take to be an injury to thy self? Nay, like as this
care is a spark of goodness, so he that is the goodness it self and the
welspring of all that ever is good in all things, sheadeth forth this care
into all things by his goodness. He say I which has voutsafed to create us,
will not disdeyne to preserve us. But forasmuch as it was his will to create us
to some purpose, (for if nature do not any thing in vain, how much less does
he that created nature?) he will also guide us to that purposed end, by his
wisdom.

Let us see what things wickedness can allege against so manifest a doctrine.
First of all steps me forth Epicurus, and denies that he sees any
providence at all in the world, but thinks to mark many things to the
contrary in the whole world; Objections against Gods Providence. Alphonse the
tenth King of Spain said that if he had bin with God at the creation of the
world, it should have bin much better ordered tha^ it is: and God punished him
for so saying. Roderik of Toledo in the sixth chap. of his 4. book.
whereby he will needs gather that there is no providence, no nor (if he durst
say it) any God at al. For if there were a providence (says he) why should
Mountains occupy any part of the Earth? why should there be any wyld
beasts? why should there be any Sea? And of that little dry ground that is,
why should two parts be vninhabitable, the one for over great heat, and the
other for over great cold; and the third part be in danger to be uninhabited
also, were it not that men plucked up the Briars and Thorns that would
ouergrowe it? Why falls the Snow upon the Corn, and the Frost upon the
Uines? Why blow the winds both on Sea and Land? To be short, why happen
sicknesses and diseases according to the seasons of the year, and finally
death? And at a word, why is man borne in worse case than the least thing that
creeps on the earth, and has need of many things which all other wights may
well forbear?

Nay, he should rather have said, I see a thousand mouings in the Heaven,
whereof every one has his peculier end, and yet tend all nevertheless to one
selfsame general end. I see them all carried by one universal moving,
notwithstanding that every of them enforce themselves to the contrary by their
own proper courses; and that this universal motion is moved by one Moouer,
which moouer so ouerruling them, must needs be of sufficient power to rule
them all, considering that even with one twinkling of an eye, he rules even
the same Heaven that caryeth all the rest about. It follows then that there
is one principal moouer, which governs the Heaven and all the diversity
contained therein. Again, I see that the Globe of the Earth and of Sea
together, is in respect of the Heaven but a little point, or (as Pythagoras
said) but as one of the least Stars: that the Moon rules the Tides of the
Sea, and the Sun the seasons of the Earth, and they both are disposed by the
course of the heaven. Whereupon I conclude, that he which rules the Heaven,
rules both the Sun and the Moon, and that he which rules them, does also
rule both the Sea and the Earth. For how is it possible that he which rules
the whole, should come short in ruling any part of the whole? Or how should
the force of him be impeached by the Earth, which governs those by whom the
earth has her force? Insomuch that if (to my seeming) his providence appear
more lightsomly in the Heaven than in the Earth, (which yet notwithstanding is
not so,) and I cannot yield a reason of all the things which I see: I will
consider with my self that I have seen many instruments made by men as I my
self am, whereof I see plainly the effects, but I conceive not the causes of
them: Also that in other some I perceive well the use of some parts of them,
namely of the greatest and notablest parts, but as for the smaller parts, as
the Uices, Nails, Pinnes, Rivers, Buttons and such like, I have thought them
to be but bywoorks, and yet without them the residue could not hold together,
nor perform that which they were made for: and although they were taken all a
sunder, and showed me severally one by one; yet could I hardly conceive them.
Yea and moreover that I my self have made some, whereof my Servants and
Children have not perceived the reason at all, but would have burned them in
the fire as serving to no use. And therefore I will praise GOD in the things
which I know, wonder at him in the things which I conceive not, and rather
think my self (who am as nothing) to want wit and understanding, than
misdeeme him that is the maker of all things too be faulty in his providence.
But since fools must be answered to their follies, least they should think
themselves wise; and that the wisdom of these folk consists all together in
putting forth questions, and in answering to nothing: let us examine these
goodly demands over from point to point. The objection of Mountains.
If there be a Providence (say they) whereto serve the Mountains? Nay, say
rather, if all were of one sort, where were then Providence? For what else is
Providence, but a disposing of many sundry things to some one end? And how
ca^ any such disposing be, where there is but one selfsame thing euerywhere
throughout? Brute beast that thou art! So would an Ant speak of thee. It
would ask whereto served the rising of thy nose above thy face, or of thy
brows above thine eyes, or of thy ribs above the rest of thy body; all
which are higher above thy body, than the Mountains are above the Plains of
the earth. Thou esteemest greatly of the beauty that is in thy face, and of
the proportion that is in thy body; insomuch that thou fallest even in love
with them in another; and yet thou will find fault with it in the whole world,
as a deformity and want of order. But thou Lucrece, durst thou (I pray thee)
be so bold as to speak so of a Painter? Or would it not offend thee if
another man should speak so grossly of thy books? If a man should find
fault with the shadowing of a picture in a table; it would be answered that the
Shoemaker ought not to presume above the Pantople. For without the black, the
white could have no grace; neither could the bright be set out, without a
dimming; nor difference and proportion of parts appear, without a medley of
contrary resemblance; nor finally the ^unning of the Painter be perceived,
without diversity of colors. Also he that should find fault with the art of
thy book, having red but some pieces of it here and there; should by and by
be answered by the Lawyer, That a man cannot judge of the Law, without
reading it wholly throughout. And if there happen any absurdity; by and by
there starts me up a whole world of Gra^marians, which enforce their wits to
the uttermost to excuse it, and to find some elegancie in thine vncongruities.
Alleging that that which is unseemly in the part, beautifieth the whole work,
and the shadow more than the perfect color, and the dim more than the
bright, when they be fitly placed. All the commendation of these painted
things, consists in their diversities. Insomuch that if thou see a Plain
ouerhanged with a shadie Rock, or a dankish den at the head of a River
springing out of it; thou likest the better of the table for it, and praysest
the Paynter the more for his skill. Surely it is not possible that the Plain
should please thee more than the Hills, or the River more than the Rocks, but
that neither without other could please thee at all. Now, if thou did
consider the World as the work of God, and the Mountains and other parts
which thou mislikest, not in themselves but as they be small pieces of that
work; doubtless thou would say as much thereof. And therefore since thou
can not at one view behold all the whole world together, to judge of the
proportion of the whole mass and of the several parts thereof at one instant;
learn to commend the cunning of the workmaister in the things which thou
think thy self to understand, rather than to call it into question, for
the things which thou understand not.

But let us see further what reason thou have to complain. Thou would
shun both Rain, Hayle, and Frost. Behold, the Mountains furnish thee with
wood and Timber to house thee, to shelter thee, and to make thee warm. Thou
followest the commodity of Traffic; and behold, they serve thy turn with
Rivers from East, West, North, and South, making way from the midst of the
Land to the Sea, and joining the Coasts of Sea and Land together. The ambition
of thy neighbors is suspected of thee, and thine perchance is noisome unto
them: the high Mountains are as bounds to separate Nations asunder, and to
keep them from incroching one upon another. I omit the Wines and fruits which
they yield forth, the clear waters which they shed out, the flocks and herds
of Cattle which they feed, and the pleasant dwellings which they convey in
them. If thou could find as many things in thy bare Plain alone, I would
give thee leave to complain of the Mountains. Nay, on the contrary part, if
thou had felt the discommodities of the Playnes of Lybie; or but only of
the Playnes of Beawsse, or of the Desert of Champayne, thou would by and by
wish that all were Mountains; and yet notwithstanding, if all were plain, or
al were hilground, thou could not tell how to commend or discommend either
of them both. Now then, let this stand for an answer to all those Philosophers
which take upon them to control the parts of a work which they conceive not
whole. For, to blame the whole World for the Mountains sake, or the Mountain
for the Woods that grow thereon, is all one as if ye should find fault with
the whole man for less than a were or a hear; when as yet notwithstanding, in
an old man thou honor the same hear which the Barber cutteth off and
casts into the fire, yea and thou honor the old man for the very same.

But let us proceed with the rest of their arguments. Thou complaynest of the
wild Beasts; Wyld Beasts.
And who has made them wild but thy self? Nay rather, thou should wonder
at the providence of God, who (as Apollonius has well marked) has printed
such an awe of man in them, that they hurt him not unless they be assaulted
or pinched with extreme hunger. And therein what do they more than man would do
in like extremity? But thou have yet further cause to wonder at his
providence, in that the Beasts which might hurt thee, go single alone by
themselves, and haunt the Couerts and Caves of the earth, and make but small
increase; whereas the Beasts which are for thy benefit, how huge and strong
soever they be, come home familiarly to thee, submitting themselves in whole
flocks and herds to a Child, and increasing into thousands within small
time. Tell me in good earnest, is it a work of fortune, that the Beasts which
may anoy thy life do shun thee, and that those with whose life thou
maynteynest thine own life, should come and offer themselves unto thee?

But the Sea displeases thee for occupying so much of ye Earth. Wart thou a
dweller in the Sea as thou art on ye Land, the Earth would displease thee for
occupying so much of the Sea. The Sea, Aristotle concludes that there is a
Providence, because the earth is uncovered, which the Sea as the higher element
would else ouerwhelme. In his book of Woonders.
And yet what a deal thereof is still empty, which were sit to be inhabited?
Know thou, that thou art beholden to it for the great number of living wights
which it fostereth for thee, for the great number of Towns and Cities which it
inricheth for thee; for the Nauigations whereby it shorteneth thy way and
yields thee Traffic; and for his vapors wherewith he mainteyneth the air
and makes the earth fat. For put the case that the Sea were dried up at an
instant: what a number of Cities think thou should be seen desolate and
Nations desert, when men should be in case with the drought, as Fishes are
that be left on dry ground at the going away of the tide? Why should thou
not rather commend the beneficialnes thereof the more, in that not thinking it
enough to lend it self to thee to do thee service otherwise: it also teaches
thee the mighty providence and provident might of him that made it, when thou
see it ouerdreepe the earth, and threaten it with drowning every minute of an
hour, and yet is not able to pass his bounds: or when thou see it seek to
inuyron a great Country round about as though it were to embrace it; and yet
to stay at a very narrow balke, or else to wind it self into the bowelles of
the Land at a narrow channel; whereas notwithstanding an infinite sort of
little Isles are settled in the midst of the deep, like a sort of small motes
in a Pond. For, seeing that thou seek thy commodity and profit thereby,
think thou not that he also seeks his glory? And though thou had none
other profit by it, were it not very much for thee to have had it as a ground
and matter wherefore to magnify him?

The Winds The wynd
perchance do make thee to hate it: for thou must needs have a saying to them
too; and yet on the other side, if it hold calm, thou art weary of it. But
could thou without them have known the tenth part of the Earth? How
could thou have discovered the Land of Perow and the Isles of Moluckes? Nay,
how could thou have come to the nerest Isles unto thee, without the^? Now, if
thou like of the Wind when it is favorable to thee; why should not another man
that has to do in a contrary Coast, like well of it when it is contrary to
thee? And if both of you find fault with the storminesse thereof; know ye
that he which made it will be glorified thereby, in that he does thee to
understand, that he is able to meet with thee both on Sea and Land, and thou
art taught to call upon him, when the selfsame wind which has carried thee at
thy pleasure, is ready to dash thee against the Land.

But of that little of the dry ground which remains, two parts (say thou)
be uninhabitable. The Earth uninhabitable.
Who told thee so? Nay rather, why do thou not couclude thereupon, that
there is a Creator; seeing that even in thy time those parts were not
inhabited? Surely the Winds whom thou blamest so much, have taught us that in
those Clymates are goodly Countries, people of better health and greater
strength than we, more beautiful Cities, and more delicate fruits; and we
find them so temperate, that we forsake the temperatest Countries here, to go
thither. The days and years are measured otherwise in one Country than in
another: but yet in this variety there is a constancy: and the one selfsame
Sun which makes so many diversities, does thee to understand, that he which
made the Sun could well make the other things. To be short, there is so
great eunning in all these things, that thou have been enforced to make an Art
for the learning of them. And what else is an Art, but the setting of diverse
Rules in order together? And if Art be so needful for the knowing of them;
who will not say that there is much more Art in the thing it self?

Thou blamest the Thorns Briars and Bushes for covering the earth: but thou
considerest not into how many mischiefs idleness plungeth thee. Thou blamest
the Frost and Snow for hindering thy Husbandry, whereas in deed they twitch
thee by the ear, to put thee in mind that the foyzon of the earth comes of
God. Thou blamest the Rain for wetting thee; whereas yet notwithstanding it
moysteneth thy grounds and makes them fat. At a word, thou playest the babe,
who thinks his Nurce does him wrong when she kembes his head or puts on his
clothes, or rather when sometimes she plucks a firesticke from him, or takes a
knife out of his hand: that is to say, thou misconstrewest all the good which
the bountiful providence of God does unto thee.

But in the end (say thou) why be we not able to help our selves as soon as
we be borne? The birth of Man.
Why be we subject to so many diseases, and in the end to death? I will not
now press thee with that which I will speak of hereafter: namely, that for
all these things none is to blame but thy self: for even in the same things
which thou find fault with, I will show thee still to thy face, the
providence of God. The babe is borne without ability to help himself, and
has none other skill at all but to cry. Contrariwise the brute Beast is no
sooner come from his Damme, but he is able to go. Be it so. Yet
notwithstanding, of all these babes (which to thy seeming are but as forlorn
things) none dies for want of nurce or nourishment, though there be nothing
but pain and care in bringing them up. Therefore it must needs follow, that
even from the beginning, a certain providence has watched over them, which
has engraven this kindly affection and carfulness in the mothers breast; and
the less that babes can do for themselves, the more manifestly does Gods power
shine forth in prouyding for them. As for the brute Beasts, it was not
requisite for them to be brought into the world in that sort, forasmuch as
being unable to conceive reason, they had no interest at all in the knowledge
of those things.

As touching diseases, Siknesses and Diseases.
if thou blame the seasons of the year for them; thou may as well blame the
fire for burning thee, which yet notwithstanding thou can not forbear: For
the fault is in thine own vndiscreetnesse, and not in their nature; and in
thine own unruliness, and not in their distemperance. The selfsame heat
wherewith thou find fault, ripeneth the Corn, Wine, and Fruits wherewith
the most part of the world are fed. And if thou think that any man be thereby
cast into an Agew; he might have forborne the to have gone into the Sun, but
he could not have forborne the shining of the Sun upon the earth. But if
fathers of households have rods at hand to correct their children withal, and
that a part of their government consist therein: think thou it strange
(...) he which has set us in the World, should have means to (...) us in awe,
and to bring us home to him? What will thou say (...) a number of diseases,
which are as certain fruits of some vices and sins? as one of Drunkenness;
and another of Lechery, and so forth? Or what will thou say to Hippocrates
himself, who speaking of ordinary sores and diseases, inioyneth the Physician
in any wise to consider well, whether there be any peculiar stroke of God in
them or no? that is to say, whether the sickness or disease be
extraordinary, so as the proper and nerest cause thereof, be the hand of God
upon the party? Now furthermore, if there be nothing but disorder and
wretchedness in this World; why blamest thou death, which makes thee to
depart out of it? If it be because thou have goods which thou art loath to
forgo: thou must consider that if thy parents had not given place to thee by
order of Nature, those goods had now been none of thine. If it be because
Death makes clean riddance of most things; think also that in so doing it
makes place for other more that are to spring up in their place. But yet if
thou would consider how often men go to seek Death where it seems to be
doluen most deep, and yet find it not; how many meet with it at Bankets, at
Feasts, at Marriages, at Triumphs, and where they would most faynest forget
it; how many there be which dye young and in good health; and how many live
fore diseased even to the depth of old age; how many return safe from most
cruel Battles, to dye in their beds; and how many dye in battle or in some
fray, which have shunned strife and tumult all their life long: thou shall
easily perceive that our life and our death are not in our own hand, ne yet
depend upon fortune, forasmuch as we escape so many places where fortune seems
to reign; and that much less does our life and death depend upon Nature,
seeing it is not with us as it is with Trees and other living things to whom
there is set a certain term, which for the most part they fulfill and
ouerpasse it not: but that our life and death depend upon a higher cause, whose
only will disposes and boundeth them, accordingly as is expedient for his
own glory, for the order of the whole, yea and for our selves too.

Had it not been better then (say thou) that man had been made immortal
rather than mortal? And had it not been much better also (I say) that the
earth had rather bin fire than earth, or that the ear had rather been eye than
ear, seeing that the one is more excellent than the other, and in the opinion
of the Philosophers it is better to have qualities active than passive? Had the
earth bin fire, where could thou have rested? And if thine ears had been
eyes, what had become of thy speech, yea and of thy reason too? Now therefore
my friend, give this world leave to be a world, that is to wit a disposing of
diverse things, and an order of many degrees. Every kind of thing has his
bounds and buttelles, accordingly as God has listed to appoint thereto. The
Plant is a Plant because it does but live and grow; if it had sense also, the^
should it be a Beast. A Beast is a Beast, because it lives and has sense: if
it proceeded so far as to have reason also, then were it a Man. Man reasons
and discourses because he is Man; and were he thereto unchangeable, he were a
God. He therefore that demands why the Plant has no sense, and why Man is
not immortal in this World; demands why the Plant is a Plant, and why Man
is Man. To be short, the cause why it is so, is that it has pleased God to set
as it were the diverse strings of the World in tune to make one harmony,
insomuch that whosoever takes away the diversity of things, takes away the
World it self.

But this is a point whereon they greatly stand. Well say they, Admit that the
divine Providence have stablished the World, yea and that it have an universal
care thereof: Yet to toil it self in the carke and care of so many particular
things, Objection of base and vile things.
specially in this sink here beneath, I mean in this elementall world which
is subject to so many chaunges; seems rather worthy of dispraise than of
praise. Nay say I, but if it be a praise unto God to have created all things as
well beneath as above; what discommendation can it be unto him to preserve
them all? And seeing he made them all of nothing, whence proceeds their
worthiness or unworthiness but of his will? Why should the cloth of Gold be
of more account than the cloth of Hemp, or the Silk of more account than the
Linen, to the Paynter that painted them both? If God govern the Heaven, why
should he not also govern the Earth, whereon do go so infinite sorts of
living things, in every of the which, yea even in the Fly and the Ant, the
greatness of the Creator shines forth more than in the very Heaven: as namely
in their so lively life, so ready use of senses, so nimble and free moving,
yea and in the very littleness of them, which in so small room conteyneth so
many great things together? For we wonder more at the Clockmakers cunning in
making a Clock which a Fly may cover with her wings, than in making a Clock
of great compass, where the very greatness if self diminishes the
estimation thereof. If thou be afraid least ye spirit of God should soil it
self in these corruptible things; remember that look with what mind
Cincinnatus commanded his men of War and ruled the Commonweal, with the
very same mind did he both till and dung his ground, and yet thou cou^test him
never the more defiled or imbaced thereby. The selfsame Sun which gives
light in the Sky, pearceth through ye dark Clouds and foggie Mistes, dries
up drawghts and Sinks, and sheadeth forth his beams even into the things
which seem most filthy and lothly; and yet he himself is not blemished or
defiled therewith. Now then, art thou afraid least God who cares for all
things without care, moves them without touching them, and atteyneth to them
without putting himself forth, is not able to weeld these lower things without
defyling himself by them? But it were more convenient (says Aristotle) that
God should deal with the great things himself, as the King of Persia does in
his privy Chamber, and that he should leave the care of the smaller things to
his Princes. As who would say, that the Gardyner which has sowed both the
great Cabbage and the little Turnippe, both the Gourd and the Melone, should
make more account of the one for ye greatness thereof, than of the other for
the smalnes thereof. Or as though thou would not also the more wonder at the
King, if without stirring out of his privy Chamber, he could appoint all
things to be done, or rather do all the things himself which other men do.
What is the thing (I pray thee) which thou commendest in Mithridates, but that
he could call all his Soldiers every one by his own name? Or in Phillip King
of Macedonie, but that he him self made the provision for all his whole Host,
even for their cariages and for fodder for their Beasts? Or in the great
Captains of our time; but that they can skill, not only to make War and to
order their Battelles, but also to set down what the daily expenses of their
Armies will come unto, even to every loaf of bread and every bottle of Hay?
and welnere within one or two shot, how many shot of the Cannon will make a
breach in such a wall or such a Bulwark, and so forth? Or finally in this
Captain or that, saving that this Captain could skill to set the Sun upon
the face of his enemies; and another to cast the wind, the dust or the smoke
in their eyes; and another to serve his own turn by a Marris; and some other
to draw his enemy into a myrie and dirtie Country? And what viler or baser
things can there be than these aforerehearsed? Finally what is it that ye
commend in the skilfullest Warriors of them al, but that they could skill to
serve their own turn? Or in the most glorious Conquerours, but that they gat
the victory in the end? And so thou must needs grant that whereas the
Counterparties failed to do the like, it was not for want of courage or
goodwill, but for want of power or skill. Now, whatsoever is in the whole
World, is the Army or Host of God, an Army or Host (I say) not which he
has gathered of his neighbors, but which he has created with his own hands?
He knows all the Stars by name; for he made them. He has provided food
for all living things, and one of them is no greater to him than another: for
they have no being at all any longer than he lists. If he make war here
beneath, all his Armies are ready to do him service and to wage battle under
his Banner, yea even the ambitiousnesse of Princes to punish themselves one by
another. If Nations wexe proud; he armeth against them the Grasshoppers, and the
Locusts, the Horefrostes and the Blastings, the Winds and the Uapors of the
Earth. In every of us he has his inlookers to chastize us; in our flesh, our
corruptions; in our mind, our passions; and in our Souls, our sins and
disorders. There is not so small a thing, which serves not him to very great
purpose; nor thing so vile, which serves not his glory; nor thing so
enemylike, which fights not to get him the victory; nor thing so wrongful,
which executes not his Justice; nor thing so much against him, which hitteth
not the mark that he ameth at. Therefore plead not in this behalf unadvisedly
for Gods glory. For, the more stirring, the more change, the more disorder
there is here beneath; the more does he show the immovable decree of his
everlasting Providence, which (will they or nill they) directs all the
vncoustancies of this world to one certain end. And if perchance thou be
afraid least GOD should be tired with the pain and travel: (for he has
need of thine ungodliness to relieve him) consider how thine own Soul, without
any toil to it self, and without thy priuitie, does at one selfsame instant
both provide for the susteyning of thee, and make all thy parts to grow, every
of them according to his peculiar portion and proportion, giving sense even to
thy nails and the hears of thy head, which are but outgrowings and not parts
of thy body. And if thou will know how this Providence is occupied without
toil; consider how that thy Soul (notwithstanding all the business which thy
Soul does without thy thinking thereon) forbeareth not also in the mean while
to mount up even unto heaven, and by the discourses thereof to turmoyle the
whole Earth; to lay for the maintenance and defense of innumerable howsholds,
and likewise for the decay and overthrow of as many others; and to search into
the dealings of the enemy, to make them to serve his own turn; to treat
both of War and Peace together at one time, and with the selfsame persons
both at once. And dare thou now think that God is toyled in the things which
thou thy self do without toil? Or that he is tired with the governments
wherein thou would take pleasure? Or that he being a free and infinite
Spirit, does not that in a limited body, which thy Soul being finite in it
self, does in thy body where it is as in a prison? To be short, seeing thou
presumest to do thy will with the things whereof thou can not make one hear;
shall GOD be unable to do his will with the things which he of his own only
will has made and created? The virtue that is in a kernel or a Plant, sheadeth
it self from the root to the uttermost branches, yielding nourishment
severally to the stock or stalk, to the pith, to the bark, to the flowers,
to the leaves, and to the fruit, to every of them according to the proportion
and nature thereof. The Sun it self in keeping his course, and without
mynding any such thing, yields heat to innumerable Plants, and to
innumerable people; and yet heateth not himself one whit the more. Now, if a
creature do so: what shall we say of the Creator? What shall we say of him
which is not the Soul of the Plant, or of the Beast, or of Man; but the maker
of al things, yea which made the^ of nothing, who is not (as some Philosophers
have vphild) the Soul of the World; but rather (if he may be so termed) the
very life and Soul of all life and Soul in the World? But as we see daily, if
the Counsel of a Realm can not cease one week, without confusion of the
Commonweal; nor the Soul of a man or a Beast, forbear woorking be it never
so little, without the death of the party; nor the life that is in Plants stay
without withering of the Plant; nor the Sun go down without procuring
darkness, or suffer Eclips without some notable change: much more reason have
we to believe, that if the world and all that is therein were not guyded,
vphild, and cared for by the same power wisdom and goodness that created it
and set in such order as it is: it would in one moment fall from order into
confusion, and from confusion to nothing. For, to have no care of it, is to
mislike of it: and to mislike of it, is in God to undo it, forasmuch as Gods
willing of it, was the very doing of it. Now, if Gods Providence extend it
self throughout to all things, as well in Heaven as in Earth: we cannot doubt
but that it extends also unto man. For what thing is there of so great
excellency, either on Earth as man's body, or in Heaven as man's Soul? And in
extending it self to man, it must needs extend it self equally to all men.
For who is either great or small, poor or rich, in respect of him which made
both of nothing? Or what odds is there betwixt them, saving that whereas both
of them be but slaves to him that sets forth the tragedy, he appareleth
the one in Cloth of Gold to play the King, and the other in a course Pilche to
play the Beggar, making them to change their apparel when he lists?

But hehold, here comes almost an universal grudge. For if there be (say
they) a Providence; how comes it too pass that ill men have so much
prosperity, and good men so much adversity? that some be so long unpunished,
and othersome so long unrewarded? And to be short, that one for his wickedness
comes to the Gallows, and another for the same cause obteineth a Diadem or
Crown? This fellow for his leawdnes gat a Gibbet, He a Crown.
This question has combred not only the most virtuous among the Heathen, but
also even the most Religious of all ages. But it were best to take here a
little breath, and to put it over among diverse other things which remain to be
treated of in the next Chapter following.

The xij. Chapter.
That all the evil which is done, or seems to be done, in the world, is
subject to the providence of God.
I Said heretofore concerning GOD, that all things teach us that there is but
one, and yet notwithstanding that all things together cannot sufficiently
teach us what he is. Also let us say concerning Providence, That in all
things we see a manifest Providence; but yet to seek out the cause thereof in
every thing, is as much as to sound a bottomless pit, if it be not much worse,
seeing that the will of God is the cause of all causes. Surely if a man will
blame Gods providence, because it agrees not with his own opinion; he is a
thousandfold too be more mislyked, than he that should find fault with the
master of an household for the order of his house, where he has not lodged
above one night; or control the Laws and Counsel of a strange country,
whereof he has had no further experience than by resorting too the Tauernes and
common Innes: Or than the Babe that should take upon him to give sentence of
his fathers doings, or than the Uarlet that should presume to judge of the
determination of a Court of Parliament, under pretense that he had hild some
man's Male at the Palace gate: or (I will say more) than the brute beast that
should undertake too deem of the doings of men. For what are we to be
admitted to the Counsel of God, which cannot so much as abide the brightness
of his face? And what understand we further of him, than he voutsafeth too
reveal unto us? What Princis Counseler is so wise, that he can give his Lord
good advice, unless his Lord do first make him privy to his purpose as well
present as past, and to all the other circumstances perteyning thereunto? Or
what Husbandman coming from a far, will presume to understand better what
tilth, what seed, what compost, and what time of rest such or such a piece of
ground requires; than he that has bin acquainted with it all the days of his
life? And how far greater thing is it to create, than to till? But forasmuch
as God is reason it self, and we through his grace have some spark thereof:
let us see whether it be not so evident in all his doings, that in this point
it inlighteneth even the darkness of our reason. And if we perceive it not so
clearly in all things, let us acknowledge our selves to be but men, between
whom and God there is no comparison, whereas in very deed there were no
difference betwixt him and us, if we could thoroughly conceive all his devices.

Now then whereas it is said, that if there be a providence, why have good men
so much evil, and evil men so much good, before we deal with the matter, let
us agree upon the words. I ask of thee which men thou call good, and which
thou call evil; and likewise what things thou meanest to be properly good
or evil. If I should ask thee why healthy men have so many diseases, and
diseased men so much health, thou might with good reason laugh me to
skorue: for health makes healthy, and sickness makes sick. But whereas thou
ask me why good men have so much evil, and evil men so much good, pardon
me though I cause thee to expound thy meaning: for naturally I cannot conceive,
that either good men have evil, or evil men have good. For if by good men you
mean rich men, men of honor, and men that are healthy; and that ye take
riches, honor, and health to be the good things: then is your question
absurd. For it is al one as if ye should demand, why hearded men have hear on
their chinnes, and beardlesse men have none. But if (as I hear thee say) thou
esteemest Solons poverty to be better than the gold of Crassus; and Platoes
honesty better than Dennysis tyranny; and the Colic and the Stone of a
wiseman with his wisdom, to be better than the health and soundness of body
of the fool with his folly: then art thou deceived with the fair name of
Good: for it is another thing than these goods, which causes thee to prefer
them and to esteem them the better. Therefore let us say that the good are
those which seek after the true good things, and that the true good things are
Godliness and Virtue: and contrariwise that the evil folks are those which
are wedded to the things that are evil in deed, that is to say, to sin and
ungodliness; and let us not confound things together, the good with the bad
and the bad with the good. For what goods soever a man can have, or (to speak
after thine own manner) whatsoever euilles he can meet with; he cannot be
good though he have all the goods in the world, so long as he himself is not
good; neither can he be in evil case, as long as he himself is not evil. As
for the goods which go about to beguyle us under that attire; let us say they
be outward things, common to the one sort as well as to the other, for the
which a man can no more be termed good or bad, blesfull or wretched; than he
can be called wise or learned for wearing a rich garment: And contrariwise
that as all these false goods are instruments to the wicked to make them
worse, (as riches to corrupt both themselves and other men; authority, to do
vyolence; health to make them the lustier and stouter to do mischief, and so
forth:) so the euilles which thou termest euilles, are helps to good men to
do good, and furtherers of them in the exercise of virtue, as poverty to
bridle their lusts, bacenesse to humble them, sickness to meeken them, and
all manner of comberances to drive them to flee unto GOD, and to teach them to
succor their neighbors in the like, when God shall have drawn them out of
them: even after the same manner that a sickly body turns all things that are
ministered unto it, into the unsound humor which gets the upper hand; whereas
on the other side, the sound and healthy body turns to his nourishment, even
the meats that are worst of digestion.

Now then, let us come to the point. Will thou know why riches and honor are
common both to good and bad? That the false goods are common both too good and
bad.
It is because that God (even in spite of the wicked) cannot but be good;
insomuch that he makes the showers to rain and the light to shine upon the
one as well as on the other, notwithstanding that the one sort do curse him
for wetting them or for making them to sweat, and the other sort do bless
him for moystening and ripening the fruits of their labors. It is because God
deemeth it not agreeable either to his own honor, or to the greefes and
trauelles of his servants, to reward them with trifling things, least they
should set their minds upon them; like as a father that keeps his heritage
for his son, thinks it not to be for his behoof, to apparel him in the
liuerie of his servants and slaves. To be short, it is because he deals like
a Prince, who makes his pay common to all his Soldiers: but as for the
Garlond of Oak, he gives it only to such as are the first that in scaling do
enter the breach, or get up upon the wall of a Town that is assaulted.
Likewise Kings do cast their largess at adventure among the people; but as
for their honors and dignities, they bestow them upon those whom they
especially favor. It misliketh thee that this man tilleth his ground with more
Ploughes than thou: but advise thy self well, whether thou could find in
thy heart to exchange yt inward gifts of grace which GOD has bestowed upon
thee, with his Oxen and his Ploughes. Another is in greater reputation and
authority with the Prince than thou art. But consider thou therewithal the
hartbytings, the envy, the hartburnings, and such other things which he
indureth; and see whether the meanest degree in Gods house where thou seruest,
being free and exempted from all those things, be not much better than the best
room about any King. The King for his service done by him, rewards him with
Lands, fees, and offices: but if thou be so bacemynded and wrongful to thy
self, as to foster thy body with the services and charges of thy Soul;
consider that God being liberal and just, intends to reward spiritual
incounters with spiritual Garlonds, and to recompense thee according to his own
honor, and not according to the bacenesse of thy heart; and that so much the
more, because that in very deed, he rewards not thy works, but his own
works in thee. Moreover, the reward is given, not according to thy desert, but
according to the worthiness of him that bestows it. The recompense of one
selfsame service, is far other at ye hand of a King, than of a mean Lord.
If thou say thou could be contented with a thousand French Crowns,
Alexander would answer thee, that it might perchance be enough for thee to
receive, but not enough for Alexander to give. And if thou would have GOD to
give thee no greater reward than plenty of Wine and Corn, if thou knew him
well, thou would be ashamed of thy self: for it is the food that is
common to all men, and not peculiar to those that are his. Nevertheless, if
thou step not so far, but art desirous to know what be the goods which good
men have in this world, (I speak of them that seem not to have them) Seneca
tells thee, that they make their life allowable to God who knows them; in
him they repose themselves, they have peace in their Consciences; if he
increase not their present state, they also do abate their desires; their
enemies commend their virtue, all the world bemoaneth their want, and those
that have the distributing of goods and honors, are blamed for leaving them
unconsidered. To be short, the very asking of that Question (be thou a
Christian or an Heathen man) is unto them an inestimable reward; namely, that
whereas concerning the most part of other men, it is wont to be demanded
wherefore they be advanced to riches, honor, and authority, and they
themselves are oftentimes ashamed to tell how they came by them; every man
asks how it happens that the good men are not rich, honorable, and in
authority. Now, if thou have the courage of a man, would thou not choose as
Cato did, that men should rather ask why thou had not an Image of thine
set up in the open place, and why thou wast not admitted to that honor, than
otherwise? Yes say thou: But if God listed not to give me them; why have I
at leastwise forgone those which I had? Why has he taken them from me? It
may be (says Seneca) that if thou had not forgone them, they would have
fordone thee. I tell thee that if he had not taken them from thee; they would
have taken thee from him. I pray thee how often have thou taken from thy Child
a puppet or some other toye that he played withal, to see whether he would be
stubborn or no? How often haste thou plucked the knife out of his hand, even
when he cried to have it still? And what evil meanest thou toward him, when
thou weanest him from his Dugge? Now then, think thou it strange that GOD
should cast thy goods into the Sea, which else would have helped to drown thee
in destruction? O how greatly did Platoes Shipwreck advantage him, to make
him wise? Or that he should pluck the Sword of authority out of thy hand
whereof thou art so desirous, which else (peradventure) had slain thine own
Soul? Or that to prepare thee to another life better than this, he should
serve thee with such fit means, as might make thee to be in love with it?
Thou will say that thou would have used them well: but what a number of men
have bin seen, which under the chastisement of poverty were good men, whom
riches and honor did afterward mar and corrupt? Thou suffer the Physician
to take from thee some kynds of meats which thou love well, and to abridge
thee both of thy fare and of thine exercises, and of thy pleasures, because he
has seen thy water or felt sometimes thy pulse: and will thou not suffer God
(who having created thee and shaped thee, feels everlastingly the pulse of
thy Soul) will thou not suffer him I say, to bereue thee of some outward thing
which he himself made, and which would work thy destruction? Thou commendest
the Captain, who to make his journey the speedier against his enemy,
dispatcheth away all bag and baggage from his Army, that his Soldiers may go
the lighter, and that the breaking of a Chariot may not stay him by the way:
and can thou not find in thine heart that he which made thee and governs
thee, should dispose of thy baggages: that is to wit, of thy purchases or
inheritances which thou have gotten here below, to make thee the nimbler
against vice, and against the continual temptations of this world?

But Envy pricketh thee. Why takes he them not (say thou) as well from this
man and that man, as from me? And why loves he thee perchance better than
them? Tell me why the Physician appoynteth thee a greater portion of
Rhewharbe, than him? Because such a one is more moved with one dram, than
another is with three. One is better purged with a single Clister, than another
is with a very strong Purgation. One man is sooner warned of God by the loss
of his cropp of Grapes or Corn, than another is by the burning of his house,
the loss of all his goods, and the taking of his Children prisoners. So Job
saw the loss of his Cattle, the burning of his houses, and the death of all
his Children, and yet for all that, he praised God still. That which was
constancy in him, might have seemed blockishnesse in another. But when God
came once to the touching of his person, he could not then forbear to dispute
with him. Now then, seeing that the things which thou termest euilles and
mischiefs, are in very deed both Medicines and Salues; will thou not have
them ministered according to the complexion of the patient? And think thou
thy self wiser in discerning the disposition of thy Soul, tha^ he that
created it, thou I say which dare not trust to thine own knowledge in the
curing of thy body? The same is to be said of diverse Nations, whereof some
one may happen to be afflicted a longer time and more sharply with the Plague
or with War, than another, and oftentimes also even for the selfsame causes.
For God knows both the common nature of whole Nations, and the peculiar
natures of every several person. Some nature, if it should not see the scurge
always at hand, would become too too proud and presumptuous: Another, if it
should see it continually, would be quite out of heart and fall into despair.
If some were not kept occupied with their own adversities, they could not
refrain from working mischief to others. Another again being more given to
quietness, is contented to sweat in tilling his grounds, and in trimming his
Gardynes, without coveting other men's goods so he may keep his own. In like
case is it with Plants: some require dunging, some rubbing to make them clean,
some proyning, some new graffing again with the same to take away the
harshnesse of their fruit, and some to have their head cropped quite and
clean off. One selfsame Gardyner does all these things, and a Child of his
that stands by and sees it, woonders at it: but he that knows the natures of
things, will count him the skilfuller in his art.

Yea say thou, but though these euilles may be Medicines and Salues, how may
death be so? For what a number of Innocents The murdering of Innocents and
giltlesse persons.
do we see slain in the world? What a number of good folk do we see put to
the slaughter, not only good in the judgment of us, but also even in the
judgment of those that put them to death? Nay rather, what is death but the
common passage which it behooves us al to pass? And what great matter makes
it, whether thou pass it by Sea or by Land? by the corruption of thine own
humors, or by the corruptnesse of thy Commonweal? Again, how often have
Judges condemmed some man for a crime, whereof he has been giltlesse, and in
the denial whereof he has stood even upon the Scaffold, and yet has there
confessed himself faulty in some other crime, unknown both to the Judges and
to the standers by? a manifest reproof either of the ignorance or of the
injustice of the Judges, but a plain acknowledgement of the wisdom and
justice of the eternal God? And if God hring them to that point for one fault,
and the Judge for another; what injustice is in God for suffering them to be
condemned wrongfully by the Judge, yea and to be punished with death or
otherwise, for a crime whereof their own conscience clears them as
giltlesse, when as God and their own conscience do justly condemn them for
some other? As for example, The Judge condemns them for conspiracy against
the commonweal, whereas God condemns them (perchance) for behauing
themselves loosely in defending the commonweal. The Judge under color of
offense given to the Church, and God for not rebuking the Churchmen freely
enough. For I speak as well concerning Heathenfolke, as Christians in this
behalf. And what a number do we see, which confess of themselves, and
witness of their familiar friends, that by thy punishing of them, wherewith
thou being the Judge mentest to have put them in fear and too have restrained
them, they have taken warning to amend, and bin the more quickened up and
incoraged? And what else is this, but that as in one selfsame deed, God had
one intent and thou another, so also he guyded it to the end that he himself
amed at, yea and to a contrary end to that which thou did purpose? But
what a thing were it if thou saw the fruit that GOD draws out of it? The
Child that behold his Father treading of goodly Grapes, could find in his
heart too blame him for so doing, for he thinks that they should be kept
still, and cannot conceive to what use the treading of them should serve: but
the Father knowing the goodness of the Fruit better then the Child, (for he
planted them, tended them, and proyned them) considers also that within two
moonethes or little more, they would wither and dry away, and therefore to
preserve the virtue of them, he makes no account of the eating of them, but
treads them in a Fat to make Wine of them. And when the Child comes
afterward to discretion, he museth at his own folly, and acknowledges that at
that time he played the very Child, notwithstanding that as then he thought
himself wyser than his Father. And after the same manner does he when he sees
him make conserve of Roses, of Uiolets, or of other flowers. He is sorry to see
them mard (as he thinks) and is ready to weep for it, and he cannot be
quieted, because he would make Nosegayes of them, which anon-after would
wither, and he himself would cast them away by the next morrow. Now consider I
pray thee, whither without any further inducement, thou find not thy self too
resemble this Child. GOD who made the good men that which they be, has no
less consideration and love toward them, than those which bewail them. He
knows to what end their life serves in this world, also he knows when
it is time to gather them, and to put to his Hook or Sickle, to cut them
down, that they rotte not upon the tree or upon the ground, and how long
they may be preserved in their kind. And think thou it strange that he
should take some when they be fresh and green, too preserve them all the
year long, or that he should make Conserues of their flowers to be kept a
long time, or that he should of their grapes make Wyns? Think thou it
strange say I, that he should after a sort make their savor, their sweet
sent, and their strength, that is to say their godliness, their vprightnes, and
their virtue too live after them, which otherwise should be buried with them?
And that they which for themselves could not have lived past three or four
years, should live to the benefit of the Church and the commonweal, not years
but worlds of years? If thou be a Christian take for me example the Apostles
and a great number of the Martyrs which have suffered persecution: do thou
not even yet still drink of that liquor of theirs? does not their constant
confession make thee also to confess Christ, and their death help thee too
the endless life? Could Ignatius and Policarpus have lived above five or six
years more than they did? And yet what part of all their ages has lasted so
long or done so much good, as the last half hour wherein they dyed? Or if
thou be a Heathen man, consider me the death of Socrates or of Papinian? If
Socrates had not droonke the iewce of Hemlocke without gilt, had thou had
those goodly discourses of his concerning the immortality of the Soul? Or
would thou have believed it so easily? and thereupon have been contented to
forgo thy life so freely for the defense of thy Country, or for the
mayntenance of the truth? And if Papinian had not showed how honorable a thing
it is to dye for doing right, and how far the souereine magistrate is to be
obeyed, should we not be bereft of a singular goodly example of stoutnesse and
rightful dealing? What thing did they in all their whole life, either so much
to their own honor, or so beneficial to them that were to come after them,
as their dying in such sort? Now therefore, let us say we be but babes. And
forasmuch as we perceive the wisdom of our Father t^o be so great, whereas
we condemn him of want of skill, and forasmuch as our own ignorance is so
gross, whereas we boasted of wisdom, let us rather confess our weakness
in all cases, than presume to doubt of his sage providence in any thing.

But Cato The Gods allowed that case which had the upper hand. But Cato with
the vanquished, against the Gods did stand.
of Vtica would needs that God should yield him a reason, why Caesar overcame
Pompey: as who would say, that the veriest rascal in the Realm, should
command the high Court of Parliament to yield him account, why his case was
overthrown. For all our great Quarrels and Complaints are less before God,
than the least case of a poor Uillaine is before the greatest Monark of the
world. Nay, he should rather have considered that private States are punished
by order of Law, and Commonweales and publik States by civil wars: And that
the Commonweal of Rome was (even by his own confession) so corrupted in
manners, in government, and in the very Laws themselves; that he might have had
much iuster cause to have doubted of Gods providence, if after her punishing of
others for the like things, she her self had escaped unpunished: That the
Great men, what part so ever they mainteyned, were the members most infected,
in so much that the wisest men of that age said, We see what part we ought to
shun, but not what part we ought to take: And that as Caesar made war openly
against his Country, so Pompey covertly and under hand made his partakers too
fight for the mayntenaunce of his own ambition, which was paraduenture
discountenanced too the common people, but could not be counterfetted before
God, who sees the very bottom of our hearts. Now then shall we think it
strange, that to the intent to show the common people how greatly they be
subject to be deceived under pretense of good faith; and to teach great men
how fore he mistiketh that they should shroud their lewd lusts under the
Cloak of Justice; God should suffer Pompey to fall into the hands of his
enemies? And that to punish the pride of the Senate and the whole state; he
should cause their Army to be vanquished, and let them fall into the hands of
their own Countryman their natural Subject? Nay how could God have showed his
providence more manifestly, than by overthrowing that State by her own force,
which thought there was not any Power in the world able too punish her? and by
making her a bondslaue to her own Servant, which had brought so many Cities,
Commonweales and Kings in bondage unto her? But it may be that Caesar himself
scapeth unpunished. Nay: To show unto Tyrannes that the highest step of their
greatness is tied to a halter, and that they be but Gods scourges which he
will cast into the fire when he has done with them; within a while after, he
was slain miserably in the Senate when it was full. Seneca in his third book
of Anger.
And by whom? Even by those in whom he trusted, which had fought under his
Standard against the Commonweal, and which presuming them selves to have
deserved more at his hand than they had in deed, Caesar saw Cimbrus Tullius,
who had a little before bin very whote in his defense, and others of his own
confederates in Arms, stand now with their Swords draw about his Chair of
Estate, and taking part with the Pompeies after Po^peyes decease.
meant to deserve also of the Commonweal in murdering him. Were we now as
diligent in marking the proceedings of things done in Histories, as we be in
noting the manner of speeches, the order of indyting, or the antiquities which
the writer reports: We should find the like providence of God The cause why
men find fault with Gods Providence.
in the change of all States. But I content my self with this one before
mentioned, as the which is best known too all men, except I were minded to
take some example of our present age to inlighten the matter withal. Now then,
whereas Cato slew himself through impatiencie, think ye not that if he had
lived still, he would have ceased to contend with God, and have commended his
Justice, and have written books of his singular providence? Yes: But the
mischief is, that whereas we would not judge of a Song by one note, nor of a
Comedy by one Scene, nor of an Oration by one full Sentence, we will presume
to judge of the Harmony and orderly direction of the whole world, and of all
that is therein, by some one action alone. Again, in Musik we bear with
changes and breathes, with pauses and discordes; In Comedies, with the
unmeasurable barbarous cruelties of an Atreus, the wicked presumptions of an
Ixion, and the lamentable outcryes of a Philoctetes: and all this is (if we
will say the truth) because we have so good opinion of the Musician, that we
think he will make al to fall into a good concord: and of the Comediemaker,
that all his disagreements shall end in some marriage: and of the
Tragediewryter, that ere he leave the Stage, he will tie the wicked Ixion to
the Wheel, or make the feends of Hell to torment the Atreus, or contrariwise
cause GOD to hear the woeful voice and pitiful cry of the poor Philoctetes.
And if God seem erewhyles to hold his peace, and to suffer men to play their
parts; ought we not too have so good opinion of his wisdom, as to think
that he can tell when it is time to pay them their hyre? And that although he
let the wicked walk at large upon the stage, and the godly to lie in prison:
he can also provide to end the braueries of the one sort with just punishment,
and the woeful complaints of the other sort with joyful triumph? When a
Tragedy is played before thee, thou art not offended at any thing which thou
hear. Why so? Because that in two hours space: thou have showed unto thee
the doings of a ten or twelve years, as the rauishing of Helen, and the
punishment of Paris, or the miserable end of Herod upon his murdering of John
Baptist. Insomuch that although thou be not acquainted with the story, yet
the art which thou perceiuest, and the end which thou expectest, make thee
both to bear with the matter, and to commend the thing which otherwise thou
would think to be both unjust, and also cruel in the gouerner of the
Stage. How much more ought thou to refreine thy mislyking, if thou
considerest that the world is a kind of Stageplay, ^^nueied to a certain end
by a most excellent maker? And what an excellent order would thou see there,
if thou might behold all the ages and alterations thereof as in a Com^^^e,
all in one day? yea or but the success of some one only Nation for an hundred
years, which were less than the interuiewe of two Servant in a Comedy? Thou
have seen Pompey overcome. Lo here a discord that offends thine ears. Thou
have seen Caesar to bring home his Sword bathed in the blood of the Senate. If
thou be a Child, thou weepest at it: but if thou be a man, thou pacifyest
the Child and attendest for the knitting up of the matter, and for the
judgment of the Poet: Hereupon the Chorus sings, and then makes a pawse.
All this while the Poet seems to have forgotten Justice, and if thou depart
out of the company at that point, thou can not tell what to make of it. But
tarry a while and hearken to the note that follows. Caesar is put to death by
his own men. See here how the discord is turned into a good concord. Thy
Child sees that this proud Peacocke which vaunted himself above all the
world, is in one day stabbed in with infinite wounds. Whereby, how little a one
soever thy Child be, he has some perceiuerance of the forecast of the Poet.
Do thou not see then again, that we be like Children, which would
control the Song of all ages by one Note, or a long Oration by one Letter,
whereas notwithstanding, our life as in respect of the whole world, is less
then a short Minim in comparison of a whole song? If thou be a Christian, thou
read the History of Joseph. When thou read how he was sold into AEgipt,
thou can not be angry enough with his brothers, nor sufficiently bewail his
poor old Father. Again, when he is cast into the deep Dungeon in recompense
of his chastity, thou could find in thy heart to blame, not only Pharao,
but even God himself. But when thou see him taken out of Prison to read the
Kings Dreams, and (within a few days after) as a King in AEgipt; a succor
to his father in his old age; and the rayser up again of his whole house at
their need: then thou perswadest thy self that he which made him to reign in
AEgipt, did suffer him to be sold to the AEgiptians; that he which made him the
deliverer of his house, did also make him to be sold into bondage before by
his brethren: and to be short, that the discord which offended thee and the
harmony which delights thee again, proceed both from one selfsame
Musition. Howbeit, before we conclude this matter, see once again how much
more upright thou art toward thy Prince, than toward God. Thou see a great
number of his Army come home wounded: if thou be a man, it must needs grieve
thee. Anon one brings thee home thine own Son dead: if thou be a Father,
thou can not forbear tears. A neighbor of thine assures thee that he was
slain in doing his duty, in getting victory to his Country. Though thou
take not comfort in it at the first brunt, yet at leastwise thou will not be
so mad as to lay the blame in thy Prince. Within a while after, when thou
fallest to considering the fruit of the victory; then as it has grieved thee
to forgo thy son, so will thou thank God that he dyed in defense of his
Country, and that he did his part in so noble a service. Shall not God then
have as great pre-eminence in setting forth his glory, as Kings for the
obteining of their victories? God over his Creatures, as Kings over their
Subjects? Or shall not we have as much patience in the death of those whom we
bring up, when they dye for his service, as when they dye for the honor of our
Prince? Or shall we have less trust in him as touching his employing of them
to good purpose, than we have in Kings Princes and Captains, which know not
the issue of their own enterprises, or at leastwise for the most part know
it not, ne have any care of the life or death of them that serve them? Let this
suffize for answer to such as vex themselves either for their own
afflictions, or for the sudden death of those whom they love and esteem. And
let us now consequently see, if we can satisfy those which are grieved, at the
prosperity and slow punishment The slow punishment of the wicked.
of the wicked.

Thou say that the wicked have welfare at will. King Cyrus was not of that
opinion, when for a punishment to the people of the City of Sardis, he
commanded them to spend their time in gaming and feasting. Nay, thou should
rather say, that they have misery; for all the good things which thou termest
good, and which we count neither good nor evil, do in the hands of the
wicked turn into evil, Well (say thou) howsoever they be termed, they have
great commodities in this world. What will thou say then, if their own wicked
disposition, and their own sin, do work them more mischief than all the
harms and euilles which thou bewaylest in the good men? Since there is not a
greater mischief than to be wicked, and that all the commodities which thou
enuyest them, have as little force against the evil which they harber within
them, as Ueluet Pantoples have against the Gowte, or Dyademes against the
Headache, or Purple Robes against the Collicke; Guess (if thou can) what
fear, and what Agewfits they sustain in following their wicked lusts; as
namely, this man in haunting of Harlots, that man in ryding to commit a
Robbery; one in poisoning his own brother, that he may succeed him in the
Kingdom; another in ridding good Commonwealemen o^t of the way, that he may
mainteyne himself still in his tyranny. Consider what misery they endure,
before they can come to the performance of their evil; what they abide in the
very doing thereof; and what a turmoyle their own Conscience makes of it,
after they have performed it: and thou shall see that it is a continual Fever,
a strange unquietness, and a sharp sorrow; so much always the more
dangerous, because the shamelessest of them all, dares not bewray his disease
to the Physician. Alexander ye Tyrant of Pherey, was wont even in the chief of
his prosperity, to get himself within a Mote and to draw up the Bridge after
him, when he went to lie with his Concubine. Dennis of Sicilie being afraid to
put any Barber in trust with the trimming of his Beard, made his own Daughters
to supplye that office: and growing afterward in ielozie of them, he findged it
off himself with a burning firebrand. Another, as often as he went to bed with
his wife, searched her whether she had not a knife hidden in her bosom or
about her. Think you not that the happiest of all these Tyrants, was more
miserable than the person that was most oppressed under his tyranny? With what
saw^e think you did Dennis eat his deynties, when he imagined himself to
have a naked Sword hanging continually by a hear with the point over his head,
as he sat at his Table? And yet what a number were there at that time, which
enuyed the Purple Robes the Dyademes and the deyntie fare of those Tyrants, and
which found fault with God for the ease and prosperity which he gave them?
Babes that we be! We would change our state with a kai^ife, that in playing
the King in a Tragedy sweepeth the scaffold with a long gown of cloth of
Gold, which within a few hours after, he must be feign to deliver home
again to the Upholster with payment for the hyre of it: and in the mean time
we consider not what ragged clowtes, what seabbes, what vermin, and what itch
and skurffe lies hid underneath it, nor how that oftentimes in counterfetting
the Majesty of the King, he was feign to s^ruh, and in manacing others, to
grind his teeth in his head. But were we clothed but one hour with yt which
he bears about him, and whereof he cannot rid himself; we would rather go
naked than be so clothed. And whereas it spyteth thee to see Tyrants reign,
Wickedness is a punishment to it self. Seneca in his Thebais. Fear not: for he
shall be punished, and that right sore. He shall reign: That is a punishment.
And if thou dout thereof, believe his father and his graundfather.
and to stout it out, and to triumph, yea and that some of them come to their
Crowns by doing the same things for which othersome come to the Gallows: does
it not greatly skill (think you) whether a man be tormented in a coat of
Ueluet or in a coat of Cannas? whether he be manacled and fettered in gyues of
gold or of iron? or whether in so short a show, he play the great Lord or the
poor Beggar? How often have thou seen the Cutpurse hanged with the purse
about his neck, and the thief hanged in the same apparel that he had stolen?
Be thou of high or low degree, be thou rich or poor, be thou Prince or
Peazant; as soon as thou have given over thy self to vice and wickedness, by
and by thou art become their prisoner and slave. And if it be so, what skilles
it who thou be, if thou be not thine own man? Or whereto serves thee all that
thou art, but to be the more wicked, which is in deed to be the more wretched?
But although vice be a punishment to it self, and that (as says Hesiodus) it
spring up with the very misdeede it self: yet notwithstanding, many men cannot
content themselves with Gods Justice, unless they see the offender led by and
by to the Gibbet: that is to say, unless the punishment be speedy, an open
example and visible, as who would say, yt the Gibbet were but ye beginning of
punishment and not rather the end of it; or that they which are cast in prison
for stealing, had not the halter about their necks already, from the very
instant that they be taken, notwithstanding that sometimes forgetting their
own misery, they play together at Cards and Dyce.

Nay contrariwise, whereas Epicurus does ground his greatest argument
thereupon; let us learn thereby to have Gods providence in the greater
admiration. I demand therefore what is the end of all Judges in punishing,
whether it be not the amendment of the transgresser, if he be not put to
death; or else that he should be an example and warning to others by his death?
If it be the amendment of the party, why find thou fault with it, for that
he is not put to death? God is a Physician and not an Executioner. He knows
better than thou, what hope of recovery there is in the disease. The party
(say thou) was unruly in his youth. The Wine that is now mild and good, was
a two months ago both hard and sharp, and it will grow riper yet in time.
Moreover, let the offender flee as far as he list, yet is he in safe prison
and under sure guard. God stands in no such doubt as thou do: The offender
can never escape his hands. No: but thou would that God should at leastwise
brond him with the broad arrowe. Where? In the forehead. Why, art thou afraid
that God could not know him again, if he had once shifted his apparel in
some other privy place? And doubtest thou that his bronding iron can not
pearce even to the heart, which thou see not? Nay rather, the selfsame Land
which for want of tillage and husbanding brought forth Briars and Thistles,
that is to say, vices and enormities, may by good husbanding bear good Wine
and good Corn, that is to say, Godliness and Urtue. And had thou once
shamed him by ye Pillorie or by Carting; might it not grieve thee to have made
him past grace? If the Athenians (says Plutarke) had killed or dissamed
Themistocles for the outrage of his youth; or Miltiades for his rebelling in
Chersonesus; where had the goodly Uictories become, which they obtained in the
Playnes of Marathon, on the Coast of Artemisia, and at the River Eurymedon? Or
had Constantine also been rigorously punished, for the cruelty wherewith his
former years were disteyned, and that thou had then known aforehand, what
things he was to do afterward for the advancement of Christianity; thou
would have bewailed him. And why sauest thou some from punishment for great
crimes, in respect that one is a good buylder, another an excellent Musition,
and a third a man of learning; whereas thou know not what they will prove
afterward; and yet think not that in so doing thou do any hurt, but
rather good service to thy Commonweal? But as for God, he knows which ground
is evil of it self, and which it is that bears Brambles and Thistles for
want of husbanding. He knows what is in every of our mynds before we our
selves know it. The things which we are to do in time to come, be as present
in his sight, as the things that we have done already. Neither Nero with his
five years good behavior, nor Constentine, with the wicked disorder of his
yoonger time, could beguyle God, though thou which see but the outward man,
call the one the Father of his Country, and the other an unkindly
Murderer. He knows when the tamed Woolfe will turn again to his kind, and
when the churlish Dog will put off his churlishnes. He foreknoweth men's
natures in the very seed, whereas we scarce know them in the flower. Whereas
we play the blind Barbers of the Country, in having recourse at every
instant to searing, cutting, launcing, and sawing for every fore; he has a
thousand receyts to heal vices withal, and a thousand kynds of scurges to
correct offenders withal, according to every of their complexions. And
think thou then that he neglects his cure, because thou see not the
fearing iron in his hand? Or that his potentials (as the Surgions term them)
are not stronger than thine actuals? And when thou see the sinful person
cured after that manner without launcing, yea and without scarce; ought thou
not to commend the curing thereof so much the more?

But there are which amend not a whit the more for the delay of their
punishment. Admit it be so: Yet what a number also are there which do amend?
Nay, consider yet further, whether they be not suffered to live to punish
thee; thee I say which have been scurged by them already, and yet art never a
whit amended. Thou would have thy father to throw his rod into the fire,
and thou have still a cursed heart that cannot yield and ask forgiveness.
Blame thine own stubbornness that he burns not the rod. Consider also
whether it be not a greater punishment to them to live after they have done
amiss, than to have dyed in the deed doing, for so much as they see that their
slaughters have not success according to their wills, but that all the
mischief which they have wrought is in vain, so as they have but provoked God
and the whole world against themselves to no purpose, and have gotten nothing
thereby but shame and reproach and torment of mind; And whether God do not by
that mean compel them to cry out, We have wearyed our selves in the way of
wickedness, until we can no more? If God (say I) by his seeming to be flow,
do both amend thee and punish the other both at once; do thou not perceive
a wonderful work of Providence? Moreover, what is the whole continuance of
all a man's life in respect of God, but one moment? shorter than the time
between the drinking of the Hemlocke, and the death of him that drinks it?
and much shorter than between the killing of a man in the morning, and the
being hanged for it in the afternoon? if thou have an eye to the chief end of
punishments, namely the example of the^ that live still, to the benefit of the
commonweal. I ask of thee whether thou think not, that they were better
warned by Neros killing of himself a good while after his committing of so
many slaughters and his setting of Rome on fire, having neither Friend that
could save him, nor foe that would slay him; than if he had been burned in the
foresaid fire which he caused to be kindled? Nay, consider whether it ought
not to be yet a better warning to thee, when thou see that the wicked man is
eu^n then hild fastest by the neck, when he thinks himself to have escaped
the hand of God; seeing there cannot be a playner proof, That no man can
prescribe time for his wickedness against Gods Justice? Agein, when Maximian
after the committing of so many cruelties, languisheth and pyneth away by
peecepeale in infinite miseries; I refer it to thine own judgment, whether
he do not more apparently preach Gods Justice against Tyrans and wicked
Courtiers, than if he had been slain when he was young, as Domitian and
Commodus were? And whether he seem not too thee, to have bin as a crier hired
for the nonce, to make this Proclamation publikly with lamentable and
languishing voice all his life long, Take warning by me to do Justice, and
not too despize God? Or whether, when Dennis the Tyran of Sicilie became a
Schoolemayster at Corinth, and fell too beating of Childrens Buttocks; it was
not a better beating too him, than if the people had caused his shoulders to
have bin rent from him upon a Scaffold? and whether all the youth in the City
were not better taught what the end of Tyranny is, by beholding him with his
Rods in his hand in the School; than they should have been by seeing him put
to death incontinently in the place?

And if thou think it not enough that Lyciscus do rotte above the ground, yea
and that he cry out that he rotteth for his treazon; unless the same
Orchomenians whom he betrayed, do come to the beholding of it: or if thou
think it not enough that Nero make a mizerable end; except Agrippina whom he
unnaturally murdered, do feed her eyes with the sight of it: or that Herod
become a forlorn creature, unless the Innocents whom he flew, be called to
look upon him: besides that thou requirest a thing against reason, thou must
also understand, that God punishes not after the manner of worldly Judges,
namely to content them yt have suffered wrong, or to satisfy thy mind desirous
of revenge, or too purchase himself the report and estimation of a good Judge
at thy hand: but because he hates the evil, which he intends to correct,
and will also draw good out thereof. And like as a discreet father, when his
Child complayneth to him of some wrong done unto him by one of his Servants,
does not by and by run upon his Servant with a cudgel, (for so should he
make his Child cockish, and cause him not only to do the like for every
tryfle, but also to take the staff in his own hand and to lay about him,
whereas he would have him to bridle his passions, and to refer the redress
of his wrongs to him being his father;) but rather takes his servant aside,
and chastyzeth him either before his fellows, or before others of his children
which bear him not so much grudge or ill mind: even so it is not to be thought
strange, if God do oftentimes chastyze the wicked far from the view of the
woorld, yea and sometimes also even after the deceasse of them that made
complaynt against them. His intent is to punish their passions, but not to
gratify thine. He will teach me his Justice, but he will not have thee too
think that thou shall have him at thy commandment, to strike whenever thou
would have him. If he should stryke at thy appointment, then should he be
but thy Executioner, and thou should be the Judge. But know thou that he
executes his own Justice and not thine.

Yea (say thou) but what Justice is it, that Children should be punished for
their fathers? And (say I) what injustice is it, if the Children be not
considered for the good service of their fathers? A Prince gives privileges
too some City, for the faithful service which it has done unto him: and who
will not blame his Successor which shall take them away ageine a hundred years
after? Another Prince bereueth a City of their Liberties and fraunchizes, for
rebelling against him: who will think it any rigor, that their Children which
come after them should be in the same state? The Prince does it for fear
least the Children having the same territory, should rebel as their fathers
did. God stands not in fear of men, but he sees what they be: and his
knowing of them is not as we know the Aspworme by his stinging of us, or the
Uiper by his biting of us; but he knows them before they be either Aspwoorme
or Uiper; and may he not then by that reason sometimes punish the Children, in
the same respect that he punished their fathers? As for example, by taking
away their authority if they committed tyranny, least they might abuse their
authority still? Or by taking away their goods which they spent in riot and
excess, least they should set their mynds upon these vices still? and so forth
of other things? But why do I term it punishing? I should rather term it
curing. For what more is all this, than we see daily done by Physicians, who
in caces where the fathers were diseased with the Stone, the Gout, or the
Dropsy, do forbid the Children the same things which they forbade their
fathers, although the Children be not yet trubbled with the same diseases? And
what else are sins and vices, but diseases and siknesses of the Soul? And
what strangeness is there in Gods doing, since that thou thy self dooest the
very same? Thou Disinheritest the Children of them that have attempted treason
against the Prince: and if the Prince may do it for the defense of his state;
how much more commendable is the doing thereof, for the preservation of the
parties themselves? But yet in this appears the mercifulnes of God, that if
the Child of the wickeddest man in the world, refuse to be heir of his fathers
sin, and wickedness, and follow godlynes and virtue; God does not only release
him the debte due to such succession, that is to wit, the pain and penalty
which is an inseperable appurtenance of sin; but also adopt him into the
number of his own Children, to make him partaker of his heavenly heritage.
Nowthen, wh^t cause have we to complain, either of the prosperity of the
wicked, or of the adversity of those whom we account to be good men, seeing
that all these things tend, not only to Gods glory and the benefit of the
Comonweale, but also to the welfare and soulehealth of those whom we bewail?
And if we did consider yet further, how many there be whose miseries we
bewail, which foster a festered sore in their bosom; how many there be whose
prosperity we envy, which have much cleaner hearts than the other, and do
spit out all their venom outwardly; how many there be which have their nails
whole, and yet do but little harm with scratching; how many there be which
would tear al things in pieces, if their nails were not pared very short; who
for want of power (I mean) or for want of courage to execute their naughtynes,
seem for the present time good men, and a thousand other such circumstances
which are to be marked in every particular person: surely they which do so
lightly charge Gods providence, would change their opinion; and where it
seems to them most worthy of blame, there would they the more wonder thereat
and commend it.

But this is yet the greatest point of all: That although God punish evil
never so much; yet it can not be denied, but that he l^au^th evil still in
the World, How God suffers evil in the World.
seeing we agree all in this, that sin or vice is evil. Now if he be
altogether good, how can he forbear to hate it? And if he be Almighty, how
can he suffer it? And if he order and dispose all things, how does he
permit it? This Question shall be the clearelyer discussed, where we prove
how evil came first into the World; namely by the fall of man. And then shall
we have wherefore too wonder at Gods Providence, who having punished us by
our own naughtynes, could skill too turn the same both to his own glory,
and too the welfare of mankind. To glaunce at it in feawe words; by the way,
It was requisite (and otherwise it could not be) that there should be some
difference beetweene the Creator and the Creature, to the intent that the
Creature should acknowledge it self to be a Creature, and yield honor to his
Creator who had made him of nothing. Now the Creator is the good that is
infinite and unchangeable: and therefore the goodness that is in any
Creature, could not but be finite and chaungeable, saving so far forth as it
consented to depend upon him alone. God therefore created man good, howbeit
chaungeably good; free from evil, howbeit so as he might choose the evil; and
he created him rightly minded, howbeit in such sort as he might also go a
stray. And this man by turning away from the Welspryng of goodness, did
thereby fall away from his own goodness; and by following his own will in sted
of Gods Will, he left his freedom and became a bondseruant unto evil. All
they that are borne of this corrupted seed, reteyne the faultynes of that
first fault, and cannot wit it upon any other than the first man. Therefore if
it be demanded why God created man free, and not vnfree, seeing his freedom
made him bond, it is all one as if it were demanded, why he created fire to
be light and subtle, that is to say Fire, or why he created water moist and
cold, that is to say, Water, or the World full of so many varieties, that is
to say, a World, and to be short, every kind of thing, to be of this or that
nature. For to have free moving and capable of Reason, is to be a man, and if
we had not had it so, we would have complained. Again, to have free moving and
such as cannot be but reasonable, is to be reason it self, that is to say, to
be God. Now God meant not to create a God, but a man to serve him, like as when
he intended to create Beasts for the service of man, he created them Beasts
and not men. But wherein will thou more wonder at the providence of the
everlasting GOD, than in that he not only orders and disposes the things
that he has created, but also the thing which he created not; insomuch that he
draws good out of the evil, yea and compels the evil (contrary to the
nature thereof) to serve unto Good? If a Captain were of such skill as to
order al things in such wise in his Army, that every thing should serve to the
atteynement of his victory; thou would commend him highly, and it were in
deed one of the rarest feats of War. But if he could moreover gain some
part of his enemies Host, and make them to take his own part; thou could
not wonder sufficiently at his policy. What will thou say then of him, which
could make them to fight on his side unwitting to them selves, and that even
his enemies Hargwebusses should help to give themselves the foil? Soothly
even after that sort is it that God can skill to make both sinners and their
sins to serve him. Cyrus (as appears by the Histories) was an ambitious
Prince; and ambition (as ye know) cannot be welliked of God. Now, to satisfy
his ambition, Cyrus Ieuyes a great Host against the Assyrians. If a man should
have told him it had bin to deliver the Israelites, and to buyld up Gods Temple
again, as Esaias had foretold; what think you he would have said unto it? Yet
notwithstanding the end of his Wars and of his warfare, fell out to be so in
deed. Thus ye see how an ambitious person and his ambition served God, without
meaning any such thing. The Emperor Titus meant to bring Iewry to due
obedience: and it had bin foretold, that of Jerusalem one stone should not be
left standing upon another. No doubt but that Titussis own passion carried him;
but yet see how God ouerruleth it. The same man which persecuted ye Christians
at Rome, goes to revenge Christ's death at Jerusalem, and (as says Josephus)
in that fact he took not himself as Emperor of the World, but as the
executer of Gods Justice against the Jews. Judas through Covetousness
betrayed the blud of ye rightuouse to death. But God by the sheading of that
blud (if thou be a Christian) redeemed thee; and yet the holy Scripture says,
that the Devil being in Judas, did put that purpose into his heart. Ye see
then that not the Covetousness of Judas only, but also the Devil himself
served GOD. Besides that, the Stories of the Bible be full of such matter, we
might mark the like examples ordinarily in the books of the Heathen, if we
were as diligent in observing them, as we be in observing the art of
Rhetoric or Logic in the author's which we read. For by reason of the
great corruption which reigned at those days in Rome, all men cried out that
there was not any Commonweal there, appealing to God for defense against the
injustice of the Senate, at the same time that GOD executed just vengeance upon
them for it, by the unjust covetousness of Caesar. Likewise when Attila
entered even into the bowelles of Europe, all the Preachers of Christendom did
nothing else but bewail the wretchedness of that time. Saluian in his vii
book of Providence.
Ye must think that when this great Robber cast lots in his Country of
Scythia, whether he should lead the third part of that Land, he had another
meaning than to reform the world. Yet notwithstanding, all men acknowledged
him to be a necessary scurge of GOD, and to have come in due season. Yea, and
he himself considering that he had conquered much more of the Country, than
ever he hoped at the first to have seen, insomuch that he had overcome even
those which were counted the strength of the World: as barbarous as he was, he
fell to think of himself, that he was the Scurge whereby God chastised the
World. Not that God is not able to chastise us himself whenever he lists;
(for his Storehouse is never unfurnished of rods to scurge us withal, as of
Plagues, Diseases, Famine, and such other things,) but that as a Master of a
howshold holds skorne to whippe his Slaves himself, causing either his
thief Servant or some other of their fellows to do it: yea and when his own
Children offend him grievously, he voutsafeth not to beat them with his own
hands, (for so should he do them too great an honor) but causes
(peradventure) the groom of his stable to do it, to the intent to show them
the justness of his displeasure: Even so does God punish the wicked one by
another, whom he could consume all at once in one hour; yea and his Children
also by the wicked, when not counting of them as of his Children, but being
ready as it were to disherite them, he disoeyneth to punish them with his own
hands. Thus therefore ye see, how God serves his own turn by the wicked and
their wickedness, to his own glory and to the welfare of those that are his.

And as touching the offenses whereinto he suffers good The very Sins of
good men are redressed to their benefit.
folks now and then to fall: what greater point of providence can there be,
than to turn them into instruments and furtherances of virtue? If God should
hold us always by the hand, it is certain that we could never trippe. And it is
not to be doubted also, but that we would think at the length, that it was of
our own steadynesse, and not of Gods upholding of us, not only that we tripped
not, but also that we tumbled not down. For what made us fall but pride? and
what manner of pride, but that we thought we would be Gods without God, yea even
of our selves? Now, to make us to know our infirmity, wherein it is his
pleasure to show his strength: sometimes he lets us go alone by our selves
for a while, and then stumble we at the next job that we meet with.
Nevertheless, this tripping and stumbling saves us from a greater fall: for
it makes us to call for his hand to hold us up. After the same manner deals
the Nurce with her Nurcechild that makes haste to go alone too soon: She
suffers him to stagger and to reele till he cry; but yet in letting him go
with the one hand, she holds him up with the other; and sometimes he thinks
he goes a^alone, when as she guides him both with her eye and with her hand.
Sometimes also when we be ouerlustie, God suffers us to fall into some
sin, both wittingly and willingly, and afterward makes us to feel such
grypes and hartbytings for it, that even the vice it self serves us for a
Schoolemaister, to drive us to eschew it. So the father suffers his Child to
burn his finger in a Candle, only of purpose to make him afraid of fire, that
the little findging of his finger, may keep him from the burning of his face.
There are examples hereof in S. Peter, in David and in others, which received
good by their trippes and falls. And I have no doubt but that a great sort
even of the Heathen, have felt in themselves how greatly their experience of
vice in themselves has profited them to the more earnest love of virtue.
Euilles are in the world as things set one against another, after the manner as
it is in the eloquence of words.
So then, let us not grudge at the prosperity of the wicked; for unto them it
is a bane: neither let us complain of the miseries of the godly; for they be
to their welfare. Let us not reverence the vizor of virtue in the wicked, for
it is but an instrument of vice; neither let us disdeyne the falls of the
virtuous, for they be but quicknings up unto virtue. But rather let us
glorify God, which makes the evil good whether it will or no, which causes
vice to do service unto virtue, and which guydeth even the most sinful
deeds, to his glory; the most unjust, to the executing of his justice; and
the most uncertain, to the hitting of his mark. And notwithstanding that he
do all this, yet can he not be blamed to have wrested any thing in the World,
nor to have mainteyned evil in any manner a wise, no more surely than the Soul
or ability of moving The actions and mouings are of God; but the disorders of
them and the haltings are of ourselves.
that is matched with a lame leg, is too blame for that the lame man halteth,
though it yield forth moving into the leg, and guide the leg whether soever
it will for all the lamenesse of the leg. What shall I say more? If any do
yet still doubt of the things before rehearsed, I will put him but to one
proof; for his answer whereto upon leisure, I will believe him upon his oath.
If he be a despiser of God, let him call to mind if he can, how much evil he
has sustained in the having of his goods, and how much evil he has endured
to do evil. Let him remember how greatly he has tired himself with his own
wishes, tormented himself with his good successes, set himself on fire when
he thought but to warm him, and wandered quite away, when he meant to have
brought others to the bent of his own bow. Or if he be one that seareth God,
let him consider how much evil he has left undone, in forbearing to have so
great store of those false goods: how many things he has wished which he
would have eschewed, if he had foreknowen the issewe of them which he saw
afterward: how greatly he had been dreaded and misliked of others, though he
could not devise to have done better: how often his falls and slidings have
served to make him to take sure footing against sin: how often his wa^derings
out of the way have made him to escape the lyings in wayt and the theeueries of
the world: how often his own wyles have served to turn him from the right: and
how often his own ouersights have served to bring him to his intended end:
and I doubt not but the heedfull marking of these things, both in others and in
himself, will make him to perceive that a certain everlasting providence
watches over our lives and all our doings. At leastwise unless we will deny,
that to lead the forecastes of others to another end than they purposed; to
bring the unadvised ouersights of others to better pass than they themselves
could wish; and to make the wisdom of the wisest to do service, not only to
his own divine wisdom, (if a man may so term it) but also oftentimes even to
the vndiscreetnesse of the meanest, is the work of Providence.

The xiij. Chapter.
That man's wisdom has acknowledged Gods Providence, and how the same wadeth
between Destiny and Fortune.
NOW, like as men of old time The Men of old time.
have acknowledged ye maker of the world, some in express terms, and
othersome by consequence: so have they also easily perceived the Providence,
which they have deemed to depend upon the same as an appurtenance thereunto.
Insomuch that even they which have flatly denied the Creation, have
neuerthelater granted the Providence, by reason that they found it so clear
and manifest a matter; howbeit that to deny the Providence and to deny the
Creation is all one. Hermes espyes it out euerywhere, as well in the Creation
of the whole and of the parts thereof, as in the order and maintenance of al
things. And if it be demanded of him, what providence it is, to have brought
forth so many things which seem needless and unprofitable; his answer is
ready shapen, That God created all things to his own glory: and that it is a
glory, both to him to have created all things, and unto all things to have bin
created by his hand. Hermes in his Asclepius, and Cyrillus in his second book.
And if it be asked again, whence the evil comes that is in things: He
answers, That GOD created them good, howbeit that (to speak properly) there
is nothing purely good but only God. As for the evil, it is come in upon the
good, like as all generation is accompanied with corruption. The iron rusteth;
thou will not wit it upon the Smith. The Wine sowreth; thou will not wit it
upon the Uintener. The things that are created do corrupt; as little also
ought thou to wit it upon the Creator. Why? Because that only he is
unchangeable, and it is meet that there should always be some difference
between the Creator, and the things created; between all, and nothing. Plato
in that he teaches the Creation, does also sufficiently teach the Providence.
For if Gods power, wisdom, and goodness be equal, or rather all one thing;
look where his power is, there is his wisdom, and thither also extends his
goodness. But his power extends even to the least things, for else they could
have no being at all: therefore his wisdom also extends unto them to guide
and govern the^, and likewise his goodness without the which nothing could be
preserved. And so, Gods provident goodness and gracious wisdom do watch
over all things. Again, when as Plato sets down God to be the end of man,
and man to be the end of all things in the world and of the world it self:
he shows sufficiently that as man tends to God, so does the world also;
but unto that end it should not tend, unless it were directed thither, and
who directs it thither, but he that first made it? To be short, the
particular forms of all things present and to come in respect of us, but
eternally present with GOD, can have no abiding without a perfect knowledge and
a steadie direction of all things.

But if any dowt hereof remain yet still; let us hear what the Platonistes
say to that matter. Surely Plotin has made two or three books thereof,
wherein he teaches providence by all things from the greatest to the smallest,
coming down even to the little flowers which we see vnblowen in the morning
and withered at night, as though he had meant to say the same thing that we
read in the Gospel: namely, Consider me the Lillies of the field; and so
forth. Unto the ordinary complaynt concerning the prosperity of the wicked,
and the adversity of the virtuous; he answers that the prosperity of the
wicked is but as a Stageplay, and the adversity of the godly is as a gaming of
exercise, wherein they be tied to a straight diet, that they may win the prize
for which they contend. Unto the Question concerning evil, he answers; that
it is nothing else but a failing of goodness, If the man that suffers be
good; also. Plotin lib. 3. Ennead. 4.
which goes on still diminishing it from degree to degree eue^ to the
uttermost; and that it proceeds not from GOD, but from the imperfection of
the matter, which he terms nothing: and that the evil, (which consists
altogether in degrees and in failing of good,) is so far of from diminishing
Gods Providence, that it is rather the thing wherein Gods Providence shows it
self the more, as without the which there were no Providence at all to be
seen: and yet that therewithal, God is the author of all abilities, and the
disposer or ouerruler of all wills. Which things (to avoid long discourse)
are more conveniently to be seen in his own works.

His Disciple Porphyrius departed not from the same opinion, howbeit that he
was combered with the like perplexities, that they be which dispute against it.
Seeing that God (says he) does by his skill ouerrule all things, and order
them by incomparable propriety of virtue; and that on the contrary part,
man's Reason being very small, is ignorant of most things how skilful and
curiouse so ever it seem to be of the truth: Surely we may then call it wise,
when it is not curiouse in serching such doutfull and hard matters, as are
matched with danger of blaspheming; but rather grants that the things which
are done, are very well as they be. For what can our small Reason find fault
with or reprove in the doings of that great Reason, to esteem them either
lawful or unlawful, seeing we understand them not? Porphyrius to Nemertius.
And in another place, If we suffer a King (says he) to dispose of his own
affairs as he lists; shall we deny unto GOD the ordering and disposing of
the things here beneath, Cyrillus in his second and Fifth books against
Julian.
which he himself created? And against such as found fault with the
government of the world which they understand not, these are his very words.
Soothly (says he) there is not a more unjust speech, than that which presumes
to teach God Justice, nor a more holy speech than that which yields to the
truth; and to think otherwise is a disease of mind and a great crime. For God
not only directs all things at all times, too the behoof and full harmony of
the whole universally; but also is the cherisher preserver and repayrer of
every several thing in particular. I pray you has he not showed too
Phisicians, (who have so much providence as he has given them skill,) the
things that are too befall too the whole body of man, how that some members are
to be cut of, some to be seared, and othersome to be eaten away with
Corrasiues, for the health of the whole body? And yet when the Nurces or
Mothers see the Surgio^ about to do it, do they not weep and cry out right
strangely, notwithstanding that they know it to be for the welfare of the
childs body? But what does the Father then who is wiser than they, but comfort
the patient, and hold the plaster ready to lay to the wound? God likewise for
the curing of the whole, has ordained that men should dye, (That is the thing
that Epicurus finds fault with) and that they should be separated asunder, as
a Toe is sumtime cut of for the saving of the whole body. And could we enter
into the mind of God, we should undoubtedly know why and to what good end he
has from the beginning barred some things from being because he foresaw they
should be to hurtful, and unto other some has given death in recompense of
their godlynes. The sum of all is, that nothing is done but by the providence
of God, howbeit that many things seem repugnant to his wisdom and goodness, as
the cutting off of a Leg, or the searing of a member seem repugnant both to
the healing of the whole body, and to the purpose of the Surgion.

Also as touching the adversities of good men, Syn^sius the Platonist.
See here what Synesius ye Platonist answers. The adversities (says he)
which we think we endure without our deserts, do help us too weed out our
affections out of our ground; which is to much inclyned too them; and by that
means the inconveniences which make fools to doubt of Gods Providence, do
confirm wise folk the more therein. For what man would be contented to part
hence, if he found no adversity here? And therefore it is to be thought, that
the Rulers of the lower Regions (he means the Feends) were the first founders
of these prosperities which the common sort makes so great account of, of
purpose to bewitch men with them, and to lull them a sleep here. Hierocles
also having made a long discourse, Hierocles.
concludes that if we fall into any adversity whereof we cannot conjecture
the cause, it behooves to consider that we be ignorant in all things, and yet
we must not proceed, so far, as to say that God is the author of evil, or
that he has not a care of us; for those (says he) were ouergreate blasphemies.

Aristotle Aristotle in his Moralles to Nicomachus and Eudemus.
speaks not any otherwise either in his great Moralls or in his little
Moralls, howbeit that he be more graueled in his Metaphysiks. Howsoever the
case stand, in his book concerning the world he grants unto God the care of
al great things. And think you it beseems man too set bounds too the
wisdom of God who has limited the natures of all things; and to appoint what
God shall esteem great or small, before whom nothing can be great or small?
Nevertheless whereas he says that the world depends upon God as the end
thereof; the best of his Desciples do by infallible consequence gather thereof
the providence of God. For seeing that the World depends upon him and tends
unto him; the beginning of that direction cannot proceed of any other, than of
him to whom it tends. Agein, seeing that (as he says in other places) all
kind of things tend too some one particular end every one peculiar to it
self, and all meet together in one universal end, and yet all of them have
not reason or understanding to appoint that end too themselves, or to hold
themselves within that bound. It follows then that there is a certain
providence which has that reason for all and every of them, and that the same
reason rests in God upon who^ al of them depend, as Aristotle's best learned
interpreters are constrained to confess. To be short, the quick sentence which
is attributed unto him, which is, That such as require a proof of Gods
providence are to be answered with the lasshes of a Whippe: does give us
sufficient credit of his opinion.

Of the opinion of Theophrastus we cannot doubt. For he that grants the
creation of a thing, cannot doubt of providence, considering that power and
goodness are alike equal in both of them. But behold here ye express words of
Alexander of Aphrodise in his book of Providence. Alexander of Aphrodise in
his book of Providence.
That God should have no will (says he) to care for the things here beneath,
is too far disagreeing with his nature; for it is the property of an envious
person. And that he should be unable, were to unseemly for him, for he is able
to do more than he has yet done. Therefore let us not dout of him, either the
one or the other, but let us rather conclude, that he both can and will have
care of all things that are done here below. And in another place he
gathers this very conclusion, That all our welfare lies in the serving of
God, and that the fear of him is a gift of his, in that he voutsafeth to
extend his providence unto us.

Of the opinions of Plutarke and Seneca, their own books do expressly
testify: namely Plutarks treatise concerning the slow punishment of evil
doers, for him; and Senecaes books concerning benefits, Seneca concerning
Benefits, lib. 2. Cap. 4. 5. 6. 21. 31.
and a treatise of his concerning Providence; for him. So likewise does the
wise Philosopher Epictetus upon whom Simplicius has written. For after many
forespeeches concerning the greatness and majesty of God, and the weakness of
man, they assayed to yield a reason of all things that offended the weaker
sort in this case, yea even to the very accidents and to the thunderclaps. And
I desire my readers to take the peynes to read them whole, that they may see
how conformable the things which Christians teach, are to the wisdom of the
best sort among the Heathen. Whereunto they may for an income, add this Oracle
of Apollo himself reported by Porphyrius.

No man too hyde himself from God by cunning can deuize;
No man by slyghts or subtle shifts can blind or dim his eyes.
All places he fulfilleth, Porphyrius in his Collectio^s of Philosophy.
Oppianus (...)
He is present euerywhere,
And gives life to every thing that mooues and life does bear.
And as concerning all other people of the Earth, in whose behalf the Poets
(which are full of such sayings every where) may answer, as Orpheus, Homere,
Hesiodus, Aratus, Sophocles, Phocylides and such others: surely in as much as
we see that all Nations have some Religion, it is a visible president, that
Gods providence is believed and received of all with one accord. For in vain
do meu serve God, if he see it not; in vain do men pray to him if he regard
them not, in vain complain they to him, if he judge them not; and to be
short, in vain do we call upon him both on Sea and Land, (where counsel
and casualtie seem most to take place) for the mainteyning of our welfare, and
the preserving of us from harm; unless we be thoroughly persuaded that he
hears us, and that he rules Heaven and Earth and all things in them from
above, yea and even the very hazard of war as Caesar terms it, wherein
fortune seems to bear greatest sway. But before we give our determinate
Judgment, we have yet two Advocates to hear, namely the Advocate of Fortune,
and the Advocate of Destiny. For (says the one) if all things pass under the
guyding of providence, what becomes of Fortune which we see in so many
things? And (says the other) what freedom then has man? must it not needs
be confessed, that a certain destiny compels every man to do whatsoever
he does?

If ye mean fortune as she is peynted by the Poets, Against Fortune.
blind, standing on a bowl, and turning with every wynd: it is as easy to
wype her away as to paynt her. For who sees not that there is an uniform
order, both in the whole world, and in all the parts thereof, and how then can
one that is blind be the guyder thereof? Also who understands not, that to
move things belongs to steadfastness and not unto unsteadfastness? for how
can that thing rule and weeld others, which is carried away it self? Or how can
he hold the stern who floteth himself upon the water? Seeing then that there
is so certain order in all things: it follows that fortune bears no sway in
any thing, and therefore that there is no fortune at all. But if by the word
fortune they mean as Proclus does, Proclus upon Timeus.
a certain divine power that gathers causes far distant one from another,
all to one end: surely in that case we be more friends to fortune than they be.
For we admit it, not only in things uncertain wandering and wavering, but also
even in the things that are most certain, yea and in all things whatsoever; as
the which is but God himself disguysed under another name.

Nowthen to speak properly, what is Fortune? Is it a Substance? Even by their
own confession, it has no being but in the disorder of other things. Shall
we term it an Accident? How should an accident work so diverse accidents?
Iunenall. I here wants no God at all, where wisdum does advise: we ^ooles have
fortune deifide and plaste above the Skies, Cicero.
What is it then, if it be any thing at all? Surely it is a word that
signifies nothing but respectively, that is to say, as having respect of some
things or persons that are spoken of, and it has no ground or being but of and
in our own ignorance. That which is fortune to the Child, is no fortune to
the father: that which is fortune to the Servant, is none to the Master: that
which is fortune to the fool, is none to the wise man: that which is fortune
to the wise man, is none unto God. According to the measure of our knowledge or
ignorance, so does fortune increase or abate. Error, and Blindness and the not
knowing of things and causes, have brought up the names of Nature and Fortune.
Take away ignorance from men, and fortune is banished from all their dealings.
The father lets a thing fall in his Garden, to see whether his child will
bring it to him or steal it away. The child thinks it to be fallen by
chance; and his father who knows to what end he did let it fall, smyles at
him. And so the thing that was chance or fortune to the child, was of set
purpose in the father. A Master sends forth diverse Servants diverse ways,
all to one place, to the intent that of many, some one at the least may escape
and come home again. They meet there all together. At the first sight the
thing which was forecast by good order, seems to them to happen by adventure.
A Captain having devised to take the Gate of some City, causes a Cart or a
Charyot to be broken upon the Drawbridge as it were by some mischaunce, that
his ambush may in the mean while break forth and enter the Town. The
Warders fall to beating of the Wagoner for it, and othersome excuse him as
overtaken by misfortune. And so the thing which was a policy of War in the
Captain that devised it, is a chance or fortune to the Town that wist not
the ground of it. A wise man to give a glyke to another wise man, or a Captain
to beguyle a Captain, or an enemy to delude his enemy, cyphereth a letter
grossly for the nonce, and sends it such a way as he imagines that it
shall be surprised. He that lights upon it is glad of so good adventure, and
thinking that he reads the secrets of his adversaries heart, builds all his
affairs in good earnest upon things contrived to deceive him. And so the thing
which was a rare devise in the one, is a rare adventure to the other. Now if
among men, which are all of one kind, and have welneere like portion of
reason, there be such odds between age and age, between quality and
quality, and between wit and wit; that the same which in one is providence,
is fortune in another: shall we think it strange, that the thing which
seems fortune to us that are but blindness and ignorance, should be singular
providence as in respect of God? Or that he which is the only cause of all
causes, should have the skill to assemble them together to some one certain
effect, how far distant soever they be? As for example, if he make thee to
find a Treasor in digging of a pit, or to escape a fall from a plancher in
going to walk upon it; would thou steal that benefit from the goodness
of GOD, who brought thee to the one place, or saved thee from the other? I say
from God who is thy maker, to father it upon blind Fortune which knows thee
not? And why should it be harder for him to match two causes together that are
far asunder, than to have made them so far at odds one from another? Or
than it is for thy self to put wood to fire, and fire to water, and thy meat
into the water, which are causes so far distant, and yetnotwithstanding thou
ioynest them together to one certain end, which is the nourishment of thy
body? And what things are further distant in thy mind, than a Charyot, a
Drawbridge, and an Host of men; which things notwithstanding thou could
skill to bring fitly together for ye taking of a City? Thus look wherein thou
do chiefly place fortune, there does the rarest and most wonderful point of
Providence most evidently show it self.

But now comes me the other Advocate; Against Destiny.
who to bring us unto Destiny, and to a certain necessity of all things and
of al doings, makes his hand of all the things which we have alleged against
Fortune. Therefore let us see how we may walk between Fortune and Destiny,
so as we may shun chance without failing into necessity, and perceive
whether the same be Providence or no. If all things (say they) be guyded by GOD
to some one certain end, yea even those also which seem casual; then can
they not be turned any other way. I willingly grant them that. And if they
cannot be turned; then are not men's doings free, but of necessity. Nay, this
co^sequent is utterly false; because the things which have free will to endeuer
themselves contrary to Gods will, have not free power to restreyne his will
from ouerruling them. But let us lay forth this matter more at large, that it
may be the better understood. We see in the Sky a great number of Stars
that are fixed, and many also (as the Planets) which have every of them their
peculiar mouings turns and courses severally to themselves. Now, the highest
Heaven, by his universal moving carries all the Stars about, as well the
mouable as the immovable, without any stopping or interrupting of their
particular mouings, whereby be made innumerable figures aspects and respects,
which I leave to the Astrologers to declare. The Sun makes the day and the
year; the Moon makes the months and the quarters; the Pleyads and Hyads
make the Seasons; the D^gstarre makes the heat of the Summer, and so forth.
Let us put the case that the highest Heaven stood still, and that the lower
Heavens kept on their peculiar mouings: or let us put the case that he went on,
and that all the rest stood still; and then should there be none of the said
figurings and aspects to be seen. But let them all alone as they be: let the
highest Heaven by his moving carry all the Stars about, and let every of them
continue the having and executing of his own peculiar nature, the mouable as
mouable, and the immovable as immovable, and every of them indeuer accordingly
against the Uniuersall; and then shall we see the woonderfulnesse of the
Heaven, which by an uniform kind of moving yt leaves to every Star his
proper and peculiar moving, yields every day diverse forms in the Sky, which
cause alterations in the air; which thing neither his own sole moving could
do if the residue of the Stars stood still, neither could the courses and
mouings of the Stars bring it to pass, if they were not carried about by the
moving of him. Now let us see how this example agrees with our matter. God by
his will and power has created all powers, and disposed all wills. That his
power ouerruleth all powers, al men confess. For who is he that makes a
Clock and cannot rule it? But that his will should direct all wills to such
end as he lists, without forcing them from their nature which is to be free;
there is the dow^. God forbid that he which created nature to do him service,
should be unable to use the service thereof without marring it. God then (say
I) guydeth all things to the performance of his will, the mouable by their
mouings, and the immovable by their steadfastness; the things indewed with
sense, by their appetites, and the reasonable things, by their wills; the
natural things, by their thraldom, and the things that have will, by their
freedom: And the freer that they be, the greater is his glory, as in deed it
is a more commendable thing to cause liberty to yield freely to obedience by
gentle handling, than to hale it by for^e and compultion as it were tied in a
chain. If the wills of all men were carried by Gods will without having their
own peculiar mouings: the power of God could not shine forth in them so much
as it does now, when all wills enforce themselves severally against his will,
and yet nevertheless even in following their own sway, do find themselves
led (they wot not how) whether soever it pleases him. Neither should we see
the said diversities of figures in the Heaven, which breed so diverse effects,
of Wars, of Peace, of decays, of prosperity, of adversity, and such other;
which serve all to the Providence of the euer^asting God; but we should see
euerywhere one uniform will holding all other wills fast fettered, and
carrying them whether soever it listed; and the more straightly that they were
tied up, the less should we esteem of his power, as who would say he stood
in fear to let them loose. Again, if we imagine all those wills to have
free scope, to follow their own lykings without any government of higher power
to ouerrule them, and restreyne their when they intend to break out: we
should undoubtedly see diverse ends in things, where as now they tend all to
one: And liberty would turn into looseness, looseness into disorder, and
disorder into destruction; whereas the world does necessarily require ord^r,
and order requires all things to be referred to some one certain end. God
therefore to show his power in our freedom and liberty; has left our wills
to us; and to restreyne them from ^^senesse, he has so ordered them by his
wisdom, that he wor^^th his own will no less by them, than if we had no
will at all. Let us enforce ourselves as much as we list against his will, and
yet even our disobedience shall turn to the fulfilling of his will. Let us go
Eastward when his will goes Westward, and yet does his moving conduct us still.
But alveit that God do lead forth and guide the one will as well as the
other; yet notwithstanding right happy as that will which indeuereth to
follow, and unhappy is that which must be haled and dragged. Likewise in a
keness of Hounds, every of them runs according to his natural inclination,
and yet all of them serve the purpose of the Hunter. Also in an Host of men,
one fights for honor, another for spite, a third for gain, and al for
victory to the Prince that sent them into the field. Take from the Hounds
their natural inclinations, and from the Souldierr^ the^ particular wills and
dispositions; and ye do away Hunting, and the Army must needs disperse.

Yea (say they) Gods foresight or Forknowledge.
but God saw al things and all the courses of the world from everlasting al at
one instant, and things cannot fall out otherwise than he has forseene them. It
seems therefore that nothing is casual nothing at the choice of our will, nor
any thing that is not of necessity. Yes: for as God beholds all things with
one view, If it be predestined (says one) that thou shall recover thy
sickness, it is in vayn for thee to send for the Phisision. If it be thy destiny
(answers another) to have Children; it is in vayn for thee to company with
thy wife.
so does he also behold every of them woorking according too their several
properties. He sees the motting of the Heaven, and the particular mouings of
the Sun and the Moon to bring forth the Eclipses of necessity: he sees men
co^sulting of war, of peace, of alyance and other things, willingly; and he
sees the Plants sp^ing up and grow naturally. He himself has set down the
second, third, yea, and fourth causes, and has linked them one to an other, to
do what he will have done: but the thing that deceives us in this case, is
that we consider not that our wills are among these causes and that according
to their freeness such as it is, they work freely in the doings of this world,
like as all other causes woork every of them according to their peculiar
moouings, inclinations, abilities, natures or kynds. After the same manner the
man that is acquaynted with his howseholdmatters, will deem aforehand which
of three parts his eldest son will choose, and which his second will choose,
though he be far of from them, because he knows their natures and
inclinations; and yet for all that, he inclyneth them not to the doing of the
one or of the other. Ageine, another foreseeth that a Prince will keep peace
or make war, because he knows him two be either of a quiet or of an unquiet
disposition. Even so is it with God: saving that he being near and innermore
to al things than the things themselves are, does know them most perfectly,
whereas we have nothing but by conjectures, and those very weak. To be short,
as in respect of God the things are of necessity, which as in respect of
themselves are things of casualtie; the cause whereof is, that the matter which
in the things themselves is to come, is present to his sight everlastingly; and
his foreseeing of things to come, is not in the causes of them as it is unto
wise men, but in himself who is the cause of all causes; and therefore he seeeth
not that thou shall do this or shall not do that [as of a thing to come] but
whatsoever thou art to do, he sees thee doing it from everlasting; naturally
if it be to be done naturally, and willingly if it be to be (...) willingly:
and yet thy will is no less subject to his will, than thy nature is subject to
the power that created it: neither is the freedom of thy will (such as it is
now after thy fall) any more compelled in taking deliberation, than thy nature
is compelled in growing or shuming. When I speak here of freewill, I mean
not to deal with this Question whether it lie in us to choose the way of
Sa^^ation or no. For as it is a thing that surmounteth the whole nature of
mankind, and exceeds ye proportion of our (...) understandings: so must it
necessity ensue that we must be drawn by some higher cause from above, as
in a case that concerns the forsaking of our selves and of our own desires,
and not the following of them. Ageine, I intend not to take away the
extraordinary motions which God works in us, when he uses us sometimes
beyond the inclination of our nature; ^y breeding that in us by a secret
operation, which was not in us of our selves, But I speak peculiarly of these
inferior doings, which are proportionable to our wit and to the capacity of
our reason; in which things our Freewill (as may^od as it is) has ability to
exercise itself, notwithstanding that is be utterly lam^aud unable to mount up
any higher. After that manner therefore may we (...) between the Fortune of
Epicurus and the de^mie of Chrysippus, by Providence; and between casualtie
and necessity by the will of Got; and between Loocenesse and Bondage by
leaving their mouings free which yet nevertheless shall come to the end which
God has listed to appoint unto them, whatsoever windings and wreathings they
seem to themselves to make in the mean time. And as touching the destiny of
the Astrologers, who make all things subject to the wheelings about of the
Sky, and make all things to be as much of necessity as the mouings thereof:
we will leave them to plead their case against that great Learned man the
County of Mirandula, praying them to consider at least wise, whether the
great study and peynes which those great Clerks have taken to disprooue this
destiny, can by any means be fathered upon destiny.

Now then, for a small conclusion of this whole discourse, let us say that God
is a souereine Being, and a souerein mind, and that Being and Mynding are all
one in him; and therefore that as in creating things the might and power of his
Being extended even to the least things or else they had not bin at all: so the
Providence, forecast and direction of his mind extend to all things, or else
they could not continue. Let not the confusion of things which we see ^eere
below trubble us; for the greater the same is, the great^^ does Gods
providence show it self therein, as the skill of a Physician does in the
intricatenesse of a disease. But who is he that can limit the sight of the
Everlasting God? Surely not the prosperities of the wicked; for they be but
visors: nor the adversities of the godly, for they be but exercises; nor the
Deaths of the giltlesse, for it is but a poudering of their vertewes to
preserve them to the use of posterity. Nay, let not even sin it self, which
is the very evil in deed, cause any grudge of mind in us; for God Created
Nature good, but evil is sproong thereof. He Created freedom, and it is
degenerated into Loocenesse. But let us praise God for giving us powers, and
let us condemn our selves for abusing them. Let us glorify him for chastising
us by our own Loocenesse, for executing his Justice by our unjust Dealings,
and for performing the ordinance of his rightful will by our inordinate
passions. It we see a thing whereof we know not the cause; let us acknowledge
our ignorance, and not name it fortune. The causes that are furthest a sunder,
are near at hand unto him, to perform whatsoever he lists. If we do any
unreasonable thing; let us not allege necessity. He can skill to use all
things without marring them; the moouable, according to their moouings; the
things indewed with will, according to their passions; and the things indewed
with reason, according to their reasonings. In thinking to do our own will, we
bring his to pass. We be free to follow out own Nature; and our Nature is
becomme evil through sin. O wretched freedom, which brings us under such
bondage! And a^fore this nature of ours, we can neither shun it nor drive it
from us: for we be bon^^laues to it, and it to sin, and there behooves a
stronger than our selves to rid us thereof. Therefore let us pray God to bring
the freedom of our wills in bondage to his will, and to free our souls from
this hard and damnable kind of freedom, and to grant us by his grace, not as
to the wicked, to do his will in being unwilling to do it; but as to his
Children, at least wise to be willing to do it even in not doing it.

The xiiij Chapter.
That the Soul of Man is immortal, or dies not.
HIthertoo I have treated of the world that is to be conceived in
understanding, and of the sensible World (as the Platonists term them) that
is to say, of God and of this World. Now follows the examining of the Little
World (as they term it) that is to say, of man. Concerning God, we have
acknowledged him to be a Spirit: and as touching the World, we have found it to
be a body. In man we have an abridgment of both, Man is both Soul and body.
namely of God in respect of Spirit, and of the World in composition of body,
as though the Creator of purpose to set forth a mirror of his woorks, intended
to bring into one little compass both the infiniteness of his own nature,
and also the hougenesse of the whole world together. We see in man's body a
Wonderful mixture of the four Elements, the veins spreading forth like
Rivers to the uttermost members; as many instruments of sense, as theere be
sensible natures in the world; a great number of sinews, Fleshstrings, and
knitters; a Head by special privilege Directed up too Heauenward; and Hands
serving to all manner of services. Whatsoever he is that shall consider no more,
but only this instrument, without life, without sense, and without moving;
cannot but think verily that it is made to very great purpose; and he must
needs krie out as Hermes or as the Sarzin Abdala does, that man is a miracle
which far surmounteth, not only these Lower Elements, but also the very
Heaven and all the ornaments thereof. But if he could (as it were out of
himself) behold this body receiving life, and entering into the use of all his
motions with such forewardnesse, hands bestirring themselves so nimbly and
after so sundry fashions, and the Senses uttering their force so far of,
without stirring out of their place: think you not that he would be
woonderfully ravished, and so much more wonder at the said life moving and
sense, than at the body, as he woondered before at the body, to behold the
excellency of the proportion thereof above the mass of some stone? For what
comparison is there between a Lute and a Luteplayer, or between a dumb
instrument and him that makes it to sound? What would he say then if he could
afterward see how the same man being now quickened atteyneth in one moment from
the one side of the earth to the other without shifting of place; descending
down to the center of the world, and mounting up above the outtermost circle
of it both at once; present in a thousand places at one instant, embracing the
whole without touching it; kreeping upon the earth, and yet containing it;
beholding the Heavens from beneath, and being above the Heavens of Heavens
both at once? Should he not be compelled to say, that in this silly body
there dwells a greater thing than the body, greater than the earth, yea
greater than the whole world together? Then let us say with Plato, that man is
dubble; outward, and inward. The outward man is that which we see with our
eyes, which forgoeth not his shape when it is dead, no more than a Lute
forgoeth his, shape when the Luteplaier ceasseth from making it to sound,
howbeit that both life, moving, sense, and reason be out of it. The inward man
is the Soul, and that is properly the very man; which uses the body as an
instrument; whereunto though it be united by the power of God, yet does it not
remove when the body ronneth. It sees when the eyes be shut, and sometimes
sees not when the eyes be wide open: It traueleth while the body rests, and
rests when the body traueleth; that is to say, it is able of it self to
parforme his own actions, without the help of the outward man, whereas on the
contrary part the outward without the help of the inward that is to wit, the
body without the presence of the Soul, has neither sense, moving, life, no
nor continewance of being. In the outward man we have a Counterfeit of the
whole world, and if ye rip them both up by percelmeale, ye shall find a
wonderful agreement betwixt them. But my purpose in this book is not to
treat of the things that perteyne peculiarly to the body.

In the inward man we have a sum of whatsoever life sense and moving is in
all creatures, and moreover an Image or rather a shadow (for the Image is
defaced by our sin) of the Godhead it self. And that is the thing which we
have to examine in this Chapter. In Plants, we perceive that besides their
bodies which we see, there is also an inward virtue which we see not, whereby
they live, grow, bud, and bear fruit: which virtue we call the quickening
Soul, and it makes them to differ from Stones and Mettalles, which have it
not. In sensitive living things, we find the selfsame virtue, which works
while they sleep and are after a sort as the Plants; and therewithal we find
another certain virtue or power which sees, hears, smells, tastes, and
feels; which also in many of them does hoord up the things brought in by the
senses; which manner of power the Plants are void of. This do we term the
sensitive Soul, because the effects thereof are discerned and executed by the
Senses. In Man are three Abilitie^ of Soul.
In man we have both the quickening and the Sensitive, the former uttering it
self in the nourishing and increasing of him, and the later in the subtilitie
of sense and imagination, wherethrough he is both Plant and Beast together. But
yet moreover we see also a Mind which considers and beholds, which reapeth
profit of the things that are brought in by the Senses, which by his seeing
conceiueth that which it sees not; which of that which is not, gathers that
which is; and finally which pulls a man away both from the earth and from al
sensible things, yea and (after a sort) from himself too. This do we call the
reasonable Soul, and it is the thing that makes man to be man, (and not a
Plant or a brute Beast as the other two do,) and also to be the Image or
rather a shadow of the Godhead, in that (as we shall say hereafter) it is a
Spirit that may have continuance of being alone by it self without the body.
And by the way, whereas I say that the inward man has a quickening power as a
Plant has, a sensitive power as a Beast has, and a power of understanding
whereby he is a man: my meaning is not that he has three Souls but only one
Soul; that is to wit, that like as in the brute Beast the sensitive Soul
comprehends the quickening Soul; so in man the reasonable Soul
comprehends both the sensitive and the quickening, and executes the offices
of them all three, so as it both lives, feels, and reasons even as well
and after the same manner, as the mind of a man may intend to his own
householdmatters, to the affairs of the Commonweal, and to heavenly things
all at once. Or to speak more fitly, these three degrees of Souls are three
degrees of life, whereof the second exceeds and conteyneth the first, and the
third exceeds and conteyneth both the other two. The one, without the which
the body cannot live, is the Soul or life of the Plant, and is so tied to the
body, that it shows not it self in any wise out of it. The second, which
cannot live without the body, is the Soul or life of the Beast; which does
well utter forth his power and force abroad, but yet not otherwise than by the
members and instruments of the body whereunto it is tied. The third, which can
of it self live and continue without the body, but not the body without it,
is the Soul of man, which gives life inwardly to all his parts, shows
forth his life abroad in the perceiving of all things subject to Sense, and
reteyneth still his force (as shall be said hereafter) yea and increases it,
even when the strength of the body and the very liveliness of the senses
fail. And in very deed, ye shall see a man forgo all his senses one after
another as the instruments of them decay, and yet have still both life and
reason vnappayred. The cause whereof is, that some of the instruments of life
and sense do fail, but the life it self which quickens them fails not.
And therefore the Beast forgoeth not life in losing sense, but he utterly
forgoeth sense in forgoing life. And that is because life is the ground of the
abilities of sense, and the sensitive life is a more excellent life than the
quickening life, as wherein those powers and abilities are as in their root.
To be short, he that bereaueth man or beast of the use of Senses, or man of
the right use of reason, does not thereby bereave him of life; but he that
bereaueth the beast or the outward man of their life, does therewithal bereave
them of sense and reason. Therefore it is a most sure argument, that the Soul
which causes a beast to live, and the Soul that causes it to have sense, are
both one, that is to wit, one certain kind of life more lively and more
excellent than the life that is in Plants. And likewise that the Soul which
causes man to live, to have sense, and to reason, is but one, that is to wit,
one certain kind of life more excellent, more lively, and of further reach,
than the life of the Beast. But like as sense is as it were the form or
Selfebeing (if I may so term it) of the life of a beast; so is reason or
understanding the very form and Selfebeing of the Soul of man; and (to speak
properly) it is the Soul or life of the Soul, like as the apple of our eye is
the very eye of our eye. And in very deed, when the mind is earnestly
occupied, the senses are at a stay; and when the senses are ouerbusied, the
nourishment and digestion is hindered; and contrary wise: which thing could not
come to pass if the Soul were any mo than one substance, which by reason that
it is but one, cannot utter his force alike in all places at once, but yields
the less care one where so long as it is earnestly occupied anotherwhere. In
this Soul of man (which yet notwithstanding is but one) the diversity of the
powers and abilities is very apparent. The quickening power does nourish,
increase and mainteyne us; and Reason and Sense meddle not therewith, neither
have they power to impeach the working thereof. The truth whereof appears in
this, that those things are best done when our mind is at rest, and our senses
are asleep; insomuch that oftentimes we forgo the sense and moving of some
parts by some Rhewme or some Palsy, and yet the same parts cease not to be
nourished still. Also, the sensitive life sees and perceives a far of, yea
oftentimes without setting of the mind thereupon, or without considering what
the Sense conceyueth. Some men which have but weak Senses, have very quick
understanding; and likewise on the contrary part. Again, some fall into a
consumption, which ^ant not the perfect use of their Senses. Sometime the
reasonable part is so earnestly bent and occupied about the things that i^
likes of, that by the increasing of it self, it hurts and diminishes the
part that quickens. Also it stands in argument against the Senses, and
reproves them of falshoode, and concludes contrary to their information. And
it may be that the man which has his digestion perfect and his Senses sound,
has not his wit or reason sound in like case. Now, were the Soul but only
one ability, it could not be so. But now is the same divided manifestly into
wit or understanding, and will; the one serving to devise, and the other to
execute. For we understand diverse things which we will not, and we will diverse
things which we understand not: which contrary operations cannot be attributed
both to one power. Nevertheless, the uniting of all these powers together is
with such distinctnesse, and the distinguishing of them is with such union,
that ordinarily they meet all together in one selfsame action, the one of
them as readily (by all likelihood) as the other, howbeit that every of them
does his own work severally by himself, and one before another as in respect
of their objects.

Thus have we three sorts of men, according to the three powers or abilities of
the inward man. Namely the earthly man, which like the Plant myndeth nothing
but sleeping and feeding, making al his senses and al his reason to serve to
that purpose, as in whom the ear of this present life only, has devoured and
swallowed up his senses and understanding. The Sensual man (as S. Paul
himself terms him,) who is given wholly to these sensible things imbacing and
casting down his reason so far, as to make it a bondslaue to his senses and
the pleasures and delights thereof: And the reasonable man, who lives properly
in spirit and mind, who enters into himself to know himself, and goes
out of himself to behold God; making this life to serve to the atteynment of a
better, and using his Senses but as instruments and servants of his reason.
After as any of these three powers do reign and bear sway in man, that is to
wit, after as a man yields himself more to one tha^ to another of them; so
becomes he like unto the Spirits, the brute Beasts, or Plants, yea and the
very Blocks and Stones. But it is our disposition even by leynd, to be carried
away by our corrupt nature, and by the objects which hemme us in on all sides;
but as for against our nature yea or beyond our nature, our nature is not able
to do any thing at all.

Now, it is not enough for us to know that we have a Soul whereby we live,
feel, and understand, and which being but one has in it self alone so many
sundry powers or abilities: for it will be demanded of us by and by what this
Soul properly is. And soothly if I should say, I cannot tell what it is, I
should not belie my self a whit; for I should but confess mine own
ignorance, as many great learned men have done before me. And I should do no
wrong at all to the Soul it self; for since we cannot deny^ the effects
thereof, the less that we be able to declare the nature and being thereof, the
more does the excellency thereof shine forth. Again, it is a plain case, that
no thing can comprehend the thing that is greater than it self. Now, our Soul
is after a sort less than it self, inasmuch as it is wrapped up in this body,
in like wise as the man that has gyues and fetters on his feet, is after a
sort weaker than himself. Nevertheless, let us assay to satiffye such
demands as well as we can. And forasmuch as it is the Image of God, not only
in respect of the government and maintenance of the whole world, but also even
in the very nature thereof: as we said heretofore when we spoke of the nature
of GOD, if we cannot express or conceive what it is, let us at leastwise be
certified what it is not. First of all, that the Soul and the Body be not both
one thing, The Body and the Soul be not one selfsame thing.
but two very far differing things, and also that the Soul is no part of the
body, it appears of it self without further proof. For if the Soul were ye
body or a part of the body, it should grow with the body as the other parts of
the body do, and the greater that the body were, the greater also should the
Soul be. Nay, contrariwise, the body increases to a certain age and then
stays; after which age is commonly the time tha the Soul does most grow, and
those that are strongest of mind are commonly weakest of body, and the Soul is
seen to be full of liveliness in a languisshi^g body, and to grow the more
in force, by the decay of the body. The Soul then grows not with the body,
and therefore it is not the body, nor any part of the body. And whereas I
speak of growing in the Soul, by growing I mean the profiting thereof in
power and virtue, as the body grows in greatness by further enlarging.
Again, if the Soul were the body, it should lose her strength and soundness
with the body, so as the maimed in body should therewith feel also a mayme in
his understanding as well as in his members: whosoever were sick of any
disease, should also be sick in his reason: he that ^impeth or halteth,
should therewith ha^^ in Soul also: the blind man's Soul should be blind, and
the lame man's Soul should be lame. But we see contrariwise, that the maimed
and the sick, the Cripples and the blind, have their Soul whole and sound,
and their understanding perfect and cleeresighted in it self. To be short,
many a man dies whose body is sound, and differs not a whit in any part from
that it was when it was alive, and yet notwithstanding, both life, moving,
sense, and understanding are out of it. Let us say then that in the body there
was a thing which was not of the body, but was a far other thing than the
body.

Some wilful person will object here, that the force and strength of the Soul
grows with the body, as appeare^h in this that a man grown will remove that
which a child cannot, and that a child of two years old will go, which thing
a babe of two months old cannot do. But he should consider also, that if the
selfsame man or the selfsame child should have a mischaunce in his leg or
in his arm, he should thereby forgo the strength and moving thereof, whereas
yet notwithstanding his Soul should have her former force and power still to
move the other as she did before. Therefore it is to be said, not that ye child's
Soul is grown or strengthened by time; but rather that his sine was are dried
and hardened which the soul uses as strings and instruments too move withal
and therefore when age has loosened and weakened them, a man has need of a
staff to help them with, although he have as good a will to run as he had
when he was young. The soul then which moves the^ all at one beck, has the
selfsame power in infancy which it has in age, and the same in age which it
has in the prime of Youth: and the fault is only in the instrument, which is
unable to execute the operations thereof: like as the cunning of a Luteplaier
is not diminished by ye moystnesse or slacknesse of his Lute strings, nor
increased by the over high streyning and tytght standing of them; but in deed
in the one he cannot show his cunning at all, and in the other he may show
it more or less. Likewise the speech of Children comes with their teeth,
howbeit that the speech do manifestly v^ter it self first, in that they
prattle many things which they cannot pronounce: and in old men it goes away
agein with their teeth, and yet their cloquence is not abated thereby. Asfor
Demosthenes, although he surmounted all the Orators of his time, yet were
there some letters which he could not pronounce. Give unto old age or unto
infancy the same sinews and teeth, and as able and lustye Limbs and members
as youth has; and the actions which the soul does with the body and by the
body, I mean so far forth as concern the abilities of sense and lyuelynes,
shall be performed as well in one age as in another. But had thou as great
indifferency in judging of the force and power of thine own soul, as of the
cunning of a Luteplayer, (I say not by the nimblenes of his fingars which are
perchance knotted with the gout, but by the plain and sweet Harmony of his
Tabulatorie as they term it, which makes thee to deem him to have cunning in
his head, although he can no more utter it with his hanos,) so as thou
would consider how thou have in thy self a desire to go, though they feet
be not able to bear the; a discretion to judge of things that are spoken;
though thine eyes cannot convey it unto thee; a sound eloquence, though for
want of thy teeth thou cannot well express it; and which is above all the
rest, a substantial quick and heavenly reason, even when thy body is most
earthly and drooping. Thou would soon conclude that the force and power of
quickening, moving, and perceiving, is whole and sound in thy Soul, and that
the default is altogether in thy body. Insomuch that if she had a new body and
new instruments given unto her, she would be as ^ustie and cheerely as ever
she was, and that the more she perceyueth the body to decay, the more she
laboreth to retire into her self, which is a plain proof of that she is not
the body nor any part of the body, but the very life and inworker of the body.

And since it is so, That the Soul is a substance.
there needs no long skanning whether the Soul be a substance or a quality.
For, seeing that qualities have no being but in another thing than themselves;
the life which causes another thing to be, cannot be a quality. Forasmuch
then as the Soul makes a man to be a man, who otherwise should be but a
Carkesse or Caryon: doubtless (unless we will say that the only difference
which is betwixt a man and a dead Carkesse, is but in accidents) we must needs
grant that the Soul is a forming substance and a substantial form, yea and
a most excellent substance infinitely passing the outward man; as which by the
power and virtue thereof causes another thing to have being, and perfecteth
the bodily substance which seems outwardly to have so many perfections.

But hereupon inseweth another controversy, whether this substance be a
bodily or an vnbodily substance: which case requires somewhat longer
examination. Soothly, if we consider the nature of a body, it has certain
measurings, and comprehends not any thing which is not proportioned according
to the greatness and capacity thereof. For, like as it self must be feign
to have a place in another thing; so must other things occupye some certain
place in it; by reason whereof it comes to pass, that things can have no
place therein if they be greater than it, without anoying the one the other. To
be short, if the thing be less than the body that conteyneth it, the whole
body shall not conteyne it, but only some part thereof: And if it be greater,
then must some part thereof needs be out of it: for there is no measuring of
bodies but by quantity. Now we see how our Soul comprehends heaven and
earth, Bodilesse.
without anoying either other; and likewise time past present and to come,
without troubling one another; and finally innumerable places, persons, and
Towns, without combering of our understanding. The great things are there in
their full greatness, and the small things in their uttermost smalnesse; both
of them whole and sound, in the Soul whole and sound, and not by parcelmeale
or only but in part of it. Moreover, the fuller it is, the more it is able to
receive; the more things that are touched in it, the more it still coueteth; and
the greater the things be, the fitter is she to receive them even when they
be at the greatest. It follows therefore that the Soul (which after a sort is
infinite) cannot be body. And so much ye less can it so be, for that whereas
it harboreth so many and so great things in it, it self is lodged in so small
a body. Again, as a thousand diverse places are in the Soul or Mind without
occupying any place; so is the Mind in a thousand places without changing of
place; and that erewhiles not by succession of time, nor by turns, but
oftentimes altogether at one instant. Bid thy Soul or Mind go to
Constantinople, and forthwith to turn back again to Rome, and straight way
to be at Paris or Lions: Bid it pass through America, or to go about Affricke;
and it dispatcheth all these iourneys at a trice: look whether soever thou
directest it, there it is; and or ever thou call it back, it is at home
again. Now, is there a body that can be in diverse places at once, or that can
pass without removing, or that can move otherwise than in time, yea and in
such time as (within a little under or over) is proportioned both to his pace,
and to the length of the way which it has to go? Then is it certain that our
Soul is not a bodily substance; which thing appears so much the more
plainly, in that being lodged in this body which is so mouable, it remoueth not
with the body. Also it is a sure ground, that two bodies cannot mutually enter
either into other, nor conteyne either other: but the greater must always needs
conteyne, and the lesser must needs be contained. But by our Souls, we
enter, not only either into others bodies, but also either into others mynds,
so as we comprehend either other by mutual understanding, and embrace either
other by mutual loving. It follows then that this substance which is able to
receive a bodilesse thing, can be no body; and that so much the rather, for
that the body which seems to hold it, conteyneth it not. Nay verily, this
Soul of ours is so far of from being a bodily substance, and is so
manifestly a Spirit; that to lodge all things in it self, it makes them all
after a sort spiritual, and bereueth them of their bodies; and if there were
any bodylinesse in it, it were unable to enter into the knowledge of a body.
So in a Glass a thousand shapes are seen: but if the clear of the Glass had
any peculiar shape of it own, the Glass could yield none of those shapes at
all. Also all visible things are imprinted in the eye; but if the sight of the
eye had any peculiar color of it own, it would be a blemish to the sight, so
as it should either not see at all, or else all things should seem like to that
blemish. Likewise, whereas the Tongue is the discerner of all tastes; if it be
not clear but combered with humors, all things are of taste like to the
humor, so as if it be bitter, they also be bitter; and if it be watrish, they
be watrish too; yea and if it be bitter, it can not judge of bitterness it
self. That a thing may receive al shapes, all colors, and all tastes; it
behooves the same to be clear from all shapes, from all color, and from all
savor of it own. And that a thing may in understanding know and conceive all
bodies, as our Soul does, it behooves the same to be altogether bodylesse it
self; for had it any bodylinesse at all, it could not receive any body into it.
If we look yet more nearly into the nature of a body, we shall find that
no body receives into it the substantial form of another body, without losing
or altering his own, ne passes from one form into another, without the
marring of the first; as is to be seen in wood when it receives fire, in
seeds when they spring forth into bud, and so in other things. What is to be
said then of man's soul, which receives and conceyueth the forms and shapes
of al things without corrupting his own, and moreover becomes the perfecter
by the more receiving? For the more it receives, the more it understands;
and the more it understands, the more perfect is it.

If it be a bodily substance, from whence is it and of what mixture? If it be
of the four Elements, how can they give life, having no life of themselves? Or
how can they give understanding, having no sense? If it be of the mixture of
them, how may it be said that of diverse things which have no being of
themselves, should be made a thing that has being? Or that of diverse outsides
should be made one body? or of diverse bodies, one Soul? or of diverse deaths,
one life? or of diverse darknesses, one light? Nay rather, why say we not that
he which beyond nature has made the mixture of these bodies, has for the
perfecting of our body, breathed a Soul also into the body? To be short, the
property of a body is to suffer, and the property of our Soul is to do. And
if the body be not put forth by some other thing than it self, it is a very
block; whereas the mind that is in our Soul ceasseth not to stir up and
down in it self, though it have nothing to move it from without. Therefore it
is to be concluded by these reasons and by the like, that our Soul is a
bodylesse substance, notwithstanding that it is united to our body.

And hereupon it follows also, Vnmateriall.
that our Soul is not any material thing, forasmuch as matter receives not
any form or shape but according to his own quantity, and but only one form
at once, whereas our Soul receives all forms without quantity, come there
never so many at once or so great. Again, no matter admits two contrary
forms at once; but our Soul contrariwise comprehends and receives them
together, as fire and water, heat and cold, white and black; and not only
together, but also the better by the matching and laying of them together. To
be short, seeing that the more we depart from matter, the more we
understand; surely nothing is more contrary to the substance of ou^ Soul, than
is the nature of matter. Furthermore, if this reasonable Soul of ours is
neither a bodily nor a material thing, nor depending upon matter in the best
actions thereof: then must it needs be of it self, and not proceed either from
body or from matter. For what does a body bring forth but a body; and matter
but matter; and material but materialles? And therefore it is an vnmateriall
substance, which has being of it self.

But let us see whether the same be corruptible and mortal or no. The Soul
has being of it sel^. Plutark in his tre^y^e why God deferreth the punishment
of the wicked: Incorruptible.
Soothly, if Plutarke be to believed, it is in vain to dispute thereof. For
he teaches, that the doctrine of Gods providence, and the immortality of our
Souls are so linked together, that the one is as an appendant to the other.
And in very deed, to what purpose were the World created, if there were no body
to behold it? Or to what end behold we the Creator in the world, but to serve
him? And why should we serve him upon no hope? And to what purpose has he
indewed us with these rare gifts of his, which for the most part do but put
us to pain and trouble in this life: if we perish like the brute Beast or the
Herbs, which know him not? Howbeit, for the better satisfying of the silly
Souls which go on still like witless Beasts, without taking so much leisure
in all their life, as once to enter into themselves; let us indeuer here by
lively reasons to paynt out unto the^ again their true shape, which they
labor to deface with so much filthiness. The Soul of man (as I have said
before) is not a body, neither does it increase or decrease with the body: but
contrariwise the more the body decaieth, the more does the understanding
increase; and the nearer that the body draws unto death, the more freely does
ye mind understand; and the more that the body abateth in flesh, the more
woorkfull is the mind. And why then should we think, that the thing which
becomes the stronger by the weakness of the body, and which is advanced by
the decay of the body, should return to dust with the body? A man's Senses
fail because his eyes fail, and his eyes fail because the Spirits of them
fail: but the blind man's understanding increases, because his eyes are not
busied: and the old man's reason becomes the more perfect by the loss of his
sight. Therefore why say we not that the body fails the Soul, and not the
Soul the body; and that the Glasses are out of the Spectacles but the eysight
is still good? Why should we deem the Soul to be forgone with the Senses? If
the eye be the thing that sees, and the ear the thing that hears; why do
we not see things dubble, and hear sounds dubble, seeing we have two eyes and
two ears? It is the Soul then that sees and hears; and these which we
take to be our senses, are but the instruments of our senses. And if when our
eyes be shut or picked out, we then behold a thousand things in our mind; yea
and that our understanding is then most quicksighted, when the quickest of our
eysight is as good as quenched or stark dead: how is it possible that the
reasonable Soul should be tied and bound to the senses? What a reason is it
to say that the Soul dies with the senses, seeing that the true senses do
then grow and increase, when the instruments of sense do dye? And what a
thing were it, to say that a Beast is dead, because he has lost his eyes, when
we our selves see that it lives after it has forgone the eyes? Also I have
proved that the Soul is neither the body, nor an appertnance of the body.
Since it is so, why measure we that thing by the body, which measures al
bodies; or make that to dye with the body, whereby the bodies that dyed yea
many hundred years ago, do after a certain manner live still? Or what can
hurt that thing, whom nothing hurts or hinders in the body? Though a man
lose an arm, yet does his Soul abide whole still. Let him forgo the one
half of his body, yet is his Soul as sound as before: for it is whole in it
self and whole in every part of it self, united in it felfe and in the own
substance, and by the force and power thereof it sheadeth it self into all
parts of the body. Though the body rot away by peecemeale, yet abides the
Soul all one and undiminished. Let the blud dreyne out, the moving wex weak,
the senses fail, and the strength perish; and yet abides the mind
nevertheless sound and lively even to the end. Her house must be pierced
through on all sides, ere she be discouraged; her walls must be battered
down ere she fall to fleeting; and she never forsakes her lodging, till no
room be left her to lodge in. True it is that the brute Beasts forgo both
life and action with their blud. But as for our Soul (if we consider the
matter well) it is then gathered home into it self; and when our senses are
quenched, then does it most of all labor to surmount it self: woorking as
goodly actions at the time that the body is at a point to fail it, yea and
oftentimes far goodlyer also, than ever it did during the whole lifetyme
thereof. As for example, it takes order for it self, for our household, for
the Commonweal, and for a whole Kingdom; and that with more uprightness,
godliness, wisdom, and moderation, than ever it did before, yea and perchance
in a body so forspe^^^, so bare, so consumed, so withered without and so
putrified within, that whosoever looks upon him sees nothing but earth, and
yet to hear him speak would ravish a man up to heaven, yea and above heaven.
Now, when a man sees so lively a Soul in so weak and wretched a body, may he
not say as is said of the hatching of Chickens, that the shell is broken, but
there comes forth a Chicken?

Also let us see what is the ordinary cause that things perish. Fire does
eyether go out for want of nourishment, or is quenched by his contrary which
is water. Water is resolved into air by fire, which is his contrary. The cause
why the Plant dies, is extremity of cold or drought, or unseasonable
cutting, or vyolent plucking up. Also the living wight dies through
contrariety of humors, or for want of food, or by feeding upon some thing
that is against the nature of it, or by outward vyolence. Of all these causes,
which can we choose to have any power against our Soul? I say against the
Soul of man, which (notwithstanding that it be united to matter and to a
body) is it self a substance vnbodily, vnmateriall, and only conceiuable in
understanding? The contrariety of things? Nay, what can be contrary to that
which lodges the contraries alike equally in himself? which understands the
one of them by the other? which coucheth them all under one skill? and (to be
short) in whom the contrarieties themselves abandon their contrariety, so as
they do not any more pursewe but insewe one another? Fire is hot, and water
cold. Our bodies mislike these contraries, and are grieved by them; but our
mind linketh them together without either burning or cooling it self; and it
sets the one of them against the other to know them the better. The things
which destroy one another through the whole world, do maintain one another in
our mynds. Again, nothing is more contrary to peace then war is; and yet
man's mind can skill to make or mainteyne peace in preparing for war, and to
lay earnestly for war in seeking or inioying of peace. Even death it self
(which dispatcheth our life) cannot be contrary to the life of our Soul: for
it seeks life by death, and death by life. And what can that thing meet
withal in the whole world, that may be able to overthrow it, which can
inioyne obedience to things most contrary? What then? Want of food? How can
that want food in the world, which can skill to feed on the whole world? Or
how should that forsake food, which the fuller it is, so much the hungryer it
is; and the more it has digested, the better able it is to digest? The bodily
wight feeds upon some certain things, but our mind feeds upon all things.
Take from it the sensible things, and the things of understanding abide with it
still: bereave it of earthly things, and the heavenly remain abundantly. To be
short, abridge it of all worldly things, yea and of the world it self, and
even then does it feed at greatest ease, and makes best cheer agreeable to
his own nature. Also the bodily wight fills it self to a certain measure,
and delights in some certain things. But what can fill our mind? Fill it as
full as ye can with the knowledge of things, and it is still eager and sharp
set to receive more. The more it takes in, the more it still craves: and yet
for all that, it never feels any rawnesse or lack of digestion. What shall I
say more? discharge our understanding from the mynding of it self, and then
does it live in him and of him in whom all things do live. Again, fill it
with the knowledge of it self, and then does it feel it self most empty, and
sharpest set upon desire of the other. Now then, can that dye or decay for want
of food, which cannot be glutted with any thing, which is nourished and
mainteyned with all things, and which lives in very deed upon him by whom
all the things which we wonder at here beneath are vphild?

And what else is vyolence, but a iustling of two bodies together? and how can
there be any such between a body and a spiritual substance? yea or of two
spirits one against another, seeing that oftentimes when they would destroy
one another, they uphold one an other? And if the Soul cannot be pushed at,
neither inwardly nor outwardly: is there any thing in nature that can naturally
hurt it? No: but it may perchance be weakened by the very force of his
encounter, as we see it does befall to our senses. For the more excellent and
the more sensible the thing is in his kind which ye sense receives, so much
the more also is the sense it self offended or grieved therewith. As for
example, the feeling, by fire; the taste, by harshnesse; the smelling, by
savors; the hearing, by the hideousness of noise, whether it be of
Thunderclappe or of the falling of a River; and the sight, by looking upon the
Sun, upon Fire, and upon all things that have a glistering brightness. I
omit, that in the most of these things, it is not properly the sense it self,
but the outward instrument of sense only that is offended or hurt. But let us
see if there be the like in our reasonable Soul. Nay, contrariwise the more of
understanding and excellency that the thing is, the more does it refresh and
comfort our mind. If it be dark so as we understand it but by halues, it
hurts us not; but yet does it not delight us. Nay, as we increase in
understanding it, so does it like us the better; and the higher it is, the more
does it stir up the power of our understanding, and (as ye would say) reach
us the hand to draw us to the atteynement thereof. As for them that are
dimsighted, we forbid them to behold the things that are ouerbright. But as
for them that are of rawest capacity, we offer them the things that are most
vnderstandable. When the sense begins to perceive most sharply, then is it
feign to give over, as if it felt the very death of it self. Contrariwise,
when the mind begins to understand, then is it most desirous to hold on
still. And whereof comes that, but that our senses work by bodily
instruments, but our mind works by a bodilesse substance which needs not
the help of the body. And seeing that the nature, the nourishment, and the
actions of our Soul are so far differing, both from the nature, nourishment,
and actions of the body, and from all that ever is done or wrought by the body:
can there be any thing more childish than to deem our Soul to be mortal by
the abating and decaying of our senses, or by the mortality of our bodies? Nay
contrariwise it may be most soundly and substantially concluded thereupon, that
man's Soul is of it own nature immortal, seeing that all death as well
vyolent as natural comes of the body and by the body.

Let us see further what death or corruption is. What is death
It is (say they) a separating of the matter from his form. And forasmuch as
in man the Soul is considered to be the form, and the body to be as the
matter: the separation of the Soul from the body is commonly called Death.
Now then, what death can there be of the Soul, since it is vnmaterial as I
have said before, and a form that abides of it self? For (as one says) a man
may take away the roundnesse or squarenesse from a table of Copper, because
they have no abiding but in ye matter: but had they such a round or square
form, as might have an abiding without matter or stuff wherein to be, out of
doubt such form or shape should continue for ever. Nay (which more is) how can
that be the corrupter of a thing, which is the perfection thereof? The less
corsinesse a man has, the more has he of reason and understanding. The less
our mynds be tied to these bodily things, the more lively and cheerful be
they. At a word, the full and perfect life thereof, is the full and utter
withdrawing thereof from the body and whatsoever the body is made of. All
these things are so clear as they need no proof. Now, we know that every
thing works according to the proper being thereof, and that the same which
perfecteth the operations of a thing, perfecteth the being thereof also. It
follows therefore, that since the separation of the body from the Soul, and
of the form from the matter, perfecteth the operation or working of the Soul
(as I have said before) it does also make perfect and strengthen the very being
thereof, and therefore cannot in any wise corrupt it. And what else is dying but
to be corrupted? And what else is corrupting, but suffering? And what else is
suffering, but receiving? And how can that which receives all things without
suffering, receive corruption by any thing? Fire corrupts or marreth our
bodies, and we suffer in receiving it. So does also extreme cold: but if we
suffered nothing by it, it could not freese us. Our senses likewise are marred
by the excessive force of the things which they light upon. And that is because
they receive and perceive the thing that greeueth them, and for that the manner
of their behauing of themselves toward their objects, is subject to suffering.
But as for the reasonable Soul, which receives al things after one manner,
that is to wit, by way of understanding, wherethrough it always works and is
never wrought into; how is it possible for it to corrupt or mar it self?

For what is the thing whereat our Soul suffers aught in the substance
thereof, I mean whereby the substance of our Soul is any whit impaired or
hurt by mynding or conceyuing the same in understanding? As little does the
fire hurt it as the air, and the air as the fire. As little hurt receives it
by the frozen ice of Norwey, as by the scorching sands of Affricke. As little
also does vice anoye it as virtue. For vice and virtue are so far of from
incombering the substance of the Soul, that our mind does never conceive or
understand them better, than by setting them together one against another. That
thing therefore which does no whit appayre it self, but takes the ground of
perfecting it self by all things, can not be marred or hurt by any thing.

Agein, what is death? The uttermost point of moving, and the uttermost bound
of this life. For even in living we dye, and in dying we live, and there is not
that step which we set down in this life, which does not continewally step
foreward unto death, after the manner of a Dyall or a Clock, which mounting up
by certain degrees forgoeth his moving in moving from Minute to Minute. Take
away moving from a body, and it does no more live. Now let us see if the soul
also be carried with the same moving. If it be carried with the same moving, then
does it undoubtedly move therewithal. Nay, contrariwise, whether the mind rest,
or whether it be buzyed about the proper operations thereof, it is not
perceived either by any panting of heart, or by any beating of pulses, or by any
breathing of Lungs. It is then as a Ship that carries us away with it,
whether we walk or sit still; the stickingfast whereof or the tying thereof to
a post, hinders not our going up and down in it still. Ageine, if the Soul
be subject to the final corruption of the body, then is it subject to the
alterations thereof also; and if it be subject to the alterations, it is
subject to time also. For alterations or chaunges, are spices, or rather
consequents of moving, and moouings are not made but in time. Now man in
respect of the body has certain full points or stoppes, at the which he
receives manifest chaunges, and thereafter grows or decays. But commonly
where the decay of the body begins, there begins the cheef strength of
the mind! Houbeit that in some men, not only their chinnes are covered with
down, but also their beards become gray, whose minds for want of exercise,
show no sign at all either of rypenesse or growing. Moreover, time (as in
respect of the body) cannot be called again, but in respect of the mind it is
always present. Yea and time perfecteth, accomplisheth, and increases our
mind, and after a sort renews and refressheth it from day to day, whereas
contrariwise it forweareth, wassheth away and quight consumes, both it self,
and the body with the life thereof. It follows then that the reasonable Soul
is not subject to time, nor consequently to any of the chaunges and corruptions
that accompanye time. Nay we may say thus much more; That nothing in the whole
World is nurrished with things better than itself; neither does any of them
conteyne greater things than itself; But the things that are corruptible do
live of corruptible things, and cannot live without corrupting them: as for
example, beasts live by herbs, men by beasts, and sofoorth. And therefore
things which live by incorruptible things, and can so receive and digest them,
as to turn them into the nurrishment of their nature, and yet not corrupt
them; are incorruptible them selves to. Now the Soul of man, I mean the
reasonable soul or mind, conceiueth reason and truth, and is fed and
strengthened with them. And reason and truth are things unchangeable, not
subject to time, place or alteration, but stedye, unchangeable, and
everlasting. For that twice two be four, and that there is the same reason in
the proportion of eight unto six that is of four unto three, or that in a
Tryangle, the three inner angles are equal with the too right angles; and such
like; are truethes which neither years nor thousands of years can change; as
true at this day, as they were when Euclyde first spoke them. And so forth of
other things. It follows then yt the Soul comprehending reason and truth,
which are things free from corruption, cannot in any wise be subject to
corruption.

Agein, who is he of all men that desires not to be immortal? And how could
any man desire it, if he understood not what it is? Or how could he be able to
understand it, unless it were possible for him to atteyne unto it? Surely none
of us coueteth to be beginninglesse, for none of us is so; neither can any of
us be so. And as we cannot so be, so also can we not comprehend what it is. For
who is he that is not at his wits end, but only to think upon eternity
without beginning? On the contrary part there is not so bace a mind which
coueteth not to live for ever; insomuch that whereas we look not for it by
nature, we seek to obtain it by skill and policy, some by books, some by
Images, and some by other devices; and even the grossest sort can well imagine
in themselves what immortality is, and are able both to conceive it and to
believe it. Whence comes this, but that our souls being created cannot
conceive an euerlastingnesse without beginning, and yet nevertheless, that
forasmuch as they be created immortal, they do well conceive an immortality or
euerlastingnes without end? And whereto serves this universal desire, if it be
not natural? or how is it natural if it be in vain? and not only in vain,
but also too bring us to Hell and to Torment? Let us wade yet deeper. Who can
dispute or once so much as doubt whether the Soul be immortal or no, but he
that is capable of immortality? And who can understand what difference is
betwixt mortal and immortal, but he that is immortal? Man is able to
discern the difference between that which is reason, and that which is not,
and thereupon we term him reasonable. Whosoever would hold opinion that a man
is not reafonable, should need none other disproofe than his own disputing
thereof; for he would go about to prove it by reason. Man can skill to discern
the mortal natures from the immortal; And therefore we may well say he is
immortal. For he that should dispute to the contrary, shall be driven to bring
such reasons, as shall of themselves make him to prove himself immortal.
Thou say the Soul can not be immortal: and why? Because (say thou (that
to be so, it would behoue it to work severally by it self from the body,
When thou think that in thy mind; consider what thy body does at the same
time. Nay yet further, who has taught thee so much of the immortal nature, if
thou thy self be nor immortal? Or what worldly wight can say what the
inwoorking of a reasonable wight is, but the wight which in it self has the
use of reason?

Yet say thou still, if the Soul be immortal, it is free from such and
such passions. How enterest thou so far into the Nature that is so far
above thee, if thou thy self be mortal? All the reasons which thou
alledgest against the immortality of the soul, do feight directly to the
proof of it. For if thy reason mounted no higher than to the things that are
mortal, thou should know neither mortal nor immortal. Now it is not some
one covetous man above all other, that desires immortality, nor some one man
excelling all others in wisdom, that comprehends it, but al mankind without
exception. It is not then some one several skill or some one natural
property, that makes such difference between man and man as we see to be
between many, but rather one selfsame nature common to all men, whereby they
be all ma^^ to differ from other living wights, which by no deed do show any
desire too ouerliue themselves, ne know how to live, and therefore their Lives
do vanish away with their blood, and is extinguished with their bodies. If
ever thou have looked to dye, consider what discourse thou made then in thy
mind: thou could never persuade thy conscience nor make thy reason to
conceive, that thy Soul should dye with the Body; but even in the selfsame
time when it disputes against it self, it shifteth it self I wot not how
from all thy conclusions, and falls too consider in what state it shall be,
and where it shall become when it is out of the body. The Epicure that has
disputed of it all his life long, when he comes to death, bequeatheth a
yearly pension for the keeping of a yearly feast on the day of his birth. I
pray you to what purpose serve feastings for the birth of a Swyne, seeing he
esteems himself to be no better than so? Nay what else is this, than a crying
out of his Nature against him, which with one word confuteth all his vain
arguments? Another labors by all means possible, to blot out in himself
the opinion of immortality; and because he has lived wickedly in this world,
he will needs bear himself on hand, that there is no Justice in the world
tocome. But then is the time that his own nature waketh, and starteth up as it
were out of the bottom of a water, and at that instant painteth again before
his eyes, the selfsame thing which he took so much pains to deface. And in
good sooth, what a number have we seen, which having been despisers of all
Religion, have at the hour of death bin glad to vow their Souls to any Saint
for relief; so clear was then the presence of the life to come before their
eyes. I had lever (said Zeno) to see an Indian burn himself cheerfully,
Cleu^. lib. 1.
than to hear all the Philosophers of the world discoursing of the immortality
of the Soul; and in very deed it is a much stronger and better concluded
argument. Nay then, let us rather say, I had lever see an Atheist or an Epicure
witnessing the immortality of the Soul, and willingly taking an honorable
farewell of nature upon a Scaffold, than to hear all the Doctors of the world
discoursing of it in their Pulpits. For whatsoever the Epicures say there, they
speak it advisedly and (as ye would say) fresh and fasting; whereas all that
ever they have spoken all their life before, is to be accounted but as the
words of Drunkards, that is to wit, of men besotted and fallen asleep in the
delights and pleasures of this world, where the Wine and the excess of meat,
and the vapors that fumed up of them did speak, and not the men themselves.
What shall I say more? Three lives i^ Man.
I have told you already that in ye inward man there are (as ye would say)
three men; the living, the sensitive, and the reasonable. Let us say therefore
that in the same person there are three lives continued from one to another:
namely, the life of the Plant, the life of the Beast, and the life of the Man
or of the Soul. So long as a man is in his moothers womb, he does but only
live and grow; his Spirit seems to sleep, and his senses seem to be in a
slumber, so as he seems to be no thing else than a Plant. Nevertheless, if
ye consider his eyes, his ears, his tongue, his senses, and his mouings, you
will easily judge that he is not made to be for ever in that prison where he
neither sees nor hears, nor has any room to walk in, but rather that he
is made to come forth into an opener place, where he may have what to see and
behold, and wherewith to occupye all the powers which we see to be in him. As
soon as he is come out, he begins to see, to feel, and to move, and by
little and little falls to the perfect using of his limbs, and finds in
this world a peculiar object for every of them, as visible things for the eye,
sounds for his hearing, bodily things for his feeling, and so forth. But
besides all this, we find there a mind; which by the eyes as by windows
beholds the world, and yet in all the world finding not any one thing worthy
to rest wholly upon, mounteth up to him that made it; which mind like an
Empress lodges in the whole world, and not alonly in this body; which by the
senses (and oftentimes also without the senses) mounteth above the senses, and
streyneth it self to go out of it self, as a child does to get out of his
mothers womb. And therefore we ought surely to say, that this Mind or Reason
ought not to be ever in prison. That one day it shall see clearly, and not by
these dim and clowdie spectacles: That it shall come in place where it shall
have the true object of understanding: and that he shall have his life free
from these fetters and from all the affections of the body. To be short, that
as man is prepared in his moothers womb to be brought forth into the world;
^o is he also after a sort prepared in this body and in this world, to live in
another world. We then understand it, when by nature it behooves us to depart
out of the world. And what child is there which (if nature did not by her
cunning drive him out,) would of himself come out of his Covert, or that
comes not out as good as forlorn and half dead; or that if he had at that
time knowledge and speech, would not call that death, which we call birth; and
that a departure out of life, which we call the entrance into it? As long as
we be there, we see nothing though our eyes be open. Many also do not so much
as stir, except it be at some sudden scaring or some other like chance;
and as for those that stir, they know not that they have either sense or
moving. Why then should we think it strange, that in this life our
understanding sees so little, that many men do never mind the immortal
nature, until they be at the last cast, yea and some think not themselves to
have any such thing, howbeit that even by so thinking they show themselves to
have part thereof? And imagine we that the unborn babe has not as much ado
by nature to leave the poor skin that he is wrapped in, as we have hinderance
in our senses and in our imprisoned reason, when we be at the point to leave
the goods and pleasures of this world, and the very flesh it self which
holds us as in a grave? Or had the babe some little knowledge; would he not
say that no life were comparable to the life where he then is, as we say there
is no life to the life of this world wherein we be? Or would he not account the
stage of our senses for a fable, as a great sort of us account the stage that
is prepared for our Souls? Yes surely: and therefore let us conclude where we
began, namely that man is both inward and outward. In the outward man, which is
the body, he resembles the being and the proportion of all the parts of the
world. And in the inner man he resembles whatsoever ky^nd of life is in all
things or in any thing that bears life in the world. In his moothers womb he
lives the life of a Plant, howbeit with this further, that he has a certain
commencement of sense and moving which exceed the Plant, and do put him in a
readynesse to be indewed with Senses as a Beast is. In this life he has sense
and moving in their perfection, which is yt property of a sensitive wight; but
yet besides these, he has also a beginning to reason and understand, which are
a beginning of another life such as the sensitive wight has not, and this life
is to be perfected in another place. In the life to come he has his actions
free and full perfected, a large ground to work upon able to suffice him to
the full, and a light to his understanding in stead of a light to the eye. And
like as in coming into this world, he came as it were out of another world; so
in going yet into another world he must also go out of this world. He comes
out of the first world into the second, as it were failing in nourishment, but
growing in strength unto moving and sense: and he goes out of the second into
the third, failing in senses and moving, but growing in reason and
understanding. Now, seeing we call the passage out of the first world into the
second a birth, what reason is it that we should call the passage out of the
second into the third, a death? To be short, he that considers how all the
actions of man's mind tend to the time to come, without possibility of staying
upon the present time, how pleasant and delightful soever it be: we may well
discern by them all, that his being (which in every thing (as says Aristotle)
follows the working thereof) is also wholly bent toward the time to come; as
who would say this present life were unto it but as a narrow grindle, on the
further side whereof (as it were on the bank of some stream or running
water,) he were to find his true dwelling place and very home in deed.

But now is it time to see what is said to the contrary: Objections.
wherein we have to consider eftsoons that which we spoke of before; namely
that if all that ever is in us were transitory and mortal, we should not be
so witty to examine the Immortality as we be: for of Contraries the skill is
all one. If a man were not mortal, that is to say, if he had no life, he could
not dispute of the mortal life; neither could he speak of the Immortal, if he
himself also were not Immortal. Therefore let us go back retryue. Some man
will say, that the Soul dies with the body, because the Soul and the body
are but one thing, and he believes that they be both but one, because he sees
no more but the body. This argument is all one with theirs, which denied that
there is any God, because they saw him not. But yet by his doings thou may
perceive that there is a God: discern likewise by the doings of thy soul,
that thou haste a Soul. For in a dead body thou see the same parts remain,
but thou see not the same doings that were in it before. When a man is dead,
his eye sees nothing at all, and yet is there nothing changed of his eye: but
while he is alive it sees infinite things that are diverse. The power then
which sees is not of the body. Yet notwithstanding how lively and
quickesighted so ever the eye be; it sees not it self. Wonder not therefore
though thou have a soul, and that the same soul see not it self. For if thine
eysight saw itself; it were not a power or ability of seeing, but a visible
thing: likewise if thy Soul saw itself, it were no more a Soul that is to
say the woorker and quickener of the body, but a very body, unable to do any
thing of it self, and a massy substance subject to suffering. For we see
nothing but the body and bodily substances. But in this thou perceiuest
somewhat else than a body, (as I have said before) that if thine eye had any
peculiar color of it own, it could not discern any other color than that.
Seeing then that thou conceyuest so many diverse bodies at once in imagination:
needs must thou have a power in thee which is not a body. Be it (say they) that
we have a power of sense; yet have we not a power of reason; for that which we
call the power of reason or understanding, is nothing but an excellency or
rather a consequence of sense, insomuch that when sense dies, the residew
dies therewith also. Soothely in this which thou haste said, thou haste
surmounted sense; which thing thou had not done, if thou had nothing in
thee beyond sense. For whereas thou say, if the sense dye, the rest dies
also; it is a reason that proceeds from one term to another, and it is a
gathering of reasons which conclude one thing by another. Now the senses do in
deed perceive their objects, but yet how lively so ever they be, they reason
not. We see a Smoke; so far extends the sense. But if we infer,
therefore there must needs be fire, and thereupon seek who was the kindler
thereof: that surmounteth the ability of sense. We here a piece of Music;
that may any beast do as well as we. But his hearing of it is but as of a bare
sound; whereas our hearing thereof is as of an harmony, and we discern the
cause of the concords and discords, which either delight or offend our sense.
The thing yt hears the sound is the sense; but the thing that judges of that
which the sense conceyueth, is another thing than the sense. The like is to be
said of smelling, tasting, and feeling. Our smelling of sents, our tasting of
savors, and our feeling of substances, is in deed the work of our Senses.
But as for our judging of ye inward virtue of ye thing by the outward sent
thereof, or of the wholsomnes or vnwholsomnes of food by the taste thereof, or
of the whotnesse or vehemency of a fever by feeling the pulse; yea and our
proceeding even into the very bowels of a man, whether the eye being the
quickest of all senses is not able to atteyne; surely it is the work of a
more mighty power than the sense is. And in very deed there are beasts which
do here, see, smell, taste, and feel much better and quicklyer than man does.
Yet notwithstanding none of them conferreth the contraries of colors, sounds,
sents and savors; none sorteth them out to the serving one of another, or to
the serving of themselves. Whereby it appears, that man excels the Beasts
by another power than the Senses; and that whereas a man is a Peynter, a
Musician, or a Physician; he has it from elsewhere than from his senses. Nay, I
say further, that oftentimes we conclude clean contrary to the report of our
senses. Our eye perchauce tells us that a Tower which we see afar of is
round, whereas our reason deemeth it to be square: or that a thing is small,
which our reason tells us is great: or that the ends of lives in a long
walk do meet in a point, whereas our reason certifieth us that they run
ryghtfoorth with equal distance one from another. For want of this discretion,
certain Elephants (says Vitellio) which were passing over a long bridge,
turned back being deceived; and yet they wanted not sight no more than we do.
But they that led them were not deceived. Their Leaders then besides their
eysight, had in them another virtue or power which corrected their sight, and
therefore ought to be of higher estimation. In like ^ase is it with the rest of
ye other senses. For our hearing tells us that the thunderclappe is after the
lyghtening; but skill assures us that they be both together. For there is a
certain power in us, which can skill to discern what proportion is between
hearing and seeing. Also the tongue of him that has an Agew, bears him on hand
that even sugre is bi^^er, which thing he knows by his reason to be untrue.
To be short, those which have their senses most quick and ly^ely, be not of
the greatest wisdum and understanding. A man therefore differs from a beast,
and excels men by some other power than sense. For whereas it is commonly
said, that such as have seen most are commonly of greatest skill: we see that
many have traueled far both by sea and land, which have come home as wise as
they wentfoorth. A horse has as good eyes as he that rydes upon him, and yet
for all his traueling, neither he nor paraduenture his Ryder whom he bears
become any whit the wyser by that which they have seen: whereby it appears
that it is not enough to see things unless a man do also mind them to his
benefit.

Now there is great difference between the lyuelynes of the Sense, and the
power that governs the Sense; like as the report of a Spy is one thing, and
the Spy himself is another, and the wisdum of the Captain that receives the
report of the Spy is a third. Nay, who can deny, that Sense and Reason are
diverse things; or rather who wilnot grant, that in many things they be clean
contrary? Sense bids us shun and eschew greef; whereas Reason wills us to
profer our leg sometime to the Surgion to be cut of. Sense plucketh our hand
out of the fire, and yet we our selves put fire to our bare skin. He that
should see a Sceuola burn of his own hand, without so much as once gnashing
his teeth at it, would think he were utterly senseless: so mightily does
Reason ouerrule sense. To be short, Sense has his peculiar inclination, which
is appetite; and Reason likewise has his, which is will. And like as reason
does oftentimes ouerrule sense and is contrary to it; so will corrects the
sensual appetyte or lust that is in us, and warreth against it. For in an Agew
we covet to drink, and in an Apoplexy we covet to sleep, and in hungre we
covet to eat: and yet from all those things does our will restreyne us. The
more a man follows his lust, the less is he led by will: and the more he
stands upon the pleasing of his Senses, the less reason uses he ordinarily.

Again, let us consider the brute Beasts which have this sensitive part as
well as we. If we have no more than that, how comes it to pass that a little
child drives whole flocks and herds of them whether he lists, and
sometimes whether they would not? Whereof comes it that every of them in
their kind, do all live, nestle, and sing after one sort; whereas men have
their laws. Commonweales, manners of buylding, and forms of reasoning, not
only diverse, but also commonly contrary? Now, what can harber these
contrarieties together, but only that which has not any thing contrary unto
it, and wherein all contrary things do lay away their contrariety? Surely it
is not the Sense that can do it, whose proper or peculiar object is most
contrary to the sense. Besides this (as I have said before) whereas we conceive
wisdom, skill, virtue, and such other things which are all bodilesse, our
senses have none other thing to work upon, than the qualities of bodily
substances: And whereas we make universal rules of particular things; the
Senses atteyne no further than to the particular things themselves: And whereas
we conclude of the causes by their effects; our Senses perceive no more but the
bare effects: And whereas concerning the things that belong to understanding,
the more vnderstandable they be, the more they refresh us; Contrariwise, the
stronger that the sensible things are, the more do they offend the Sense: To be
short, the selfsame thing which we speak in behalf of the Senses,
proceeds from elsewhere than from the Senses. And we will easily discern,
that he which denies that besides the common Sense there is in man a reason or
understanding, distinct and severed from the Sense, is void both of
understanding and of Sense.

But see here a gross reason of theirs. This reason or power of understanding
(say they) which is in man, is corruptible as well as the power of perceiving
by the Senses. I think I have proved the contrary already; nevertheless,
let us examine their reasons yet further. The form or shape of every thing
(say they) does perish with the matter. Now, the Soul is as ye would say ye
form or shape of the body: therefore it corrupts with the body. This argument
were rightly concluded, if it were meant of the material form. But I have
proved that the Soul is vnmateriall, and has a continuance of it self. And
in deed the more it is discharged of matter, the more it reteyneth his own
peculiar form. Therefore the corrupting of the matter touches not the Soul
at all. Again, if men's Souls live (say they) after their bodies, then are they
infinite; for the world is without beginning and without ending, and (as we
know) nature can away with no infinite thing: therefore they live not after
their bodies. Yes say I; for I have proved that the world had a beginning, and
that with so substantial reasons, as thou art not able to disprove. Therefore
it follows that the inconvenience which thou alledgest can have no place.
Another says, If dead men's Souls live still, why come they not to tell us so?
And he thinks he has stumbled upon a woonderful subtle devise. But how does
this follow in reason? There has not come any man unto us from the Indies of
a long time: ergo there be no Indies. May not the same argument serve as well
to prove that we our selves are not, because we never went thither? Again,
what intercourse is there between things that have bodies, and things that
have no bodies; or between heaven and earth, considering that there is so small
intercourse even between men, which live all under one selfsame Sun? He that
is made a Magistrate in his own Country, does not willingly return to the
place of his banishment. Likewise the Soul that is lodged in the lap of his
God, and come home into his native soil, forgoeth the desire of these lower
things, which to his sight beholding them from above, are less than the point
of a Needle. On the other side, he that is put in close prison, (how desirous
soever he be) cannot go out; so the Soul which is in the Iayle of his
souereine Lord God, has no respit or sportingtyme to come tell us what is done
there. Unto the one, the beholding of the Everlasting God is as a Paradize
wherein he is wiling to remain; and unto the other, his own condemnation is
an imprisonment of his will. But we would have God to send both the one and
the other unto us to make us to believe. As who would say, it stood him
greatly on hand to have us to believe, and not rather us yt we should believe.
And in effect what else is all this, but a desiring yt some man might return
into his mothers womb again, to encourage young babes against the pinches and
pains which they abide in the birth, whereof they would be as shye as we be
of death, if they had the like knowledge of them? But let us let such vanities
pass, and come to the ground.

Ye bear us on hand (say they) that the Soul of man is but one, though it
have diverse powers. Whereof we see the sensitive and the growing powers to be
corrupted and to perish: therefore it should seem that the understanding or
reasonable power also should do the like. At a word, this is al one as if a
man should say, you tell me that this man is both a good man, a good
Swoordplayer, and a good Luteplayer altogether; and that because his sword
falls out of his hand, or his hand itself becomes Lame, therefore he cannot be
a good or honest man still as you reported him to be. Nay though he lose those
instruments, yet ceasseth he not therefore to be an honest man, yea and both a
Swoordplayer and a Luteplayer to, as in respect of skill. Likewise when our
Souls have forgone these exercises, yet cease they not to be the same they
were before. To inlyghten this point yet more; of the powers of our Soul, some
are exercysed by the instruments of the body, and othersome without any help
or furtherance of the body atall. Those which are exercysed by the body, are
the senses and the powers of the Senses and the powers of the growing, which
may carye the same likeness that is between a Luter and a Lute. Break the
Luters Lute, and his cunning remains still, but his putting of it in practice
fails. Give him another Lute, and he falls to playing new again. Put out a
man's eyes, and yet the ability of seeing abides still with him, though the
very act of seeing be disappoynted. But give unto the oldest Hag that is the
same eyes that he had when he was young, and he shall see as well as ever he
did. After the same manner is it with the growing or thriuing power. Restore
unto it a good^ stomach, a sound Liver, and a perfect heat; and it shall
execute his functions as well as ever it did before. The power that works of
it self and without the body, is the power of reason or understanding, which
if we will we may call the mind. And if thou yet still doubt thereof, consider
when thou myndest a thing earnestly what thy body furthereth thy mind therein;
and thou shall perceive that the more fixedly thou think upon it, the less
thou see the things before thee; and the more thy mind wandreth, the more thy
body rests: as who would say that the workings of the body, are the greatest
hinderance and impediment that can be to the peculiar doings of the mind. And
this ability of understanding may be lik^ned to a man, which though he have
lost both his hand and his Lute, ceasseth not therefore to be a man still, and
to do the true deeds of a man, that is to wit, to discourse of things, to
mind them, to use reason and such like; yea and to be both a Luter and a man as
he was before, notwithstanding that he cannot put his Luteplaying in exercise
for want of instruments. Nay, (which more is) this understanding part grows
so much the stronger and greater, as it is less occupied and busied about
these bace and corruptible things, and is altogether drawn home wholly to it
self; as is to be seen in those which want their eyes, whose mynds are
commonly most apt to understand, and most firm to remember. Do we debate of a
thing in our selves? Neither our body nor our Senses are busied about it. Do
we will the same? As little do they stir for that too. To understand and to
will (which are the operations of the mind,) the Soul has no need of the
body; and as for working and being, they accompany one another says
Aristotle. Therefore to continue still in being, the Soul has not to do with
the body, nor any need of the body: but rather, to work well and to be well,
the Soul ought either to be without the body, or at leastwise to be utterly
vnsubiect to the body.

Yea (say they) but yet we see men forgo their reason, as fools and
mealancholike persons: and seeing it is forgone, it may also be corrupted; and
if corrupted, it may also dye: for what is death but an utter and full
corruptnesse? Nay, thou should say rather, I have seen diverse which having
seemed to have lost their right wits, have recovered them again by good diet
and medicinable drinks. But had they been utterly lost and forgone, no
Physic could have restored them again: and had they been utterly perished,
the parties themselves should have had neither sense nor life remaining.
Therefore of necessity the sold of them was as sound as before. But our Souls
we see not otherwise than by the body and by the instruments of the body as
it were by Spectacles; and our mind which beholds and sees through his
imaginations as it were through a Cloud, is after a sort trubbled by the
dimining of the Spectacles and by the smoakinesse of the imaginations. After
that manner the Sun seems to be dimmed and eclipsed; and that is but by the
coming of the Moon or of some Clouds between him and us; for in his light
there is no abatement at all. Likewise our eysight conceyueth things according
to the Spectacles wherethrough it looks, or according to the color that
ouerthwarteth the things which it looks upon. Ta^^ away the impediments, and
our eyes shall see clear: purge away the humors, and our imagination shall
be pure: and so our understanding shall see as bright as it did before, even as
the Sun shines after the putting away of the Clouds. And it fares not with
our Souls as it does with our bodies, which after a long sickness reteyne
still either a hardness of the Spleen, or a shortness of breath, or a falling
of the Rhewme upon the Lungs, or a skarre of some great wound that cannot be
worn out because of the break that was made in the whole. For neither in
their understanding, neither in their wills do our Souls feel any abatement,
saving that there abides some mayme or blemish in the instruments; to wit (as
I will declare hereafter) so far forth as it pleases GOD for a just
punishment, to put the Soul in subjection to the body whose souereyne it was
created to have been, because it has neglected the will of the Creator, to
follow the lusts and lykings of the body. This appears in Lunaticke folks
and such others, which have their wits troubled at times and by fittes. For
they be not vexed but at the stirring of their humors, being at other times
sober and well enough stayed in their wits. The like is seen in them that
have the falling sickness. For their understanding seems to be eclipsed, and
as it were stricken with a Thunderclap, during the time of their fittes; but
afterward they be as discreet as though they ayled nothing. To be short, the
body is subject to a thousand diseases, wherewith we see the understanding to
be no whit altered, because they touch not the instruments of the Senses and
of the Imaginations, which move the understanding. Troubled it is in deed by
those few things only, which infect the Sense and the Imagination, which by
that means report the things unfaithfully whereon the mind debateth. Therefore
ye shall never see any body out of his wits or out of his right mind, in
whom the Physicians may not manifestly perceive, either some default of the
instruments, as a misshapen and misproportioned head; or else an ouerabounding of
some melancholic humor, that troubled and marred his body before it troubled
or impaired his mind. And like as the wisest men being deceived by false Spies,
do make worng deliberations, howbeit yet grounded upon good reason, which thing
they could not do unless they were wise in deed: So the reason that is in
our mind makes false discourses, and gathers wrong conclusions, upon the
false reports of the imaginations; which it could not do, if it were either
diminished or impaired, or done away. Whereunto accords this ancient saying,
That there be certain follyes which none but wise men can commit, and
certain Errors which none but learned men can fall into: because that in some
cases, discretion and wisdom are requisite in the party that is to be
deceived, even to the intent he may be deceived; and learning is required in a
man that he may conceive and hold a wrong opinion. As for example, to be
beguyled by a dubbledealing Spy or by the surprising of a cosening letter,
belongs to none but to a wise man. For a grosheaded fool never breaks his
brain about such matters as might bring him to the making of false conclusions
by mistaking likelyhoods in stead of truth. Likewise to fall into Heresy by
misconceyuing some high and deep point, befalls not to an ignorant person;
for he is not of capacity, neither does his understanding mount so high. To be
short, whosoever says that man's Soul perishes with the body, because it is
troubled by the distemperature or misproportionatenesse of the body; may as
well uphold that the Child in the moothers womb dies with his moother,
because he moves with her, and is partaker with her of her harms and throws,
by reason of the streyt conjunction that is between them; howbeit that many
children have lived safe and sound, notwithstanding that their moothers have
dyed; yea and some have come into the world even by the death of their moothers.

And whereas some say, that because our mind conceyueth not any thing here, but
by help of Imagination; therefore when the Imagination is gone with the
instruments whereunto it is tied, the Soul cannot work alone by it self, nor
consequently be alone by it self: surely it is al one as if they should say,
that because the Child being in his moothers womb takes nourishment of her
blud by his nauill; therefore he cannot live when he is come out of her womb, if
his nauillstrings be cut off. Nay contrariwise, then is the time that the
mouth, the tongue, and the other parts of the Child do their duty, which
served erst to no purpose, saving that they were prepared for the time to come.
After the same manner also do we cherish our mind by Imagination in this
second life; which in the third life being (as ye would say) escaped out of
prison, shall begin to utter his operations by himself, and that so much the
more certeynly, for that it shall not be subject to false reports, nor to the
senses either inward or outward, but to the very things themselves which it
shall have seen and learned. To be short, it shall live, but not in prison;
it shall see, but not through Spectacles; it shall understand, but not by
reports; it shall list, but not by way of lusting: the infirmity which the
body casts upon it as now, shall then be away: the force which it brings
now to the body, shall then be more fresh and lively than before. Now then,
notwithstanding these vayn reasons of theirs, let us conclude, That our soul
is an understanding or reasonable power, over the which neither death nor
corruption have naturally any power, although it be fitted to the body to
govern it. And if any man doubt hereof, let him but examine himself; for even
his own doubts will prove it unto him. Or if he will stand in contention still,
let him fall to reasoning with himself: for by concluding his arguments to
prove his Soul mortal, he shall give judgment himself that it is immortal.
And if I have left any thing vnalledged which might make to this purpose, (for
why may I not, seeing that even the selfsame things which I have bin able to
allege on the behalf of mine adversaries, do drive them thereunto?) let us
think also that he which feels himself convicted in himself, and for whose
behoof and benefit it were greatly, both to believe it and to confess it,
needs no more diligent proof than has been made already. But if any man
will yet of spyght stand wilfully still against himself, let him try how he
can make answer to my foresaid arguments: and in the mean while let us see
what the said opinion of the wisest men, yea and of the whole world has been
upon this matter.

The xv. Chapter.
That the immortality of the Soul has been taught by the Philosophers of old
time, and believed by all people and Nations.
SOothly it had been a very hard case, if this mind of ours which searches so
many things in nature, had not taken some leisure to search it self and the
nature thereof, and by searching atteyned to some point in that behalf. And
therefore as there have at al times been men, so shall we see also that men
have at all times believed and admitted the immortality of the Soul; I say
not some one man or some one Nation, but the whole world with general consent,
because all men universally and perticularly have learned it in one School,
and at the mouth of one Teacher, namely even their own knowledge in
themselves. The holy Scripture which teaches us our salvation, uses no
school arguments to make us believe that there is a God: and that is because
we cannot step out of our selves never so little, but we must needs find him
present to all our Senses. And it seems to speak unto us the less expressly
of the immortality of our souls, specially in the first books thereof,
because we cannot enter into our selves be it never so little, but we must
needs perceive it. But inasmuch as from the one end thereof to the other, it
declares unto us the will of God: in so doing it does us to understand, that
it is a thing whereof it is not lawful for us to doubt. The opinion of the Men
of old time.
And whereas it sets forth so precisely from age to age, the great and
manifold troubles and pains which good and godly men have sustained in
indeuering to follow that will; it shows infallibly that their so doing was
in another respect than for this present wretched life. For who is he that
would depart with any piece of his own lyking in this life, but in hope of
better things? and what were it for him to lose his life, if there were not
another life after this? This serves to answer in one word to such as demand
express texts of Scripture, and are loath to find that thing in the Bible,
which is contained there, not only in every leaf but almost in every sine. For
whereas God created man after the world was fully finished and perfected: it
was as much as if he had brought him into a Theater prepared for him, howbeit
after another sort than all the other living things which were to do him
service. As for Beasts, Birds, Plants, and such other things, the Elements
brought them forth: but Man received his Soul by inspiration from God. Also
the brute Beasts are put in subjection to man, but man is in subjection only
unto God. And the conueying of that good man Henocke out of this life for his
godliness, was to none other end, but to set him in another life void of all
evil and full of all good. The belief of the Patriarchs. etc.
But when we read the persecutions of Noe, the ouerthwartings of Abraham, the
banishment and wayfarings of Jacob, and the distresses of Joseph, Moses, and
all the residewe of the Fathers; they be all of them demonstrations that they
did certeynly trust and believe that the Soul is immortal, that there is
another life after this, and that there is a judgment to come. For had they
been of opinion that there is none other life after this; the flesh would have
persuaded them to have hild themselves in quiet here, and they would have liked
nothing better than to have followed sweetly the common trade of the world, Noe
among his friends, Abraham among the Chaldees, Moses in Pharaos Court, and so
forth. So then, although the Scripture seem to conceal it; yet does it
speak very loud thereof in deed, considering that all the cries of the good
and godly, and all the despayres of the wicked which it describes unto us, do
sound none other thing unto us, if we have ears to hear it. And it may be,
that in the same respect, this article of the Immortality of the Soul was not
put into the ancient Creed of the Jews, nor also peculiarly into the Creed
of us Christians, because we believe beyond reason, and this is within the
bounds of reason; and whosoever treats of Religion must needs presuppose God
eternal and man immortal, without the which two, all Religion were in vain.
Also, when we see that Godliness, Justice, and virtue were commended among the
Heathen of all ages: it is all one as if we should hear them preach in
express words the Immortality of the Soul. For their so doing is builded
every whit upon that, as upon a foundation without the which those things
could not stand. I will spend my goods or my life for the maintenance of
Justice. What is this Justice but a vain name, or to what end have I so many
respects, if I look for nothing out of this present world here? I will (said a
man of old time) rather lose even the reputation of an honest man, tha^ behave
my self otherwise than honestly. But why should I do so, if I look for no
good in another world, seeing I have nothing but evil here? The wise Men of
Egypt.
Surely if there be none other thing than this life, then is virtue to be used
no further, than profit and commodity may grow upon it; and so should it
become a Chaffer and Merchandise, and not virtue in deed. Yet notwithstanding,
those are the ordinary speeches, even of such as speak doubtfully of the
Immortality of the Soul. Therefore they do but deny the ground and yet
graune the consequence; which is all one as if a man bauing first bin burned,
should fall to disputing whether fire be hot or no. But now (which is better
for us) I will here gather together their own speeches one after another.

Hermes declares in his Poemander, Hermes in his Poemander.
how at the voice of the everlasting, the Elements yielded forth al reasonlesse
living wights as it had bin out of their bosoms. (...)
But when he comes to man, he says, He made him like unto himself, he
linked himself to him as to his Son, (for he was beautiful and made after his
own Image) and gave him al his works to use at his pleasure. Again, he
exhorts him to forsake his body, (notwithstanding that he wonder greatly at
the cunning workmanship thereof) as the very cause of his death, and to manure
his Soul which is capable of immortality, and to consider the original root
from whence it sprang, which is not earthly but heavenly, and to withdraw
himself even from his Senses and from their traitorous allurements, to gather
himself wholly into that mind of his which he has from God, and by the which
he following Gods word, may become as GOD. Discharge thy self (says he) of
this body which thou bear about thee, for it is but a cloak of ignorance, a
foundation of infection, a place of corruption, a living death, a sensible
carryon, a portable grave, and a household thief. It flattereth thee because
it hareth thee, and it hates thee because it enuieth thee. As long as that
lives, it bereueth thee of life, and thou have not a greater enemy than that.
Now, to what purpose were it for him to forsake this light, this dwellingplace
and this life, if he were not sure of a better in another world (as he himself
says more largely afterward?) On the other side, what is the Soul? Hermes in
his Poemander. cap. 10.
The Soul (says he) is the garment of the mind, and the garment of the Soul
is a certain Spirit whereby it is united to the body. And this Mind is the
thing which we call properly the Man, that is to say a heavenly wight which is
not to be compared with Beasts, but rather with the Gods of Heaven, if he be
not yet more than they. The Heavenly can not come down to the earth without
leaving the Heaven, but Man measures the Heaven without removing from the
earth. (...).
The earthly man then is as a mortal God, and the heavenly God is as an
immortal man. To be short, his conlusion is, That man is dubble, mortal as
touching his body, and immortal as touching his Soul, which Soul is the
substantial man and the very man created immediately of God (faith he) as ye
light is bred immediately of the Sun. Hermes in his Esculapius. AEnaeas Gaz.
concerning the immortality of the Soul.
And Chalcidius says that at his death he spoke these words. I go home
again into mine own Country, where my better forefathers and kinsfolk be.

Of Zoroastres who is yet of more antiquity than Hermes, we have nothing but
fragments. Nevertheless, many report this article to be one of his, Gha^deans.
That men's Souls are immortal, and that one day there shall be a general
rising again of their bodies; and the answers of the Wise men of Chaldye (who
are the heirs of his Doctrine) do answer sufficiently for him. There is one
that exhorts men to return with speed to their heavenly father, who has
sent them from above a Soul indewed with much understanding; and another that
exhorts them to seek Paradise as the peculiar dwelling place of the Soul. A
third says that the Soul of man has God as it were shut up in it, and that
it has not any mortality therein. For (says he) the Soul is as it were
dronken with God, and shows forth his ^^^uders in the harmony of this
mortal body. And again another says, It is a clear fire proceeding from the
power of the heavenly father, an incorruptible substance, and the mainteyner of
life, containing almost all the whole world with the full plenty thereof in
his bosom. But one of them proceeds yet further, affirming that he which
sets his mind upon Godliness, shall save his body, frail though it be.
And by those words he acknowledges the very glorifying of the body.

Now, The Greeks.
all these sayings are reported by the Platonists, and namely by Psellus; and
they refuse not to be acknowne that Pythagoras and Plato learned the^ of the
Chaldees; insomuch that some think, that the foresaid Hermes and Zoroastres and
the residewe aforementioned, are the same of whom Plato speaks in his second
Epistle, and in his eleventh book of Laws, when he says that the ancient
and holy Oracles are to be believed, which affirm men's Souls to be
immortal, and that in another life they must come before a Judge that will
require an account of al their doings. The effect whereof comes to this, That
the Soul of man proceeds immediately from God, that is to say, that the
father of the body is one, and the father of the Soul is another: That the
Soul is not a bodily substance, but a Spirit and a light: That at the
departure thereof from hence, it is to go into a Paradise, and therefore ought
to make haste unto death: And that it is so far from mortality, that it
makes even the body immortal. What can we say more at this day, even in the
time of light wherein we be? Pherecydes Pherecydes.
the Syrian, the first that was known among the Greeks to have written in
prose, taught the same. And that which Virgill says in his second Eglog
concerning the Drug or Spice of Assyria, Assyrium vulgo nascetur Amonium.
and the growing thereof euerywhere, is interpreted of some men to be meant of
the Immortality of the Soul, the doctrine whereof Pherecydes brought from
thence into Greece; namely, that it should be understood euerywhere throughout
the whole world. Also Phocylides who was at the same time, speaks thereof in
these words.

(...).
That is to say: Phocylides.
The Soul of man immortal is, and never wears away
With any age or length of time, but lives fresh for ay.
And again, (...).
The Remnants which remain of men unburied in the grave,
Become as Gods, and in the Heavens a life most blessed have.
For though their bodies turn to dust, as daily we do see,
Their Souls live still for evermore from all corruption free.
And in another place he says again: (...).
We hope that we shall come again
Out of the earth to light more plain.
And if ye ask him the cause of all this: he will answer you in another verse
thus. (...).
Because the Soul, Gods instrument and Image also is.
Which saying he seems to have taken out of this verse of Sibils. Sybill.
(...).
In very reason Man should be
The Image and the shape of me.


Of the same opinion also are Orpheus, Theognis, Homer, Hesiodus, Pindar,
Pindar in the second song of his Olympiads Homer in the Funeralles of his
Iliads.
and all the Poets of old time; which may answer both for themselves and their
own Countries, and for the residue of their ages. Likewise Pythagoras a
disciple of Pherecides, held opinion that the Soul is a bodylesse and
immortal substance, put into this body as into a Prison for sinning. And
whereas the fleeting of souls out of one body into another, is fathered upon
him; although the opinion be not directly against the immortality of the
Soul, yet do many men think that he has wrong done unto him. And his
Disciple Timoeus of Locres reports otherwise of him. For what punishment were
it to a voluptuous man, to have his Soul put into a beast, that he might
become the more voluptuous without remorse of sin? Soothly it is all one as
if in punishment of Murder or theft, ye would make the Murderer to cut the
throtes of his own Father and Mother, or the Thief to commit treachery against
God. Howsoever the case stand, he teaches in his verses, that man is of
heavenly race, and that (as Iamblichus reports) he is set in this world to
behold God. And his Disciple Architas says, Pythagoras. Hera^litus as he is
reported by Philo. Epicharmus as he is reported by Clement of Ale^andria.
that God breathed reason and understanding into him. Likewise Philolaus
affirms that the Divines and Prophets of old time bare record, that the Soul
was cuppled with the body for her sins, and buried in the same as in a Grave.
Of Epicharmus we have this saying. If thou be a good man in thy heart, Death
can do thee no harm, for thy Soul shall live happyly in heaven, etc. Also of
Heraclides we have this saying, We live the Death of them (that is to say of
the blessed) his meaning is, Thales, Anaxagoras, Diogenes and Ze^o.
that we be not buried with our bodies; and we dye their Life, that is to say,
we be still after this body of ours is dead. Of the like opinion are Thales,
Anaxagoras, and Diogenes concerning this point; yea and so is Zeno too, howbeit
that he thought the Soul to be begotten of Man, wherein he was contrary too
himself. To be short, scarsly were there any to be found among the men of old
time, save only Democritus and Epicurus, Epicurus.
that held the contrary way; whom the Poet Lucre immitated afterward in his
verses. Yet notwithstanding when Epicurus should dye, he commanded an
Anniuersarie or Yeermynd to be kept in remembrance of him by his Disciples: so
greatly delighted he in a vain shadow of Immortalite, having shaken off the
very thing it self. And Lucrece Lucretius.
(as it is written of him) made his book being mad, at such times as the
fittes of his madness were off him, surely more mad when he thought himself
wysest, than when the fits of his frenzy were strongest upon him. Whosoever
reads the goodly discourses of Socrates upon his drinking of poison, as they
be reported by Plato and Xenophon Socrates, Plato and Xenopho^.
himself; can not doubt of his opinion in this case. For he not only believed
it himself, but also persuaded many men to it with lively reasons, yea and by
his own death much more then by all his life. And so ye see we be come unto
Plato and Aristotle, with consent of all the wise men of old time, vngeinsayd
of any, saving of a two or three malapert wretches, whom the vngraciousest of
our days would esteem but as dronken sottes and dizards. Certesse Plato Plato
in his Timaeus.
(who might paraduenture have heard speak of the books of Moses) does in
his Timaeus bring in God giving commandment to the vndergoddes whom he
created, that they should make man both of mortal and of immortal substances.
Wherein it may be that he alluded to this saying in Genesis, Let us make man
after our own Image and likeness. In which case the Jews say that GOD
directed his speech to his Angels; but our Divines say he spoke to himself.
But anon after, both in the same book and in many other places, Plato Plato in
his Timaeus, and in his third book of a Comonweale.
(as it were coming to him himself ageine,) teaches that GOD created Man by
himself, yea and even his Liver and his Brain and all his Senses; that is to
say, the Soul of him, not only indewed with reason and understanding, but
also with sense and ability of growing and increasing; and also the
instruments whereby the same do work. Moreover he makes such a manifest
difference between the Soul and the body; as that he matcheth them not
toogither as matter and form, as Aristottle does: but as a Pilot and a Ship, a
Commonweal and a Magistrate, an Image and him that bears it upon him. What
greater thing can there be than to be like God? Now (says Plato in his
Phoedon) Plato in his Phoedon, in his matter of state, in his Al^ibiades, and
in the tenth book of his Comonweale.
The Soul of Man is very like the Godhead; Immortal, Reasonable, Uniform,
Vndissoluble, and evermore of one sort, which are conditions (says he) in his
matters of State) that can not agree but to things most divine. And therefore
at his departing out of the world, he willed his Soul to return home too her
kindred and to her first original, that is to wit, (as he himself says
there) to the wise and immortal Godhead the Fountain of all goodness, as
called home from banishment into her own native country. Plato in his fifth
book of Laws.
He terms it ordinarily (...), that is to say, of kin unto God, and
consequently (...), that is to say, Everlasting, and of one selfsame name with
the immortal ones, a Heavenly Plant and not a Earthly, rooted in Heaven and
not in Earth, begotten from above and not here beneath, and finally such as
cannot dye here, forasmuch as it lives still in another place. To be short,
seeing (says he) that it comprehends the things that are Divine and
immortal, that is to wit, the Godhead, and the things that are unchangeable
and incorruptible, as truth is: it cannot be accounted to be of any other
nature than they. The same opinion does Plutarche also attribute unto him,
which appears almost in every leaf of his writings. As touching the
auncienter sort of Platonists, they agree all with one accord in the
immortality of ye soul, saving that some of them derive it from God, and some
from the Soul of the World, some make but the Reason or mind only to be
immortal, and some the whole Soul: which disagreement may well be salued, if
we say that the Soul all whole together is immortal in power or ability,
though the execution and performance of the actions which are to be done by
the body, be forgone with the instruments or members of the body.

The disagreement concerning this point among such as a man may voutsafe to
call by the name of Philosophers, seems to have begone at Aristotle, howbeit
that his Disciples count it a commendation to him, that he has given occasion
to doubt of his opinion in that behalf. For it is certain that his newfound
doctrine of the Eternity or euerlastingnesse of the World, has distroubled
his brain in many other things, as commonly it falls out, that one error
breeds many other. Aristotle in his second book of liui^g things.
Because nature (says he) could not make every man particularly to continue
for ever by himself, therefore she continues him in the kind by matching Male
and Female together. This is spoken either grossly or doubtfully. But whereas
he says that if the Mind have any inworking of it own without any help of
the Senses or of the body, it may also continue of it self, concluding
thereuppon that then it may also be separated from the body, as an immortal
thing from a thing that is transitory and mortal: It follows consequently
also, that the Soul may have continuance of it self, Aristotle in the third
book of the Soul.
as whereof he utters these words, namely, That the Soul comes from
without, and not of the seed of Man as the body does, and that the Soul is
the only part in us that is Divine. Now, to be Divine and to be Humane, to be
of seed and to be from without, that is to say, from GOD; are things flat
contratrie, whereof the one sort is subject to corruption, and the other not.
Aristotle in his tenth book of moralles.
In the tenth book of his Moralls he acknowledges two sorts of life in man;
the one as in respect that he is composed of Body and Soul, the other as in
respect of Mind only; the one occupied in the powers which are called humane
and bodily, which is also accompanied with a felicity in this life; and the
other occupied iu the virtues of the mind, which is accompanied also with a
felictie in another life. This which consists in contemplation, is better
than the other; and the felicity thereto belonging, is peculiarly described by
him in his books of Heaven above Time, as which consists in the frank and
free working of the Mind, and in beholding the souereine God. And in good
sooth, Michael of Ephesus upon Aristotle's Moralles.
full well does Michael of Ephesus upon this saying of his conclude, that the
Soul is immortal; and so must al his morals also needs do, considering that
too live well, whether it be to a man's self or toward other men, were else a
vain thing and to no purpose but to vex our minds in this life. (...).
In his books of the Soul, he not only separateth the Body from the Soul,
but also puts a difference betwixt the Soul it self and the Mind, terming
the Soul the inworking of the body and of the bodily instruments; and the mind
that reasonable substance which is in us, whereof the doings have no fellowship
with the doings of the body, and whereof the Soul is (as Plato says) but the
Garment. This Mind (says he) may be severed from the body, it is not in any
wise mingled with it, it is of such substance as cannot be hurt or wrought
upon, it has being and continuance actually and of it self; In his second
book of the Soul.
and even when it is separated from the body, then is it immortal and
everlasting. To be short, it has not any thing like unto the body. For it is
not any of al those things which have being before it understand them. And
therefore which of all bodily things can it be? And in another place he says
thus: As concerning the Mind, and the contemplative power, it is not yet
sufficiently apparent what it is. Nevertheless it seems to be another kind
of Soul, and it is that only which can be separated from the corruptible, as
the which is Ayeuerlasting. To be short, when as he puts this question,
whether a Natural Philosopher is to dispute of all manner of Souls, or but
only of that Soul which is immateriall: it follows that he grants that
there is such a one. And again, when as he makes this Argument; Look what
God is everlastingly, that are we in possibility according to our measure:
but he is everlastingly separated from bodily things, therefore the time will
come that we shall be so too. He takes it that there is an Image of God in
us, yea even of the Divine nature which has continuance of itself. Uery well
and rightly therefore does Simplicius gather thereof, the immortality of the
Soul. For it depends upon this separation, In the last book of the parts of
beasts. In the tenth of his Supernaturalles.
and upon continuance of being of it self. Besides this he says also, that
hunting of beasts is granted to man by the law of Nature, because that
thereby man chalengeth nothing but that which naturally is his own. By what
right I pray you, if there be no more in himself than in them? And what is
there more in him than in them, if they have a soul equal unto his? In his
first book of matters of state.
Hereunto make all his commendations of Godliness, of Religion, of blessedness,
and of contemplation. For too what end serve all these, which do but cumber
us here below? Therefore surely it is to be concluded, that as he spoke
doubtfully in some one place, so he both termed and also taught to speak
better in many other places, as appears by his Disciple Theophrastus, who
speaks yet more evidently thereof than he.

The Latins The opinion of the Latin writers.
(as I have said before) fell to Philosophy somewhat later then the Greeks.
And as touching their common opinion, the exercises of superstition that were
among them, the manner of speeches which we mark in their Histories, their
contempt of death, and their hope of another life; can give us sufficient
warrant thereof. Cicero Cicero in his first book of his Tusculane Questions,
and in his book of Comfort.
speaks unto us in these words. The original of our Souls and Minds cannot
be found in this low earth: for there is not any mixture in them, or any
compounding that may seem to be bred or made of the earth. Neither is there
any moisture, any wyndinesse, or any fiery matter in them. For no such thing
could have in it the power of memory, Understanding, and conceit, to beat in
mind things past, to foresee things to come, and to consider things present,
which are matters altogether Divine. And his conclusion is, that therefore they
be derived from the Mind of GOD, that is to say, not bred or begotten of Man,
but created of God: not bodily, but vnbodily; whereupon it follows that the
Soul cannot be corrupted by these transitory things. The same Cicero Cicero
in his second book of the Nature of the Gods: and in his fust book of Laws.
in another place says that between God and Man there is a kindred of reason,
as there is between man and man a kindred of blud. That the fellowship between
man and man comes of the mortal body, but the fellowship between God and
man comes of God himself who created the Soul in us. By reason whereof
(says he) we may say we have Alyance with the heavenly sort, as folk that
are descended of the same race and root; whereof that we may evermore be
myndfull, we must look up to heaven as to the place of our birth, whether we
must one day return. And therefore yet once again he concludes thus of
himself. Think not (says he) that thou thy self art mortal, In Scipioes
dream.
it is but thy body that is so. For thou art not that which this outward shape
pretends to be, the Mind of Man is the man in deed, and not this lump which
may be poynted at with ones Fingar. Assure thy self therefore that thou art a
GOD; For needs must that be a God, which lives, perceyueth, remembereth,
foreseeth, and finally reigns in thy body as the Great God the maker of all
things does in the universal world. For as the eternal God rules and moves
this transitory world, so does the immortal Spirit of our soul move and rule
our frail body. Hereuntoo consent all the writers of his time, as Ovid,
Virgill and others, whose verses are in every man's remembrance.

There wanted yet the wight that should all other wights exceed Ovid in his
first book of Metamorphosis.

In lofty reach of stately Mind, who like a Lord in deed
Should over all the resdewe reign; Then shortly came forth Man,
Whom either he that made the world and all things else began,
Created out of seed divine, or else the earth yet young
And lately parted from the Sky, the seed thereof vncloong
Retained still in fruitful womb: which Iapets son did take,
And tempering it with water pure, a wight thereof did make,
Which should resemble even the Gods which souereine state do hold.
And where all other things the ground with groueling eye behold;
He gave to man a stately look and full of Majesty
Commanding him with steadfast look to face the starry Sky.
Here a man might bring in almost all Senecaes wrytings; Seneca writing to
Gallio and to Lucillus.
but I will content my self with a few sayings of his. Our Souls (says he)
are a part of Gods Spirit, and sparks of holy things shining upon the earth.
They come from another place than this low one. Whereas they seem to be
conversant in the body, yet is the better part of them in Heaven, always near
unto him which sent them hither. And how is it possible that they should be
from beneath, or from anywhere else tha^ from above, seeing they ouerpasse al
these lower things as nothing, and hold skorne of all that ever we can hope or
fear? Thus ye see how he teaches that our Souls come into our bodies from
above. But whether go they again, when they depart hence? Let us here him what
he says of the Lady Martiaes Son that was dead. He is now everlasting (says
he) and in the best state, Seneca concerning the Lady Martiaze Son and the
shortness of this life In his Questions, and in his hook of Comfort.
berest of this earthly baggage which was none of his, and set free to
himself. For these bones, these sinews, this coat of skin, this face, and
these serviceable hands, are but fetters and prisons of the Soul. By them the
Soul is overwhelmed, beaten down, and chased away. It has not a greater
batterll, than with that mass of flesh. For fear of being torn in pieces, it
labors to return from whence it came, where it has ready for it an happy
and everlasting rest. And again: This Soul cannot be made an Outlaw: for it is
a kin to the Gods, equal to the whole world, and to all time; and the thought
or conceyt thereof goes about the whole Heaven, extending it self from the
beginning of al time to the uttermost point of that which is to come. The
wretched coarse being the Iayle and setters of the Soul, is tossed to and fro.
Upon that are torments, murders, and diseases executed. As for the Soul, it
is holy and everlasting, and cannot be laid hand on. When it is out of this
body, it is at liberty and set free from all bondage, and is co^uersant in
that beautiful place (wheresoever it be) which receives men's Souls into the
blessed rest thereof as soon as they be delivered from hence. To be short,
he seems to prick very nere to the rising again of the dead. For in a
certain Epistle to Lucilius, his words are these. Death, whereof we be so much
afraid, does not bereue us of life, but only discontinew it for a time; and a
day will come that shall bring us to light again. This may suffice to give us
knowledge of the opinion of that great personage, in whom we see that the more
he grew in age, the nerer he came still to the true birth. For in his latest
books he treats always both more assuredly and more evidently thereof.

Also the saying of Phauorinus is notable. Fauorinus.
There is nothing great on earth, (says he) but Man; and nothing great in Man,
but his Soul. If thou mount up thither, thou mou^test above Heaven. And if
thou stoop down again to the body, and compare it with the Heaven; it is
less than a Fly, or rather a thing of nothing. At one word, this is as much
to say, as that in this clod of clay, there dwells a divine and vncoruptible
nature: for how could it else be greater than the whole world?

As touching the Nations of old time, The common opinion of all nations.
we read of them all, that they had certain Religions and divine Services, so
as they believed that there is a Hell, and certain fields which they call the
Elysian fields, as we see in the Poets Pindarus, Diphilus, Sophocles, Euripides
and others. Porphyrius in his 4. book of Abstinence.
The more supersticious that they were, the more sufficiently do they witness
unto us what was in their Conscience. For true Religion and Superstition have
both one ground, namely the Soul of man; and there could be no Religion at
all, Which with their own hands made the fire to burn their bodies in: and
saw alive the kindled flame that should consume their Skin.
if the Soul lived not when it is gone hence. We read of the Indians, that
they burned themselves before they came to extreme oldage, terming it the
letting of men loose, and the freeing of the Soul from the body: and the
sooner that a man did it, the wiser was he esteemed. Which custom is observed
still at this day among the people that dwell by the River Niger otherwise
called the people of Senega in Affricke, who offer themselves willingly to be
buried quick with their Masters. All the demonstrations of Logic and
Mathematicke (says Zeno) have not so much force to prove the immortality of
the soul, as this only doing of theirs has. Also great Alexander having taken
prisoners ten of their Philosophers, (whom they call Gimnosophists) asked of
one of them to try their wisdom, whether there were mo^men alive or dead.
The Philosopher answered, that there were more alive: Because (said he) there
are none dead. Ye may well think they gave a dry mock to all the arguments of
Aristotle and Callisthenes, which with all their Philosophy had taught their
scholar Alexander so evil. Of the Thracians, we read that they sorrowed at
the birth of men and rejoiced at the death of them, yea even of their own
chidren. And that was because they thought that which we call death, not to be
a death in deed, but rather a very happy birth. And these be the people whom
Herodotus reports to have been called the Neuerdying Getes, and whom the
Greeks called the Neuerdying Getes or Thracians. Who were of opinion that at
their departing out of this world, they went to Zamolxis or Gebeleizie,
Gebeleizie, that is to say, Register or Giver of caze and rest.
that is to say (after ye interpretation of the Getish or Gotish tongue) to him
that gave them health, salvation or welfare, and gathered them together. The
like is said of the Galls, chiefly of the inhabiters about Marsilles and of
their Druydes; of the Hetruscians and their Bishops; and of the Scythians and
their Sages; of whom all the learning and wisdom was grounded upon this
point. For look how men did spread abroad, so also did this doctrine, which is
so deeply printed in man, that he cannot but carry it continually with him.
Which thing is to be seen yet more in that which we read concerning the
hearers of Hegesias the Cyrenian, who dyed willingly after they had heard him
discourse of the state of men's Souls after this life; and likewise concerning
Cleombrotus the Ambraciote, who slew himself when he had read a certain
treatise of the immortality of the Soul. For had it not been a doctrine most
evident to man's wit, they would never have bin carried so far by it, as to the
hurting of their bodies. And if among so many people, there be perchance some
few wretched caytifes, that have borne themselves on hand the contrary; which
thing nevertheless they could never yet fully persuade themselves to be out of
all doubt or question: surely we may believe that they had very much ado and
were utterly besotted like Drunkards, before they could come to that point: so
as we may well say of them as Hierocle Gebeleizie, that is to say, Register or
Giver of caze and rest.
the Pythagorist said: namely, That the wicked would not have their Souls to
be immortal, to the intent they might not be punished for their faults: But
yet that they prevent the sentence of their Judge, by condemning themselves
unto death before hand. But if they will neither hear God, nor the whole world,
nor themselves: let them at leastwise hearken to the Devil as well as they do
in other things; who (as says Plutark Plutarke in his treatise of the flow
punishing of the wicked.
) made this answer to Corax of Naxus and others in these verses.

It were a great wickedness for thee to say
The Soul to be mortal or for to decay.
And unto Polytes he answered thus.

As long as the Soul to the body is tide,
Though loath, yet all sorrows it needs must abide.
But when fro the body Death does it remove,
To heaven by and by then it styes up above.
And there ever youthful in bliss it does rest,
As God by his wisdom has set for the best.
Not that any saying of the Deuilles own is to be alleged in witness of the
truth; furtherfoorth than to show that he speaks it by compulsion of Gods
mighty power, as wicked men diverse times do when they be upon the Rack. Now
we be come to the time or nere to the time that the heavenly doctrine of Jesus
Christ was spread over ye whole world, unto which time I have proved ye
continual succession of that doctrine, which could not but be unseparably
joined with the succession of men. The opinion of the later Philosophers.
But from this time forth it came so to light among all Nations and all
persons; that Saint Austin after a sort tryumphing over ungodliness, cries
out in diverse places, saying: Who is now so very a fool or so wicked, as to
doubt still of the immortality of the Soul? Epictetus a Stoikphilosopher, who
was had in very great reputation among all the men of his time, is full of
goodly sayings to the same purpose. May we not be ashamed (says he) to lead
an dishonest life, Epictetus. (...)
. and to suffer our selves to be vanquished by adversity? we be alyed unto
God, we came from thence, and we have leave to return thither from whence we
came. One while, as in respect of the Soul, he terms man the offspring of
GOD, or as it were a branch of the Godhead; and another while he calls him
adiuine ympe or a spark of God: by all which words (howbeit that they be
somewhat improper) (for what words can a man find to fit that matter?) he
shows the vncorruptiblenesse of the substance of man's Soul. And whereas the
Philosopher Simplicius Simplicius.
has so diligently commented upon his books, it does sufficiently answer for
his opinion in that case, without expressing his words here. Plotinus Plotinus.
Plotin. lib. 1. Ennead. 4. concerning the Being of the Soul, and lib. 2. cap.
1. and lib. 3. cap. 18. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. lib. 4 cap. 11. and the seventh
book throughout.
the excellentest of all the Platonists, has made nine treatises expressly
concerning the nature of the Soul, besides the things which he has written
dispersedly here and there in other places. His chief conlusions are these.
That men's Souls proceed not of their bodies, nor of the seed of the Parents,
but come from above, and are as ye would say graffed into our bodies by the
hand of God: That the Soul is partly tied to the body and to the instruments
thereof; and partly frank, free, workfull, and continuing of it self; and yet
notwithstanding that it is neither a body nor the harmony of the body, but (if
we consider the life and operation which it gives to the body) it is after a
sort the perfection [or rather the perfector] of the body; and if we have an
eye to the understanding whereby it guydeth the mouings and doings of the body;
it is as a Governor of the body: That the further it is withdrawn from the
Senses, the better it discourses of things; insomuch that when it is utterly
separated from them, it understands things without discoursing, reasoning or
debating, yea even in a moment; because this debating is but a certain
lightening or brightness of the mind, which now takes aduisement in matters
whereof it doubts, and it doubts wheresoever the body yields any
impediments unto it; but it shall neither doubt nor seek aduisement any more
when it is once out of the body, but shall conceive the truth without
wavering: That the Soul in the body is not properly there as in a place, or as
in a ground, because it is not contained or comprehended therein, and may also
be separated from it; but rather if a man had eyes to see it withal, he
should see that the body is in the Soul, as an accessory is in a principal,
or as a thing contained in a conteyner, or a sheading or liquid thing in a
thing that is not liquid, because the Soul imbraceth the body, and quickneth
it, and moves it equally and alike in all parts. That every ability thereof
is in every part of the body, as much in one part as in another, as a whole
Soul in every part; notwithstanding that every several ability thereof
seem to be severally in some particular member or part, because the
instruments thereof are there; as the sensitive ability seems to rest in the
head, the yrefull in the heart, and the quickening in the Liver, because the
Sinews, Hartstrings and Uaynes come from those parts: Whereas the reasonable
power is not in any part, saving so far forth as it works and has his
operation there, neither has it any need of place or instrument for the
executing of it self. And to be short, that the Soul is a life by it self, a
life all in one, vnpartable; which causes to grow, and grows not it self;
which goes throughout the body, and yet is not contained of the body; which
unites the Senses, and is not divided by the Senses; and therefore that it is a
bodilesse substance, which cannot be touched neither from within nor from
without, having no need of the body either outwardly or inwardly, and
consequently is immortal, divine, yea and almost a very God: Which things he
proves by many reasons, which were too long to be rehearsed here. Plotinus in
his book of the Senses, and of Memory. En. 4. lib. 3. and in his book of
doubts concerning the Soul chap. 26. 27.
Yea he proceeds so far as to say, yt they which are passed into another
world, have their memory still, notwithstanding that to some men's seeming it
go away with the Senses as the treasury of the Senses. Howbeit he affirms it
to be the more excellent kind of memory; not that which calls things again
to mind as already past, but that which holds and beholds them still as
always present. Of which two sorts, this latter he calls Myndfulnes, and the
other he calls Rememberance. I will add but only one sentence more of his
for a full president of his Doctrine. The Soul (says he) has had company
with the Gods, and is immortal; and so would we say of it (as Plato affirms)
if we saw it fair and clear. But forasmuch as we see it commonly troubled,
we think it not to be either divine or immortal, howbeit that he which will
discern the nature of a thing perfectly, must consider it in the very own
substance or being, utterly unmingled with any other thing. For whatsoever else
is added unto it, does hinder the perfect discerning of the same. Therefore let
every man behold himself naked without any thing save himself, so as he look
upon nothing else than his bare Soul: and surely when he has vewed himself
in his own nature merely as in respect of his Mind, he shall believe himself
to be immortal. For he shall see that his Mind, ameth not properly at the
sensible and mortal things, but that by a certain everlasting power, it
takes hold of the things that are everlasting, and of whatsoever is possible
to be conceived in understanding: insomuch that even it self becomes after a
sort a very World of understanding and light. This is against those which
pretend a weakness of the Soul, by reason of the inconveniences which it
indureth very often in the body.

Of the same opinion are Numenius, Iamblichus, Porphirius, and Proclus,
notwithstanding that now and then they pass their bounds, suffering their wits
to run royet. For in their Philosophy they had none other rule, than only
the drift of their own reason. It was commonly thought that Alexander of
Aphrodise believed not the immortality of the Soul, Alexander of Aphrodise in
his books of the Soul.
because he defined it to be the form of the body proceeding of the mixture
and temperature of the Elements. Surely these words of his do us to
understand, either that he meant to define but the sensitive life only (as many
others do) and not the reasonable soul; or else that he varieth from himself
in other places. And in very deed he says immediately afterward, that he
speaks of the things which are subject to generation and corruption. But
speaking of the Soul he says it is separable, vnmateriall, unmixed, and void
of passions, unless perchance we may think as some do, that by this Soul
he mean but only God, and not also the Soul that is in us; for the which
thing he is sharply rebuked by Themistius, who notwithstanding speaks never a
whit better thereof himself. Howsoever he deal elsewhere, these words of his
following are without any doubtfulnes at all. The Soul (says he) which is in
us, comes from without and is incorruptible. In his second book of Problemes.
I say incorruptible because the nature thereof is such, and it is the very
same that Aristotle affirms to come from without. And in his second book of
Problemes, searching the cause why the abilities of the Soul are oftentimes
impeached: If a man's brain be hurt (says he) the reasonable soul does not
well execute the actions that depend thereon. But yet for all that, it abides
still in itself, unchangeable of nature, ability and power, through the
immortality thereof. And if it recover a sound instrument, it puts her
abilities in execution as well as it did before. But I will reason more at large
hereafter against the opinion that is fathered upon him.

What shall we say of Galene, (who fathereth the causes of all things as much
as he can, upon the Elements and the mixture and agreeble concord of them) if
after his disputing against his own Soul, Galen in his book of the Manners
of the Soul.
he be constreyned to yield that it is immortal? Surely in his book
concerning the manners of the Soul he does the worst that he can against
Plato: and in another place he doubts whether it be immortal, and whether
it have continuance of it self or no. Yet notwithstanding, in his book of the
doctrine of Hippocrates and Plato, In his book of the doctrine of Hippocrates
and Plato.
It must needs be granted (says he) that the Soul is either a sheere body
and of the nature of the Sky, (as the Stoiks and Aristotle himself are
enforced to confess) or else a bodilesse substance, whereof the body is as it
were the Chariot, and whereby it has fellowship with other bodies. And it
appears that he inclyneth to this latter part: For he makes the vital
spirit to be the excellentest of all bodily things, In his book of Conception.
and yet he grau^teth the Soul to be a far more excellent thing than that.
What shall we then do? Let us wey his words set down in his book of the
conception of a Child in the Moothers Womb. The Soul of Man (says he) is an
influence of the universal Soul that descends from the heavenly Region, a
substance that is capable of knowledge, which aspyreth always to one substance
like unto it self, which leaves all these lower things to seek the things
that are above, which is partaker of the heavenly Godhead, and which by
mounting up to the beholding of things that are above the heavens, puts it
self into the presence of him that rules all things. Were it reason then that
such a substance coming from elsewhere than of the body, and mounting so far
above the body, should in the end dye with the body, because it uses the
service of the body?

Now hereuntoo I could add infinite other sayings of the ancient The
universal consent.
authors both Greek and Latin Philosophers, Poets, and Orators from age to
age, wherein they treat of the judgment to come, of the reward of good men,
of the punishment of evil men, of Paradise and of Hell, which are appendants
to the immortality of the Soul: but as now I will but put the reader in mind
of them by the way, reserving them to their peculiar places. To be short, let
us run at this day from East to West, and from North to South, I say not
among the Turks, Arabians, or Persians, (for their Alcoran teaches them that
man's Soul was breathed into him of God, In the Alcora^, Azo: 25. and 42.
and consequently that it is incorruptible) but even among the most barbarous,
ignorant and beastly people of the Would, I mean the very Caribies and
Cannibals; It appears by the stories or the East and West Indyes.
and we shall find this belief received and embraced of them all. Which gives
us to understand, that it is not a doctrine invented by speculations of some
Philosophers, conveyed from Country to Country by their disciples, persuaded
by likelyhods of reasons, or (too be short) entered into man's wit by his ears:
but a native knowledge, which every man finds and reads in himself, which
he carries euerywhere about with himself, and which is as easy to be
persuaded unto all such as view themselves in themselves, as it is easy to
persuade a man that never saw his own face, to believe that he has a face,
by causing him to behold himself in a glass.

There remain yet two opinions, to be confuted. The one is the opinion of
Auerrhoes, Against Auerrhoes.
and the other is the opinion of Alexander of Aphrodise, who affirm themselves
to hold both of Aristotle; namely in that they uphold that there is but one
universal reasonable Soul or mind, which works al our discourses in us,
howbeit diversely in every several person. And this thing (if we believe
Auerrhoes) is done according to the diversity of ye Fantasies or Imaginations
wherewith the mind is served as with instruments. But if we believe Alexander,
Let the Reader bear these terms and their significations in Mind, for all the
discourse here ensewing.
it is done according too the diversities of the capable mind as they term it,
that is to say, of the ability or capabilitie that is in men to understand
things, by receiving the impression of the universal mind that works into
every of them which in respect thereof is called of them the woorker. Soothly
these opinions are such as may be disprooued in one word. For this only one
Mind, whether in possibility or in action, could not have received or
imprimted in every man one selfsame common belief and conceit of the
immortality of the Soul, in so great diversity of imaginations, and in so
many Nations, as we see do believe it, considering that the very same conceit
is directly repugnant against it. Nay, it may well be said that Auerrhoes and
Alexander had very diverse conceits and imaginations one from another, and very
contrary to all other men's, seeing they had so diverse and contrary opinions
imprinted either in their mind or in their imagination. Howbeit forasmuch as
there may be some, ye will make a doubt of it; Let us examine them severally
yet more advisedly. Auerhoes, upon Aristotle's third book of the Soul.
First Auerrhoes will needs bear Aristotle on hand, that Aristotle is of that
opinion. Let us see how this surmize of his can agree with the propositions
which Aristotle has left us. Aristotle tells us that the Soul is knit to
the body as ye form or shape too the matter; that the Soul has three chief
powers, namely of life, of sense, and of understanding; and that the
understanding part contains in his power both the other two powers, as a
Fiuesquare contains both a Fowersquare and a Triangle. Aristotle in his
second book of the Soul.
Whereupon it follows that if any one of the three powers of the Soul be
joined to the body as a form to the matter; all the three be joined so to, as
which are all in one soul as in their root. Now Auerrhoes neither can nor
will deny that the powers of growing and of perceiving by the senses are joined
after that manner too the body; and therefore it follows that the understanding
power is to joined also, and consequently that according to Aristotle, as every
body has his form, so every body has his Soul. Aristotle in his first book
of the Soul.
The same Aristotle finds fault with the former Philosophers for holding
opinion that a Soul might pass out of one man into another: because (says
he) that every certain Soul must needs be apportioned and appointed to some
one certain body. Now look by what Soul a man lives, by the same Soul does
he understand: for it is but one Soul endued with three diverse abilities, as
he himself teaches opently. One vnderstauding or Mind therefore, must
(according to Aristotle) work but in one several body, and not in many
bodies. Also according to Aristotle, a Man and a Beast agree in this, that both
of them have one sensitive power and one selfsame imagination of things
perceived by the Seuces, and that they differ in this, that man has yet
further a mind and reason above the beast, which thing the beast has not. Now
if this Understanding or Mind be without the man, as the Son is without the
Chamber that it shines into and inlighteneth; then cannot he be called
reasonable or indewed with understanding, neither does he consequently differ
from a beast. For the difference must be in nature, and not in accident. And
so should it ensue that Aristotle's foresaid definition of a man is false, as if
he should define a Chamber by the shyning of the Sun into it: Or say that a
Dog differs not from a man in kind; yea and that Beasts are eapable of
understanding, forasmuch as they have Imagination ready aforehand to receive
the influence thereof as well as we. But Aristotle is always one in his
defining both of beast and of man; and Auerrhoes also holds himself to it,
without doubting thereof at all. This conclusion therefore cannot in anywise be
vpheld by such grounds.

Again, if there be not in every several man a several mind, but only one
universal mind common to all men, which becomes diverse by the only
diversity of our imaginations: Then in respect that we have sundry
imaginations, we shall be sundry living wights; and in respect that we have
al but one mind, we shall be all but one man. For man is not man in respect of
the sensitive power, but in respect of the reasonable part which is the mind.
But Aristotle grants that we be not only diverse living wights, but also
diverse men. And therefore he must needs mean also, that we have not only
diverse imaginations, but also diverse mynds. Now besides many other Reasons that
might be alleged, ye might add this also, That otherwise Aristotle's Moralles
and his discourses concerning Justice, Freewill, the Immortality of the Soul,
the happy bliss, the reward of the good, and the pains of the wicked, were
utterly frutelesse and to no purpose: For as our fancies or ymaginations did
come and go, so would al those things come and go likewise; and so should they
have no continuance of themselves, but only be as a shadow and vain fantasy.
But let Aristotle alone, (for he has wrong) and let us come to the matter it
self. The Philosophers do ordinarily make a dubble mind; the one which they
call possible or in possibility, which is capable and of ability to
understand things; and this they liken to a smooth table; the other they call
working or workfull, which brings the ability into act, whereas
notwithstanding they be not two mynds, but two several abilities of only one
mind. Now, as for this ability or possibility of understanding, we affirm it
to be in the Soul of every man. Contrariwise, Auerrhoes affirmed only one
universal capable mind to be shed abroad every where throughout all men; and
that the same is diversely perfected and brought into act in every several man,
according to the diversity of the imaginations which the man tonceyueth, even
by the help or influence of the said vniuerall workfull mind, which he says
is also a substance severed from man, and (in respect of the understanding in
possibility) is as the Sun is to the sight of our eyes; and the
understanding in possibility is to the imaginations, as the sight is unto
colors. Now, I demand first of all, whether these universal Mynds of his,
be substances created or uncreated. If they be created, where becomes then
his conclusion, That the world is without beginning, and without ending, seeing
that he will have them to be continued everlastingly in all men that have been,
are, or shall be? If they be uncreated, how can so excellent substances be
made subject to our fond imaginations, to yield influence into them at their
pleasures? Or rather how happens it that they correct them not? How happens
it that they leave them in such errors, yea even in the knowledge of
themselves, seeing that by the erring of the imaginations, the very
understanding and reason themselves must also needs be so often beguyled?
Again, as concerning these substances, which extend into so many places; are
they Bodies or Spirits? How can they be Bodies, seeing they be in infinite
places at one instant, and do infinite things, yea and flat contraries? And if
they be Spirits, does it notfollow thervpo^, that they be wholly in all men, and
wholly in every man; that is to say, that every man has them whole to
himself? And therefore that if they be deceived by the fantasy of any one
man, they be consequently deceived in all men? And whereof comes it then, that
one man overcomes his imaginations, and another man not? Or that one man
resists them, and another suffers himself to be carried away by them?
Moreover, who can deny that a man wills things, whereof he has
understanding; and likewise that he wills some things which he understands
not; and that he understands some things which he wills not? And also that
he wills things even contrary to his appetites, and concludes oftentimes
contrary to his imaginations, as comes to pass in Dreams and in
Lookingglasses; which thing the brute Beasts do not? When a man wills
contrary to his appetites, wills he not contrary to his senses, yea and
contrary to his imagination too? for what else is fantasy or imagination, than
the rebounding back of the senses? And if this workfull understanding be the
only worker in his possible understanding by mean of imagination; how comes
it to pass that a man wills contrary to his imagination? Again, when either
in dreaming or in debating, reason concludes clean contrary to that which
fancy or imagination offers; whereof comes it that a man is contrary to
himself, or that the deed is contrary both to that which imprinted it, and to
that wherein it is imprinted? Also what else is imagination (according to the
opinion of Auerrhoes,) than a certain operation annexed to the body, steaming
up from the Heart to the Brain? And on the contrary part who can say nay, but
that the Will and Understanding are able to perform their operations without
the instruments of the body, seeing that a man does both will and debate things
that are most repugnant to the body? Aristotle in his ^. book of
Supernaturalls.
Yea and that (as Aristotle says) those be not actions which pass into the
outward man, but those which abide within and make perfect the inner man? And
who can make Will and Understanding to be things depending upon imagination,
seeing that both waking and sleeping and all manner of ways else, they daily
utter infinite judgments and determinations against it? Now, if we have
nothing in us above Imagination: then considering that we do both will and
understand, it must needs be that this power or ability to will and
understand is shed into us from without. And if it be but only one universally
in all men; then seeing that the actions thereof are executed without the
imagination, without the senses, and without the instruments of the body, yea
and against them: it follows that it wills and understands in us
whatsoever it likes and lists, even in despite of all impediments and lets
of the body; and that as it is but one, so it shall will but one selfsame
thing, and likewise also understand but one selfsame thing in all men. For if
(as Aristotle confesses) our imaginations make not our will and reason subject
unto them; much less do they make the foresaid universal mind subject to
them as Auerrhoes pretends. But now contrariwise we see there be as many
Wills as men, yea even in one matter; and that the understandings of men are
not only diverse, but also contrary. It follows then that every particular
person has in that behalf a particular substance, which wills and
understands, frank and free from all imaginations whenever it lists to
retire into it self; and not that there is but one universal mind which
wills and understands all things in all men. Besides this, by the judgment
of Aristotle as I said before, this universal mind could not work will and
understanding in us: for to will and understand (says he) are operations that
pass not into the matter nor into the outward thing, but abide still in the
worker, that is to say in the mind, as actions and perfections thereof.

Let us yet again take of that which has bin said before. If the said
universal only one working mind, have wrought from everlasting in the said
universal only one capable mind, by the Imaginations of men: then has the
knowledge of all things bin evermore imprinted in the said capable mind; for it
shall evermore have brought the ability into act: And therwithal, the working
and perfection of the thing that is everlasting, shall have depended upon a
thing that is temporal; which is impossible. And although Auerrhoes supposed
not the World to be everlasting: yet notwithstanding, the said capable mind
which has been set a work so many hundred years, by so many imaginations of
men, and in so many sundry Nations, could not now meet with any new thing
whereof it had not the knowledge before. For this capable mind (says Auerrhoes)
is a certain spiritual substance, which spreads it self forth into all men
and into all ages, and the nature of such sort of substaunces is to be all in
the whole, and all in every part thereof. For they be not tied to any one
place, but are wheresoever they work, and their working is in respect of the
whole and not in respect of any one part, forasmuch as they be vndiuidable.
Therefore it should follow by his opinion (as I have said before) that the one
universal capable mind is and works whole and vnparted in every man. And if
it be so; then is ye being of it there, not in way of mere ability or
possibility only, but in way of operation and perfect inworking, as a wicked
spirit is in a Witch, in a Pythonesse or in a possessed person: which spirit,
(were he possessed of the man as he himself posseseth the man, (after which
manner Auerrhoes affirms us to possess the understanding in possibility, by
our imaginatious;) would make the man capable of all that ever the Spirit
himself knows or is. Whereupon it will follow, that this understanding in
possibility shall everlastingly in all men from their very birth, actually
understand and know all things that all men understand, as well in the old as
the young, and in the ignorant as the skillful; so as we shall have no more
need of senses, nor of imagination to understand withal. Too be short,
although Auerrhoes admits not the World to be without beginning: yet at
leastwise he will not deny, but that [by his reckening] they which come into
the world at this day, should come far more skillful than all their
predecessors, and the children of them more skillful than their fathers, and
the offspring of those children more skillful than those children themselves,
and so forthon, because they should succeed in the knowledge continued
throughout all ages. Whereupon it will also ensue, that all Sciences shall be
equally in all men that make profession of them. As for example, we will speak
here but of some one special Science, as Grammar and Arithmetike. Now if
there be any diversity in the skill thereof, that diversity cannot come but
of the diversity of the subject or ground wherein the skill is. Now the ground
of the skill is the capacity of the mind or understanding, (which Auerrhoes
supposes to be but only one, common to all men) and not the Imagination, which
is but a reflection or rebounding back of the Sense. And so forasmuch as there
is (by his saying) but one ground in all men; it follows that the knowledge or
skill of this or that Science must needs be equal and alike in all men: or
else that if it be not equal, but do vary, as we see it does in diverse
degrees; then the same varying or diversity happens through the diversity
of the ground wherein the skill is, and consequently that there is one
particular understanding or one peculiar mind in every man, and not one
universal mind common to all men. Also it is a general rule, that the receiver
of a thing has not the thing before he receive it. For (as Aristotle Aristotle
in his third book of of the Soul.
says (that which is to receive a thing, must needs be first utterly void of
the thing which it receives. Now before that our Sense and Imagination had any
being at all, this universal common mind had received and possessed all things
aforehand; and not only received them, but also kept them together. For as
Aristotle himself says, that manner of mind is the place of all vnderkinds and
sorts of things, and thereto has no less power than the Imagination, to
retain whatsoever the Senses receive. In vain therefore should that
universal mind understand by our Imaginations, considering that it
understands by it self: in vain likewise should the Imaginations imprint
those things in it, which were imprinted in it so long before: and in vain is
Aristotle's settingdowne of a workfull understanding, which should bring our
understanding in ability, from possibility into action; if the said only one
universal mind or understanding be perfect of it self from everlasting, as it
follows to be upon the opinion of Auerrhoes. Neither is it to be said, that
although the conceyuable vnderkinds of things have been imprinted everlastingly
in the said universal mind; yet notwithstanding there needed an Imagination
for the understanding of them, as there needs now whenever we will use the
things that we have seen or learned before. For by that reckening, to learn
all manner of Sciences, we needed no more but to bethink us by imagination, of
the things that were already aforehand in the said only universal one mind, as
we do the things that have been printed sometime in our memories, and are
somewhat slipped out of our remembrance; and so might we our selves learn all
sciences without a teacher, because that in the said universal mind of ours,
we should have all the skill that ever any man had atteyned to, in like manner
as the person that has once had the skill of Arithmetik or Cosmographie
thoroughly settled in his mind, needs no teacher to teach it him ageine, but
only to ouerturne his own imagination, and to search his memory for the
finding again of that which he had laid up there. Now we know that whosoever
learneth nothing* knows nothing, and that ordinarily he which most studyeth,
most learneth: and that all the tossing and turmoyling of a man's own
imagination that can be all his life long, will never make him to attain of
himself to so much as the very principles of the least science that is. By
reason whereof it follows, That we have not the skill of any science in us,
until we either be taught it or find it out by beating our wits about it: and
that our imagination serves not to revive the Sciences in us, but to bring
them into us, and to plant them in us. And forasmuch as all the Sciences should
be in all men from the beginning, if there were but one universal mind in all
men, [which is not so] it follows that there is in every particular person a
particular and peculiar mind, and not any one universal mind common to all
men. Moreover, our mind atteyneth after a sort to the understanding of itself:
which thing it could not do in very deed, if there were but one universal
mind common to all men. For too understand it self, it must needs work upon
it self. But if we believe Auerrhoes, our mind shall but only be wrought
upon and receive into it from the Imagination, as a Window receives light
from the Sun. Ageine, the capacity of the universal understanding in
possibility, could not do that. For it behooved it to have some other thing
besides itself, to bring it self into action. And surely Imagination could not
help it, for it does but offer up the sensible things unto it, and atteineth
not so far as to the things that are to be discerned by drift of reason. Yet
notwithstanding we understand that we understand, and we reason and judge both
of our Imagination, and also of our reasoning and understanding itself. The
thing then which does so enter and pearce into itself, is another manner of
power than an Imagination, or than an universal understanding in possibility.
What is to be said to this, that of one selfsame Imagination, one selfsame
person concludes now after one sort, and byandby after in another sort; and
thereoutof draws both contrary arguments and contrary determinations: or
that diverse persons by diverse imaginations do close together in one will and
one mind? Is it possible that this should proceed of an everlasting substance
in one selfsame person, seeing that enerlastingnesse is not subject to any
change of time or place? Or that it should proceed of any one selfsame
substance in many men, seeing that the imaginations of them be so diverse one
from another? at leastwise if the said substance work not but by such
instruments?

As touching the opinion of Alexander of Aphrodise, Against Alexander of
Aphrodise.
who vpholdeth a certain vniuer sal working mind that imprinteth things in the
understanding in possibility, that is to say in every man's several capacity,
and brings it forth into action: the most part of the Reasons alleged before
against Auerrhoes, will also serve against him. Howbeit forasmuch as by this
workfull mind, he seems to mean God himself, there is thus much more to be
added unto it; That God who is altogether good and altogether wise would not
imprint in our mind the fond and wicked conceits, which we find there, nor
leave so great ignorance and darkness as we feel there, but would in all
men ouercomme the infection which the body brings: and although he inspired
not all men alike with his gracious gifts, according to the diversity of
their capacities after the mauer of a planed Table; yet would he not at
leastwise peint the World with so many false Portraytures and Traynes, as
every one of us may perceive to be in our selves. Again, were there any such
inspiration or influence, it should be either continual or but by times. If
continual or everlasting, we should without labor and without cunning
understand all that ever our imagination offers unto us. And if it be but at
times, then should it not lie in us to list or to understand any thing at all,
though we would never so feign. For contrariwise, we have much a do to
understand some things, so as we must be feign to win them from our
ignorance by peecemeale: and there be some other things, which we understand
by and by as soon as they be put unto us, and when we list our selves. There
is then in us a power of Understanding, though very feeble; but yet
neuerthelater obedient to our will: which thing cannot be fathered upon God.
Also if there be but only one Mind working in all men, there shall be but one
selfsame understanding in all men, I mean naturally, notwithstanding that it
differ in degrees. For into what place soever the Sun do shed his beams, he
does both inlighten it and heat it, howbeit diversely according to the nature
and condition of the places and things that receive him, some more and some
less, some brightlyer and some dimlyer. But howsoever the case stand, his
light yields no darkness, nor his heat any cold. So then, if the
diversities of men's imaginations do cause diversities of effects in the
inspiration or influence that flows into the capacity of our understanding;
surely it must needs be after this manner, namely that one man shall
understand one selfsame thing more, and another man less; but not in that any
man shall take untruth for truth, unright for right, or one thing for another.
Now, we see unto how many errors we be subject, I mean not in such things as
this, namely, that one man sees better a far of, and another better at hand;
but that one man sees white and another sees black (which are things
contrary) in one selfsame ground and at one selfsame time. It follows
therefore that diverse and sundries mynds do work in diverse persons, and not
one selfsame mind in all persons. By force of which reasons and of such others,
I say that every man shall find in himself and of himself, That every man
has a particular Soul by himself, that is to say a spiritual substance
united to his body, which in respect of giving life to the body is as the form
thereof, and in respect of giving reason, is as the guide of our actions: That
in every man there is a certain Sunbeame of Reason, whereby they conceive
things and debate upon them; wherethrough it comes to pass, that oftentimes
they agree both in the Reason it self which is one, and in the manifest
grounds thereof, and in whatsoever depends evidently upon the same: That every
man has also a peculiar body by himself, and likewise peculiar complexion,
humors, imaginations, education, custom and trade of life: whereof it comes
that every man takes a diverse way, yea and that one selfsame person swarueth
diversely from the unity of Reason whereof the path is but one, and the ways to
stray from it are infinite: That this Sunbeame of reason which shines and
sheadeth it self from our mind, is properly that understanding which is termed
The understanding in ability or possibility, which is increased and augmented
by all the things which it sees, hears, or lights upon, like fire, which
gathers increase of strength by the abundance of the fuel that is put unto
it, and becomes after a sort infinite by spreading it self abroad: Also it
is the same which otherwise we call the Memory of understanding, or myndfull
Memory: and it is nothing else but an abundance of Reason, and as it were a
hoorder up of the continual influences of the Mind: That the Mind from whence
this flows as from his spring, is properly that which they the said Auerrhoes
and Alexander do term the working or workfull Mind, which is a certain power
or force that can skill to extend reason from one thing to another, and to
proceed from things sensible to things insensible, from things mouable to
things immovable, from bodily to spiritual, from effects to causes, and from
beginnings to ends by the mean causes. This Mind is in respect of Reason, as
cunning is in respect of an Instrument or tool; and Reason, as in respect of
imagination and of the things that are sensible, is as an Instrument or tool
in respect of the matter or stuff that it works upon: Or to speak more
fitly, this Mind is unto Reason, as the mouer of a thing is to the thing that
is mouable, and Reason is to her objects, as the mouable thing is to the thing
whereunto it is moved. For to reason or debate, is nothing else but to proceed
from a thing that is understood, to a thing that is not understood, of
purpose to understand it: and the understanding thereof is a resting that
inseweth upon it, as a staying or resting after moving: That both of them as
well the one as the other, are but only one selfsame substance; and like as a
man both when he moves and when he rests, is all one and the same man, or as
the power that moves the Sinews is one selfsame still, both when it stirs
them, and when it holds them still; so the reasonable or understanding Soul
that is in every man, is but only one selfsame substance bodylesse and
immateriall, executing his powers partly of it self and partly by our bodies.
And seeing that Auerrhoes and Alexander make so great estimation and account of
the effects which are wrought in us, that they be enforced to attribute them
to some incorruptible and everlasting Mind; let us take of them, that in very
truth the thing which works so great woonders in the body, can be neither
sense, nor body, nor imagination; but a divine, incorruptible and immortal
mind, as they themselves say.

But let us learn the thing of mo than them, which al wise men teach us, and
which every of us can learn of himself; namely, that this Understanding or
Mind is not one universal thing as the Sun is that shines into all the
windows of a City, but rather a particular substance in every several man,
as a light to lead him in the darkness of this life; for surely it was no
more difficulty to the everlasting GOD, to create many sundry Souls, that
every man might have one severally alone by himself, than to have created but
only one Soul for all men together. But it was far more for his glory, to
be known, praised, and exalted of many Souls, yea and more for our welfare
to praise, exalt and know him, yea and to live of our selves both in this life
and in the life to come: than if any other universal Spirit, Soul or Mind
whatsoever, should have lived and understood either in us or after us. Now
then, for this matter let us conclude, both by reason, and by antiquity, and
by the knowledge that every of us has of himself; That the Soul and the Body
be things diverse: That the Soul is a Spirit and not a Body: That this Spirit
has in man three abilities or powers, whereof two be exercised by the body,
and the third works of it self without the body: That these three abilities
are in the one only Soul as in their root: whereof two do cease whenever
the body fails them, and yet notwithstanding the Soul abides whole without
abateme^t of any of her powers, as a Craftsman continues a Craftsman though he
want tools to work withal: And finally, that this Soul is a substance that
continues of it self, and is vnmateriall and spiritual, over the which
neither death nor corruption can naturally have any power.

And for a conclusion of all that ever I have treated of hitherto in this
book, let us mainteyne, That there is but only one God, who by his own
goodness and wisdom is the Creator and gouerner of the world and of all that
is therein: That in the world he created Man, after his own Image as in
respect of mind, and after the Image of his other creatures as in respect of
life, sense, and moving; mortal so far forth as he holds the likeness of
a creature; and immortal so far forth as he bears the Image of the
Creator: that is to wit, in his Soul: That he which goes out of himself to
see the world, does forthwith see that there is a God, for his works declare
him euerywhere: That he which will yet still doubt thereof, needs but to
enter into himself, and he shall meet him there; for he shall find there a
power which he sees not: That he which believes there is one God, believes
himself to be immortal; for such consideration could not light into a mortal
nature: and that he which believes himself to be immortal, believes that
there is a God: for without the unutterable power of the one God, the mortal
and immortal could never join together: That he which sees the order of the
world, the proportion of man, and the harmony that is in either of them
compounded of so many contraries, cannot doubt yt there is a Providence; for
the nature which has furnished them therewith, cannot be unfurnished thereof
it self; but as it once had a care of them, so can it not shake of the same
care from them. Thus have we three Articles which follow interchaungeably one
another. Insomuch that he which proves any one of them, does prove them all
three, notwithstanding that I have treated of every of them severally by it
self. Now, let us pray the everlasting God, that we may glorify him in his
works in this world, and he voutsafe of his mercy to glorify us one day in
the world to come.

Amen.
The xvj. Chapter.
That man's nature is corrupted, and man fallen from his first original: and how.
YET for all this, let not man be proud of the excellency or immortality of
his Soul: for the more he has received of his maker, the more is he indebted
to him; and the more excellent that his nature is, the more loathsome and
dangerous is the corruption thereof. The Peacocke is said to be proud of his
gay feathers, when he sets up his tail round about him: but when he has once
stretched out his wings, he falls into a dump, and as soon as he looks upon
his feet, he casts me down his tail and is ashamed. Even so, as long as we
think upon the liveliness of our Spirit, and the excellency of our Soul as
in respect of the nature thereof; surely we have whereof to glorify God that
gave it unto us, and of his gracious goodness has voutsafed to honor us above
al other creatures. On the other side, if we consider how this nature of ours
is straungely defiled and corrupted, and how far it is digressed from the
first original thereof: surely there is no remedy but we must be ashamed of
our selves, and wonder to see from how great a height we be now fallen and
sunk down. Even so the best Wine becomes the sharpest and eagrest Uineger,
and of Eggs (which were in old time the delicats of Kings) is made the rankest
poison. For look what degree of goodness a thing holds while it abides in
his nature, the same degree of evil does it come unto, when it falls into
corruption. Now then, look how much our original generation was the better;
so much shall the corruption that lights into it be the woorser: which thing
according to the order which I have used hitherto, we may examine toward God,
toward the world, toward men, and toward our selves.

Greatly in good sooth is man bound unto God, Man's corruption appears in his
respect to Godward.
if he would consider it; and very blind is he if he have not the skill to
perceive it. Of the great multitude of Creatures which God had created, he
has given to some but only bare being; to some, both being and life; and to
other some both being, life, and sense; But unto man he has given all these,
and moreover a reasonable mind, whereby he (and only he here beneath) knows
in all things what they have and what they be, which thing they themselves
know not. Which is an evident proof, that whatsoever they have or whatsoever
they be, they have it and are it for man, and not for themselves. For to what
purpose are all their virtues and excellent properties, if they themselves
know them not? The Son excellent among the celestial bodies, and the Rose
among flowers. The beast is a degree above the Trees, and among the Beasts,
one has some one point which another has not. But what skilles it what thou
art or what thou have, if thou know it not? What booteth thee the light, if
thou see it not? what art thou the better for sweet sents, if thou smell them
not? Or what avails it thee to excel in any thing if thou discern it not?
Of a truth, only man of all the things in this inferior World, can skill of
these things and how to enjoy them; and therefore it must needs be that they
were made for none but him; that is to wit, that to speak properly, GOD has
given unto him whatsoever all other creatures either have or be; and he has
not dealt with him simply as with a Creature, but rather as with a Child of
his, for whom he has expressly created this world and given it him to
possess. Now if the thing that is possessed be infinitely less than the
possessor thereof; and the world is given to man to possess: how far then
does man excel the world? And how greatly is man bound unto God, who created
him of nothing that is to say, not only has given the world unto man, but also
given even man to man himself? Wherefore if he acknowledge not him to whom he
is beholden, not only for this inheritance but also even for his own being:
what shall we say but that he is an unnatural and bastardly Child, even such
a one as has lost not only his right mind, but also even his senses? But of
so many men, of whom all and singular persons stand bound, both jointly and
severally in the whole and for the whole of that great bond for performance of
the Condition thereof, how few be there which do once think of it, and how
much fewer be there which think well of it? Nay, how few be there which
know that there is such a bond, and how much fewer do dispose themselves to
acknowledge it? And if perchance some one or two among many do dispose them
selves thereunto, yet notwithstanding who is he that ever was able to atteyne
unto it, considering that it imports a yielding unto God of that which is his
due: that is to wit, the employing of our selves and of all that he has given
unto us, even our whole being and life, our Senses, our Reason, our doings, and
finally all that ever we have both within and without us, in his service? and
that we contrariwise turn all things to our selves as to their proper end,
yea and even our selves to our selves which are nothing? If we kept a reckoning
of our life, how small a part thereof do we bestow upon God? How few of our
steps do we walk in his service? How few of our thoughts are directed
unto him? And if we look upon our very prayers, what are they but continual
offenses, seeing that even in the midst of our greatest vehemency, we vanish
away by and by into vain imaginations, and are carried as far away from our
prayers into wandering conceyts, as heaven is distant from earth, and further?
What Son will not fall out with him that speaks evil of his Father? or else
all that stand by will count him a coward if he pass it over with silence?
Contrariwise, which of us is moved when he hears Gods name blasphemed? or if
he be moved, that sets himself in defense of him: or if he set himself in
defense, does not by and by forget it? What then does this argewe, but that in
very truth, our Soul lives not, but our Body; and that our Soul has not
her mouings and actions free and lively, seeing it is not moved at the injuries
that are done to the Soul and to the father that made the Soul, but at the
wrongs that are done to the body and to the father of the body? If a man
break the Scutchions of our Arms, we take it to be a great disgrace to us,
and a touching of our credit; and if he break our Images or Pictures, we
fall out with him and will never be reconciled: And if it be done to a Prince,
he makes it a point of high Treason; and that we do not the like, it is not
for want of pride, but for want of power to revenge it. On the contrary part,
which of us is grieved at the wrong that is done to his neyghbor, or rather
which wrongeth not his neyghbor every day? Or which is much moved when he sees
a man slain before his face, unless he be his brother or near friend? Nay,
which of us our selves does not daily kill his brother, either in very deed,
or in heart, either with the Sword I mean, or by hatred, even for the least
offense that can be pretended, and so teareth or breaks not the Image of God
which he has painted and ingraued in man, even every hour without any regard?
Now what else is this, but that we know not this Image of God to be in our
selves? For otherwise how durst we be so presumptuous, as to offer any hurt
or harm unto it, but because the secret consent of all mankind in such
outrage, confesses it to be quite and clean forgone, or at leastwise to be
so disfigured and defaced, and so straungely berayed, that it can scarsly be
discerned any more? And because the kindred that is between all men, derived
from the father of their Souls, moves us very little, but the vile kindred of
the flesh moves us very much, which is as far inferior to the other, as
there is odds betwixt ye soul and a lump of earth, or between the fathers of
either of them; that is to wit, between GOD and Man: Yet notwithstanding,
seeing that the wickeddest man in the world, and such a one as seems to be
touched with nothing, having once slain him whom he hated most of all men,
does by and by after the deed done, feel a hart^ biting in his mind, and a
torment in his Conscience; which thing he feels not for the killing of a
thousand beasts every day; what can we say to be the cause thereof, but only
the remaynder of Gods Image common to all men, which puts him in mind of the
wickedness that he has done, and is highly offended at his own offense, and
which (according to this saying The good blud lies not) makes our indytement
of it self, and would feign even it self be revenged of us within us? Therefore
let us say (which thing we cannot deny unless we deny our selves) that God
created man to be to him as a Child, and that man is grown out of kind, yea
straungely grown out of kind, not regarding (as we see in most men) to be
known either of his father or of his brethren, (which thing notwithstanding
the bastards of this world do seek to their uttermost to do) but by his will
going about to abolish his pedigree and al his titles of kindred, that he might
be called the Son of the earth, The son of the earth.
(which was the name of Bastards in old time) rather than the some of him that
begat him, and created so many things for him to inioye. For proof whereof to
be true, what ame we at in all our studies and indeuers, but the earth and
earthly things? Had we continued still in our original creation, we should
according to the spiritual substance of our Souls, have naturally pursewed
spiritual things, yea and have mounted up above the very heavenly things. But
where seek we now our inheritance, our welfare, and our felicity, but in
these transitory things? And whereof are al our suites and quarrels in this
world, but of Cattle, of Corn and of Land? Wherefore we must needs confess,
that it is a witness of the dishereting of Mankind from the heritage of his
father, and that he is in his fathers displeasure and dissauour, and that he
does but run after Peasecoddes as the prodigal Child did, when he had
wasted his inheritance licentiously.

But now to come to those which make most profession of godliness; whence
(think we) comes the distrust that all of us have naturally of Gods
goodness and assistance; but of the feeling of our just disherison, which our
conscience is grieved at within us? The son of a good and rich father
behighteth himself as much relief as his father is able to yield, and as he
himself has need of. If not; but that the Child doubt thereof: we presume so
far of the fathers goodness, that we conclude that his son has offended
him, and made himself unworthy of his goodness by some great crime. Now then,
seeing that God is the very goodness and riches themselves, whereof comes it
that no man can assure himself of them? that no man can rest himself boldly
enough upon him? that no man can trust unto him so assuredly as his goodness
requires? and finally that our requests are so full of distrust, and our
hearts so full of unbelief? Surely, seeing the fault cannot be in Gods
goodness, which is a fountain that cannot be dreyned dry: it must needs be
that the fault remains alonly in the naughtiness and frayltie of our selves,
which dare not hope for good at the hand of him which is most excellently good,
because our whole nature tells us that we be unworthy of his grace, by
reason we have offended him too grievously.

If we consider the government and order of the World, In respect of the World.
we may even there also find apparently, that man holds not himself in his
state, but is fallen from the seat of honor wherein God had placed him. God
had set him aloft, above the Stones, above the Plants, above the Brute
beasts, yea and above the world it self. If he abide still in his degree,
whence comes it that so many men make themselves bondflaues to Gold and other
metals? and that so many men do lead the life of Plants and brute beasts in
the bodies of men? some giving themselves to naught else than to eating,
drinking and sleeping, and never lifting themselves up any higher; and
othersome consuming and wasting themselves in most beastly delights and
pleasures? For what beast is there that would be a Plant, or Plant that
shoots not up to get out of the ground? To be short, what thing is there in
the whole world saving only man, which does not very precisely keep the own
state and degree? I pray you if a man should see one with a princely Crown al
myry on his head, tilling the ground and following the Plough; what would he
think but that he were deposed from his Throne, and that some mischief were
befalne him? And what then is to be said of that man, which toyleth in
Doonghils and skulketh into corners to wallowe himself in a thousand sorts of
filthiness, and imployeth all his wit upon such things: but that he is fallen
from the top of his mind, and that by the greeuonsnes of that fall, he has
so lamed and maimed all his abilities, that it lies not in him to return
again from whence he is fallen? For who can deny but he is borne to greater
things than he does? Or who can think that GOD has given him an immortal
Soul, to the intent he should employ himself altogether about things which
are not so much as worthy to be mortal? Or a countenance which he calls
continually to the mynding of Heaven, to look groueling on the mire? Or a
Scepter, to play the dizard with it in a Play? Or a triple Mace to rake
Dounghilles withal, or too dig the ground withal?

Again, how is the Law and order of government which shines forth in the
whole world and in all the parts thereof, turned vpside down in man who is
the Little World, by the disobedience of the Body to the Soul? In Plants, in
Trees, and in brute beasts, the soul distributeth nurrishme^t by proportion.
Their bodies obey the direction of their Souls without geynsaying, and every
ability performs his duty accordingly. The nurrishing ability follows
his appetites, and goes not beyond them. The sensitive follows his natural
delights, but it violateth them not. But as for man, what shall we say of him?
Surely that his body commands his Soul, as if the Plough should draw the
Horses, as they say; that his will suffers it self to be ruled by his
appetites; that his reason is an underling to his senses, and that his very
whole nature is most commonly quite out of order. So must we needs confess an
overthrow of nature, in him for whom nevertheless nature it self was made,
and that man was swarued aside from his right way, seeing that all other parts
of the World do follow their Nature, and that Nature itself teaches us it.
What is to be said then, but that man is not only fallen from the state wherein
he was, to be set in lower degree than he was before; but also that he is fallen
in himself and from himself, in and from his own peculiar nature? Moreover
it is manifest that the world was created for man's use; for the world knows
not it self, nor the creatures that are therein. And ageine, as for the
Angels, they needed it not; and as for the brute beasts, they have no skill to
use it. Only man has understanding to use the service thereof, and a body
that has need of their service. Since it is so, who can doubt that God created
man with a knowledge of his creatures, and also gave him power over them?
Whereof comes it then that the beasts do naturally know their seasons, the
remedies of their diseases, and the Herbs that have a propriety of nature to
heal them; and that only man among all other living things, knows them not,
insomuch as he is feign to go to School to the brute beasts to learn them?
Also whereof comes it that these creatures (which surely GOD made not to be
snares to man, for that had been repugnant to the goodness of the Creator, but
for man's benefit and service) do now kick and spurn against man, yea even
those which have no power or strength at all to withstand him? Let us omit
Woolues, Leopards, and Lions, which seem to have some force to ouermatch the
weakness of man. What means it that worms make us war within our Bowels,
yt vermin deuoureth our Corn, and that the earth yields us not any kind of
fruit which has not a peculiar enemy in it, to mar it ere it come to our
hand: but to drive us to confess, that man must needs have offended his maker
right grievously, and that whereas Gods putting of his creatures in subjection
to man, was to the end that man should have continued in obedience unto GOD,
now because man has rebelled against Gods Majesty, God also suffers those
to rebel against man, whom he had put in subjection to man, yea even to the
very off kourings of the earth? For what else is this contrariety of the earth
to him that tilleth it, of the Sea to him that sayleth it, and of the air to
the success of all our labors and travels, but a protestation of whole
nature, that it disdeineth to serve a creature that was so presumptuous as to
disobey his Creator; a creature I say, which by doing service to the creatures,
has forgone the authority which he had received of this Maker?

Now consequently let us consider man toward man. In respect of Man.
What is there more disordered or more contrary to nature, than is the nature
of man himself? If beasts of one kind do kill or eat one another; we take
it for an ougly thing. What an ouglynesse then ought it to be unto us, when we
see how men (who alonly be endued with reason,) do every hour kill one
another, and root out one another? Nay rather is it not a great wonder to see
good agreement and friendship, not among Nations, not between Countries, not
among Companies; but even in households, yea and between Chamberfellowes?
Wolves are cruel: but yet in what race of Wolves shall we find Caribies and
Cannibals? Lions also are cruel: but yet where were they ever seen in Battle
one against another? Now what is war, but a gathering and packing up together
of all the sorts of beastlines that are in the world? And yet what is more
common among men than that? A Beast (say some) will bark or grunt ere he byte;
a house will crack ere it fall down; and the Wind whistleth ere it break
things. But contrariwise what is man toward man? who even in laughing,
threatens, in saluting sleaeth, and under fair countenance of courteous
interteynement, cloketh a thousand Serpents, a thousand Lions, a thousand
Quickesands, and a thousand Rocks at once? Well: let us leave the wicked which
discover themselves too much. What do we in all our bargayning, buying and
selling, but beguyle one another? or what do we in our dalying, but delude one
another? And what else is the whole societte of man which we so highly commend,
but a selfgaine, and a very incroching one upon another, the greater sort as
tyrants upon the meaner, the meaner upon the inferior sort, and the inferior
sort one upon another too take him in some trippe? To be short, if we do
any good, it is but to the end to be seen; asfor in secret, we will do none
at all. Ageine, if we forbear to do evil, it is but for fear least the
World should know it; and were that fear away, we would stick at nothing.
Whereto then serves us our reason which should further us unto all goodness, but
to cover our naughtiness, that is to say, to make us worse and more
unreasonable? yet notwithstanding how unreasonable so ever we be in all our
doings, we cannot but know that there is a reason; and were it not in us, we
could not conceive it; and were it not corrupted, we should not swerve from it;
and yet if we examine our selves, we shalnot be able to deny, but that we
digress very far from it. Therefore we may well deem of our reason, as of
an eysight that is either impaired or inchaunted. It has the ground of sight
still; but yet it stands the party in no stead, but only to beguyle him by
false images and illusions.

Let us come to man in himself, Man in respect of himself.
and see whether at leastwise he love himself better than other men: and the
more we stir him, the more shall we feel the stinche of his corruption.
When a diseased man feels peine, we say there is corruption in his body; and
furthermore that there is a default in Nature, or that the party has taken
some great surfeit, which has brought him to that case. Nowthen what shall we
say of the great number of diseases wherewith mankind is peyned, and wherewith
he is so wholly overwhelmed, that there is not any age of his life, any part of
his body, or any small string in any part of his flesh, which has not some
peculiar disease? Nay I say further, that man alone is subject too mo diseases,
than all other living things in this World together. The Philosophers saw it,
and have made books expressly thereof, and are utterly amassed and graueled in
seeking out the cause thereof; and they could never yet yield any Reason
thereof which might satisfy others or themselves. Nevertheless the most part
of them come to this point, that man is the most unhappiest of all living
wights; and they find fault with God and nature for it, whom notwithstanding
they confess to have done nothing but justly in that behalf. One says, that
only Man fleaeth himself through impatience of greef. Another says, That the
life of man is such, as that death is rather to be desired of him than life.
And of such speeches do all their Schools ring. There is another which with
great woonderment, reckeneth up certain hundreds of diseases whereunto the eye
alone is subject. Now which of all the beasts has so much as the thirtith
part of them in his body? Is it likely that God, which has given to Man so
great pre-eminence above all his creatures, created him of purpose to torment
him above all other creatures? Or rather is it not to be said, that man in his
original was created far after another sort than he now is, whether it be in
respect of the Creator himself, or of the end for which he created him?
Surely then, let us say as we have said before, that the very cause why Man
alone has mo diseases in his body, than all other Creatures toogither; is for
that he having abused Gods gracious gifts, has done more evil than all they
could skill too do: and that the very evil and untowardness that is in them,
is but to punish man withal: as for example, the Hayle and Snow serve not to
hurt the earth or the fruits of the earth, but to punish him that should take
the benefit of them.

Again, when we come to consider the Soul and the body knit together; what a
number of affections do we meet withal there, (which as says Plutark) are
so much more sorrowful and grievous than the bodily diseases, as the Soul is
more sinful and blameworthie than the body? To bring these passions to some
reasonable order, the Philosophers have made books expressly of Moral virtue,
and given precepts (say they) to bring them to obedience: wherein they confess
the rebelliousnesse that is naturally in us against reason. But who feels not
in himself, that their remedies serve not so much to take away the mischief,
as to cloak it? Which is a plain declaration, that it is not a spot which may
be washed away, but a deep impression bronded in nature as it were with a
fearing iron, which in very deed is not to be wyped out again, but covered;
nor to be subdewed and overcome, but with much a do to be restreyned and hild
short. Furthermore, seeing that reason is so much more excellent than passion
or affection, as the form shape or fashion (say they) is more excellent than
ye matter or stuff wherein it is: whence comes this infection in us, that
makes the matter to ouermayster the form, and causes the form (as ye would
say) to receive shape and fashion of the matter; that is to say, which puts
reason in subjection to affection, and to the impressions which affection
yields, contrary to the order which is observed in all the whole world
beside? For what else is this Intemperance of ours, but reason (such as it now
remains) imprinted with lust and concupiscence? And what else is anger, but
reason atteynted with choler, and so forth of the rest? And if a man will say,
that these things are natural in us; whereof comes it that of these
affections, we conceive inwardly remorse, and outwardly shame; yea and that so
naturally, as we must of necessity needs feel them whether we will or no,
and can no more let them than we can restreyne the beating of our Pulses or the
panting of our Hearts: but because that shame and remorse for sin are
natural in us, but the sin it self is against nature? As for example, there
be things the doing whereof is in us vice; and in brute Beasts, nature: for they
be angry, they aduenge themselves, and they company together indifferently and
in open sight: and of so doing they be not ashamed, because it is their
nature. Now, were these affections and fleshly pleasures as natural in us as
in the Beasts; as little should we be ashamed of them, as they. But
contrariwise, if an honest man come in while we be angry, by and by our rage
is repressed, as who would say our vice did hyde it self from him: and if a
man come upon us unawares in taking our pleasure (yea though it be well
lawful) we blush, as if our blud were desirous to hide and to cover our
doings. Yea and how secretly soever we be alone by our selves in execution of
our vices; we encounter continually with a companyon in our selves, which not
only bears witness of them, but also condemns and punishes them in us.
Soothly then, the motions of anger and lust against reason in man, are not
natural nor original, that is to say, Diodorus lib. 4.
they proceed not of his first creation; but are come in afterward by
corruption. Herodotus in his Clio.
And therefore the remorse which happens unto us in those passions, is
nothing but a secret (howbeit very lively) warning of nature, which is ashamed
to play the brute beast; which thing she would not be, if those things were
originally of man's nature. And in very deed, the universal consent of mankind
in being ashamed to go naked, Austin in his woork of the City of God, lib.
14. Chap. 17. and 18.
insomuch that they had lever to see the skin of a Beast, or the excrement of
a Woorme upon themselves, than to see their own flesh: and the thing which
Saint Austin notes in all men; namely, that they will rather do open wrong in
all men's sight, than have to do with their lawful wines openly; do evidently
show that the beastliness (that is to say the concupiscence or lust) that is
in carnal copulation, is not an original nature, but a mere corruption
thereof. Which thing our present age (but surely nothing to her praise) may
better prove unto us, than all the reasons in the world. For certeynly,
considering the excessive ouerflowing of vices which is to be seen, and ye
customable use of them, yea even of such as are against nature, turned almost
into nature; if ever voluptuousness could have transformed it self into
nature, and prevailed against nature, it must needs have been in this our age;
wherein notwithstanding, as strongly armed, authorized, and reigning as vice
seems to be, yet is she enforced to hyde herself even in the midst of her
tryumphs, undoubtedly as acknowledging that she reigns not over her own, but
over another man's.

Again, if ye have an eye to friendship, to charity, to the bringing up of
Children, to society in Marriage; who will not say that for all our trayning up
to lead us thereto, and for all our reading to instruct us therein, yet we had
need to resort to the brute beasts to learn of them, and to take example of
them, which is a token (as I said before) that their nature is less corrupt
than ours? If the case concern the turning away from the vices of
Intemperance; Lechery, Drunkenness, Incest, and such others: who would think
that our nature being so excellent, and (besides the discourse of reason
(having so many Laws, Statutes, Penalties, and Magistrates to help it; and
being brydled with so many dangers, sorrows and pains insewing the same;
should yet notwithstanding not be restreyned: whereas on the contrary part,
the brute beasts do naturally forbear both food and pleasure, saving only
so far forth as nature requires, that is to wit, for the maintenance and
preservation of them selves and of their kind? And seeing their nature does so
uphold it self, and that our nature being stayed so many ways, and closed in
with so many bars, cannot be vpheld nor kept within compass: who can say
that our nature (in case as it is now,) is not in worse plyght than theirs is?
And yet who will say that the Nature of the excellentest of all other Creatures,
has always been such from the first original beginning thereof? All the said
things are common both to Man and Beast: but yet moreover, Man glories of an
excellency of mind enriched by God with infinite goodly gifts. What is to be
said then, if in the thing whereby he surmounteth them, he be found inferior
to them? Or if in that which of it self is incorruptible, corruption be most
open and evident? Of so many men indewed with Reason, I pray you how many be
there that use it? That is to say, Of so many men, how many be not brute
beasts? Or what rarer thing is there among men, than a very man in deed? And
of such as use Reason, how many be there that use it well; that is to say, how
many be there which be not Devils? Now take me out of mankind the beasts and
the devils, and who will think it strange that a Philosopher took a Torch at
high nooneday, to seek for a Man in the mids of a multitude? One sort all
their life long do set their mind upon nothing but this life; they spare not
so much time as to consider what that power is which woorketh that thought in
them. What booteth it these more to have a mind, than it booteth a man to have
eyes that does nothing but sleep? Others employ it about the defyling of some
man's wife, or the deflowring of some maiden, or the glosing of some wrong, or
the eluding of some right, or the sowing of discord in some household, or the
setting of fire on the four corners of some Realm. To what purpose ageine is
it for these men to have a mind, which is bent and intended to nothing but
mischief? Or what else is such a mind, than ye eye of the The Catopleb and also
the Cockatryce.
beast of AEgipt, which kills those whom it looks upon, and it self also by
ye rebounding back of his own sight? Some in deed do lift up ye eye of their
mind aloft; but how far or what see they? Surely (as says Aristotle) even as
much as an Owl in the bright sun. The Edge of understanding rebateth at the
outside of the least things that are: and how then shall it be able to enter
into them? Our mind is dazeled with vapors; and what will it be then at the
vnaprochable light for which it was created? GOD created the World for man;
therefore his intent was that man should have the service thereof: and that he
might have the service of things, it behooved him to know them. Contrariwise,
what thing do we knowe-sufficiently? What know we in comparison of that we
know not? And how can we use the service of them, seeing even the least
things commannd us; not the Beasts, the Herbs, and the Stones only, but also
even the Earth and the very dross thereof? God has created man for his own
glory; and as man is the end of the World, so is GOD the end of Man. And it is
not to be doubted, but that as God gave man knowledge of the world, that he
might use it too his behoof; so he gave him knowledge of his Godhead, that he
might serve him. But how many be there which ame at this mark? and how shall
we hit it if we ame not at it? and how shall we ame at it, if we see it not?
and how shall we ^ee it, if we think not on it nor pass not for it? Again,
let us bend our wits to it as stoutly as we can; who is he that feels not
him self to quayle, when he is to think upon God? Who is he that bursteth not,
if he streyne himself to far? And whereof comes this, but that the string
of this Bow has fallen into the Watter, and is made so wet that it will serve
to no purpose any more? This mind brings forth deeds; and because they be
somewhat slow, they be done with the more aduisement. But what are the best of
those deeds but sin? If we commit any crime, all our whole mind goes with
it, and our doing of the evil is for the evils sake. But if we do any good;
which of us does it not as a bywoorke for some other things sake, rather than
for the love of the good itself; as one for honor, another for gain, and a
third for fear? And what else is this, but a serving of vanity, and not an
obeying of virtue? And whereas evil is naught else than a bereuing or wanting
of good: who is he on the contrary part, which thinks not himself a man
goodynough, if he do no evil? As who would say yt good also were nothing else
but the bereuing or absence of evil. And in very deed whom do we call good
and honest men, but such as absteyne from doing men wrong, from stealing, from
extorting, and from lending upon Usurie, albeit that it behoue them to
proceed further, and to be liberal in giving, forward in helping, and
diligent in serving, forasmuch as goodness is not a defect or a notdooing of
things, but an effect or doing of things, and consists not in only
refreyning or ceassing, but in woorking and performing. And in effect, what else
is it to define an honest man to be such a one as does nothing atal; than to
define a good Archer to be such a one as never shoots at all? This mind of
ours does also yeeldfoorth words: and they pass out more swiftly than deeds,
yea even from the wisest. If a man would keep a reckening of his words but for
one day; what should he find at night but a heap of vanities, as
backebytings, slanders, leasings, raylings, besides a thousand sorts of
slipperdeuices and idle words, which even by their only idleness do well
bewray our vanity? And since i^ is evident that whereas speech was given us to
procure and mainteyne society, we see it is commonly applied to the breaking
thereof, by sowing of discord and debate: who can deny but that there is a
notable corruption in the mind, which utters forth that speech? Ageine,
seeing it is an universal vice, against which the better sort do strive with
all their force and cannot overcome it: who can say it is a vice that is
incident but to some peculiar persons, and not to the whole kind of man? What
is to be said then of our thoughts and wits, whereof whole thousands pass
through our mind in an hour, which our mynds can neither repress nor
express? O how many do we esteem to be good men, whom we should see to be
wicked men if their thoughts lay open, or if we had eyes to see into them? O
what a sort of wild beasts should we see harbered in a man's heart as in a
Forest? And what is then our skill, but ignorance; our wizdome, but vanity; and
our holiness, but hypocrisy? Wherein consists our virtue, but in concealing
our vices, whenas in truth (as says Aristotle) it were both more for our
behoof and more approaching to righteousness, if we laid them open? Moreover,
what is all our enforcing of our selves to vanquish our vices, but a laboring
to outronne our own shadow, which (do we what we can) will always accompany
us whether we will or no? And surely we ought to be ashamed, not so much for
that we be such, as for that either we know not our selves to be such, or be
not sufficiently ashamed that we be such. Neither is there a stronger proof of
our corruption, than that: in like manner as we deem them to be filthy and
stinking, which are raking in Priuies and feel not the stinche of them: and
those to be more sick which feel not themselves sick, than those which are
most peyned with their disease: and those too be more frantic which find not
them selves to be braynsicke, than those which seek to the Physician for the
curing of their frenzy. For had we the wit to consider our chaunges, to feel
the vneeuennesse of our Pulses, and to observe the steamingvp of our humors
with the impressions which they make in our brain: we should by such
discerning of our diseases, become half sikfolke and half Physicians. But
surely considering the state wherein we now be, how we live as it were by a
borrowed Soul; I wot not whereunto I should compare us, except it be to
certain diseased persons, of whom Hippocrates makes this express Aphorism,
(...).
saying: When such as are very sore sick, do feel no pain, but fall to
playing with their Couerlet, pulling out the hears, and picking out the motes;
the case goes very hard with them, and there is small hope or lykelihod that
they shall live. And what else is this life of ours, but even such? We lay
stick to stick, stone to Stone, and Penny to Penny, no more minding the life
of our Soul, than if we had no Soul at all. If any man do yet still doubt
hereof, I offer him a condition, which if he will put in trial, I dare assure
him he will doubt thereof no more. Let him but set down in writing, all the
thoughts and imaginations that come in his head by the space of one day, and at
night let him reuiew them and take the account of them; And I dare undertake he
shall find in them so many vanities, so many crimes, so many Hobgoblins, and so
many Monsters; so strange, so fond, so foul, and so ougly; that he shall be
afraid of himself like the beast that starkleth at the sodeine sight of
himself in a lookingglasse; and that he shall not stand gasing, enamored at his
own beauty as Narcissus did; but run away ashamed of his foul deformity,
to seek where to wash away the mire that he has wallowed in. What a thing
then were it, if he considered it thus all the week long without putting it in
writing. And how much more were it, if he should do it a whole year; and
finally all his whole life? To be short, to set man in few words before our
eyes, we read commonly that there are four powers or abilities in man's Soul,
namely, Wit, Will, the ability of being angry, and the ability of lusting,
and in these four we lodge four virtues, that is to say, in Wit, Wizdome; in
Will, Rightfulnesse; in the ability of being angry, Hardiness; and in the
ability of Lusting, Stayednesse. Now, Wit is maimed with ignorance; Will, with
wrongfulnes; Hardiness, with Cowardlines, and Stayednesse, with Licentiousnes;
so as in this world they can neither be cured without skarre, nor be brought
to a skar. Also we perceive there are in man the outward senses, Imagination,
and Appetite, which three the brute beasts have as well as he, over and besides
the which, he has also wit and will as peculiar gifts given him of God. And
if we be men, we esteem our selves better than beasts, and look to have them
to be our underlings. Contrariwise, whereas Imagination ought to rule the
Senses, and Reason to rule Imagination, and will to rule Appetite: now the
outward sense carries away Imagination, Imagination Reason, and Appetite will,
insomuch that the only sense being bewitched or beguyled, carries a man
headlong into all evil after the manner of Phaeton whom the Poets speakeof. It
is a plain case therefore, that man has made himself an underling to the
beast, and consequently that mankind is turned strangely vpsidedowne, and
doubtless far more monstruously, than if we saw him go upon his head with
his heels upward. Nowthen, seeing that man is so ouerturned, whereof can he
brag, but of offending God incessantly in this life, and of infinite punishment
in another life, according to the infiniteness of him whom he has offended?
And to what purpose therefore shall his immortality serve him, but to dye
everlastingly and never to be dead?

But let us leave this matter to another place. Whence man's corruption comes.
And forasmuch as by considering man what he is to Godward, to the worldward,
to Manward, and to himself, I have evidently proved his corruption and
frowardness; namely, that he is utterly contrary to the end to which he was
created of God, to the order of the whole World, to the welfare of all
Mankind, and to his own benefit: Let us henceforth consider from whence and
from what time this mischief may have befalne him, and what may have been the
cause thereof. Certesse, if we say it came of God and that he had it of his
creation; we blaspheme God too too grossly. For God is good, and the very
goodness it self: and therefore he cannot have made any thing evil. Also it
appears throughout the whole government of the world, that he is the master
and mainteyner of order. And therefore how is it possible that he should make
the little world (namely man) to be a mould of confusion and disorder? Again,
no other thing than his own glory and the welfare of man, moved him to create
man; and yet man being in case as he is, forbeareth not to blaspheme Gods
name, and to purchase his own destruction. Needs then must it be that Man was
made a far other creature at the beginning, than he is now: as in very deed
the Husbandman creates not the wiuell in the Corn, nor the Uintener the
sowernesse in the Wine, nor the Smith the rust in the iron; but they come in
from elsewhere. Nevertheless, the man that never drank other drink than
Uineger, would think it to be the natural sap and taste of the Grape. And we
likewise who never felt other in ourselves than corruption, and are bred and
brought up in darkness like the Cimmerians, would bear ourselves on hand,
that GOD is the cause and author thereof. Now, let us which have tasted both
the Wine and the Uineger, judge what manner of creatures we may have bin in our
first creation: in doing whereof there is yet notwithstanding this great
difference, that the pa^at of our bodily mouth is able to discern the sweet
from the sower; but the palate or tas^^ of our soul, is unable to do either of
them both the one, because corruption can not judge of cleanness; and the
other, because it cannot judge well of it self. In Wine and Uineger we
discern a liquid nature common to them both: but as concerning their
qualities, the Wine is sweet, warm, and friendly to nature; whereas the
Uineger is sharp, cold, and corrosiue: yea and the very colors of them are
unlike one another. Lo here two things utterly contrary; and yet
notwithstanding, the Uineger is nothing else but Wine altered from his nature.
And because we have seen the one as well as the other; we will never be made
to believe, that the Uineger was Uineger from the very Grape. Let us judge of
our Souls with like discretion. We find there a spiritual nature,
immateriall and immortal; and that is the only remaynder of her first
original. But yet this Spirit of ours is foreward to nothing but evil, nor
inclyned to any other thau bace and transitory things. It clingeth to the
earth, and is a bondslaue to the body. To be short, in stead of stying up, it
crauleth I wot not how, contrary to the nature of a Spirit, which mounteth up
on high, and cannot be shut up in these vile and drossie things. Therefore it
must needs be said, that this nature of ours was not so of nature; it
departed not such as it now is from the hand of the workmayster: but
contrariwise, good, free, pure, and indewed with far other qualities than it
has now: for now it is steyned with naughtiness, bondage of sin, and
corruption. Nay will some man say, seeing it was created clear from all
corruption, who was able to corrupt it as we see it to be now? Sure we be that
it is a spiritual nature: and therefore neither the Elements nor any other
body, could naturally do any hurt unto it; and as little also could time do
any thing thereto: for time is nothing but the moving of bodies. Moreover it
was free of it self, and Lady of the body, and therefore could not receive
her first corruption from the body. And yet notwithstanding we see, that as
now it is subject to be corrupted, both of her own flesh and of the vanities
of the world, which by nature had no power over it. Needs then must the maker
of nature himself, have given a power to these things above their nature,
whereby they might prevail against the nature of the Soul; the doing whereof
surely could not but have bin rightful in him, considering that he is the very
righteousness it self. For Justice lays not any punishment, but where some
fault or offense has gone before. Therefore it must needs be said, that man
had committed some hey^^^s crime against his maker, whereupon such penalty and
bondage were appointed justly unto him. And therefore let us say, that the
Soul of man being the first corrupter of it self, did of it own accord vanish
away as Wine turns in it self and of it self into Uineger: whereas if the
Soul had hild her self in awe and under couerture, and had rested on her Lees
as is said of Wine; that is to say, if she had abidden steadfast in beholding
her maker, without seeking her welfare in her self: she might have continued
utterly uncorrupted still. And again, that by turning so away from GOD to her
self, she offended her maker, and forwent the gracious gifts which she had
received of him; whereupon followed the curse of the Creator, and the sentence
of his just wrath upon his creature; wherethrough it came to pass, that the
same was not only bereft of all the grace wherewith it was replenished by
beholding it self in him, but also was made an underling to the selfsame
things which were made to have done it service. Now what this sin was, we
cannot better understand, than by the punishment thereof. For punishment and
sin have a mutual respect one to another, as a sore and a salve, and may
after a sort be known the one by the other. Order would that our wit should
obey GOD, and that all our senses and appetites should obey our reason: but we
see that as now our senses and appetites hold reason under foot. This
punishment ought to set our fault before our eyes, when as we see our selves
fallen down and thrust under our selves; namely, that man intended to have
mounted up above God. The same order would also that all the whole world and
worldly things should have served man, and man have served GOD; that God might
have been the mark of man, as man should have been the mark for all other
things to have amed at. But we see that at this day man is an underling to the
least things that are: insomuch that even those which have neither sense nor
life do resist him, and he pitcheth the end of all his desires in earthly
things, as if they were of more valewe than himself, accordingly as all of us
know, that the end is always better tha^ the things that tend to the same.
Seeing then that nature is revolted from man, it is certain that man is
revolted from God: for it is the ordinary punishment of rebellious Subjects,
that their own servant and underlings also do kick and spurn against them.
And moreover, seeing that man not only finds all manner of mischief and
misfortune in himself, but is also so blind as to seek his felicity in the
mire, and in the durtie dunghils of this world; it is a token that he sought
his happiness in himself, and elsewhere than in God? To be short, we be
stricken in our Souls with ignorance of the things that are most needful for
us; and in our bodies with continual infirmities, and finally with death: and
that is because we have been curious in seeking trifeling things, as not
contented with the lesson that GOD had given us; and would needs have made our
selves immortal, howbeit not by the everlasting power of Gods quickening
spirit, but by the forbidden use of transitory things, yea even which had no
life in them. Thus see we now whereof the corruption of mankind is come, namely
even of our own transgression, and of the punishment that followed upon the
same.

But it is demanded of us yet further, How long ago corruption came into man.
how long it is ago since this befell. If we had espied this corruption in us
but from some certain hundred years hence; it were not for us to seek any
further for it. But let us hold on our course up the stream of Mankind even to
the Rivers head, and we shall find it still always foul and muddy; and we
shall from age to age hear these outcryes even among the best, I love well the
good, but I cannot do it; and (to be short) that man is inclyned to do
evil, and subject to receive evil; which are in one word both the fault and
the punishment. Again, were it but in some households, or but in some Nations
only, men would not stick to father the fault upon the Clymate and the Soil,
or upon the misteaching or misexample of the Parents. But when we see that in
that respect all men are in one selfsame taking, as well the men of old time as
the men of our days, saving that sin increases continually, as well under
the Equinoctial line as between both the Tropicks, and as well on the further
side as on the hither side of them, saving that some take more pain to keep
it from sight tha^ others, and that those which have most wit are woorst;
forasmuch as I have already sufficiently proved the creation of the world and
of the first man: we be driven to mount up again to the same man, and to say
that as he is the root of our offspring, so is he also the welspring of this
corruption which reigns in us, as in whom our whole race was both atteinted
with sin, and attached with punishment. In this behalf it is not for us to
plead against GOD, but to submit our shoulders to his Justice, and to lift up
our eyes to his mercy. For necessarily from point to point does this
consequence ensewe: The Soul is corrupted in all mankind: Who is so corrupted
that he feels it not? This corruption cannot proceed from the Creator. For
when did ever pureness yield forth corruption? The other creatures could not
have defiled it. For what makes a thing unclean, but the taking of
uncleanness unto it? and what causes the taking of uncleanness unto it, but
the touching thereof? and what touching one of another can there be between a
Spirit and a Body? It remains therefore that our Soul corrupted it self by
forsaking her duty, either of her own accord, or by the admitting unto it of
some wicked Spirit, that is to say by persuasion of that Spirit, which
persuasion is unto Spirits, as touching is unto bodies. And again, this
coruption is from all time: then comes it not of trayning. And in all Nations:
then comes it not of Constellation. And in all ages, both old young and middle
sort: then comes it not of imitation or exampletaking. Therefore it must needs
proceed both from one only man, and from the firstcreated man, who turned away
from God through pride, whereupon God also did justly turn away from him, as
we read of our first father Adam in the holy Scripture. Now then, what
remains more for us, but to conclude that thing by nature, which we believe
through Scripture? namely, That God created man good: That he told him his
will: That man chose to live after his own lyking, and would needs become
equal with God: That thereupon he was banished from Gods presence and favor:
That the Earth became rebellious against man, and man against himself: and to
be short, that man was wrapped in the wretchedness of this world, entangled
with sin in himself, driven to live ever dying in this life, and (were not
Gods wrath appeased toward him) sure to dye everlastingly in the life to come.

The xvij. Chapter.
That the men of old time agreed with us concerning man's corruption and the
cause thereof.
IT follows that we gather the voices and judgments of the wisest sort, yea
and of all men in general; the which in mine opinion ought to bear the more
sway with us, because it is a kindly thing with us, both to love our selves,
and also to think ouerwell of our selves. For what cause has a man to
complain, if being made Judge in his own case, he frame his own indytement,
and willingly bear witness against himself, by his own voluntary
confession? Surely, that man is straungly infected with vice; it is witnessed
sufficiently by the Histories of all ages, which in effect are nothing else but
registers of the continual Manslaughters, Whoredoms, Guyles, Rauishments, and
Wars? And when I say Wars, I think that in that word I comprehend all the
mischief that can be imagined. The Conscience of Sin.
And that these vices were not created in man's nature, but are crept into it;
it appears sufficiently by the books of the Ceremonies of al Nations; all
whose Churchseruices are nothing but Sacrifices, that is to say, open
protestations both evening and morning, that we have offended God, and ought to
be sacrifized and slain for our offenses according to our deserts, in stead
of the silly Beasts that are offered unto him for us. Had man been created
with vice in him, he should have had no conscience of sin nor repentance for
it. For repentance presupposes a fault, and conscience misgiueth the insewing
of punishment for the same. And there can be neither fault nor punishment in
that which is done according to creation, but only in and for our turning away
from creation. Now, the Churchseruice and Ceremonies of all Nations, do
witness unto us a certain forthinking and remorce of sin against God. And
so they witness altogether a forefeeling of his wrath, which cannot be
kindled against nature which he himself created, but against the faultiness
and vnkindlynesse that are in nature.

Also what else are the great number of Laws among us, but authentical
Registers of our corruption? And what are the manifold Commentaries written
upon them, but a very corruption of the Laws themselves? And what do they
witness unto us, but as the multitude of Physicians does in a City; namely,
the multitudes of our diseases; that is to wit, the sores and botches whereto
our Souls are subject, even to the marring and poisoning of the very playsters
themselves? Again, what do the punishments bewray which we have ordained for
our selves, but that we chastise in us, not that which GOD has made or
wrought in us, but that which we our selves have undone or unwrought: nor the
nature it self, but the disfiguring of nature? But yet when we consider that
among all Nations, that Lawmaker is believed and followed by and by, which
says, Thou shall not kill, thou shall not steal, thou shall not bear false
witness; whereas great persuasion is required in all other laws which are not
so natural: It must needs be concluded, that the Consciences of all men are
persuaded of themselves, that the same is sin, and that sin deserves
punishment; that is to wit, that sin is in nature, but not nature it self.
But to omit the holy Scripture, which is nothing else but a Lookingglasse to
show us our spots and blemishes; what are all the Schools of the
Philosophers, The opinion of the Ancient Philosophers.
but instructions of the Soul? And what else is Philosophy it self, but an
art of healing the Soul, whereof the first precept is this so greatly
renowned one, know thy self? Aristotle Aristotle.
in his Moralles, shows that the affections must be ruled by reason, and our
mind be brought from the extremes into the means, and from iarring into right
tune. Which is a token that our mind is out of tune even of it own accord,
seeing that it needs so many precepts to set it in tune again. And yet is
not Aristotle so presumptuous as to say, that ever he brought it to pass in
his own mind. Theophrast.
Theophrast his Disciple was wont to say, that the Soul paid well for her
dwelling in the body, considering how much it suffered at the bodies hand. And
what else was this, but an acknowledgement of the debate between the body and
the mind? But (as says Plutarke) he should rather have said, that the body
has good cause to complain, of the turmoyles, which so irksome and
troublesome a guest procures unto him. Plato in his Phedrus.
Plato who went before them, saw more clearly than both of them. He condemns
euerywhere the company and fellowship of the body with the soul, and yet he
condemns not the workmanship of God. But he teaches us that the Soul is now
in this body as in a prison, or rather as in a Cave or a grave. And that is
because he perceived evidently, that contrary to the order of nature, the
Soul is subject to the body, notwithstanding that naturally it should and can
command it. The same Plato says further, that the Soul creeps bacely upon
these lower things, and that it is tied to the matter of the body: the cause
whereof he affirms to be, that she has broken her wings which she had before.
His meaning then is, that the soul of her own nature is winged and flies
upward, that is to say, is of a heavenly and divine nature, which wings she
has lost by means of some fall. But to get out of these bonds, and to recover
her wings, the remedy that Plato gives her, is to advance her self toward
God, and to the things that concern the mind. By the remedy we may conjecture
what he took the disease to be namely, that our Soul having bin advanced by
God to a notable dignity, the which it might have kept still by sticking unto
God; fell to gazing at her gay feathers, till she fell headlong into these
transitory things, among the which she creeps now like a silly woorme,
reteyning nothing as now of her birdlike nature, save only a rowsing of her
feathers and a vain flapping of her wings. Now he says that he learned all
this of a secret Oracle, the which he had in great reverence. And of ^^^cueth,
in this doctrine of the original of our corruption, we have to mark the same
point which we have noted in some other things before; namely, that the nearer
we come to the first world, the more clear and manifest we find the matter.
Empedocles and Pythagoras.
Empedocles and Pythagoras taught that the Souls which had offended God, w^^
condemned and banished into bodies here below. And Phil^^^aus Philolaus.
the Pythagorian adds, that they received that opinion from the Divines and
Prophets of old time. Their meaning is, that the body, which ought to be the
house of the soul, is by Gods just judgment turned into a prison to it; and
that which was given it for an instrument, is become Manicles and Stocks. So
then, there is both a fault and the punishment: and the fault must needs
proceed from one first man, even in the judgment of those men of old time,
which acknowledged the Creation of the world. Also those ancient fathers seem
to have heard what provoked the first man to sin. For Homer speaks of a
Goddess whom he calls Ate, (that is to say Waste, Loss, or Destruction)
which troubled heaven, and therefore was cast down to the earth, where she
has ever since troubled Mankind. And hereupon Euripides calls the Feendes
(...), that is to say, Fallen from Heaven. And the AEgiptians, who be of most
antiquity, hild and taught the same in their Mysteries. It is a meetly clear
shadow of that which we read in the Scripture concerning the fall of the
devil, whereunto he drew mankind afterward by his temptations. Pherecydes
alleged by Origin against Cellus.
But when as Pherecydes the Syrian agreeing therein with Sibil, tells us
expressly that this Devil which has marred and destroyed the whole earth was a
Serpent, (whom he calls (...) or (...), that is to say, Snakebread or
Adderbread,) which armeth men by whole troops against God: we by gathering al
these testimonies together, shall have the whole story of the fall of man.
Hermes Hermes in his Poemander.
being auncienter than all these, does plainly acknowledge the corruption of
man, yea and that so far, as to say that there is nothing but evil in us,
and that there is no way for us to love God, but by hating our selves. And to
keep us from accusing the Creator, The workmaister (says he to cut off all
quarelling) is not the procurer of the rust, neither is the Creator the author
of the filth and uncleanness that is in us. On whom then shall we father the
cause thereof? God (says he) created man after his own likeness, and gave him
all things to use. But man in stead of staying upon the beholding of his
father, would needs be meddling and doing somewhat of himself, and so fell
from the heavenly contemplation into the Sphere of Elements or of Generation.
And because he had power over al things, he began to fall in love with
himself, and in gazing upon himself, to wonder at himself; whereby he so
entangled himself, that he became a bondslaue to his body, whereas he was
free and at liberty before. Now he intangleth this truth with his accustomed
speculations. But yet what is this in effect, but that the first man being
proud of the grace which he had received, drowned him self in the love of
himself, whereas he might have lived everlastingly by drinking still of the
love of GOD? And if we mount up yet higher to Zoroastres, Zoroastres
who (as is written of him) was Noes graundchild: we shall find that in his
Oracles, he bewayleth the race of Mankind in these words. Alas alas, the Earth
mourns even unto Children! which words cannot be otherwise interpreted than
of original sin, which has passed from the first man into all his offspring;
after which manner the Cabalistes and namely Osias the Chaldian interpret it;
whereunto Gemistus Gemistus.
the Platonist is not repugnant. And as touching the original of this
mischief, he denies in these words that it came of creation; The thing that is
imperfect (says he) cannot proceed of the Creator.

Now that we be come as it were up the stream to the first man Adam by whom
sin entered into the world, and by sin, death: let us see he^ceforth what
the opinion of the Philosophers has bin, since the coming of the second man
Jesus Christ. We have a little book of one Hierocles a Stoic, Hierocles the
Stoic against Ath^^^ts.
upon the golden sayings of Pythagoras, which shall answer both for the
Pythagorists and for the Stoiks. Man (says he) is of his own motion inclyned
to follow the evil and to leave the good. There is a certain strife bred in
his affections, which stepping up against the will of Nature, has made it to
tumble from Heaven to Hell, by undertaking to fight against God. He has a free
will which he abuses, bending himself wholly to encounter the Laws of God: and
this freedum itself is nothing else but a willingness to admit that which is
not good, rather than otherwise. What else is this, but as the holy scripture
says, that all the imaginations of manes heart are altogether continewally bent
to evil? and which we daily dispute of, namely that our freedom is fresh and
foreward unto evil, but lame and lasie unto doing well? If ye ask him the
cause thereof, Let us not blaspheme for all that, (says he) nor say that God
is the author of our sins: but rather that man is of his own accord become
untoward; and that whenever we fall into sin, we do that which is in us,
but not which was in us from God. How then shall we make these propositions of
his to agree; namely that God created man; that man is froward and corrupted;
and yet that God created not man such a one: unless we say that God created
man good, and that afterward man degenerated from his nature? But it is the
very thing whereunto he comes of himself. Ambition (says he) is our bane;
and this mischief have we of ourselves, because we be gone away from God, and
do give ourselves to earthly things, which make us to forget God. And that this
mischeef is common to all mankind, he confesses sufficiently in that he gives
us an universal remedy that is to wit Religion: the which alonly is able
(says he) to rid us from earthly ignorance, without the riddance whereof, we
can never come agein to our former shape, and to the lykenes of our kind, which
was to be like unto God. Now if all the whole kind be defiled as he says it
is; surely we must resort back to one first father, from whom it is spread out
into the rest by natural generation. Plutarke in his book of Moral virtue,
and in his book of the mutual love between Parents and their Children and
That Beasts have Reason.
Plutarke writing of Moral virtue, finds it a very hard matter to make our
affection subject to reason, and the body obedient to the spirit. And he is
driven to marvel greatly, That our feet should be so ready to go or too
stand still whenever Reason loozeneth or pulls back the Bridle; and that
on the contrary part, our affections should carry us away so headlong for all
the restreint that we can make. Also he thinks it strange, that in our
discourses of the greatest matters, as of Love, of the bringing up of our
Children, and of such like, we be driven to take the brute beasts for our
Judges, as who would say that nature had stamped no Print of them in our
selves; And he finds himself so sore graueled in his consideration, that he
prefers the brute beasts before us in all things, saving in the capacity
which we have to know God; undoubtedly as perceiving a continual following
of their kind in all of them, whereas in us only there is contrariwise such an
unkindly and Bastardly Nature, that not even the best of us have any whit of
our former nature remaining in us, saving only shame that we have it no more.
And this very gift of knowing God which remains to man, graueleth Plutarke
more than all the rest. Man (says he) is a reasonable Creature; God has set
him in the world to be served and honored of him, and he has made him to be
borne to common civil Society. Whereof comes it then that in his doings he
is more unreasonable, more contrary to Gods will, and more against the Law of
Nature, then the very brute beasts? In this perplexity, one while he says
that man had received fair and sound Seed, but that he corrupted it
afterward: Anotherwhile he says that he dealt with reason as perfumers do
with Oils, which never cease meddling and mingling of them, till there remain
no sent of Oil at all: And in one place, perceiving (by all likelihod) this
corruption to be so universal: he says further, that at the very beginning and
from their first coming into the World, men entangled and confounded
themselves with sin. Whereby we may perceive, that had the thing bin declared
unto him in such sort as we believe it; surely he would willingly have
embraced and received it, as the only solution of so many perplexities wherein
he was entangled.

Let us come to the Platonists. All of them agree in these points; That the
Soul of Man is a spirit; and that a spirit cannot naturally receive any
affection from a body, neither which may cause it to perish, nor which may do
so much as once trouble it. Yet notwithstanding, on which side so ever they
turn themselves, they cannot deny but that our mynds are trubbled with
infinite affections and passions in this body, and that they be subject one
while to starting besides themselves through pride, anger or envy; an another
while to be cast down with Riottousnes, Gluttony, and Idleness; yea and to
receive diverse impressions not only from the body, but also from the air, the
water, and from Mistes, and finally from every little thing in the world. Now
how can this contrariety be reconciled, except their meaning be as ours is,
that naturally our Souls are not subject to any of these things, but that they
be put in subjection to them beyond the course of nature? If it be beyond the
course of nature; by whom is it done, but by him that commands nature, to
whom it is as easy to put a spirit in Prison, as to lodge a man in a house?
If it be done by him who is the righteousness it self; does it not follow that
it was for some fault committed by the Soul? If for some fault; then seeing
that the punishment thereof is in all men, in whom should that first fault be,
but in that man which was the original of all men, as in whom all of us (say
I) were materially? Now again, this fault cannot be imputed to the body, for
it is in the will, and the body of it self has no will: neither can it be
imputed to any ^^fection received first from the body; for the Soul could not
be wrought into by the body. In the Soul therefore must the fault of mankind
needs be, and for the souls offense does the Soul itself suffer punishment,
and make the body also to suffer with her.

Howbeit, that we may the better judge of their opinions, let us hear them in
the chief of them one after another. Plotine having considered that the Soul
is of nature divine, heavenly, and spiritual; concludes that of itself it is
not wrought into by the body. But afterward perceiving how it is defiled,
ouermaistred by sin, Plotin: Enn. 3. lib. 2.
and by force of necessity linked unto lust; he comes back to this
solution, That her being here beneath is but a banishment too her, Also Enn.
1. lib. 6 Cap. 5. Also Enn. 1. lib. 8. Cap. 14. and Enn. 6. lib. 9 Cap. 9.
which he terms expressly a fall, and otherwise (as Pato does) a losing of her
wings: That the virtue which she has, is but a Remnant of her former nature;
That the vice which she has, is taken by dealing by these bace and transitory
things: and too be short, that all the virtue which is learned, is but a
purging of the Soul, which must be feign to be as it were newfurbished, to
scour of the great Rust that has ouergrowen it. In these Contradictions
therefore he makes this question to himself: Plotin. lib. 1. Enn. 5. Cap. 1.
What should be the cause (says he) that our Souls being of a divine
nature, should so forget both God their father, and their kindred, and
themselves? Surely (answers he) the beginning of this mischeef, was a
certain rashness and overboldness, wherethrough they would needs pluck their
necks out of the collar, and be at their own commandment; by which abuse
turning their liberty into licentiousnes, they went clean back, and are so
far gone away from GOD, that (like Children which being newly weaned, are
byanby conveyed away from their Fathers and Moothers, they know neither whose,
nor what they be, nor from whence they came. Now in these words he agrees with
our Divines, not only in this, yt corruption came in by sin, Plotin. Enn. 1.
lib. 8. Cap. 4.
but also in ye kind of sin, namely Pride, whereby we be turned away from our
Maker. In another place, The Soul (says he) which was bred for heavenly
things, has plundged itself in these material things, and matter of itself
is so evil, that not only all that is of matter or matched with matter, but
also even that which has respect unto matter, is filled with evil, as the eye
that beholds darkness is filled with darkness. Here ye see, not only from
whence we be turned away, but also too what: that is too wit, from God, to
vanity, from the Creator to the creature, from good to evil. But of this
inclyning to the material things, he sometimes makes the body to be the
author, Plotin. Enn. 3, lib. 5. Cap. 5.
as though the body had carried the Soul away by force of his imaginations; and
he acquitteth the mind thereof as much as he can, insomuch as he sticks not
to affirm, that notwithstanding all this marrednesse, yet the Soul lives and
abides pure and clean in God, Enn. 3. lib. 3. Cap 4.
yea even while the Soul (whereof the Mind is as ye would say the very
eisight or apple of the eye) dwells in this body. Howbeit, besides that he is
reproved for it by Porphyrius, Proclus and others; his own reasons whereby he
proves that the Soul is not naturally subject to the body, be so strong; that
it were impossible for him too shift himself from them. In this the great
Philosopher is ouershot, that he will needs seek out the cause of sin in
Man as Man is now. Where finding Reason carried away by Imagination, and
Imagination deceived by the Senses; he thought the fault to have proceeded of
that; whereas in deed he should have sought the cause in Man as he was first
created, when he had his Senses and Appetites absolutely at commandment,
whose wilful offending has brought upon us the necessity of punishment
which we endure. And in good sooth, this saying of his in another place cannot
be interpreted otherwise; namely that the cause why the Soul indureth so many
trubbles and passions in this body, is to be taken of the life which is led
before out of the body: that is to say, that the subjection of the Soul to the
Body is not the original cause of the sin thereof, but rather a condemnation
thereof to punishment. Plotin. Eun. 1. lib. 8. Cap. 14. and lid. 3. Cap. 4
Neither also can he escape from these conclusions of his own, namely that the
Soul being separated from the body, has her wings sound and perfect: and
that the Body being joined to the Soul, has no power to break her wings, and
yet that she finds herself there to be weak and without wings: except he
hold with us, that the Soul has by her fall forgone her strength, and that
the body by the feeblenes of the Soul and the sentence of the Creator, is
strengthened in his weakness: that is to wit, in so much as the body (as I
have said before) is of a House become a Prison to the Soul. To be short,
granting Gods Justice, as he does; he can never wind himself out of this
question which he himself makes; namely why the sins are imputed to the
Soul, seeing it does them not but by infection of the body; unless he make
this infection to be a punishment of the fault which the Soul had committed
before in the body.

But Porphyrius, who perceived these inconveniences, has spoken more
distinctly of the matter than his Master did, agreeing with him nevertheless
in the corruption of man, S. Austin in the City of God, lib. 10. Cap. 23. and
32.
and in the cleansing of the Soul; Which cleansing of the Soul (says he) is
so needful a thing, as that it cannot possibly be but that God has provided
some universal mean of cleansing mankind. How is it possible then (says he)
that the fall of the Soul, should come of Imagination which knitteth the Soul
to the body, seeing that the higher things are not drawn down by the lower,
but contrariwise the lower are drawn up by the higher? Nay rather (says he)
the higher substances come down in themselves from understanding into
imagination, from spiritual things to bodily things, from high things to low
things, from perfect things to imperfect things. And whereas by sticking fast
unto God they might have abidden firm, not so much by their own strength as
by his, and might have lived and wrought as under his form; they be come to a
fall of themselves by stooping to matter. And therefore Porphyrius in his book
which shows how to do the things that are to be conceived alonly by reason
and understanding.
(says he) in the substaunces which are inclinable to such things, there is
befalne (as men say) a sin, and a certain unbelief which is condemned,
because they fell in love with the Creatures, and turned away to them from the
Creator. To be short, he comes to this point, that the fall of men's Souls,
is like the fall of the Feendes that is taught by the Jews, and that through
the fault of the wit and the will, which he terms unbelief or
unfaithfulness, man is fallen into the folly of concupiscence, that is to say,
Also in his third book of Abstinence.
from the fault into the punishment thereof, from the rebellion of the Soul,
into the bondage thereof to the body. And ye must not think we speak
contraries when we say, one while that man sinned by aduauncing himself too
high, and by presuming to become as it were equal with God; and another while
that he sinned by stooping down to these bace and low things. For in very
deed, the lifting up of a man's self to Godward, is the true abacing and
humbling of himself: for who is he that can rightly look up to God, and make
account of himself, or rather not be abaced in himself? And to inclyne to a
man's self, is in very truth a presuming to make himself equal to God. For
it is a seeking of that thing in our selves, which is not to be found but in
GOD, namely of welfare and felicity; and what else is pride, but a
selfestimation or an ouerweening of a man's self?

Proclus Proclus concerning the Soul and concerning the Feend. cap. 4.
does ordinarily call the inclyning of our nature unto evil, a descending or
coming down; and the corruption thereof, a fall, because the highest that our
Soul can atteyne unto, is the beholding of God; and the descending, stooping,
or coming down thereof, is to fall into estimation of our selves; and the
fall is to be thrust down [in subiectio^] under our selves, like a body that
falls from some high place. But as touching the cause of the corruption, he
fathereth it upon our Mind, that is to wit, the highest part of our Soul;
saying that if the same had continued sound, and sticked fast unto God, (as
says Plotin) it had also hild reason sound still, which is the Sunbeame
thereof, and consequently all our actions should have been found, so as we
should not have been subject to sin. Seeing then that the punishment is come
even to the highest part of us, which we see combered with so many passions,
dimmed with so much darkness, and defiled with so many vices: surely the fault
proceeded only from thence. Hereunto we might ad many other sayings; but we
will content our selves as now with only Simplicius Simplicius upon Epictus.
the famous interpreter of Aristotle. As long as man's Soul (says he) cleaves
fast unto God the author thereof, it abides sound, and holds her perfection
wherewith she was created of God: but fall she once to shrinking away from him,
by and by she withers as having lost her root, and comes to nothing; neither
can she recover her former liuelynesse, except she be reunited again to her
former cause. Now perceive we euerychone of us, that our nature is withered;
and therefore let us say that we be slipped from our root. And the root
leaves not the branches, but contrariwise the branches leave the root. Let
us say then that we have bereft ourselves of the gracious goodness of God, who
would have mainteyned us still: for to nourish and quicken, is the property
and nature of the root. In one only thing do the Philosophers differ from us
in this behalf: namely, that they uphold all men's Souls to have sinned every
one in himself; and we say, That the only first man sinned, and thereby has
bound all his whole offspring to the punishment. But yet do both come back
again to one point, seeing that even by their own reasons I proved the
creation of the world, which of necessity leads us to one man the father of
us all, whereas the Philosophers hang wavering still unresolved in that point.

Among all people we see there were prayers to crave pardon for sin,
Universal consent,
Sacrifices to appease Gods wrath, Mystical washings, and Satisfactories or
Uotaries that were (...) ^he sins of some whole Realm, City, or (...) (as I
have said before) are public protestations of a public (...). The Philosophers
were sore combered in finding a mean (...) Mankind from his filthiness; some
would have done it by the Morals; some by the Mathematicals; and some by
Religious Ceremonies: but in the end they confess that all these ^^^ngs can
do nothing in that behalf. They be fools in their remedies, but wise in
discerning the disease. We read of the people of Affricke at this day, (who
be given enough to contemplation,) that they fall into great conceyts of mind,
and are not able to persuade themselves that all their Churchseruices are
sufficient to make them clean. And that is a proof that they feel a mischief
within them, whereinto neither the eye of the Physician can see, nor the
medicine that he ministers can atteyne. Agathias in his second book of the
Persian Wars.
Also the Persians were wont to hold a holyday every year, which they called
The Death of vices: In the which Feast, for a token of devotion, they killed of
all sorts of Serpents and wyld Beasts. And doubtless that was because they
had learned, that man does covertly carry in his breast all manner of Beasts, ye
which it behooves him to kill in himself, according to this saying of the
Platonists, That the readiest way to return unto God, and consequently to a
man's first nature, The general History of the Indyes ca. 122.
is to kill his own affections. But what shall we say to that which we have
learned in these our days among the barbarous Nations of the West Indies?
There came a man into their Country (say they) which called himself the Son
of the Son, who by his word and power replenished the Land with men and women
whom he created, and gave them great abundance of fruits. Who does not
herevppon call by and by to remembrance the creation of man and woman in the
Scripture, where God says unto them, Increase and multiply and fill the earth;
I have given you al herb bearing seed, and all trees bearing fruit, and so
forth? But (says the book of their Divinity) because some men provoked his
displeasure, he afterward changed the good soil which he had given them, into
dry and barreyne sands, and bereft them of Rain, and left them nothing but a
few rivers to help themselves withal by their great labor and travel. Who
espyeth not here again the sin of man, Gods curse upon the earth, and
namely these words, In the sweat of thy brows shall thou eat thy bread all
the days of thy life? And who should be ignorant of God, when as even those
know him, whom we esteem to be almost of another kind than we be?

But here the wicked perceiving themselves to want matter to replye, Objections.
do fail to railing against God. Seeing that man (say they) sinned through the
freewill which GOD gave unto him; how can God be called good, having given man
wherewith to sin? By the same reason I say at once for all, if God be good;
why has he made Man, or any thing for Man? If he should take from thee all
that thou abusest, I pray thee what should be left thee? Thy Reason? What is
there in thee that makes thee more unreasonable? Thy Senses? To what other
service do thou put them, than to the marring of thy Senses? Thy Tongue? How
much more eloque^t is it in speaking evil, than in speaking good? To be
short, where shall the good things become which he has given thee for the
maintenance of thy health and life? Nay, on the contrary part, which of them is
it that thou turnest not to thy death and to thy bane? Now is the founder of
them to blame, if thou kill thy self with the things without the which thou
could not live? Or if thou become evil by the things without the which thou
could not be good? GOD has given thee a will; and without will thou
could not be good. Unto will he has added a good wit to guide it: and
without wit thou could not be wise. If thou be loath to be either good or
wise, it is but because thou art loath to be a man. Thy will was given thee to
love God withal. Now, love delights to be freeharted; neither would God be
loved of us as inchaunted to it, but freely and utterly vnconstreined. Therefore
it behooved this will to be free. Likewise thy wit was given thee to behold God
withal. And had thou but only thy Senses, what had thou more than the
brute Beasts? And if thou had no more than they; why were they and all the
whole world made for thee? Now then, which of these two can thou find fault
with, seeing that without them both, thou could be neither good, nor wise,
no nor a man? Thou would have bin created unchangeable; howbeit, not as a
Rock or a Mountain, but as a Man. Surely the vnchaungeablenesse of Spirits,
was created to depend upon their linking in with their maker. Thou would
peradventure have bin an Angel: but there are even of the Angels that are
fallen; and as they were far higher than thou, so was their fall more
dangerous than thine. O man, acknowledge the goodness of the Creator in
creating thee good; and acknowledge the vanity of the creature, which cannot
stand in his own goodness, but in the goodness of the Creator. But
especially above all things commend thou his goodness and mercy, in that he
has not only relieved thee in thy fall, but also as it were vphild thee that
thou might fall the softer.

Another takes exception to Gods Justice. What Justice is it (says he) to
punish a man so rigorously for so small a fault? Nay, what is more just than
nature? What is more natural than to run into darkness, when a man turns
away from the Sun? Or (as Plotin says) to impair and wex naught, when a man
departs from the souereyne good? But O thou man which think thy self
iuster than God, what punishment would thou appoint to thy Son, not being
a babe or a young child, but being come to years of discretion, and a
mangrowen; not pinched and pyned, but flowing in all wealth: if upon a bravery
and lustiness of courage, he would disobey thee for a thing of nothing? The^
set thou Adam also before thine eyes newly come into the world by the goodness
of the Creator, not stark naked, but furnished with ye whole world to serve
him; not witless, but with a pure sound and skillful mind; not subject to his
lusts, but able to hold them in awe to his will, and having his will obedient
to reason. Now, whether thou consider his sin, his rebellion, his
unfaithfulness, and his pride; or whether thou have an eye to the easines of
absteyning from sin: what punishment will thou not deem him worthy to have?

Yea (say thou) but why uses he this rigor against his children? Nay
rather, say, why is he so merciful, why is he so gracious, as to keep them
low in their fathers fall, least they should fall [more greeuously] through the
same rashness? Thou buildest a City, and the custom is to beautify it with
Privileges. Afterward this City rebelleth; thou take^^ away their
privileges, their Belles, their Armor, and their weapons; and this punishment
of their Insurrection extends to all their posterity, albeit they were but
few at the beginning, and grew to be mightily multiplied afterward. The
granting of the Privileges to the first, was a point of goodness; for
otherwise they might have had occasion to complain of thee. Likewise it is
Justice to take them so from the^, and mercy to withhold them from their
posterity who have the same rebellious mind in them, and had else run
headlong into extreme punishments. God gave thee the privilege of freedom,
and enriched thee with singular gifts both of body and mind: praise thou his
goodness. Now, because thou have abused them, he either takes them clean
away, or else diminishes them: acknowledge thou his Justice. And because thy
children might do as thou have done, and would not be amended by thine
example, he takes them from them also and diminishes them in thee: commend
thou still his mercy in his Justice, but specially honor thou his Justice in
his mercy, in that of this rebellious race he causes the party to be
borne, which can appease his Justice.

Yet for all this, they give not over. If by the sin of the first man (say
they) nature be corrupted in all men: why be not the children more corrupted
than their Fathers, by means of so many sins committed by their Fathers? In
this behalf they mislyke of Gods clemency, and yet could not Gods Justice
have contented them. Now the Lords intent in punishing the rebellious Citizens,
was to make them submit themselves again under his government, and not to
destroy them utterly. And it was Gods intent to humble mankind by making him to
feel the smart of his fall; and not to break him in pieces in his wrath, but
to reclayme him by his mercy. We be fallen into a Pit, we be fallen from our
highness: now what would a second fall be? We have broken our Wings already
against the Earth; whether would we fall at the next fall, being unable to
make a second flight? We be fallen (say I) from the goodness of our nature into
naughtines, from Gods favor into his wrath: how can we fall any lower? Nay
rather by creeping halfebroken upon the Earth, we know that we be fallen; and
feeling the loss which we have sustained, we cry unto God for relief, and
like little Nurcechildren we beseech him to stay and uphold us with his mighty
hand.

Now therefore let us conclude for these two last Chapters, That man's nature
is corrupted; and that it was not so created of God; but that man abusing Gods
grace, did cast himself down from goodness into naughtines, and from Gods
freefauour intoo his just displeasure; and that the man in whom the said
Nature was first corrupted, was the first man: from whom we have received our
corruption, as well as our nature. But let us not so much muse to take an
account how we be fallen into this pit of infection, as earnestly bethink us by
what means we may get out again, which is the thing that we have to treat of
next.

The xviij. Chapter.
That God is man's souerein welfare, and therefore that the cheef mark which
man should ame at, is to return again unto God.
WE say that the chief point wherein fools differ from wisemen, is that
fools shoot out their doings at allauenture into the air, and that wise men
direct all their doings to some certain end. And again, that the point
wherein good men differ from evil men, is that good men determine with
themselnes upon the good things, and evil men upon the evil things, the good
upon that which is good in deed, and the evil upon that which is good in
show. Therefore it stands us greatly on hand, both to have some one certain
mark, and the same to be good: and to have but one, because God has given us
but one wit, and the perfection of wit is wizdome: and to have the same good,
because he has given us but one will, and the perfection of the will is
goodness. Surely God being the very goodness and wizdome it self, was not
without this one mark and the same very good, when he first created al things.
For Nature (say the Philosophers) does nothing otherwise than well and to a
good end. If they spoke so of the Handmayd, what shall we say of the Master
of the house? But forasmuch as he him self is the beginner, the holder on, and
the ender of all things: he in all his doings did not set down any other end
than himself. Things are said to be good, either by cause they come to good
end, or were purposed to a good end.
We his creatures, who take our beginning and continuance from him, can have
none other end than him. Yet notwithstanding, the reaso^^^^ creature wishes
well to it self, and does always purpose a certain end with it self, which
it thinks to be behooffull. For the end of every thing, is the peculiar good,
benefit, or welfare thereof: and this desire being in us by kind, cannot be in
vain. Therefore it must needs be that the true welfare of man consists in
his true end or in his true amingpoynt: and that the true amingpoynt of man,
and the end which the Creator intended, must meet iumpe together: Man's end
or amingpoynt and his welfare consist or rest both in one thing.
That is to wit, he must imploye himself to the glory of God, whose creating
of all things was for his own glory, and by tending thitherward atteyne to
his own welfare, which is ye thing that all things do naturally seek. And
therefore if we find either man's chief amingpoynt, or his souereyne welfare;
we find them both: for they be both but one selfsame thing; which in respect
that his wit looks thereat, is called his amingpoynt, and in respect that
his will rests thereon, is called his welfare, both of them together being
the restingpoint of the whole man. And unto this end is he to apply himself
and all his motions, all his indeuers and all his desires, as to his highest
felicity benefit and welfare.

Now, The Mark^^ whereby to know the amingpoynt and welfare of Man.
had we continued in our original nature, we should have had no pain at all
to seek them: for our wit was enlightened with the sight of our mark, and our
will was drawn by our welfare, that is to say, by GOD by whom and for whom we
were created; whereas now through our pride our eyes are gazing at all things,
saving our right way and our chief welfare. Yet notwithstanding, we may trace
it out by certain marks, specially if we bear in mind that we be fallen: for
then we will not stand groping for it in the filth of the things that are here
beneath, as folk amazed at our fall; but we will seek for it in the grace
and in the face of our maker from whence we be fallen. For like as when we seek
to know the use and goodness of a tool (as for example, of a Saw,) we
consider it not by the rustinesse thereof that has eaten away the teeth, or by
the breaks that it has taken by some falls; but by the teeth thereof which
are sound, sharp, and smooth, such as they were when they came new out of the
Sythemakers shop: even so must we do with man; we must not judge of his end by
the blyndnesse, ignorance, naughtiness, and corruptnesse that is come upon
him, but by the excellency, goodness, and light that was in him at the first
when GOD created him. Also we judge not of the use of the Saw by the metal
thereof in that it is Steel, or in that it has a handle, or in that it has
an edge to cut withal: for a knife has all things, which yet notwithstanding
is never the more a Saw for all that: but we deem thereof by some peculiar
shape, and by some property of the teeth thereof, which make it to differ, not
only from a Knife, the which has no teeth, but also from a Fyle which has
teeth, howbeit of another sort. Then let us do the like still in man. If we
deem of the use whereto God has appointed him, by that he lives, or by that
he has senses; what needs man to be made, seeing that the Plants are indewed
with life, and the brute Beasts both with life and sense? But now has he made
Man, and he has not made him in vain. The use of him therefore is to be
taken, of that part which GOD has given him specially and peculiarly to make
him a man; of that (I say) which makes him to differ from the things which
have but only being, life, and sense: I mean the very highest part of his
Soul. Again, the fayd particular shape which gives a particular use to the
Saw, is common to all tools which bear the name of a Saw: and therefore the
special property of Man which gives him a peculiar use which no other
Creature has, must needs be after such a sort peculiar unto him, as it may
nevertheless be common to all of the same kind: that is to say, as al men are
created with that property, so all men must tend to that end. And forasmuch as
that end is the souereyne welfare of Man; it has consequently certain marks
or tokens whereby it is to be known. Man fears nothing more than his end,
neither desires he any thing so much as to continue for ever: and yet
notwithstanding the souereine welfare is the end of Man: and therefore it must
needs be an end without end; and end which does not consume or waste, so as
the thing which tends to it should thereby be fordone: but which perfecteth
and fulfilleth it, so as beyond it there is not aught that can be desired or
be. If there were any other beyond it, it were neither an end, nor souereine or
chief. But for such a one do we seek. And if it could either waste or perish,
we might be afraid to lose it: and the greater that the pleasure were, the
greater also should the grief thereof be. But the property of felicity or
happiness is, to content the desire and to exclude fear. Now then, as
touching the thing which we seek; in respect that we seek it as our end, it
behooves it to be agreeable to the very nature of Man, peculiar to the whole
kind, and common to all that be of the kind: and in respect that it is our
souereine welfare, it behooves it to be universal, perfect, and continual.
And now let us see what that may be.

Surely if we consider man and the world; The world is not the end to which man
was made.
in man the Senses, and in the World the sensible things: man as the beholder,
and the world as a Theater: man as the guest, in the world the Feast prepared
of all things convenient for him: we will say by and by, not only that they be
made the one for the other, but also that in very deed the World was made for
man, and not man for the World or for any thing therein. And ageine, if we
consider how that in the World there is wherewith to content the eye the ear
and all the senses; but nothing that can sufficiently content the mind, the
which (as earthly as it is) passes from the things visible to the invisible,
from the bodily to the gostly, and from the creatures to the maker: shall we
not easily conclude (which thing I will treat of more at large hereafter) that
as the world cannot be man's end, so can it not also be his contentation? And
yet notwithstanding man is not created for naught; neither is the desire of his
own welfare planted in him to no purpose. For as say the Philosophers, nature
has made nothing in vayn, neither is she maimed in things needful. Therefore
it must needs be, and otherwise it cannot be, but that the creator is the end
and contentment of man, whose mind cannot be satisfied nor his will contented
to the full, if any part of him do rest upon these vile and transitory
things. By the way whereas we commonly affirm that God is both the end and the
welfare of all things for that then he guyded and led whither soever be lists
by his providence, and also be made partakers of his goodness: we must
understand that this is verified of man after a ^ore high and excellent manner.
Of the Creatures here beneathe, some have but sense and appetite, and other
some but only a bare inclination of nature: only man has wit and will, which
make him a man. Now all these are vnfall^^^y directed whether soever it
pleases God, as the arrowe is leueled at some mark by the Archer, who
shoots the Arrow straight though it have no eye to see with. But man by a
peculiar pruiledge has an understanding wit which was given unto him clear
sighted and clean, that he might see the mark whereat he is leueled, and
will, which he received frank and free, that he might repose all his delyght
therein: the one to know and discern it, the other to love and embrace it;
the one to see, and behold it, the other to obtain and enjoy it. Nowthen, as
the hither end of all Creatures here beneathe is man, and the furthest end of
them is God: so the nearest and immediate end of man is to know God, and his
only welfare is to stick wholly unto him.

Let us imagine man as much as we list, God is the end or Mark that Man ameth
a^.
to be still as sound as ever he was: yet what end, or what contentment could he
have but only God? We make great account of riches; what could he be the
better which had gotten all, or which had all riches gotten for him all ready
to his hand? For what else is the getting of this world, but a proof of want
and poverty? we esteem hyghly of honor, of vain tytles, and of dignities:
And what else are all these but a bayne gasing and wonderment of people, which
can be none at all where no people are? Surely then was not man set in the
world, to the intent that that should be his mark to ame at; and much less
could he seek his contentment there. Yet notwithstanding he had received more
wit than we have, and not to no end. And therefore we must needs say it was to
direct him to some further thing than vanity, which at that time could have no
place at all. Some will say, his fouereine welfare consisted in his health.
What was his health; but his very being, and what makes he^th to be esteemed,
but siknesse^ and who longs for it, but he that is diseased? But whereto
serves so excellent a wit, if it be to have nothing more than ye brute beast?
Another (...) it co^sisted in virtue. How in virtue, seeing yt virtue is
nothing else but the subduing and conquering as affection by reason; whereof he
was in possession already by nature, and had (...) it still without
co^tradiction she had not of his own (...) himself (...) who sees not that
many brute beasts do pass man in lively force both of life and sense? But in
this alone he (as Plutark says) does pass them all. Secondly, it must
nevertheless be common to all men. Now (as utterly blinded and corrupted as we
be) what is more common among us all, than the knowledge of God? If Riches and
Honor be the mark we shoot at; how feawe of so many men which level at it
with Heart, Eye, Hand, and Sinews, do hit it? If our welfare consist in
having our health, in being virtuous, in dealing uprightly, or in calmness
of mind; how feawe do enjoy it? On the contrary part, who is so blind, that
he feeth not God, as soon as he does but look out with his Eyes? or which
finds him not within him self? or which atteyneth not to him, if he look
above himself? And who sees not this mark, so clear that the world is but a
shadow to it? so great that the whole world is nothing to it; and so near, as
that we be not nearer to our selves? Or who can be afraid to be shut out from
it, whose greatness has room enough for all, and whose sufficiency is such,
as the former shot can be no impediment to the latter to have a lighting
place? Surely therefore we may well say, that if we had continued sound, we
could have had none other mark or end but him; for all things else had bin
nothing. And now also for all that we be corrupted; we ought not to tend or
intend to any other than him; for he alone can be all to all, and this point
can be nowhere but in him. To be short, like as the Soul is the shape of man,
so is the knowledge of God the true shape of al understanding of man.
Nevertheless, although the shape of man was disfigured in the first man, yet
there remains a certain common conceiving of God, howbeit so defaced and
beslubbered, that either we discern him no more to be our end, though he
put us in mind thereof on all sides; or else imagining our selves to level at
that mark, we swerve aside one while to ungodliness, and another while to
superstition; or at leastwise we had lever for the most part, to roue at every
thing that our senses meet withal, and too wallowe in these bace things like
Beasts which have no more but their senses.

Thirdly in our souereine welfare, I required that it should be universal.
Now where shall it be found to be so but in God, who is in deed the very good
of all goodness, and the very welfare of all welfare that is in the world? Also
that it should be perfect and full. And what desire we but the things that
are? And what can he want, which possesses him in whom all things are?
Again, I added that the same must be everlasting and unchangeable. Now who
can be so, but the maker of order and change it self? and what thing see we
heer^ in this word, yea even in our selves, which a ^deth in one state by the
space of two moments? To be short, if we desire to content our senses, he
has made sensible things for the ^once; and if we desire to content our mind,
he himself is the things that are to be minded. Where then is the thing to be
recovered which we covet, but only in him? Now as touching this universal
souereine good, true it is that all of us are able too desire it, but for the
most part of us, unable to discern it, and none of us able to atteine unto it.
There remains nothing to us at all, I mean even to the best of us since our
fall, but a greef that we have it not any more, and that we be not able of
ourselves to recover it ageine here below. Then let us say, that as it had
bin a happy case for us, to have continued still in our first state: so is it
now for us to return thither again; that is to say, to be set again in Gods
favor, that we may oneday see his face yet again. And because this blessedness
cannot be brought to perfection in this life so full of wretchedness: we must
dispose our life in this world, not to live still in the world, but to dye in
respect of these dead things, and to live unto God; at leastwise if we intend
to live the true life, and to live everlastingly in him.

Now then we see that we have found our true restingpoynt and our true
welfare, The false ends and the false Welfares.
that is to wit the turning ageine unto God, from whose favor and fellowship
we be departed. For proof thereof, we need but to examine from point to point
the other ends and welfares which worldly men do set down to themselves, by
the tokens and proofs which I have made of the other already. Whereby as we
shall find a common desirousenes in all men to seek the welfare; so will we
doubtless wonder at such diversity of tastes, which like to the lustings of
them that have the green Sickness, (who be greedy of Dust, Coals, Ashes and
such other baggage) cannot but bewray unto us a strange distemperature and
corruption of our whole nature. Most men have in all ages spent their whole
life, either in raking together of riches, or in Ambition, or in purchasing of
Lands, or in puffing up themselves with the wind of Pride. And what can be
more contrary to the lyking of our understanding, than those things? The end
whereto things tend, is better than the things themselves. What is it then for
a man too ^end himself to these outward things; but too show that we be
worse then Earth and Doong? And who would not believe that the Soul of man
were infinitely less made for such things, than cloth of Gold to wrap up mire
and dirt in?

Also we seek the uttermost end of man. Riches.
Now who is he that desires not Riches for some other end, than for the Riches
themselves? namely that he might spend them either wantonly or honorably, or
necessarily? Nay who would pass for them at all, if he might have the other
things without them? Were it not so; what were more wretched than man in whose
end consists his welfare; seeing that either the Wind, or Fire, or robbing
may bereue us of that felicity; that is to wit, ouerwhelme us with miseries in
one moment? Again, how can Riches be the common mark for all men to shoot
at, seeing that the enriching of one man is the impouerishing of another? Yea
and that the very being of them consists but in the opinion of men, some
counting Gold, some stones, some Shelles, and some Nuttes to be Riches; and all
resembling young children, which set al their felicite in Checkstones and
pinnes? And what is it for men to set their felicity in things which are
neither Man nor of Man, as if they should set the goodness of a Knyfe in the
Sheath, or of a Horse in his Footecloth or Saddle? To be short, how can that
be the souerein Good, which is no good at all? which is common as well to the
bad as to the good, and does rather impair men than amend them? Or how can
that be our chief mark to shoot at, which of all things turns us most
from the true mark, that is to wit, from God; as in truth there is not a
readier way to drive us quite and clean from God, than to draw us nearer and
nearer to worldly riches?

And what is Ambition? Honor.
We might discourse of that time without end: for in very deed it has no end.
Some atteyne to some certain point: othersome be quite excluded. Which of them
in our opinion are the happiest? Soothly they that are excluded are
disappoynted of their pretensed felicity. That is all the harm they have by
it. They that atteyne to honor, are in continual torment, spightfull or
spighted, doing mischief or receiving mischief, ouermated or ouermating. What
is this but many euilles for one, and a multiplying of miseries without number,
for the obteynement of one silly shadow of felicity? We will leave the
residue to declamers: what are the fruits of these hellish torments, what are
they? Forsooth Honor, Reputation, and Power or Authority. What is all this
but wynd, which cannot fill us, nor scarsly puff us up? I shall be saluted as
I go abroad, I shall sit highest at meetings. In having these things, what
have I, which a wicked man may not rather have than I: And if it be a good
thing, how is it given to evil men? I shall have reputation. If it be among
evil men, O how shall I be blamed among good men! Perhaps I shall have it among
good men. If for virtue: who sees not that reputation is but a shadow, made
to follow virtue? And who will run after the shadow, to forgo the body? If
freely for nothing, (as men say) upon Credit: who knows not that thing to be
nothing worth, which is given for naught, and by such as are noughtworth? And
who will believe that we be borne to such an end as that? Nay rather, how many
be the slanders wherewith good men be charged: insomuch that diverse times they
be feign to forgo their reputation, for the preservation of their Conscience?

Finally, Power Authority and Soucreintie.
I shall have obtained power and authority. If that be the end of Man; how
happens it that for one man's having of it, so many millions are feign to go
without it? And if it be his souereine good; whereof comes it, that not only
it is turned to evil, but also commonly turns the possessors thereof to
evil? But let us put the case that all this is good. To whom? For every one
that is honored as a Prince, ten thousand are feign to kneel: For one that
tryumpheth, a hundred thousand are led in captivity: For one that reigns,
ten hundred thousand serve as Slaves. By this reckoning, some only one man
should be the end of many men: and the felicity of three or four should be
the infelicitie of a whole world. Now our seeking is for the end and felicity,
not of some one or two men, but of all the whole kind. What willye say then if
even those few have it not? I take to witness the happiest Courtiers that
are, whether one wrye look of their Prince do not sting them more at the
heart, than a thousand flatterers and as many crouchers and cappers can delight
their ears and eyes? Nay, I report me even to the greatest Princes themselves,
whether one Rebellion of their Subjects against them, do not vex them more
than all their honorable tryumphs do rejoice them? And were it not a shame to
say, that man's souereine good should stand in awe or depend upon a grim look?
What else then are all these things, but resemblances of the Apples that grow
about Sodom, which being pleasant to the eye, and provoking to the appetite,
do vanish into smoke or into soote as soon as a man puts his teeth to them?

Besides this, the felicity of man ought to abide in the thing it self. But
the contentment of the ambicious person, depends upon another. Also it ought
to be everlasting: But ambition ends with the body, and is buried with it in
the same grave. Again, the things that ambition craves, are fought sometimes
for some other things sake: but we demand an end whereupon to rest, and not a
mean to an end. To be short, so far of is ambition from being a way to
bring us to souereine good or felicity; that in very truth (as I have said
before) it casseth us miserably down, and makes us to fall quite and clean
from it.

Now, The utmost end and ^^uerein good of Man are not in himself.
seeing we cannot find the thing we seek for, neither among men, nor in these
worldly things; does it not follow that we must seek it in our selves? Surely
the world is not of it self, nor for it self, but was made by another, and
for another; neither has man his own beginning of himself: and therefore he
cannot be the end of himself. The maker of a thing makes it not for the
things sake, but for his own sake: and therefore he himself is the end of
his work. Again, the thing that is made is not good in respect of it self,
but for the ^fe or end whereto the maker makes it: and therefore the maker
himself is the souereine good thereof. But let us discover the matter ^et more
largely. Man is composed of Body and Soul; the Body mortal, the Soul
immortal. Now, if we set man's felicity in his body only; we do too great
wrong, both to the Soul, and to the whole man. For if it consist in the body,
it perishes and ^adeth away with the body. And then what remains to the
Soul which over lives, but wretchedness? But we look for (...) which
belongs to the whole Man, and to his whole life both together. Beauty.
Again, what should be this felicity of the body, unless perhaps it be
Beauty; which gladdeth more the beholder than the hauer thereof, and yet
within a while after, is lost by some wound, soon sore, some pimples, or some
Sunburning? In the Soul joined with the body we have three abilities, namely
of life, of (...) and of understanding. Let us see in which of these three man's
souer^ine welfare and end may be harbered. The Soul gives life to man's body,
Health
and the perfection of life is health. If our life serve to none other end than
that; what had the first man to do with it, who was created healthful? If it
must be the end of us now after our corruption; what is more unhappy than
man? Nay, what is more incapable of happiness than man? A body subject to a
thousand diseases, a thousand harms, a thousand dangers; weak, frail,
fraught with miseries within, wrapped in them without; always uncertain of
life, always sure of death; whom a Worm, an Herb, a grain of dust may kill:
who if he looked for none other happiness than that, were much better to be a
Plant than a Man. Again, who is so sound and healthie of body, or so diseased
in mind, which (if he were put to the choice) had not lever to have a sound
mind in a sick body, than to be out of his wits having perfect health of
body? Soothly then it is a very clear argument, that our chief happiness
rests in our mind, seeing we can find in our hearts to redeem it with the
miseries of our body.

Let us come too the sensitive part. Bodily Pleasure, Voluptuousenes, or
Sensuality.
The happiness thereof seems to consist in Uoluptuousenes or Sensuality. If
that make us happy; then happy be brute beasts, as who do use it both more
freely and with more delyght than we: and unhappy is man, who cannot wholly
becone a beast, do what he can. The beast takes his pleasure, without regard
who sees him, without remorse of conscience, and without any argewing against
himself. Contrariwise, what man is he which feels not a Law in himself
that goes about to bridle him; which feels not a hartbyting in the m^^ds of
his pleasure; or whose greatest delyghts leave him not a sting of repentance
behind them? And what happynes can that be whereof we be ashamed, and which
compels us to seek covert for the doing thereof? Also what a fond woorkman
was he, that framed us so far unfit for such a purpose^ insomuch that whereas
al our body is liable too aches and stiches both within and without and on all
sides; we scarsly have above two or three parts upon us capable of pleasure,
and even those also subject to greef and peyue. Let there be a man (says
Plutarke) that has led his whole life in pleasure and sensuality; and about a
two or three hours before he draw toward death, let him be put to his choice
whether he had lever too delight his senses by lying with his Lais, or delyght
his mind with delivering his Country from some great peril. will be (think you)
be so very a beast, as to dout which of them he shall choose? who sees not then
that the pleasure of the mind, is both greater than the pleasure of the body,
and more peculiar to man, and more agreeable too his end? We seek a souereine
good; if it be good, it will amend us. But what does mar us and impair us
more both in body and soul, than fleshly pleasure? Also we mean it should be
perfect. If it be so, it will make us perfect too. But what consumes us, what
decays us more than sensuality? Agein, we seek an end; but yet an endless
end, not which makes an end of our pleasures, but which does still feed our
desires. Contrariwise, what is there which is sooner at an end in it self,
which sooner makes an end of us, or which sooner wearieth us and less
contenteth us, than the bodily pleasures; considering that (as the Poet says)
the pleasure and pain go both together? Moreover, how may that be the
souereine good, which is not so much as a mean good? For who can deny, but
that abstinence is taken for a virtue, even among the vicious sort? And what
manner of good is that, which may become evil by increasing, if it were not
evil of it self before? Finally, al bodily pleasures consist in the Senses,
and are executed by the sensitive parts. Now, the Senses are oftentimes
forstalled in us, either by diseases or by old age: and the sensitive parts are
dispatched at the least by death.

Now albeit that a man have a dubble life, the one in this world, the other in
another, the one dying, the other immortal; the first which is here tending to
the second as the worse to ye better; yet is not our seeking for such an end
or such a felicity as dies with us, but for such a one as makes us happy,
quickens us, (...) sheth us everlastingly; the which surely is not to be
found in mortal things. Now follows therefore the Understanding part, which
is occupied one while in itself, another while in the government of the world,
and another while in contemplation of heavenly things: and of these three
operations spring three perfections; namely Virtue, Policy, and Wisdom. Let
us see yet in which of these (...) consists our souereine felicity and
contentation. Soothly it is not to be doubted, but that our end will be found
to consist in that part: for whether can the mind of man reach, beyond the
world and man and him that made them both? But let us see if we come near it
in this world. Virtue.
I pray you what is Virtue? The cal^edesse of our affections. What are these
affections of ours? The waves and storms of our Souls, raised with every
little ^last of wind, which do so ^osse and turmoyle it vpside down, that
even the best Pylots are feign to strike Sail, and reason it self is driven
welnere to forsake the Helue. If M^n were created to this end, why was he
created with calmness of mind? Or if his souereine good consist now in
ouermaystering his affections; what more contrariety can there be, than to
be ^oyd of affections and to be a man? Let us put the case that some man
atteyne thereunto: shall he also stay there? No: for valiantness has an eye
to war, war to peace, peace to the prosperity of the Commonweal, weal,
and so soorth of others. Now, that which tends unto another, cannot be the
utmost end. But will man at leastwi^e be contented therewith? Nay, let us
commend Virtue as much as we list, and let us busy our selves in making
books of it; yet if it extend no further than to the things on earth, I dare
well say there is not any thing, I say not so happy, but so wretched and
miserable as man. Folk will say he is an honest man; but yet as honest as he
is, they will let him starve for hunger. The Prince will say he is a faithful,
a sound, and an upright dealer, neither led by covetousness nor carried away
with ambition: but yet he will not put him in trust with the managing of his
affairs in this world. The foulest vice in the world shall find a mate: but
if Virtue run through the whole world, she shall scarce find a husband. Now
then, if we seek our felicity in this life; what is Virtue but very misery?
And if we seek it in the other life; what shall become of this virtue where we
shall have no affections to encounter with? Surely then is not Virtue our end:
for the end that we seek, has not an eye to a further thing; neither does
the souereine good thereof which goes jointly with it come to any end.

What then? Polici^.
Is Policy that end? We call Policy the right use of reason in the governing
of worldly affairs. Besides that, it may also properly be defined, to be an
art or skill of guyding men's doings to a certain end. Now the skill and the
end that it ameth at, cannot be both one thing. But (to be short) what is this
world? Strife, War, Discord, Envy, Rancor, Burning, Sacking, wasting,
Spoiling, and destroying; a miserable ground for man too buid his felicity
upon. What is the governing and disposing of al these things, but a dealing
with By^es, Botches, and Cankers, whereof if we have no feeling, they can (to
go the best way) do us no good; and if we have feeling, they work us
nothing but sorrow, grife, stinch, and lothsomnesse ^ Yea, but the happiness or
felicity is in healing them. Happy then is that comonweale which receives
good by thy pain; but not thy pain happy which thou have taken to heal it.
For when a Physician heals a man, who receives the benefit, the Physician,
or the Patient? And if the Phicion did his Cure for gain, and the Magistrate
his duety^ for honor; who sees not that the skill of curing was not the end of
the one, nor the skill of governing the end of the other; seeing that they
tended either of them to a further end, and that so ^^lie aone? Notwithstanding
all this, in the end Man dies and the World perishes; but the Soul lives
still, and yet gives over the dealings of the world. Therefore needs must
some other thing then Policy be our souerein good, seeing that this Policy is
limited within the bounds of this world.

Now then, Wisdom or Religiousnes.
let us examine Wisdom. It is the beholding of God and of things belonging to
GOD. This requires a man to lift up himself above the world, and above
himself; I mean that a man should retire from all outward things into his
own soul, the Soul unto her Mind, and the Mind unto God. Surely there is
great lykelyhod that our doings ought to be referred to this wisdom, and
that our end and welfare should consist therein. For the perfecting of such a
contemplation, we say there are required Wealth, Health, Virtue, and Policy.
For want and poverty, be as Fetters of Iron to a weldisposed mind: a sickely
and diseased body, is as a torture to it; unruly affections dazzle it and make
it see one thing for another; Policy is the stablisher of Comonweales, and
whosoever gives himself to contemplation, it behooves him to be settled in a
quiet place, that he may hold the Plommet of his mind steady without shaking or
stirring. Thus do all things seem to serve to that use. But when they come
all to the forenamed point, to help us; yet I pray you how far do they
further us? It is naturally bred in man to believe that there is a GOD: and his
works do put us in mind of it every hour. But shall we enter into our
woorkemayster, seeing that the very outside of the least of all his works does
stop us? Again, who knows not, that if there be not a God, there can be no
happiness atall? And since we know it, even (as ye would say) from our birth;
why take we so much peine in seeking that which we have already? Reason
tells us further, that God is good and just; that is to say, that he loves
that which is good, and hates that which is evil. And our own conscience
tells us, that we do little good or none, but much evil. And if the little
good which we do be done amiss, what happiness is there, or rather what
unhappiness is there not in that knowledge which makes us to feel a continual
torment in our selves? But the party that is given too contemplation, mounteth
up yet higher, and considers that God is immortal, unchangeable, and not to
be wrought into; which is as much to say, as that he is not as we men are, who
do dye, move, and change: and when he comes to that point, he is at the
highest that his wit can reach unto. And what is all this stying up, but a
creeping still upon the earth? For, to say that of a thing which it is not, or
to say it is not this or it is not that; what else is it but a protesting that
we know not what it is? as if a man should boast that he knows an Elephant,
vndr pretense that he knows it is not a Snayle? What then is our highest
contemplation but deep ignorance? And who would make ignorance his highest
felicity and furthest end or shooteanker? Yet notwithstanding how feawe be
there which atteine so far? And if any through rashness adventure any further:
(...) what error and blyndnesse do they fall, no less than they which forgo
their fight by looking against the Sun?

It remains then in the end, Faith or Belief.
that we must atteine to that by Faith, which we cannot atteyne unto by
Reason; that we must mount up by lively belief above our understanding, unto
the things whereunto the eye of our mind is not able to reach. Agazel in the
beginning of his Supernaturalles.
And Algazell the Arabian proceeded so far, as to say that the root* whereby
the felicity to come is atteind unto, is faith. And what is this faith in God,
but a believing that our welfare lies in him? What is the believing, but the
hoping for it? What is hope, but the desiring of it? What is the desire of it,
but the not having of it? And to be short, what is the continual belief of it
here, but a bewraying that here we can neither have it nor see it? If we have
not faith; what have we but ignorance? And if we have faith; what have we but
only a desire and longing; considering that the greater our faith is, the more
we despise these bace things; and the greater our desire is, the more we hate
our selves, and the more earnestly do we love God. To be short, What is faith?
Welfare behighted. But we would see it. Again, what is faith? The way unto
felicity. But we would possess and enjoy it. Look then what proportion is
between that which is present, and that which is to come; such proportion is
there betwixt the hope which we have here (yea even above the world and above
our selves,) and the perfect and full fruition of the good which we seek to
atteine unto. But let us in feaw words gather together what we have said
heretofore. Whereas we seek for an end or restingpoint, the world is made
for man, man for the Soul, the Soul for the mind, the mind for a much higher
thing than it self, and what else can that be but God? As for that which we
understand here as concerning* God by our natural wisdom; it is but
ignorance; and that which we conceive by our supernatural power, (...) but
belief; and belief makes not things perfect, but only moves the
understanding. It follows then that our doings can have no end to rest upon
here, but only in the life to come, which is the beholding and knowing of God.
Again, if we seek the souereine good; our appetites owe obedience to our
will, our will to our reason, and the perfection of our reason is the knowing
of God. And so the contentment of our will is our possessing of God. Now we
possess not God, but so far forth as we love him: we love him not, but so
far forth as we know him: and neither can ignorance engender earnest love,
nor belief engender full and perfect fruition, but only a certain hope,
which hope is matched with impatience even in the best of us. It follows
therefore that we cannot inioye our souereine welfare, until we be come to
our utmost end; nor have our full contentation, until we have full knowledge:
that is to wit, we cannot have it in this world, nor in man, which two cannot
content the mind or satisfy the will of man, for so much as either of them both
is a world of wretchedness: but though we have a dubble life, yet can we have
our utmost restingpoynt and our only souereine welfare, nowwhere else but only
in God and in the everlasting life.

Here I should declare what that felicity of man shall be, when he is come to
his utmost restingpoynt. But who wilbee so rash as to open his mouth in yt
behalf, after him that has told us that neither eye has seen it nor heart can
conceive it? And how should we know it here, being unable either to see it or
to have it here? Now therefore at one word, let us be contented with this, that
all our desires shall be satisfied at that day, seeing they extend not but too
the things that are; and that in God we shall at that day see, have, and know
all things. But yet for a more larger confirmation of this former point, it is
now time to here what the Philosophers say thereof.

The xix. Chapter.
That the wysest of all ages agree that God is the utmost end and souereine
good, felicity, or welfare of man.
SUrely man does naturally desire, for the contentment of his will, to be
well; and for the exercise of his wit, to have some certain end. And therefore
there is not a ryfer nor a larger place in Philosophy, than the serching out
of the cheef end and souereine good of man; insomuch that Cicero says that
the whole authority of Philosophy, consists in that point alone.
Notwithstanding, forasmuch as by reafon of our fall, we find our selves
astonished here by love like folk fallen out of the Clouds, and moreover
benighted with very deep darkness in a place that leads many sondrie ways
clean contrary one from another; we know not in this perplexity which way
to take, and yet every of us thinks himself wise enough to direct his
companion. One calls to the right hand, and another to the left: One points ye
up the hill, and another sets ye through the playnes: and yet all of them can
as little skill of the right way one as another: and at the last the most part
of them perceive in the end of their travel, that the more haste they made,
the further they wandered from their way. But what wonder is it if blind
folks, or such as are guyded by blind folks, or such as have no guide at all,
do go astray? Nay rather, were it not to be esteemed for a miracle, if any
of them all, howbeit being guided from above, should happen to hit upon the
right way? Natural desire causes men to seek their welfare. And all
Philosophy lies in that point of seeking out the welfare of man. Sin has
put us from it, and makes us to lose it. And therefore the wiser sort have
labored to recover it by eschewing sin. But most men knowing not that this
sin is come upon us by a high fall, and therefore imagining themselves to
be nestled still in their former place: do busy their heads about the
seeking of it there, not perceiving that they be thrown down very low, far
from GOD, and underneath themselves. Austin in his xix book and first cap. of
the City of God.
That is the cause why we to no purpose do seek by groping round about us,
for that which is not to be had there, nor is to be found there. Varro says
that in his time there were twohundred fowerscore and eight opinions,
concerning this point in the books of the Philosophers: that is to wit, two
hundred fowerscore and eight Sects: for that was the badge or Cognizance that
made the difference betwixt them. It was a wonder to see so many diversities,
and a more wonder that of so many, so few could hit upon the truth. Yet
notwithstanding they tryumphed one over another, and were curious in confuting
one another; as in deed it is always more easy to reprove a fault, than to
amend it; and to convince a lie, than to find out the truth. But yet at
leastwise we have won thus much at the hands of them al, That there is one
chief end and one souereine good, whereat all men ought to ame: and we find
even by the contrariety of their own reasons one against another, that it is
none of all those things wherein they have sought it: whereupon we may easily
conclude, that it cannot be anywhere else, than where we seek it. Had they
well considered, that Man is fallen from his former dignity, and compared the
glory of his former state with the wretchedness of his present state; they
would have sought none other happiness or felicity than to return thither,
that is to say, than to be linked again unto GOD: and they would never have
followed so many fond fancies, more worthy to be pityed than to be laughed at.
Nevertheless there are some few to be found in all ages, which have leueled
at this mark, like as among all the rest, we see that some have had a
certain knowledge of our first original nature.

The Epicures sought this souereine good in the pleasures and delights of the
body: The Epicures. Antisthenes answered (...).
and the Stoikes mocked them for their labor, perceiving well, that there is
not here so fair and sweet a Rosebush, which has not very sharp pricks,
and that it was the next way to make a man a beast. To be short, the Epicures
themselves were so much ashamed of the matter, that to make Lady Pleasure to
go for an honest woman, they were feign to disguyse her as much as they could,
and to say that by Pleasure they meant the delights of the mind, and not the
feuerous pleasures of the body, which pass away in the turning of a hand. But
in the end, what were their pleasures? Forsooth (say they) to bethink a man's
self how often he has made good chere, or how often he has seen his trull. O
strange beastliness. As who would say (says Plutarke) that the pleasures of
this world were to be kept in Conserues, or to be laid up as Restoratiues in
the closet of man's memory: or rather (say I) as though the rememberance of
troubles past, yea or of some grievous sickness recovered, were not more
delightful than the greatest joys that are possible to be had.

The Stoikes The Stoiks.
therefore do give us another kind of happiness or welfare; namely Moral
virtue, which consists in the quiet reigning of reason in us. But what is
this else than a mere imagination? How will they answer to the Peripateticks,
which say that man is not made for himself alone, but for common society:
That his virtue must ame at a further end: That virtue neither in respect of
that whereat it ameth, nor of that whereon it works can make men happy? To
be short, what will they say to their own companions, who for the upholding
of this their surmised felicity, do underprop it with wealth, health, courage,
and measurable pleasure, as insufficient to stand alone without aid? But I
have ripped up this point sufficiently in the Chapter going last before

What then do the Peripateticks The Peripatetikes or walkers.
set us down? As the Stoiks left the Body to mount up to the Soul, so these
mount up from the Soul to the Mind. There are (says Aristotle Aristotle in
his Moralles. lib. 5
) two sorts of Blessedness. The one civil and public, called Policy; which
consists in action: and the other private and of household, called Wisdom,
which consists in Contemplation. He thinks verily that he has said
somewhat. But how can Policy be this blessedness, considering that according
to his own saying, Policy is but a cunning or skill to lead things to a
certain end, and is not the end it self? Or how can Wisdom be it, seeing
that (as he himself says) our understanding sees as little in matters
concerning God, as the eye of an Owl does when she comes nere the Sun? Our
understanding is dull, our judgment uncertain, and our memory deceytfull.
The deepest of our knowledge (says Socrates) is ignorance; and all Philosophy
(as Porphyrius Porphyr. in his first book of the Soul to Byrithius and Anebon.
vpholdeth) is but mere conjecture, easy to be overthrown with every little
push. Now then, how may this be a happiness, unless we will grant that the
Owl is happy in coming near the Sun; or a blind man happy in beholding
colors?

His Disciples Alexander and Auerrhoes, perceiving that all our contemplation
is but vexation of mind, most commonly to no purpose; have found us out another
deuyce. Which is, that all our happiness consists in joining the capacity
of our mind, or rather of our imagination, unto certain separated substances,
to be informed by them in all manner of knowledge: for the which deuyce they be
reproved of most Philosophers, and as I believe, in the end they laughed
themselves to skorne for it. But as I have said already, what are these
separated substances of theirs? Or rather why did they not set our felicity in
being knit unto GOD, whom they confess to be better than all these things?
Again, who is he, were he never so fantastical, even though it were Auerrhoes
himself, that could vaunt himself to have ever atteyned to that imagined
Conjunction of theirs in this life? The Academiks. Plato in his Commonweal
lib. 10. In his Epinomis. In his Theete^^s.
And seeing that (as they bear us on hand) the knowledged of the nature of
all sensible things, is required to the atteynment of that felicity of theirs;
how shall we atteyne to the full heyghth thereof, if we stop at the very
beginning?

The Academikes therefore, who take upon them to wear Platoes livery, mounted
up one step higeher, and considered very well that all our contemplation is but
a continual wrestling, one while against the darkness of the things, Laertius
in the life of Plato-Plato in his Phoedon.
and another while against the darkness of our own mind. And as they
acknowledged our hurt to proceed of a fall, whereby we brake our wings, which
(as Plato interprets them) were Moral virtue and contemplation: so conceived
they thereupon, that it were a great good turn for us to recover them again.
But whether to be carried by them? Let us hear that of Plato. All the things
in this world (says he) which we call goods, as Beauty, Riches, Strength,
Nobility, and such other; are so far of from being goods in deed, that they
be rather corrupters and hinderers of good. Then are they very far of from
being the Souerein good of man, or consequently the End whereat he out to
stay. Again, It is impossible (says Plato) that men should be happy in this
life, do what they can: that is to be had in another life, where the virtuous
shall receive felicity for a reward. In vain then do we seek that here
beneath, by our deeds and contemplations, which is not here to be found: and
in vain do we set our utmost end here, where is not the furthest end of our
life. But in the end, what is this felicity? It is (says Plato) to be joined
unto GOD, and to become like unto him, who is himself the highest top, the
furthest end, and the utmost bound of all felicity. Thus ye see that (by
Platoes judgment) the two things which we seek, do meet both together
alonly in God. The end of our life is to be joined unto God. And our Blessedness
or felicity which ought to content us, which consists in the full fruition
of all good things, is the possessing of God, who is the very felicity
itself. Yet nevertheless, Aristotle seems to have come at length to ye same
point, in that he says, Aristotle in his book of the World: And in his
Morals; and in his first book of the Heavens.
That God is the beginning, the middle, and the end of all things: and again,
that man's felicity consists in the same thing wherein the felicity of the
Gods consists, that is to wit, in perfect contemplation of that which is
above all mooueable things.

Pythagoras said that the end of this life is Contemplation; The Philosophers
of old time.
that the end of all Contemplation, is God; and that the felicity of man is to
be lifted up unto God. Also he taught us that we be but as Pilgrims in this
world, Pythagoras. Mercurius Trif megistus, otherwise called Hermes.
and as folk banished from Gods presence: and what does the banished man
desire more, than to be restored home into his own Country? And Mercury
says, that our end is to live in Soul, which in this world is as good as
buried; That in this world there is not any thing that is worthy to be said to
be well or good. It is in another place therefore that man must live and enjoy
his welfare, namely (as he says) in being become one again with God. And
Zoroastres Zoroastres.
says, that we must travel with all our power toward the brightness of the
father, who is the giver of our Soul. Also he has told us that we be fallen
away from this brightness of light into thick darkness, and have lost Gods
favor by going about to set our selves free from his service. But as the world
has taught us more and more that there is no good in the world: so the later
Philosophers have discoursed yet more largely thereof, than those that went
before. Here therefore we might rehearse a good part of Seneca and Cicero and
others, whose opinion forasmuch as I have alleged already in the Chapter of
the Immortality of man's Soul, where it may be known wellynough: I will
content my self for this time with a four or f^ue of them.

Surely Plutarke Plutarke.
is wonderful in confuting the beastlynes of the Epicures and the awk opinions
of the Stoics; setting against the Epicures, the pleasure that a good man
receives in seeing God well served here on earth, and in having him for his
Leader from above: and against the Stoiks, the strife which man has against
himself, which all their Philosophy is not able to appease, and therefore he
resolves himself in the end, that as in the mysteries of the men of old
time, (...).
the looking upon them was the end why they took the orders of them upon
them; so the end of true Philosophy is the Contemplation and beholding of the
myndly and immortal nature, that is to say of God the Creator.

Iamblichus was surnamed the Divine: Iamblichus.
and it is said that he was so called, because he spoke so Divinely of this
matter. Thus therefore does he say: Shall we say that to be healthy, to be fair,
to be rich, to be honored, to be of a good wit, and such like are man's
happiness? No surely. The strength of man is but a jest, and his honor a
mockery. Yea, Man himself and all that he makes account of, are but a fleeting
shadow. Nevertheless, unto good men, they be good possessions; but unto
wicked men, they be evil and dangerous. What then? should not the possessing
of them for ever, and not as in a Dream that vanishes away, be the true
happiness? No: the possessing of them for ever, if it were without virtue, were
a very great mischief, and the sooner they were taken from us, the less
harm it should be. Nay, the very true mean to atteine to the heavenly
felicity, is praying and calling upon the Gods, and cheely upon the great
God which reigns over them all. And therefore he says in another place,
Whatsoever a man does or leaves undone, ought to be referred to the Godhead*
and all this life is ordained for nothing else but to follow God; the knowledge
of whom is perfect virtue, Wisdom and Blesfulnes, which makes us like the
Gods, that is to say (after his manner of speaking, like the Angels. Let us
hear yet more of him. The time has been (says he) that man was fast tied to
the beholding of God: but afterward he was made subject to the body, and tied
to the necessity of Destiny; and therefore it behooves him to be well advised,
by what mean he may be rid of it. Now, other knowledge there is none that can
deliver him, but only the knowledge of God. For the pattern of felicity, is
to know the good, and the knowing of good, is the holy gate whereby to come to
the maker of all things. Now (says he again afterward) the care of these
inferior things which makes us to forget God, cannot be separated from this
transitory life wherein we be: for this body will never suffer us to play the
right Philosophers in deed. It follows then that this knowledge of God under
the which he comprehends all virtue, all wisdom, and all study of
Philosophy, cannot be atteind unto nor become perfect in this life, but only
in the life to come.

The final end of Man ( says Plotin) is the pure Good, Plotin. Enn. 1. lib.
4. cap. 15. 16.
that is to wit God; and all other things are but appurtenances to that end,
and not the end, itself. Whosoever possesses this good, Plotin. Enn. 6. lib.
9. Cap. 10.
can have no good taken from him, nor any good put unto him. For it is not only
an uniting unto God, but almost a being of God himself. Now who is he that can
take such possession of it in this life? And therefore he adds. There our
mind beholds the fountain of life, of understanding, of being, the cause of
good, and the root of the Soul. There lies our welfare after such a sort,
that to be far from it, is as good as not to be atall. There is the beginning
and end of life. The beginning; for from thence does it proceed; and the end;
for there is the welfare whereon it rests. The welfare, say I; for in
atteyning thither, it becomes agein that which it had bin before. For as for
the being which it has here, what is it but a downfall, whereby it has lost
her wings? Here reigns a bace and vile Venus; but there reigns a heavenly
one. Here a love of the World; there the love of God. And what a grief ought
it to be unto us, to be wedded to the earth? And on the contrary part, how
desirous ought we to be to feel God in all parts above? Yea and to be so
joined unto him, as one center is within another, so as both of them may be but
as one? Now he is full of such and larger sayings; and always he concludes
blesednes and euerlastingnes follow one another, whereby he excludes them, both
out of this world and out of this life.

But for the more speed, let us come to others. What is the end of Man (
says Porphyrius)? Porphyrius in his work of abstinence. lib. 1. cap. 2.
It is undoubtedly to live in Mind. And how is that? By contemplation in this
life? No ( says he in another place). All Philosophy is but gessing, a light
belief received from hand to hand, and which has nothing therein which may
not be called in question. What manner of Contemplation then shall the true one
be? Porphyrius concerning the Soul, to Byrithius and Anebo the AEgiptian.
Simplicius upon the Naturalles and upon Epictetus.
Not a heap of words ( says he) nor a patching together of precepts; but a
true union of the beholder and the thing that is behild, that is to say of our
Mind and of God.

Simplicius the Peripatetik, whether he learned it of Epictetus or some where
else, speaks of it thus. The greatest good that is in the knowledge of Nature,
is that it is a fair path to lead men to the knowing of the Soul, of the
separated substa^ces, and of Gods being. Moreover it inflameth us to the
serving of God, leading us by the effects to the Majesty of the Creator;
whereupon follows an onement with God, with assured faith and hope, which are
the things for which philosophy is chiefly to be used. And in another place;
The beginning ( says he) and the end of happy life, and the perfection of our
Soul, consists in being bent and turned unto God, as well by acknowledging
that he governs all things with Justice, as by consenting to all that he
does, as proceeding from a rightful judgment. For so long as our Soul
abides in him as in the root, it abides in the perfection wherein GOD
created it. But if it fall to starting out of him, it becomes withered and
droopeth, until it turn back and be united again unto him. The cause then
of our unhappiness, is our seperating of our selves from God; and the cause of
our happiness is our linking in again with him; and man seeks a happiness
agreeable to his kind, as all other things do. The end of man therefore is to
turn again unto God, that he may become one with him.

Syrian the Schoolemayster of Simplicius writing upon Upon these words, (...).
Aristotle, has comprehended the matter in one word; we deal with Philosophy
( says he) for our own benefit; that is to say, for our own welfare; which
welfare is to be united unto God.

And Alexander Alexander in his book of Providence, cyted by Cy^illus.
of Aphrodise comes not far behind when he says, that our souereine
felicity consists in devotion toward God, beyond whom there is not any
further reward to be desired. For seeing (says he) that the worthiest
operation of the Soul is contemplation; and contemplation properly is the
knowing of the best things; and none are so good as the things that concern
God: our end and felicity ought to be the contemplation of things belonging to
God. To be short, the bestesteemed interpreters of Aristotle, do make him to
yield to this point whether he will or nill, as me^ ashamed in his behalf, that
having sought so much for the true end of man, he has not set it down more
certainly.

Now, the Philosophers of old time knew in all times, The ends both of the good
and of the bad.
not only that those which atteyne to the said end for which Man was created,
are happy; but also that those which despise it do fall into extreme
wretchedness: the one sort receiving everlasting felicity, the other sort
being by Gods Justice condemned to endless pain. Also it is an article
expressly set down in the Creedes of al people, as a point that is probable to
all men at the very first sight, That God is rightuous and good; and that evil
is accompanied with punishment, and good is accompanied with reward. In their
book of shame concealed.
As for the Cabalistes of the Jews, it is no wonder though they have handled
this matter well: for they have drawn matter out of the fou^taines of the holy
Scripture. And therefore let us hear but the Heathen.

Those ( says Hermes) Hermes Trismegistus in his Poemander.
which have obtained the favor of God, are of mortal become immortal, and
conceive the only Good, which makes them to fall into a misliking of these
inferior things, that they may indeuer with all their power to return to him
the more speedily.

Orpheus speaking yet more clearly, Orpheus.
brings good men into Gods presence, to the seat of felicity, and to the
feast of the rightuous, where he makes them dronken with the perfect and
everlasting contemplation: but as for the wicked he buryeth them in a quamyre,
tormenting them with vain thoughts, and making them to draw water into a
Sieve: Pythagoras. Pindarus Diphilu^ Sibylla.
that is to say, he assures the one sort of perfect contentation, and puts
the other sort in extreme despair.

Of Pythagoras we have these verses. (...), Tat is to say, they that worship
the soothfast and everlasting God, shall inherit life for ever time without
end, dwelling in Paradyse alyke ever flourishing green. But of the other sort
she says thus.
If reason here thou follow for thy guide,
Then at thy parting hence thou shall be sure,
In Heaven a God immortal to abide,
No death thensforth for ever to endure.


And these verses were followed by all Poets, who commonly represented the
received opinion: among whom Pindarus and Diphilus proceed so far, as to
describe an excellent Garden replenished with all things, and appointed to be a
reward for good men, as if they had heard speaking of the Paradise of the
Jews; or else had read Sibilles verses concerning a certain green Garden
which she also calls Paradise, affirming it to be assighed for an heritage to
such as follow the way of God: that is to wit, which take him for their
shootanker, with whom they shall have everlasting life and light: whereas on
the contrary part, the wicked (says she) shall lie burning like firebrands and
Torches in endless pains.

Also Timeus of Locres has not forgotten this point in his little book, where
he says thus. There is a certain vengeance both according to the Laws and
according to the Oracles, which makes us to fear both heaven and earth. For
strange and vnintreatable punishments are prepared for the wicked in hell.

Asfor Plato, he takes so great pleasure in this matter, that he cannot be
drawn from it: and he scarsly passes any one dialog, wherein he has not some
speech thereof; meaning doutlesse to do us to understand, that without that,
all Philosophy and all Divinity be maimed; and it should seem that the
constancy of Socrates his teacher, (...). That is to say, roasted continually
with fyrebra^ds of peines Socrates in defense of himself.
had confirmed him not a little therein; in whose defense of himself, which was
as it were his last will, we read these words. Death would be grievous to me,
if I were not sure, first that when I am departed hence I shall go to the wise
Gods (so did they term the Angels or Created mynds) and secondly to the men
that are delivered out of this life, who out of dout are in better case than
those that are here. And unto Cratylus ageine he says, when the good man
departs this world, he comes to great honor and to a great inheritance;
for he becomes a Demon according to the true signification of the word, that
is to say, skillful and wise. Plato in his Cratylus.
That then is the perfection of a Philosopher, Plato in his Theetetus.
whose end and profession is to have knowledge and skill. And in his Theetetus
he says, that with the Gods there is no evil, but evil walks here
beneath among these transitory things, and therefore that we must hye us
thither and flee from hence, that is to say, we must become ryghtuous and wise.
For (says he) such as shall have followed the way of folly and wickedness,
shalnot be admitted into the restingplace of the blessed sort which are
exempted from all evil; but according to their leawd life, they shall be
condemned to dwell for ever with the evil. In his Gorgias Plato in his Gorgias.
he makes mention of an ancient Law under Saturn, which he affirms to
have bin then still in use, namely that when good men depart out of this life,
they be sent into the fortunate Isles (which Isles Pindarus also descrybeth very
curiously) and the wicked into the Iayle of Uengeance, which he calls Tartar;
undoubtedly betokening these unknown places, by places known unto them, which
they took commonly to be either most pleasant or most horrible; like as the
Jews betokened the Restingplace of the blessed sort by a goodly Gardyne, and
Hell by the valley of Onam or Ghehinom, which was an irksome place nere
Jerusalem. Plato in his Phoedon, and in his tenth book of Laws.
In his Phedon he brings in a certain Prophet raised from the dead, which
reports that those which are justified, go on the right hand, pure, and
clean, and are sent up to Heaven; and that the damned sort go on the left
hand, besmeared with filth and mire, weeping and gnasshing their teethe, and in
the end are sent into low deep places. Yea and he descrybeth there the
blessed Country in such terms, that some men have taken the peynes to
confer it, with that which is written there of in the Apocalips. Plato in his
Axiochus.
To be short, in his Axiochus he calls ye place of Judgment the feeld of
truth; from whence (says he) they which have followed the inspiration of the
good spirit, shall be sent into a Paradyse or pleasant Gardyn, which he
descrybeth there in the delyghtfullest manner that he can devise, to represent
the things which he cannot conceive, by the things which we see here on earth:
(...).
and that they which have bin led by wicked feends, that is to say by the
instinct of the devil, shall be condemned to darkness and confusion, where he
describes a great number of endless torments. Nevertheless he shows that
these things are not to be taken according to ye letter, when he says in his
Comonweale, Plato in his Commonweal.
that neither the punishments nor the rewards of this world are any thing atall
either for number or for greatness, in respect of those which are prepared for
either sort in the life to come.

Cicero who would needs be as a Plato in Latin, follows him as it were step
by step; Plutarke, concerning the slow punnishing of the wicked.
and so does Plutarke also, who counterfetting Plato, brings in one
Thespesius raised from the dead, and makes him to discourse of the life to
come. And without calling in Plotine, Porphyrius, Proclus, Hierocles and such
others, whom it would be ouerlong to hear, only Iamblichus shall suffice,
whose words are these: The good Soul shall dwell with GOD, and walk up and
down in Heaven, where it shall have a dwelling place. But the Soul that is
defiled with cursed deeds, shall be sent under the Earth, to the judgments
which are there executed upon Souls. Now what can we demand more of the
Philosophers, than that which they confess? Namely that the happiness and the
end of man, are not in this life but in the other, and that the mark which
man should shoot at, is to employ this in the knowing of GOD, that in the
other life he may everlastingly enjoy all good things in him.

So then, let us conclude both by man's reason and by the authority of all
Philosophy. That as the body of man relyeth upon his Soul; so his mortal
life relyeth upon the immortal life that is to come: That the end wheretoo man
was created in this world, is to know and serve God, and to possess him wholly
above. Howbeit for as much as by our fall we be fallen from knowledge into
ignorance, and therefore although we have some little glimmering sight of our
end which we ame at, yet we wot not how to shape our selves to it; And
again, by the same fall we be fallen from our souereine welfare into a
bottomless pit of misery, where we creep so lame as it is not possible for us
to return ageine to our former state: Let us see whether God of his mercy,
have not left us some remnants whereby to get up ageine, and to be directed
into our right way; and whether he himself also do not reach us out his
fatherly hand, through the clouds of darkness wherewith we be overwhelmed, to
pull us back and to call us home ageine to him, as very Bastards, Rebels,
and unworthy Caytifes as we he.

The xx. Chapter.
That the true Religion is the way to atteyne to the said end, and souereine
welfare; and what are the marks of that Religion.
I Have proved already, That there is but one God the father of Mankind: That
he created the world for man's use: and that he governs both the World and Man
by his providence. Herevppon the lea^t man among all will conclude by and by,
That ^ith he is our father, we owe him obedience; since we hold all things of
him in fee, we owe him fealty and homage; since he provides all things for
us, we ought to call upon him in all our doings and in all our necessities.
Also I have showed, that Man is of nature immortal: and therefore he must
apply himself withal his heart to immortal things. That by sin he is fallen
from God and from himself: and therefore he must crave forgiveness of him,
that his wrath may be appeased: That this offense was a certain pride and
ouerweening of himself; and therefore he must acknowledge his frayltie and
wretchedness, and humble himself before GOD. Now in one word, what is all this
to say, but that as there is but^ one God and one Mankind; so there ought to be
but one Religion, that is to say, one ordinary duty and service of man
toward God? For what else are all the exercises of Religion, but appertenances
of the Articles which we have proved; that is to wit, of the creation of the
world, and of Gods Providence; of the Immortality of the Soul, and of Man's
fall; and of Man's souereine welfare? In Religion men (...), men kneel, men
have ordinances to observe: this is done in token of obedience. Again; they
give thanks (...) praise unto GOD, and they give him the firstfruites both of
their Cattle and of their Corn: that is a sign of acknowledgement that they
be but as his Tennants: They call upon him in their adversity, and they ask
prosperity of him in all their doings, be they never sosmall* It is properly a
commending of themselves to his providence. Also in Religion there is weeping,
forrowing, fasting, putting on of sackcloth, and besprinkling of themselves
with du^t. This is in token that we ought to humble our selves beneath the
very earth. Again, there be Sacrifices both general and particular; and what
are those but protestations that all of us and every of us have deserved death?
In the end of all this, there comes a promise and a pretense of everlasting
life, to such as discharge their duty toward God: which is as much to say,
as yt those Ceremonies and observations are not the things that we must rest
upon, but are means to lead us to our right end, which is to lift us up on
high. But between these two last Articles, namely between the death which we
protest our selves to have deserved, and the everlasting life that is behighted
us to inherit, there is a marvelous waste distance to be filled up: and yet
notwithstanding either it must needs be that man is set in the world in
vain, or else that there is a way or a bridge ordained for the passing thereof.
Therefore Religion, which has brought us to the pits brim, must also show us
this bridge; that she may unity and link us again unto God, from whom we be
gone so far and so strangely by our fall; and that she may reconcyle us as
bastardly children to our father, and as rebellious Subjects to our Prince:
without which reconciliation or (according to the Latin deriuation) Religion,
God ceasseth to be our father, and we to be his children; and all Religion,
how gay and glorious show soever it have, is utterly unprofitable and vain.
Now, the end that man should ame at in this life, is to return unto God, and
it cannot be in vain: but in vain it should be, if there be no way to lead
man unto GOD, or rather to bring God unto man. To the intent therefore that
neither GOD be defrauded of his glory, nor man of his end and felicity, there
must according to my former profes) needs be a way, that is to say a mean to
reconcyle man unto God, and to unite him again unto him, that he may be
saved; which way we will (according to the common speech) call Religion.

Now, There is but one true Religion.
all the ancient men agree fully, that there ought to be a Religion among all
men; as in deed there is not a thing that does more necessarily follow, than
a GOD, a Man, and a Religion; a Father, a Son, and an Obedience; a Master, a
Servant, and a service: a Giver, a Receyuer, and a reward: or rather a Lender,
a Detter, Marsilius ficinus concerning the Christian Religion.
and a Bond. And therefore full well does one say, The Philosophers ought to
have bin the first Divines. For, inasmuch as we make toward GOD with two
wings, that is to say, with Wit and Will: Wit can no sooner conceive that God
is our father, but by and by Will infers thereupon, Ergo we ought to obey
him and to serve him: yea and it proceeds yet further, that since he is our
father and we his children, it is for our most behoof to return unto him. In
the last cap. of his Esculapius.
O Lord (says Hermes) What thanks shall we yield thee? And byandby he
answers, Lord, there is but only one thank, and that is the acknowledging of
thy Majesty. And agein: The only way to come unto God, is godliness matched
with knowledge, that is to say, to know how he will be served, and thereupon to
serve him. And Pythagoras was wont to say to the same purpose, forasmuch as
we be nothing without God, it becomes us to live unto God. Plato in his
Epinomis and in his Thoe^tetus.
Plato commends Religion in a thousand places, whereof I will not take past
two or three sayings here. It is man's felicity (says he) to be like unto God.
As how? By being rightuous and holy. How may that be? By Religion toward GOD,
which is the greatest virtue that can be among men. Aristotle (by many men's
report) was Religious, and as for Auerrhoes his interpreter, he was utterly
irreligious. Nevertheless see how nature swimmeth over ungodliness. Aristotle
in his fifth book of Moralles: and in his first of Heaven.
Aristotle says it is graffed in nature to do sacrifice. And Auerrhoes upon
that first book of Heaven.
Auerrhoes says that we be bound by nature to magnify God with Prayers and
Sacrifices. What is this to say, but that it is natural to man, yea even in
respect of his shape and substance, to have a Religion? And why? Alexander of
Aphrodyse, concerning the providence of God, cyted by Cyrillus.
Alexander professes himself to be the interpreter of Aristotle, and
therefore he shall interpret him for us here. It is (says he) because our
whole felicity consists in devotion toward God. For we look for none
other reward but God himself, and him being the very souerein good, we obtain
by serving him. Now when we hear these words, we may think it was a strong
torment of conscience that wroong this truth out of them. For all men know,
that cheesly Auerrhoes urges the eternity of the world, and the universality
of one only Mind, which yet notwithstanding cannot match with godlynes.

Epictetus makes not the like florishes of Philosophy, but yet he plays the
Philosopher much better in deed. If we had wit ( says he) what should we do
but praise God continually, and sing Psalms of thanksgiving unto him, even in
digging and tilling the ground, and both in iourneying and in resting? As how?
Even saying thus: Great is God which has given us these tools to till the
earth withal; Great which has given us hands to work withal; Great which
has given us too grow even not woting it, and to breath even being a sleep,
for these are things that cannot be imputed to our own cunning. Such ( says
he) ought to be the Songs of every of us. And again: If I were a Nightingale,
I should do as Nightingales do: but being a reasonable Creature, what shall I
do now? I will evermore praise God ( says he) without ceasing; and I will
exhort you all to do the like. Simplicius upon Epictetus.
And Simplice his interpreter having first made many goodly discourses, adds
that he which is negligent and slothful in serving and honoring God, cannot
be diligent in any other thing, how needful so ever the same be. Hierocles in
his first chapter against Atheifts.
Of all virtues ( says Hierocles) Religion is the guide, for it concerns the
matters of God, and therefore Pythagoras begins his precepts thereat. And the
word which he uses there for a guide signifies a Queen, which one word
imports very much, namely that all the virtues which we make account of, as
Hardines, Wisdom, Justice, and Temperance, are nothing if they be not referred
unto God, and used in respect of him, that is to say, if Religion do not direct
and lead them to God the principal end whereto all our doings ought to tend.
Hierocles. cap. 6. 19. 11.
But what is Religion? It is ( says he) the obeying of God, the moother of
all vertewes, and the disobeying of all vices. And our obeying of God must be
of such a sort, that we must rather disobey our parents, yea and lose our
lives to than disobey him. For our obeying of our parents must be for the love
of God; and it is of his goodness that we possess our lives. Iamblichus in
his 45. Chapter of Mysteries,
Iamblichus says thus. Let us begin at the best and most precious; namely the
observing of Religion, which is the serving of God. And in another place. Thou
surmisest ( says he) that there is some other way than Godlynes to atteyne to
felicity, and thou ask of me what that way may be. But surely (say I) if
the very substance and original power of al goodness and welfare be in the Gods:
only those are happy which consecrate and unity themselves to God after our
example. For in that state are both contemplation and knowledge accomplished;
and besides the knowledge of the Gods, there is also the knowledge of
ourselves, which is gotten by casting back our understanding toward
ourselves. Proclus in his book of praying.
To be short, Proclus as well upon his own judgment as upon the opinions of
Plato, Iamblichus, Porphyrius, Plotin and others, says that Religion and the
calling upon God are proper and peculiar to man after the fourth manner as
Aristotle terms it; that is to say, a natural property which agrees fitly
to the whole kind of man, and only to man, and without the which he cannot be
a man. Now I am not ignorant that they speak sometimes of the serving of the
Gods in the pulrall number, as though there were mo Gods then one; insomuch
that some of the Philosophers turned aside to art magike, and all of them
yielded to the I dolatries and Superstitions of their times. For in deed, to
know that God ought to be served, and to know after what sort he will be
served, and to serve him thereafter, are things far differing. But it is
enough for this time that we win thus much at their hands, that of necessity
there is a Religion; which thing even the Nauigations of our time do show to
be imprinted in all the Clymates of the world, and in all kinds of men; as
which have discovered Nations that wander in Woods, without Law, without
Magistrate, without King, but none without some kind of serving of God, none
without some shadow of Religion.

Heerby then we know that there is a Religion, Tha^ there is but one true
Religion.
that is to say, a way to Salvation, or a way whereby to come home again unto
God. But are there many ways, or but only one? It is a high question, but yet
easy to be decyded, if we consider what Religion requires of us, and what it
is to get for us. Religion (as the men of old time themselves have taught us)
requires of us in effect, that we should yield full obedience unto God: full
obedience say I, so as we should dedicate our selves to his glory, both our
thoughts, words and deeds, in such sort that our selves and all that ever is
in us should be referred to his honor. If Religion require this, how can it
be any other then one? Or what diversity can it admit? And if any require
less of us, contented peradventure with the outward man, (which is all one as
if they would rob God of one half of a Man;) what is their doing but
Hypocrisy or high treason against God? But now ageine, seeing that Religion
byndeth us in so great a bond, even by nature, that there is not any man which
is not enforced to confess the debt so witnessed by the whole world: surely
there is no man that feels himself able to pay it, or which does not
willingly plead guilty, yea and which is not enforced to say, that the most
part of his thoughts, words and deeds, are not only far of from God, but
also tending directly to offend GOD. Now then, if Religion offer us not as well
a mean whereby to discharge and cancel the bond, as it offers us the bond
it self: It is so far of from being the way to welfare which it ought to
be, that it is rather a definitive sentence of death, and an express
condemning of us. Therefore let us see whether there be many ways of
satisfaction, or but only one.

What shall the deuoutest man in the world offer unto God for his own
discharge? Shall he offer his first fruits? God gave him both the seed and
the whole crop. Sacrifices? The Wood, the Fire, and the Cattle, are all of
Gods gift. The whole world, if a man had it? He has lost the inheritance and
the right thereof in seeking to infranchise himself from the service of God.
Nay (which more is) God not only gave the world unto man, but also man to man
himself. The world then and all that ever is therein, cannot discharge man
against God. What may man himself do? Surely an acceptable Sacrifice should
man be to GOD (as Hierocles says) if he were such a one as he ought to be. But
what should the best of all men offer up in sacrifising himself? Soothly
nothing but envy, hatred, railing, backebyting, vain thoughts, untrue words,
wrongful dealing, and (to go yet further) faint thanks, with cold and
counterfeit prayers. Now these are so far of from amounting to a discharge,
that they turn to a huge heap of worse and more vndischargeable bonds,
according to the infiniteness of the Majesty of the Creator that is offended
by them. Now then, if neither yt world nor man can dischardge man against God;
what remains to do it, but God himself, whom Religion must offer to man for
his discharge; even God merciful, to God just; God a paymayster, to God the
creator: Uerily, that having showed us how deeply we be indetted to GOD; it
may also teach us the wonderful mean ordained by God and in God, whereby he
and his souereine Justice may be satisfied, and our extreme iniquity be
therewith relieved? Now the debt of us all is all of one sort and nature;
namely that we owe our selves all wholly unto God; and our inability to
discharge it is also all alyke; namely that all that ever comes of our selves
can deserve nothing but death upon death. Our common bond (say I) entered into
of us all by Gods benefits toward the first man, is by his disobedience
become forfeted, both in respect of himself and of all mankind. Besides this,
the creditor and the payer are both one, and cannot be but both one. For it is
only God that both does and can satisfy himself. It follows then, that the
true Religion can be but one; namely even that only one which shows us the
only one mean of salvation: and that all other Religions, if they abate any
whit of man's debt unto God, are traitorous to his majesty; and if they set not
down a sufficient mean of discharge, they be but vain and vnauaylable
ceremonies: and so as well the one sort as the other, utterly unworthy of the
name of Religion. Furthermore, if there be diverse true Religions, I mean
diverse, as in respect of the substance of them, whereof rises that diversity?
Of the thing which they point at? Nay, in God (whom Religion looks at) there
is such unity, that all other manner of unity is diversity in respect of
that. And then if it be so that one Religion rely upon one God, and another
upon another, we be sure that there is but one God, and that all other Gods are
either Creatures or Uanities, insomuch that (as Proclus himself says) mo Gods
and no God differ nothing atall. And so what shall those other Religions be, but
either Idolatry or Atheism, that is to say, utter Godlesnes? Whereof then? Of
their ground? Nay, Man which is the ground whereon Religion works, is but one
kind of thing. Also as the disease being in all men comes of one root, so is
it of one selfsame nature. Likewise the remedy thereof (as I have said
already) is but only one. Now where the ground is all one, the disease all one,
and the remedy all one too: who will ever say that there should be diversity
of Arts in the handling or ministering of them? If a man be too humble
himself, I would feign have them to tell me, what other way there is than to
know himself: what other way to know himself, than to behold himself: what
other way to behold himself, then to look into a fair clear glass? And
what clearer glass is there, than the Law of God, and the perfect obedience
which GOD requires at man's hand? And seeing that this law, and the perfect
obedience required by the same, can be but one, How may Religion be divided
into mo than one? Ageine, if man be to be lifted up unto God, what other way is
there than to make him know God as his Creator, that he may honor him; as his
governor, that he may call upon him; as his father, that he may obey him; and
altogether just, that he may seek to appease his wrath? Which thing since he
cannot do of himself, what shift has he but to have recourse to the remedy?
And seeing that the remedy can be but only one; does it not follow that
salvation lies in that only Religion which shows it unto us, and that to
have any mo Religions, is but confusion and vanity? And to speak properly,
what is Religion? An art or skill (if I may so term it) how to save men. And
wherein consists this art? First in showing men their disease; secondly in
showing them that it is deadly; and finally in teaching the fit and convenient
remedy. In deed the very Law of Nature leads us well too the first point.
For who is he which even of Nature accuses not himself, and whose conscience
nippeth him not when he has sinned? Reason also leads us to the second
point. For who is he that concludes not with himself, that the Creature
which offends his creator deserves to be rooted out, that is to say, that
sin ingendreth death? And thus far may all Religions come, and all
Ceremonies ordained by man, as Prayers, Sacrifices, Wasshins, Cleansings, and
such others. Bnt what is all this but a bringging of us to Hellgate, or rather
a showing of Paradise unto us a far of, howbeit with such a horrible and
infinite gulf betwixt us and it, as man and all the whole world can neither
fill up nor pass over? Yet must there needs be a passage; For the end of Man
is to be united unto God, and this end is not in vain; the mean to be united
above, is to be reconcyled here beneath; and the mean to be reconcyled here
beneath, is (as I have said already) but only one, which is, that God
himself acquit us without our discharging of the debt which we owe unto him.
Only that Religion then (and none other) which leads us straight to the said
passage, and by the following whereof we find it, is the true Religion, as that
which allonly atteineth to the end of Religion, which is the saving of man.
May not men (will some say) worship God diversely, some lifting up their eyes to
heaven, and othersome casting their faces down to the ground? Yes, for the
worshipping is but one, and the humbling of men's selves is but one still,
though there be difference in the signs. But our disputing here is not of the
Ceremonies, but of the substance of them. Also may not men offer Sacrifice
diversely? Yes. But if thy Sacrifices have no further end then the sheading of
the blud of a beast; then (as says Hierocles) they be to the Fire but a
feeding thereof with fuel and vapors; and to the Priests, a superfluous
maintenance of butcherie. It is requisite therefore that sacrifices should be
referred to somewhat; namely that by them thou should protest, that whereas
the silly innocent beasts do suffer death, it is thou thy self that have
deserved it both in body and Soul. Again, if thou have nothing else in thy
Religion, but Sacrifices and prayers; how goodly a show soever they make, thou
have nothing but a confession of thy fault, and a sentence of death against
thee for the same. For if those Ceremonies aim not at a certain mark, they be
trifling toys; and if that be the end whereat they aim; then come they short,
as which do but lead thee unto death, and there leave thee.

There are some that would bear us on hand, An objection.
that Religion is but an observation of certain Ceremonies in every Country;
by which reason, that which is holy here, should be unholy in another place;
and that which is godly in one Land, should be ungodly in another. To be short,
they make it like the Laws that depend upon Custom, which pass no further
than the bounds of the place where they be used. If Religion be nothing else
but so; what science, art, or trade is more vain than that? Or rather what is
to be said of it, but that in deed it is no Religion at all? Leachecraft is
uncertain in many respects, as of air, of water, of age, and of clymate: but
yet, ye which is Leachecraft in one Country, is not manquelling in another.
Lawecraft has almost as many sundry Laws as caces, and the caces that are in
the world are infinite. Yet notwithstanding who sees not that all these
diversities of caces are brought under one vpryghtnes and reason? and that they
which yield not thereunto, are not reputed for men, but rather, for enemies of
mankind and wyld beasts? Also virtue has the affections to work upon, a
ground more mouable than the Sea and the wind. And yet who will say, that that
which is hardines between the too Tropiks is Cowardlines in all other
Countries; or that yt which is stayednesse in one half of the world, is
vnstayednesse in the other half? To be short, what thing is more subject to
rising and falling, or to be cried down or inhaunced, than coin of silver and
gold, as which seems to follow the wills of princes? And yet
notwithstanding, for all their ordinances and proclamations, both gold and
silver do always keep a certain rate and value. What shall we say then to
Religion, which has a firmer and substantialler ground than all these; I mean
not men's bodies, goods, affections, or fantasies; but the very soul and mind
of man, who also has such a rest to stay upon, as is settled, immovable, and
the Lord of all Chaunges, that is to wit, God? How much more wisely does our
Pythagorist Hierocles teach us, that Religion is the gouernesse of all
vertewes, and that all vertewes tend to her as to their certain end, as who
would say, they be no vertewes if they swerve from her; insomuch that
hardynesse being referred to any other than godliness, becomes rashness;
wisdom becomes wylynes; lines; and Justice becomes Iuggling; and at a
word, all virtue is but masking and hypocrisy? If Religion be the end of all
vertewes, must it not needs be fixed and immovable? Or if it be mouable, what
is there then that is just, good, or virtuous? And if the case stand so; what
thing in the world is more vnauaylable than man, or to speak more ryghtly,
what thing is to less purpose in man, than his mind? But there is virtue, and
the wickeddest man that is, will auow it. Therefore there is also a certain
Religion, which makes it to be virtue, and whereunto virtue refers itself;
and the vngodlyest man that is cannot escape from it.

Let us look yet further into the absurdities of this opinion. Who can deny
but that among the diversities of Religions, there were many sorts of wickedness
and ungodliness openly executed; some woorshipping the creatures in Heaven yea
and on earth, as the Egiptians did in old time, and as the Tartarians do at
this day; some offering up men in Sacrifice, as the Carthaginenses did in old
time and as the Western Isles do yet at this day: and othersome permitting
things not only contrary to all Laws, but also even horrible and loathsome to
nature? If all this be good; I pray you what good is there, or rather what
evil is there in the world? But if it be evil in itself; who can deny but
that there were wicked and ungodly Religions in the world, (I use the word
Religion after the common manner) and that a man had need of a Rule whereby to
discern the good Religion from the bad? And in very deed it is so rooted in
nature to believe that there is but one Religion to be had, as well as to
believe that there is but one God; that (as we may daily see) a man will rather
endure the change of a temperate air into an extreme whot or into an extreme
cold; of freedom into bondage; and of Justice into Tyranny, than any
alteration atall (though never so little) in the case of Religion: verily as
who would say, it were not so natural for a man too love his native Country,
to be free, and to be at his easy; as to have some one certain Religion to
gwyde him to salvation.

Now my meaning has bin to lay forth this truth after the mo sorts, of
purpose to take away the doubts, and to avoid the krinks invented anew by
certain Libertines. But forasmuch as there are many Ceremonies which disguise
them selves in the attire of Religion to deceive us: The first mark of the true
Religion.
it is more needful for us to have sure and infallible marks, whereby to
discern the true Religion. First of all therefore let us lay this foundation
which I have laid and settled already heretofore, namely that Religion is the
right Rule of serving God, and of reconcyling and reuniting man agein unto God,
that he may be saved. Now man's Salvation is nothing else but his felicity,
happynes, souereyne good, or welfare: and his welfare (as I have declared
before) is to be knit unto God. For neither the world, nor any creature in the
World can make man happy, but only he that made man. And it is a clear case
that we ought to serve him here beneath, who is to make us happy above, and
none other but him. All Religion therefore, (how goodly a show so ever it have
to the eye,) which turns away from serving God to serving the Creature, is
but Idolatry and ungodliness unto us. Also all Religion which causes us to
seek our welfare anywhere else, than only in him that is the maker of all
welfare; will be unto us not only vanity and a thrusting of us out of the way;
but also a murdering of ourselves, and a casting of us headlong into all
wretchedness. They may well have in them an offering of first fruits, of
thanksgiuings, and of other services: but all these are but injuries and
blasphemies against God, if we think ourselves beholden too any creature for
the things which we neither have nor can have of any but the Creator. Also they
may well have prayers, and sacrifices, but those prayers shall be both vain and
ungodly, being made to him that cannot here them, and which impute the
government of the world unto Creatures, or to such as see them not, or can
scarsly see the things that are before them. And asfor their Sacrifices, they
shall be but smokie savors, yea full of traiterous treachery to God, in that they
confess their lives before dead things and make amends to Creatures for the
offenses which they have committed against the Creator. Now therefore let the
first mark of the true Religion which we seek, be this; that it direct us and
all our Churchseruices unto the true God the maker of Heaven and earth, the
only searcher of men's hearts, which are the things wherewith he will cheefely be
served; that it may distinguish it from all Idolatries, which seek unto wood,
to stone, to the Sun, to the Moon, to Men, to Angels, and to all the
Creatures that are in Heaven and in earth. And it is not needful to heap up
here great nombers of proofs, or to repeat agein the things that have bin
discoursed in the second and third chapters of this work. For since there is
but one God, and but one Religion; there is not also any thing more agreeable
to nature, than to refer the same wholly to the creator. And in very deed
Plotin, Porphyrius, Proclus, Iamblichus and such others; which worshipped the
Angels or good spirits as they thought; said that their so doing (wherein
nevertheless they were more inexcusable) was to atteyne by degrees to the
highest God.

But will this said mark alone fuffice us? The second mark of true Religion.
No: we must not only serve GOD, but we must also serve him aright. Now then,
what is the Rule of this service, or who is he that can set it down in
writing? That we may serve him aright, it behooves us to know him aright: and
which of us can vaunt of that? How many be there which after long study, can
but so much as tell us what it is not? And what follows then, but that like
as the wizdome of the world, cannot without the overthrow of it self, atteyne
any further concerning God, than to say what he is not: so the same wizdome
may well atteine so far as to discern what serving of God is false; but it
can no more set down and point out the true service, than it can atteyne to
the knowledge of the Godhead. The Country cloyne shall be skorned for his labor,
if he take upon him to appoint how his Prince is to be served; and yet is he a
man as well as the Prince, differing from the Prince in state and calling, but
not atall in nature and kind. What is to be said then of Man, who is but a
woorme, yea and less than a woorme in respect of the everlasting God; if he
will needs shape him and serve him after his own fancy? The Philosopher will
say that GOD ought to be served. And if he be a Divine, he will pass somewhat
further, and say, that he is not served with vapors and smoakes, nor with the
sheading of blud. But which of them has ever said, God is spirit and served in
spirit? And if any of them have come any thing near it; how wide has he
wandered away ageine when he came to the particular poynting out of that
service? Of a truth, what are all the worshippings of God which man has
ordained of his own head, but childish imaginations, not only unbeseeming the
Majesty of God, but also inferior to the discretion of a man? as Gamings,
Shows, Stageplayes, Ronnings of Horses, Iusts, a thousand sorts of Combats,
Swordplayings, Wrestlings, Buffetings and such other? And what does all this
betoken, but that man mounteth not above man; and that when he thinks himself
to fly his lightest pitch, he scarce heaueth himself upright upon his feet,
but never rises above the earth? For what man is he which calling his wits
about him, and looking advisedly unto him self, could find in his heart to be
honored and served after that manner? Surely then let us say, that look how
far God voutsafeth to stoop unto us, so far be we able to mount up unto
him: for his coming down, is our mounting up. For if we cannot see the Son
but by help of the Son, how welsighted so ever we be: much less can God be
seen or known of us, without the help and light of God himself. To be short,
we cannot serve God except we know him nor know him except he voutsafe to
discover himself to us, and therefore we can not know how to serve and
worship him, furtherfoorth then he lists to show it unto us by his word. And
yet for the discovering of himself unto us, he needs neither to draw us up
to his brightness, nor to come down to us in his majesty. For our mynds could
no more abide it than our eyes can away with the beholding of the Son: but
he must be feign too stoop to our small ability, by telling us what service
he requires at our hands, not according to his spiritual nature which we
cannot possibly comprehend, but as it were through a glass or a scarf,
according to ye fleshly nature which we bear about with us. Thus have we found
our second mark of Religion; namely that the service of God which Religion is
to teach us, must be grounded upon his word, and revealed unto us by his
ownselfe.

Let us hear what the heathen say in this case, who knew very well that all
the Ladders of their Philosophy were too short to reach thereunto, and that
it behooved men to be enlightened and instructed from above. Divinity (says
Plato Plato in his second Epistle: and in his Parmenides.
) cannot be laydforth after the manner of other kinds of serving, but has need
of continual mynding. And then our wit is forthwith kindled as with a fire,
which afterward gathers light more and more, and maynteineth it self.
Finally (says he) we know nothing of Gods matters by our own skill. If he
which of all the ancient Philosophers saw most clear, confess here that his
sight fails very much if it be not aided from above: what may we deem of
others? And in good sooth, in matters of Religion he sends us evermore to the
ancient Oracles, that is to say (according to his meaning) to Gods word.
Aristotle in his Supernaturals.
Aristotle in his Supernaturals rehearses and commends a certain answer of
Simonides too Hieron King of Sicilie; which is, that it belongs to none but
only God, to have skill of the things that are above nature; and how much
less then to be skillful in Divinity, and to dispose of Religion, that is to
say to show the mean how to overcome and surmount nature? And whereas Cicero
in his Laws says, Cicero in his first book of Laws.
that there is not any law among men whereto men are bound to obey, unless it
be ordained by GOD, and delivered as it were with his own mouth: if he had
been well examined, he would have said no less concerning Religion. It is
certain (says Iamblicus Iamblichus.
) that we be bound to do the things that please God. But which are those?
Surely (says he) they be not possible to be known of any man, but of him that
has heard God himself speak, or which have learned them by some heavenly
instruction. And Alpharabius the Arabian agrees thereunto in these words.
Alpharabius in his book of Sciences.
The things that concern GOD, and are to be believed through holy faith, are
of a higher degree than all other things, because they proceed from divine
inspiration, and man's wit is too weak, and his reason too short too attain to
them. And therefore we read that as they which have ordained and stablished
any Religion in any Nation, have given it forth as proceeding from God; verily
because nature taught them, that it belongs to none but to God alone, to
appoint how he shall be served; neither would the ordinance thereof otherwise be
observed, because the parties that were to obey it, would make as great account
of themselves as of the party that should inioyne it. Thus by the definitive
sentence of the Philosophers, our second mark stands firm, which will serve
us to discern the true Religion from the inventions of men, so as we may well
refuse for untruth, whatsoever is not grounded upon Gods word. But in
following our former purpose, let us consider yet further whether this will
suffice or no. The third mark of true Religion.


We have need of a Law that proceeds from Gods mouth: and what may that I
pray you be, but the same which proceeds from holiness it self, namely that
we should be holy as he is holy? And if we cannot of our selves know God, nor
how he ought to be served; alas how shall we perform it when he has declared
it unto us? The end of Religion (says Plato) is to knit man unto God. The
way to bring this to pass, is to become rightuous and holy, or (as says
Iamblichus) to offer unto GOD a clean mind void of all naughtines and clear
from all spot. What man (as even they themselves confess) could ever vaunt
thereof? And what else then is Religion to all of us, but a book wherein we
read the sentence of our death, that is to wit our very death in deed,
unless that in the end we find some grace or forgiveness of our sins? Yet
notwithstanding Religion is the Pathway to life, yea even to eternal life; a
Pathway that has a certain end, and which beguyleth us not. Therefore it
must by some means or other fill us up the great gulf that is between
endless death, and endless life, and between the dwellingplace of
blessedness, and the horriblenes of Hell. And therefore let our third mark be,
That Religion must put into our hands, a mean to satisfy Gods Justice,
without the which, not only all other Religions, but also even that which
contains the true serving of the true GOD were utterly vain and
unprofitable. Now, man's reason has well perceived that some such mean was
needful in Religion: but to know what that mean is, was to high a thing for
man's reason to atteyne unto. In respect whereof the Platonists busied
themselves very much in finding out some mean to cleanse men from their
sins, and too knit them unto God being reconciled to his favor, and they
set down certain degrees whereby to atteine thereunto. But yet in the end they
confess all their washings and clensings to be utterly insufficient. There are
which say it is to be done by abstinence, by virtuous behavior, by skill, or
by Jupiters mysteries; and some say it is to be done by all of them successively
one after another. But yet when they have bestirred themselves on all sides,
Porphyrius conclusion is, That they be Ceremonies without effect, and yet
notwithstanding that there must of necessity needs be a mean to purge and
justify men, and that the same must be universal, and that it is not
possible (admitting Gods providence as we ought to do) that God should leave
mankind destitute of that mean. And that this remedy ought to be conteyne din
Religion, he shows sufficiently in that he seeks it in taking the Orders,
and in the Consecrations, hallowings and other mysteries of his own Religion,
which in the end he lets go again. But yet more apparently does Hierocles
show it, Hierocles in his 14. and 24. Chapters, and in his preface.
who says that Religion is a study of Wisdom that consists in clensing
and perfecting the life, that men may be at one with God, and become like unto
him: and that to atteyne to that cleanesse, the mean is to enter into a man's
own conscience, and to consider of his sin, and to confess it unto God.
Thus far he is very well. Nevertheless, here they stop ouershort
euerychone of them: for upon confession inseweth but death, unless God (who
is the very Justice it self, and more infinitely contrary to evil than we can
imagine,) be appeased and satisfied for our offenses, whereas in Religion we
seek for very life. To be short, of the great number of Religions which are
in the World, some have no certain restingpoint atall; as we read of some
people of Affrik, which worship that thing which they meet first in the
morning; and that is but a vain Ceremony: Some have a restingpoynt, howbeit
an evil one; as for example, all they that direct us to the creatures; and
those are nothing else but Idolatries. Some do set unto themselves a good end,
in that they aim at the Creator; but they will needs worship him after their
own fancy; and that is a swaruing aside to superstition, or rather (which
worse is) a serving of their own fancy, and not of GOD. And among the
residue, there is one which has an eye to the Creator and honors his Law,
and that is the Religion of the Jews. This again is a way that leaves us in
the mids of our way, leading us into the wood, but not leading us out again.
But the true Religion in deed and which deserves the name of Religion, is
only that which has God for her shooteanker, his word for warrant of her
worshipping, and a mean appointed by him to pacify him withal; and in that
only and in none other rests any Salvation.

Some tell us that Religion is nothing else but charity; An objection.
that is to say, the performing of a man's duty toward his neighbor: and
those men would tell us if they durst, that Religion is but an instrument of
civil government. But when they have enlarged the commendations of charity as
far as they can, what can they (at a word) say more than we say thereof;
namely, that Charity is of such force and weight, that Religion can by no
means stand without it? Nevertheless, to speak properly thereof, Charity is
not the mark whereby to discrene the true Religion, but rather to discern who
is ryghtly Religious. Too the intent a man may be happy, he must return unto
God; therefore he must needs serve him. That is the badge of Religion. But the
godly or Religious man utters his Religion, (that is to say, that God has
touched him truly in his heart,) in that he performs all the duties of
unfeigned freendship and godly affection toward his neybor who is the Image of
God. Charity therefore is nothing else but a rebounding of godlynes or of the
love of God, back unto our neybour, or a reflection or sigh upon this Image.
Also that a man may be happy, he must be linked unto God; and that he may be
linked unto God, he must be reconciled into his favor. Now this charity which
they speak of, is but a linking of Man unto Man. It is not that which makes a
man happy, neither does the fault which has destroyed us all, consist in want
of charity, (I mean that Charity which they pretend); but in rebelling
against God. Therefore it booteth us not to be at one with our neybour, except
we be at one with God. Nevertheless it is a good sign that our heart is
seruent in the love of God, as the child is in ye love of his father, when
being unable as yet to unite our selves unto him, we link our selves in one
body and one mind to al those which bear his Image. To be short, the true
mark of fire is not heat; for there are other things which are whot as well
as fire: but it is a vertew that is so linked unto it, that as soon as ye
hear of fire, it follows immediately that there is heat also, but not
contrariwise. Likewise Charity is not the true religion itself, but a virtue
which accompanies it so of necessity, that a man can no sooner say there is
Religion in this man or that man; but that it must needs follow incontinently,
that there is charity in him also. And what manner of charity? Soothly not
such as they take it to be which refreyne from misdealing for fear of man's
Law; for that is but hypocrisy: nor a desire of credit that we may have the
better speed in our affairs; for that is but a chaffaring. Nor a desire of
honor whereby we be spurred to dowel; for that is but a self love. But it is a
certain fear and love of God, which makes us to cherish and love all those
for Gods sake, which are of him and hold of him. Now what man is he that dares
vaunt of this perfect charity, yt he loves his neyghbor as he ought, and in
such respect as he ought, that is to say as himself, and for the love of God?
For how can we have this charity, if Religion go not before? And if our love
toward God be so short and feeble (as I said before); what rebounding back
thereof will there be upon our neighbor.

Now therefore let us conclude, That as man has but one end, namely of
returning unto God; so there is but one right path to lead him thither, and
that is Religion. And that as there is but one God; so there can be but one
true Religion, that is to say, one way that leads to salvation; which
Religion has these three infallible marks whereby to discern it; namely that
it woorship the true GOD; that it worship him according to his word; and that
it reconcyle to God the man that follows it. And now let us consequently see
which of all the Religions in the world it is, that alonly is to be discrned by
these marks.

The xxi. Chapter.
That the true God was worshipped in Israel: which is the first mark of the
true Religion.
THe first mark of ye true Religion, without the which it cannot rightly bear
the name of Religion, is the serving of the true God. And the true God (as I
have said before) is the same yt created heaven and earth and all things in
them; which governs them by his wisdom; which mainteineth them by his
goodness; which weeldeth them according to his will, and directs them according
to his glory. By this so notable a mark we cannot fail to decipher the true
God from the false Gods, and by the selfsame mean to discern the true
Religion which bears our first mark, from all other Religions how peinted
and disguysed so ever it is possible for them to be. This God which has done
those things can be but one. For seeing he created all things, all the things
which we see here beneath are but creatures. Now then, whatsoever Religion
points us to any mo Gods then one, we ought to abhor it even at the very
first approach. Again, the same God is also infinite and incomprehensible. For
the work cannot conceive the woorkmayster, but contrariwise the woorkemayster
conceyueth the work. Whatsoever work therefore is made to counterfeit him or
too resemble him, or to show him unto us, can be nothing else but Idolatry and
Superstition, invented by the Devil or by man.

Now let us come nearer to the rabble of Religions; and we shall see there
throngs of hundred thousand Gods distinguished by strange fantastical deuyces
of men, of women, of beasts and of monsters. Yet shall we not see there any
whit of that which we seek for. But there is one Religion to be seen among
all the rest, which for all the rest, bears this mark graued in her
forehead, In the beginning GOD created the Heaven and Earth: and sounds out
this speech alowd euerywhere, The Lord our God is but one God; and in the
mids of all the rout that barketh and byteth at her on all sides, cries out
coragiously, All your Godds are but error and vanity. Therefore without
staying upon the others, which are not worthy so much as to be looked on, we
will proceed to that only one Religion which alonly in truth professes the
true way, and the knowledge of the place whereunto we would come. Now, to
show the way, the end whereto it leads must be known: and the end which all
of us tend unto, is a happy life. And to lead a happy life, is to live in God
who is the very happiness it self. And the same God (as I have made the
heathenmen themselves to confess) is but one. The Religions therefore which
were not the livery of that, but of many, cannot bring us too the happynes
which we seek: for it is but one, and to be had at the hand of that one. Which
then is the one Religion that shall lead us to the one God? Shall we seek for
it among the Assyrians? They worshipped as many Gods as they had Towns. Among
the Persians? They had as many Gods, as there be Stars in the Sky and Fyres
on Earth. Among the Greeks? They had as many Gods as they had fancies: Among
the AEgiptians? They had as many Gods as they sowed or planted Fruits, or as
the Earth brought forth fruits of it self. To be short, the Romans in
conquering the world, got to themselves all the vanities in the World, and
they wanted no wit to deuyse others of their own brain. What shall it avail
us to ask the way of these blind Souls, which go groping by the Walls sides,
and have not so much as a Child or a Dog to lead them as some blind folk have,
but catch hold unadvisedly of every thing that comes in their way? But yet
among these great Nations, we spy a little Nation called the people of Israel,
which worshippeth the maker of al things, acknowledging him for their Father,
calling upon him alone in all their needs, as (for all the small account that
others made of them) abhorring all the glistering gloriousnes of the great
kingdoms that were out of the way. It is in the Religion of this people and
not elsewhere, that that we shall find our said former mark. And therefore we
must seek it only there, and leave the damnable footsteppes of the rest, as
being assured that we may more safely follow one man that is cleeresighted,
than a thousand that are blind. For what greater blindness of mind can be, than
to take the Creature for the Creator, a thing of nothing for ye thing that is
infinite?

Now, that the people of Israel worshipped the true GOD in such sort as I have
described him; the continuance of their whole History shows well enough. All
men know in what reverence the Bible has bin had in all times among the
Hebrews. And if any man doubt whether it be Gods word or no; that is a
question to be decyded otherwise. But yet for all that, it is out of all doubt,
that the Hebrews themselves took it to be so, and that we cannot better
judge of their Belief and Religion, than by the Scriptures, for the which they
have willingly suffered death. And what else do those Scriptures preach from
the first word of them to the last, than the only one God the maker of Heaven
and of Earth? As soon as you do but open the Bible, byandby ye see there, In
the beginning God created the Heaven and the Earth. At the very first step in
at the gate of that book, it excludes all the Godds made or devised by man
from that people, to the intent to keep them wholly to the true God that
created man. Open the book furtherfoorth at all adventure whersoeuer you list,
and from line to line you shall meet with nothing but the praises of that God,
or protestations and thunderings against the strange Gods. God made man
excellent, who for his disobedience is become subject to corruption. Who could
punish and imprison such a substance, but he that made it? He founded the world
and peopled it, which afterward was overwhelmed by the flud, and who could let
the waters loose, but he that held them at commandment? The people of Israel
found dry passage through the Red Sea; and who prepared them that way, but he
that founded the Earth upon the deepes? Also the Sun stood still and went
back at the speaking of a word; and of whose word? but of his whose word is
a deed? I dispute not here as yet, whether these things be true or no; but I
say only that the Hebrews believed them, yea and that they believed them in
all ages; and that they worshipped him whom they believed to be the doer of
those things; who certesse cannot be any other, than the same of whom the first
line of the book says, That he made the Heaven and the Earth. Job. 38.
Ask of Job who it is whom he worshippeth; and he will not say it is he
whom the invention of the Craftesman, or of the Imbroyderer, or of the proyner
of Uynes has devised; nor that is sponne, weaued, or hamered; nor that has a
Tail cut with a Razor; nor an Image turned arsyuersie, nor some iuggling
trick to dazzle childrens eyes withal; for such (as we shall see more plainly
hereafter) are the Gods of the heathen: (but he will say) it is the same GOD
that founded the earth, and stretched out his Metlyne over it, which has shet
up the Sea within doors, and bounded the rage of his waves; which made the
light and the darkness; which holds back the Pleyads and unbinds Orion;
which has created the world, and given understanding to man. P^alm. 104.
It is he (says David) which spreads out the Heavens as a Curtain, and
makes him Chambers among the the Waters; which has settled the Earth upon her
Pillars, and chaced away the Sea at one only threatening of his; which makes
the Winds his messengers, and the Elements his servants. It is he (says
Esaias) which is the first and the last; Esaias. 48. and 61.
His hand has grounded the Earth, and his right hand has measured the
Heavens. As soon as he called them, they appeered together before him: Heaven
is his Seat, and the Earth is his Footestoole. Yea and besides all this,
Moses will tell us, that streine we our selves to say what we can of him, we
can say no more of him but that it is he whose name is I am that I am; even he
that alonly is, of whom all things that are have their being, and in comparison
of whom al things are nothing, whom neither words nor works can express,
only in effect, and yet infinite therewithal.

Some man will say, it may be that this so great a God, voutsafeth not to
stoop down unto us, but has left the charge both of the world and of men to
some Servants of his whom it behooves us to woorship. Nay, as he is high and
great in power, so is he deep also in wisdom and goodness. Art thou sick? It
is he that both makes health and sends sickness; thou see how he was
Ezechias Physician. Would thou have Children? It is he that opens and
shetteth the bearingplace. Insomuch that he made the old age of Sara fruteful,
and the barrein Anne a moother and a Nurce. Does thine enemi^ vex thee? He is
the God of Hosts, whom Gedeon finds as strong with a small army as with a
great. Would thou have a prosperous wind? Job. 38.
It is he (says Job) that sheadeth forth the Eastern wynd upon the earth,
and at whose call the northwynd comes. Does thy Husbandrye dry away with
drought? It is he that deals forth both the morning and the evening rain;
which beget the drops of the deawe; and which makes it to rain upon the
ground, yea even where nobody dwells. To be short, art thou afraid of famine?
He prepares food for the Ravens to pray upon, Psalm. 104.
and their young birds cry unto none but him. The Lions whelps rore unto him
for food, and all things that live in the air, on the Land, and in the water,
do wayt upon him for the supplying of their needs. And what is all this in
effect, but that the God whom Israel woorshipeth, is the Creator and Gouerner
of all things? The very true God which maynteyneth all things by his goodness,
as well as he made them by his power. As careful for all things yea even to
the least, as he is myghtfull and of ability to maynteyne them. All the whole
scripture from the one end to the other, that is to say the people of Israel
from age to age, sing nothing else but that. Now if we read over the old
ceremonies of the Egiptians, Persians, and Thuscanes leaf by leaf; where shall
we find in them one word of the true God, but only in renowncing, and
blaspheming him? And what are all their Gods but caryers of Receyts, like
these dogleaches which profess but the curing of some one disease only, or
like these common craftsmen, which profess but the skill of some one craft or
mystery? But this true God (as I have said) is the only one God. What other
people have bin forbidden to call upon many Godds? Nay rather, what other
people have not bin commanded to have infinite Gods, as a token of Religion? He
is a quickening Spirit which cannot be counterfetted nor conceived. What other
God has said, Whereunto will ye lyken me, which do hold the Earth between my
Fingers? What house will ye build for me which make the Earth my footstool
and the Heaven my feate? And to what other people has it bin said, Origin
against Celsus. lib. 3.
Thou shall not make any graven Image? And what other people has chosen rather
to dye a thousand times, than to break that commandment? Insomuch that they
would not admit either peynter or karuer into any of their Cities.
Contrarywyse, which of all the Gods of the Heathen have not required Images?
Yea and (as we read in Porphirius) taught how they should be peynted? Much
more vain in good sooth than the me^ that woorshipped them. To be short, the
true God which governs the whole world, must also (as I have said before)
govern both men and their wits to his glory. And to govern them so, it
behooves him to know them; and to know them, it behooves him to see them; and
to see into their hearts, it behooves him to have made them. For the father
which thinks himself to be the begetter of a Child, sees not into the heart
thereof; another does the schoolemayster see into his scholars wit, whereof he
thinks himself to be the framer. And much less can an Imaginatiue God do any
of those things, having not made the one nor the other. What other God shall ye
read to have said, Thou shall not covet: or to have required the sacrifice of
the heart, or the fasting of the spirit, or a hartbroken and lowly mind? Who else
can forbid Couetousenes and hypocrisy, but he which is able to punish it? And
who can punish it, but he that sees it? And who can see it in man, but he that
made man? On the contrary part, who sees not that the Laws which are
reported to have bin inspired by the Godds at Rome, in Athens, and in
Lacedemon, extend no further than to the outward man? Cato in his oration for
the Rhodians.
Insomuch that none of them (as says Cato) is found to have said He yt is
minded to steal, but only He that steals, shall be guilty. Which is as much to
say, as that they be but Laws of men, who see not into folks hearts; Laws of
Creatures which pearce no further then the Cote or the Skinue. The people of
Israel therefore are the people that served the only true God that made man,
and all other people served Gods made by men.

Now this silly people (as we read in Histories) was strangely despised and
trampled under foot, The Heathen acknowledged the true God to be in Israel*
as though all the devils had conspired and banded themselves against that
people, which alonly worshipped the true God. But what are the Heathen
compelled in the end to confess? Varro the best learned of the Romans, who
made a beadroll of all the Gods, for fear (as he says) least they should
stray away: concludes in the end, that those do worship the true God, which
worship the only one, without Images, and which believe him to be the governor
of the whole world. Yea and (which more is) he says that the Jews (by what
other name soever they call him) do worship the same God truly: Austin, in
the Citi of God. lib. 8. chap. 31. Denis of Halycarnassus. lib. 1.
and that if after their example all Images had bin forbidden, (as they were a
long time in Rome) men had not fallen into so many superstitions and errors. It
is not to be doubted but that he which spoke so of yt whole rabble of false
Gods that were in Rome, would have spoken much more of them, if he had not
feared men more than his Gods. And whereas some of the heathen to excuse their
own sacrilege, have borne the world on hand yt the Jews worshipped ye head
of a wild Ass, because a beast of that kind had showed the^ a fountain in the
wilderness, at a time yt they were distressed with thirst: Polybius, Strabo,
Tacitus, lib. 5. or (as some editions have) lib. 2.
and Tacitus himself the maker of yt goodly report, do witness, yt in the
Temple of the Jews there was never yet found any Penon, Pensil, Relik, or
Image, neither at the time yt Antiochus through covetousness sacked it, nor when
Pompey for reverence spared it. Appio^ against Josephus.
And truly the said Assish report of the Asses head, is scarce worth the
disproof. But more rather because the Jews rested upon the Sabbath day, which
the Gentiles dedicated afterward unto Saturn, many men have thought that they
worshipped Saturn, whereas if the heathen had asken but some Babe of the Jews
concerning that matter, he would have taught them that the GOD of Israel never
fled away for fear of a man as Saturn did, but that he abides in Heaven, and
that the whole Earth quaketh at his presence. Notwithstanding, the chief
Monarckeies of the world armed themselves in all ages against this small
people: but yet the smaller that they were, the greater appeared the mightines
of their GOD. Sennacharib King of the Assyrians had subdewed all his
neighbors, and intended to fill up the Dyches of Jerusalem as he had done by
the overthrow of other Cities. For performance whereof he sent Rabsaces the
General of his Host to subdue Ezechias King of Judah. In the opinion of men
Senacharibs argument was good and well concluded. If I should send thee two
thousand Horses (says he) ready furnished to Battle, 2. Kings. 18. 19.
thou could hardly furnish as many men to ride them. And can thou think
then that thou art able to resist my whole army? I have conquered Aram, and
Arphad, and Ana, and Aua, and Sepharnam, and what shall then become of
Jerusalem, if it stand wilfully against me? But when as he said, Consider what
became of the Gods of those Nations, supposing the GOD of Israel to have been
of the same stamp: therein his argument failed, not for that (as the Logicians
say) he concluded from the particular to the general, or from that which is
true simply to that which is true but in some certain respect, but for
argewing from that which is nothing at all to that which is all, namely from
the vanity of Idols, to the almightines of the Creator. But what became of
this victorious Monarke, and of his men, and of their Idols? Although the holy
Scripture had said nothing thereof, Herodotus can tell us it sufficiently. The
Host of Sennacharib (says he) was miserably discomfited, his state came to
decay, his own sons murdered him in the Temple of his Idols, the
Babilonians gathered up ye scatterings of his Empire, (which more is) in a
certain Temple of AEgipt, an Image of his was set up with this Inscription,
(...)
Learn at the sight of me to fear God. What more almost says the holy
Scripture unto us thereof? And who can say that this was not a very arche of
victory and triumph to the true God, against the Gods of the Heathen, in the
person of that Prince which had destroyed so many of them? From henfoorth the
Monarchy of the Assyrians did never prosper, but the Medes and Persians came
to be Lords of it, who at the first seemed to take warning by the example
thereof. For they restored the Jews home agein into their Country, according
to the Prophesies, and gave them leave to buyld up their Temple ageine,
furthering them by all means therein, and giving them certain allowances for
the maintenance of their Sacrifices, acknowledging in their Letters to their
Lieuetenants, that the God of the Jews was the true God, and none other.

But what shall we say of the Gods of Greece, who in conquering the Persians,
came to take a foil in Iewrie? For Alexander having subdewed ye Persians, made
men to worship him as a God; and hearing that in the Mountains of Palestine,
there was a people whom neither the Assyrians nor the Persians could subdue to
their Gods, for all the rigor and cruelty they could show; insomuch that at
his own being in Babylon, certain Jews that had bin conveyed thither, did
flatly disobey him, when he meant to have builded there a Temple to Jupiter
Bele, Hecataeus the Abderita.
as Hecateus reports, who accompanied Alexander in that voyage: he turned
head toward Jerusalem, with a venomous rancour to that poor people. But when
Iaddus the Highpriest of the Jews came before him in his Priestly attire,
accompanied with his Levites about him; Alexander cast down himself at his
feet and worshipped him. This Moenina, Alexander who vaunted himself as a God.
God I say whom yt greatest personages worshipped thensforth, did there worship
a man that came to make supplication unto him. Parmenio thinking this to be a
very strange sight, asked Alexander the cause why he did so. It is not the man
(quoth Alexander) whom I worship, but the God whose Priest he is: for I saw
him (said he) in the same attire, when I was yet in Macedony; Josephus in his
Antiquities, lib. 11 cha. 8.
and when I doubted whether I might meddle with Asia or no, he gave me courage
to proceed, assuring me that by his guyding I should overcome the Persians.
Hereupon he went up into the Temple, and offered Sacrifize unto GOD, in such
manner as the Highpriest instructed him; who showed him the book of Daniell,
wherein it was prophesied certain hundred years before, that a certain Greek
should come and conquer the Persians, which now fell out to be he. Whereupon
he suffered the Jews to live after their own laws, and from seven years to
seven years released them of all tributes, which thing he denied to the
Samaritanes. Now, of all the great number of Nations, of whom he conquered many
more than he saw, where read we that ever he did the like to any of them? And
whereunto shall we attribute this deed of his, but to his bethinking him of the
thing which hehad learned in secret of the great Priest of the AEgiptians
called Leon, namely, that all the Gods whom the Gentiles worshipped, were Kings
of old time, of whom the memorial had bin consecrated by their posterity: and
therefore he is a greater King than any of them all, thought also that he might
well be the greatest God of them all. But in the God of Israel he acknowledged
another manner of thing: namely, that he was God of Gods and King of Kings, the
chaunger of Empyres at his pleasure, which vpholdeth Kings with his hand, not
to perform their vain attempts, but to bring to pass his own everlasting
decrees. By the death of Alexander the Monarchy of the Greeks came to be
dispersed, so as the Ptolomies gate the souereintie in AEgipt. And what greater
proof would we have of their acknowledging the only one God, than to see
Ptolomie Philadelph cause the Bible of the Hebrews to be so solemnly
translated at his own charges? For what do Conquerours desire, but to give
laws to those whom they have vanquished: and therefore what else was this, than
a receiving of laws at the hands of the Jews? And seeing that the men of
Israel were weaker than the men of AEgipt: what can we say, but that the God
of Israel had subdewed the Gods of AEgipt? And soothly, afterward when
Ptolomie surnamed the bountiful had gotten ye souereintie of Syria, he offered
not Sacrifize for his victories unto the Gods of AEgipt (which notwithstanding
were very many in number, and seemed to have given law to the Nations round
about them): but he went to Jerusalem, and there acknowledging himself to have
received his prosperity of the God of Israel, did consecrate the Momuments of
his victories unto him. And yet was this in the time of the greatest adversity
of the Jews, even when their Country was forrayed, and their Temple
unhallowed by their enemies and by their own Priests themselves; that is to
say, at such a time as all outward things should have dissuaded him from
woorshipping of the God of that people, had not the most manifest truth driven
him to the contrary.

As touching the Romans, what time they extended their wars into Iewrie, we
read that they reverenced the Temple of Jerusalem: insomuch that Augustus
ordained certain Sacrifizes to be offered there both yearly and daily, and
that diverse Heathen princes, being provoked by his sending of offerings thither
so carefully, followed his example in doing the like. But seeing the Romans
brought all the Gods of all the Nations whom they had conquered into Rome: how
happens it that only this God could find no place there? Cicero in his
oration for Flaccus.
Cicero answers, that it beseemed not the Majesty of the Empire. But if I
should appose him upon his conscience, did Bacchus, Anubis, Pryapus, and their
shameful nightwakes and mysteries celebrated in the dark, yield renown to
the state of the Empire? Nay, if he will say the truth, they knew that the God
of Israel (and none other) was the true God, and that for the harboring of
him, it behooved them to drive away all the rest: but they had so long time
foaded folk with Idolatry, that they were afraid (as many Princes are at this
day) least they might be deposed by their Subjects in receiving their rightful
Lord.

Yet notwithstanding (will some say) this silly people of the Jews were
carried away from their own Country into the four quarters of the world,
scattered among other people, and parted among all Nations of the earth, at the
pleasure of their enemies that had gotten the upper hand of them. Surely Gods
wonderful providence is to be noted in this case, far more without
comparison, than if that people had conquered ye whole world by force of arms.
For by the things which the Poets have written of them, we see in what
contempt they were had of all men. But yet let us hear the wonderment that was
made thereat, not by a common person, but by the great Philosopher Seneca.
Seneca in his Book of Superstitions.
Yet notwithstanding (says he) the custom of that Nation has so prevailed,
that it is the rather received of the whole world, and they being vanquished,
have (I wot not by what means) given laws to their Conquerours. Who sees
not here a great motion of mind in this Philosopher? And what man having common
reason, is not ravished thereat as well as he? Is it possible for Kings to have
subdewed a people whom they could never enforce to change their own laws?
The example thereof is Iewrie, which has bin trodden under foot by the
Assyrians, Persians, Greeks and Romans; and yet for all their changing of
their Masters, they could never be brought to alter their law. There may
perchance some like constancy be found among other Nations, as in respect of
their laws: but that a people being conquered, carried away, brought into
bondage, vnaccounted of, led in triumph by diverse Empyres, as the Jews were,
should not only subdue the hearts of their Conquerours to their GOD, so as the
Conquerours could not fasten their laws upon the vanquished sort, but
contrariwise the vanquished sort have fastened their laws upon their
vanquishers, the Subjects upon their Prince, the Captives upon their Master,
and the condemned upon their Judge: who (I pray you) would believe it unless
he saw it? Seneca in his book of Superstition. Austin de Ci^itate Dei. lib.
6. cap. 10.
And if a man see it, how can he say that any other can possibly do it but
God? But if Seneca will voutsafe to hear Seneca quietly, it may be that he
himself shall find a resolution to his own wonderment. Namely, that the Gods
(as he says) which were called inviolable and immortal, whom the Jews left
to other Nations, were dumb and senseless Images, disguysed in the shapes of
Men, Beasts, and Fishes; and some in ugly and ill-favored monsters; and that
the Feends which possessed those Images, required worse things of men for
their service, tha^ the horriblest Tyrants that ever were; as that men should
gash themselves, mayme and lame themselves, geld themselves, and offer men
women and children in Sacrifize to them. But when folk heard speaking of the
true God the maker of Heaven and Earth, and that he will be served with the
hearts and mynds of men: that word issewing out of the mouth of a poor
prisoner, caught men prisoners and overcame their Gods. And in very deed (as
we shall see hereafter) if we read the good authors of that time; either they
speak but of the one God, or if they speak of mo Gods, it is but for customs
sake and in way of condemning them. What else then were the manifold fleetings
of the Jews, but as many conueyings abroad of companies of Preachers, to show
forth the true God; and as many Armies to destroy the Idols and to root them
out? Origin against Celsus. lib. 3.
We read that the Coniurers which were in old time among the Gentiles, did
use ye name of the God of Israel, the God of the Hebrews, and the God that
drowned the AEgiptians, in coniuring such as were possessed of Deuilles, and
that the Deuilles trembled at that name. This serves not to prove that they
worshipped not other Gods, but that they knew those Gods to be of no force.
Julian against the Galileans.
Julian the Apostata did underset his shoulder, to shore up the service of the
false Gods as much as he could. But yet durst he not deny, but that the God of
Abraham Isaac and Jacob is a great and mighty God; and he swear by all his
Gods that he was one of them that were converted to his service, and that he
knew him to be very gracious to such as serve him as Abraham had done. Who now
could ever make an Israelite confess that any other God was good, than the
same whom he worshipped? And if he be the very God, how can it be (even by
Iulians own saying) that all the residue should not be evil, seeing that
this good God condemns them, and declares them to be all wicked Spirits
and enemies of mankind? But if Julian himself would tell us what befell him
at Antioche, when he asked counsel of his Deuilles who made all his
Philosophers to quake, and all his great Sorcerers to run away for fear: we
should see well enough what stuff they be: Zosimus. lib. 4. Socrates. lib. 3.
cap. 11.
insomuch that even his own Historiographer Zosimus, is ashamed to make report
of it.

Now, I would feign that the Heathen or their Aduocats should but show me one
of these two things; either where any Author of the Jews yields record to
any God of the Heathen: or where any grave Heathen author has condemned the
God that is worshipped by the Jews. Forasmuch then as in a Chapter appropried
to the same purpose, I have already proved by all the ancient Authors, and by
consent of all people, that there is but only one God; and by Varro even now,
that the Jews do worship the same God: what follows thereof, but that al of
them be Jews in that point, and that as many as are not so, are al ydolaters
and deceived? And for that cause when Orpheus had praised God in these and such
like verses alleged in the third Chapter. There is but one perfect God the
maker of all things,
Who cherishes and fostereth all things. etc.
He adds immediately, Never man yet knew his incomprehensible being, saving
one of the blud of the Chaldees.

Which saying of his some refer unto Abraham, othersome to Moses; and some
of the Platonists to Zoroastres the graundchild of Noe. And Apollo himself
being demanded by the Gentiles, what people was rightly religious from of old
time; answered him thus. The Chaldees and the Hebrews have all wisdom twixt
the^ twain,
And of the true God only they the worship do maynteine.
Whereunto agrees this verse of Sibilles: The Jews are sure a heavenly race,
divine, and full of bliss.


But it will be yet much more, if we can by their own best Authors, prove
their Gods to be nothing but vanity and leazing: which is as much to say, as
that they have not only allowed the God of Israel, but also condemned all
their own Gods.

The xxij. Chapter.
That the Gods worshipped by the heathen, were men consecrated or canonyzed to
posterity.
I Have sufficiently showed heretofore in the second and third Chapters, that
there is but one God; That both Angels and Feendes are but Creatures, the one
servants, and the other slaves; That Nature and Philosophy consent together
therein, notwithstanding that ouerrooted custom have like a waterstreame
carried folk away, and that the wise of the world have loved better to follow
the course of the stream, than to row against it. Yet for all that, it shall
not be superfluous to see what they themselves have written of their own Gods,
both generally of them all, and particulerly of every of them. Hermes in his
Esculapius, translated by Apulcius.
Therefore to begin with Hermes, whom we have heard so highly commending the
only one GOD; He writes of them in these words Like as the Lord God (says
he) is the maker of the Gods in Heaven, so is man the maker of the Gods that
are content to dwell in Temples, that they might be near unto men. Austin de
Ciuitate Dei. lib. 8. cap. 23. The Gods of the Egiptians.
Man then makes Images after his own likeness, whereunto he calls Spirits
by Art Magic, or else they come into them of their own accord, and foretell
unto men things to come. But the time will come, that all this kind of Religion
of the AEgiptians shall be abolished, and that all their worshippings shall
vanish away. And in very deed (says he) Esculapius the Graundfather of
Asclepius, and Mercury mine own Graundfather, which are worshipped at
Hermopolis in AEgipt, were Men, whose worldly men, that is to say their bodies)
lie the one in Lybia and the other in Hermopilis, and under their names are
worshipped certain Devils, whom I allured and drue into their Images. What
more substantial witness now could we produce against the Gods of AEgipt,
than the very party himself that made them? Cyprian concerning the vanity of
Idols
And what else were they then, than either men, or Devils shrouded in the Images
or in the dead Carkeses of men? But I proceed with these two parts the one
after the other.

The great Highpriest of AEgipt called Leon, being asked secretly by
Alexander, concerning the original of their Gods, and fearing more his power
than their wrath; bewrayed unto him, that all the great Gods, yea even those
whom the Romans termed The Gods of the greater Nations, were al of them men.
But he prayed Alexander that he would not tell it to any body, saving his
Moother Olimpias, and that she should burn his Letter as soon as she had read
it. Plutarke in his treatise of Isis and Osyris.
For as for the Beasts which the AEgiptians worshipped, Plutark says that some
of them were worshipped as Planets and signs celestial; and othersome because
that when Osyris led his people to Battle, he had diverse Antesignes according
to the diversities of the Countries, as in one a Dog, in another an Ox, and so
forth: which afterward through emulation were turned into Superstition. As
touching the Phenicians, The Gods of the Phoenicians.
their next neighbors, Sanchoniation their own Chronacler writes, that they
honored such men for Gods as had been great among the^, Sanchoniation
traslated by Josephus.
or had inverted any thing profitable for the life of man: and that as they
were long time Lords of the Sea, and conveyed many companyes of their own
countrifolke into Libya and Spain to inhabit there: The Gods of the Greeks.
Herodotus, lib. 2.
so they peopled them with their Gods also. Concerning the Gods of the Greeks,
we read that Orphey, Homer, and Hesiodus were the first bringers of them in,
and did set down their Pedegrees in writing, giving them names and Surnames,
and appoynting them honors at their pleasures. Aulus Gelliu^ lib. 3. cap. 11.
and li. 17. ca. 21.
Of who^ Pythagoras says, that their Souls were hanged upon a Tree in Hell,
and there pinched with Serpents on all sides for their so damnable devices.
Pophirius in the life of Pythagoras.
And what he himself deemed of those Gods, we may see in his life written by
Porphirius. For he wrote verses upon the Tumb of Apollo at Delphos, declaring
him to have bin the Son of Silenus that was slain by Pithon, and buried in a
place called Tripos, because the three daughters of Triopus came thither to
moorne. Afterward again, coming into a Cave of Ida, where he found a Throne
set up unto Jupiter, he wrote this inscription upon it: Apuleius and Aulus
Gelins.
Pythagoras to Jupiter. Here lies the great Zeus whom men call Jupiter.
Socrates in despite of those Gods did swear by an Oak, by a Got, and by a
Dog; and was condemned to drink poison, because he taught that there was but
only one God. Which is as much to say, as that he deemed less godhead to be in
those Gods, than in the least creatures. Yet notwithstanding, he was the only
man whom Apollo auowed to be the wysest man of all Greece: wherein he had
showed himself to have had less wit than those beasts, if he had deemed such
a one to be wisest as had condemned the Godhead. But it is the property of
the Devil, both to abuse men and also to mock them for their labor. They
cried out against Socrates that he was a blasphemer, and made him to drink his
own death. But within a while after, the Athenians did set up an Image of him
in one of their Temples, and in a rage did put his accusers to death: [which
deed of theirs made notably against themselves:] for surely they could not
better have condemned their Gods, than by their justifying and honoring of the
party that condemned them. As for his Disciple Plato, this saying of his shall
suffice. When I write unto you in good earnest, I speak but of one God; and
when I mean otherwise, I speak of many. He employed his Gods about vanity,
because the esteemed them to be but vayn. To be short, one says, If they be
Gods, why mourn ye for them? and if they be liuelesse, why worship ye them?
Another says, be of good cheer my Countrymen, men lived before the Gods, and
the Gods dye before men. And the Poets themselves, who made the Gods to be such
as they be, take as great pleasure in the vnmaking of them, as little Children
do in playing with their Puppets: insomuch that there is no Tragedy good,
which does not baffle some one of the Gods, as Euripides (among the rest) does
in these verses.

Thou Neptune and thou Jupiter, and all you other Gods,
So wicked are you euerychone, so fell, so far at odds,
That if due justice for your deeds were justly on you done,
Ye should be banished out of Heaven and from all Temples soon.
The Gods of the Romans.
You will say perchance that the Romans may possibly have some better stuff.
By the original of them which they themselves describe, we may judge what they
were. And let us note that the writers of these things were no Greeks, which
might have bred some suspicion; but they were Romans, even ye Idolaters
themselves. The first that ordained Religion among them, was King Numa; who to
authorize it the more, feyned himself to have had conference with a Goddess
called Egeria which was a witch: and under that gay pretense, Titus Liuius,
Decad: 4 libro ^kimo.
he bewitched the ignorant people with a thousand superstitions. A long time
after, in the Consulship of Cornelius and Bebius, Valerius Ma^mus lib. 1.
it happened that in the ground of a certain Scriuener named Petilius, near to
the place called Ianiculum, there were found two Coffins, in one of the which
was the body of Numa, Plinius lib. 13. cap 13.
and in the other were seven books in Latin concerning the Laws of their
Priesthod, that is to say, their Ceremonies and Churchseruices; Austin lib. 7.
cap. 14.
and other seven Books in Greek concerning the study of Wisdom;
Lactantius. lib. 1.
whereby he ouerthrewe, not only the Gods of other Nations, but also the very
self same whom he himself had instituted. The Senate hearing thereof,
caused the Books to be burnt openly before the people; which was as much to
say as that they condemned all the Gods and all their Services to the Fire.
Among many other Stories, Varro reports the same too: and he concealeth not
that Numa used Waterspelling, and had communication with Devils. And as
touching the Gods whom the Latins worshipped before the time of this Numa
Pompilius; Varro and Caius Bassus say, that Faunus ordained Sacrifices to his
Graundfather Saturn, to his father Picus, and to his Suffer and Wife Fauna,
whom the good huzwiues call Fatua of Fate, that is to say Destiny, because she
was wont to read their Fortunes; and afterward the people worshipped her by
the name of Good Dame or Goddess. And surely of no better value were those
whom AEneas brought thither, whom Virgill terms vanquished Gods, and after
a sort puts them and little Babes both together in one Basket. Sceuola the
Highpriest of the Romans (as I have said before) made three sorts of Gods:
Poetical, worse than the worst men, Philosophical, whom they taught to have bin
men, howbeit yt it was not good for the people to know it; and Civil, made by
Princes to hold their people in awe with; for the which purpose also Varro
adds, that it is good for Capteynes and Gouerners to be persuaded that they
be descended of Gods, that they may the more boldly undertake and the more
happily perform their enterprises. But who could answer better to the matter,
than the Highpriest himself? And which are these better Gods, which are no
Gods at all furtherforth than it pleases men? Varro says likewise, that his
writing of humane things before divine things, is because there were Cities
before there were Gods made by them, as the Paynter is before his Picture. How
much more reasonable had it been that the Gods should have committed themselves
to the custody of the Cities, than that the Cities should have committed
themselves to ye custody of the Gods? Austin de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 7. cap. 17.
Also he deuideth his Gods into certeynes and vncerteynes. The certain (says
he in his second book) are as much or more subject to vncerteyntie than the
uncertain. What certeyntie will he report of the Gods, if they themselves be
uncertain? But behold the godliness of the man. He says he will make a
Register and an Inventory of them: and wherefore? for fear (says he) least
they should be lost, not so much by some sacking of the City, as by the
negligence of the Citizens, which began sore at that time to make no account of
them. Soothly the Romans had been the more excusable, if they had deified this
Varro that had such a care to save and preserve their Gods. But ye wise Senate
thought themselves to have provided well for the matter, by making this
ordinance, That no GOD should be admitted into Rome without their advice. As
who would say, that to be a God it was meet that a bill of petition should
first be exhibited unto them, and men were to be sewed unto for the
obteynement of their voices. By which one argument of theirs they declared
themselves to be more divine than their Gods. And thereupon it came to pass,
that they received into their City all the Deuilles, all the Tyrants, and all
the filthy Rakehelles of the world for Gods. As for the only one true God the
Creator of men, the founder of Cities, and the remouer of Empyres; he had no
name at al among them. Cicero concerning the Nature of the Gods, the first of
his Tusculane questions.
Concerning the nature of the Gods, Cicero has written three books; which to
speak properly, are made to overthrow all the Gods of the Romans. For he
reckons up their ages, their garments, their deckings, their ofsprings, their
auncetors, and their alliances. He says that their Temples are their Tombs;
their Sacrifizes and Ceremonies, representations of their lives; and that from
the least of them to the greatest, they were all men, and all their Religious
Superstitions and old wives tales. As touching the true God, he speaks far
otherwise. For he says that he made al things, that he made man, that he made
the very Gods themselves, and to be short, that it is much easier for him to
wonder at God, than to utter what he is; and to declare what he is not, than
what he is. And whereas sometimes after the manner of the Stoikes, he goes
about to draw natural things out of the fables of the Gods; he does it but
only to keep the people in ignorance, and according to his own saying in the
selfsame books, where having condemned his own Gods, he says that yet for
all that, those things are not to be uttered to the people; and his allegories
are so cold, that it is to be thought that even he himself laughed at them.
As touching the Birdgazers he himself being a Birdgazer does flatly skorne
them, that is to say even his own profession, yea and all such as sought
counsel at Crows and Ravens, that is to wit, the whole Senate of Rome.
Likewise we read that Caesar held still the Province of Affricke against the
forwarnings of the Birdgazers; and that Cato wondered how two Birdgazers could
meet one another or look one upon another without laughing. Seneca. lib. 2.
cap. 4. and 42.
And Seneca says in his book of Questions, that the Bowelgazers were invented
for nothing else but to hold the people in awe. So little did the Wisemen
believe the things which they themselves did to be wondered at and woorshipped
of the common people. And thus much concerning their Gods in general.

But if we come to the particulars, the matter will be yet more clear,
wherein I will be as brief as I can, because it is a matter that is treated
of expressly by others. Among the innumerable rabble of Gods, The Gods of
Greater Nations.
they have twelve of principal renown, whose names are comprehended in these
two verses of Ennius.

Juno, Vesta, Minerua, Ceres, Diana, Venus, Mars,
Mercurius, Jupiter, Neptune, Vulcanus, Apollo.
And unto these some added Bacchus and Saturn; Eusebius de prepar. euangelica,
lib. 4.
this latter, because he might seem to have wrong, if he should not be counted
a God as well as his son: and the other, because it might come to pass, that
(being a fiery fellow) he would else make some fray, seeing that Ceres is a
Goddess. To dispatch the chief of them quite and clean of that doubt,
Euhemere of Messene will alone suffice; who gathering the history of Jupiter
and the rest, sets down their tytles, Epitaphs and Inscriptions which were
in their Temples, and namely in the Temple of Jupiter Triphillian, where was a
pillar set up by Jupiter himself, whereon the notablest of his doings were
engraven. And this history being called holy, was translated by Ennius, the
words whereof are these. Euhemere as he is cited by Lactantius.
Saturn (says he) took Ops to his wife, and Tytan being his elder brother
claymed the kingdom; but Vesta their mother, and Ceres and Ops their Sisters,
counseled Saturn to keep his possession. Which thing when Tytan perceived;
finding himself to be the weaker, he compounded with Saturn, upon condition
that if Saturn had any Sons, he should not suffer them to live, that the
kingdom might reuert again unto his Children. According to which composition,
the first child that was borne to Saturn was killed. Afterward were borne
Jupiter and Juno twins both at one birth: of whom they showed but Juno, and
delivered Jupiter to Vesta to be brought up in secret. After them came Neptune,
who was served likewise. And last of all came Pluto and Glauca; of whom only
Glauca (who dyed within a while) was showed, and Pluto was nurced secretly as
Jupiter was. Now this came to Tytans hearing, who assembling his Sons to him,
took Saturn and Ops and put them in prison. But as soon as Jupiter came to
age, he gave battle to the Tytans; and getting the upper hand of them,
delivered his father and mother out of prison. At length perceiving that his
father, whom he had set up again, was jealous over him and sought his life; he
deposed him from his estate and drove him into Italy. In this only one history
we see what Saturn, Jupiter, Juno, Vesta, Ops, Neptune and Ceres were, that is
to wit, men and women; yea surely even men, and among men, but only mere men.
And yet were they the fathers and mothers of the rest of the Gods, and reigned
in the Isles of the chief Midland Sea; and in Candy, a little before the wars
of Thebes and of Troy. And by that means we see also, from whence the Poets
have fetched their fables; which are not (as some think) mere fancies or
imaginations without ground, but disguising of the truth, and of the History:
True in that they report deeds rightly beseeming men; untrue in that they
attribute them as to Gods, and not as to men. Saturn is taken for the father
of them al. And look what is found of the father, is to be verified of his
offspring. The Historiographers therefore have said, that his wife did hide his
children from him: and the Poets have said that he did eat them up, because a
Soothsayer had told him that one of them should depose him. To avoid the
absurdity of the word Krouos which is Saturn, the Stoikes have turned it to
Chronos, (that is to say time,) which deuoureth all things. But how will they
apply all the rest of the Allegory unto the History? Who shall be the days
lost, and who the days saved? What shall Ops be, and Jupiter, and Pluto? who
shall be this son of time, that perishes not with the time nor before it?
Hermes in his Aselepius.
But Hermes (whatsoever he be) who knew this pedigree well enough, holds
himself to the letter, accounting Vranus, Saturn, and Mercury among the rare
men that were in time past. And Ennius says that this Varnus was the father of
Saturn and reigned before him. Now, because Vranus in Greek signifies Heaven;
the Stoikes more fabulous (as says Plutarke) than the Poets, have called his
son, Time; and his graundsonne Jupiter, the Welkin or highest region of the
air; whom Euhemere reports to have ordained Sacrifices unto Vranus. And
Ennius his translator reports, that he ordained them unto his Graundfather
Heaven, who dyed in the Ocean, and lies buried in Aulatie. To be short, of all
these writers of antiquities, such as Theodore the Greek, Thallus, Cassius,
Seuerus, Cornelius Nepos and others were; none describes him otherwise than a
man: insomuch that even Orpheus himself who canonized him for a God, speaks
of him after the same manner. What read we of Jupiter? Jupiter (says the
History) deposed his own father, held his assemblies in Mount Olympus, stole
away Europa in a ship named the Bull, and carried away Ganymed in another ship
called the Eagle: but he forbear Thetis, because an Achilles (which should be a
man of greater might than his father) was to be borne of her. Finally, after he
had made certain Laws, and parted the offices of his estate among his
friends, he dyed and was buried in the Town of Gnosus. What a life is this,
but the life of a man? yea and of a most wicked man, unworthy, not to reign
in heaven, but even to go upon the earth? Nevertheless, because his
successors enforced men to worship him as well as his Graundfather, yea and he
himself in his life time had caused his Subjects, Uassalles and Confederates
to dedicate Temples unto him; by reason whereof we see he was called by the
names of Labradie, Ataburie, Tryphill, and diverse other: all things were feign
to be applied and referred unto him: insomuch that of a man, the Poets made him
a God; of the Mountain Olympus, they made Heaven; of a Ship, and Eagle; and
of Thetis, a Goddess. Yet for all this, his buryall place puts al out of
doubt, and so does the Epitaph that Pythagoras wrate thereon. For, to have a
Temple in one place, and a Tomb in another; and to be worshipped with prayer
in the one, and to be eaten with worms in the other, are things far
differing. Callimachus will needs taunt the Cretanes for showing his Tomb
with this inscription, (...) that is to say, Jupiter the son of Saturn: and
yet he considers not, that in saying that Rhea was delivered of him among
the Parrhasians, he himself makes him to dye. For what is birth but a
beginning of death? And therefore Sibill speaks of the Gods in these words.
The fond vaynglory which the Cretanes use
About their Gods does many a man abuse.
They be but ghastly Ghostes and feendes of hell,
Or graves of men in whom no soul does dwell.
To be short, Amalthea, and her Goat that nurced Jupiter, which were honored
in the Capitol, and all his other mysteries, represented nothing else but the
trauells of his Childhod and of his life; as, how he was stolen away, how he
was hidden, and how he was nurced: all which things are a manifest derogation
of his Godhead. Seneca in his Moralles.
And Seneca takes it to be a matter so worthy to be laughed at, that he
forgets his own gravity to give a mock^vnto it. Seeing (says he) that
this Jupiter was so lecherous, why begets he not Children still, if he be
yet alive? Is it because he is threescore years old? Or has the Law of Papie
restreyned him? Or has he obtained the privilege of three Children? The Law
of three children.
Or finally, is it come into his mind to look for the same measure at other
folks hands, which he has measured unto others, so as he is afraid least some
Son of his should deal with him, as he himself dealt with Saturn? After that
manner did this great Philosopher mock at his great God; wherein he was so
much the less to be excused, because he woorshipped him, knowing so much as he
did.

As touching Juno, I wilnot stand so much upon the Poets. Varro himself says
that she was brought up in Samos, and there married to her brother Jupiter, by
whom she could not concey^e, in respect whereof, that Island was called
Parthenie, that is to say Maydenland. There also was her famousest Temple,
where she stood in wedding attire; and her yearly feasts are in very deed
but plays ordained after the fashion of old time, to represent her life, that
is to wit, her marriage, her iealosie, and her incest.

And as concerning Minerua Jupiters daughter, we read that she was deffowred
by consent of her father, who had made a promise to Vulcane, not to deny him
whatsoever he should ask: so monstruouse and Lawless was the whole race of
them. For as for Venus, whose aduoutries are mo than her Children; Euhemere
reports her too have bin the first bringer up of Stews in the world, and
that her woorshippers to honor her withal, did call her (...) and such other,
which names even a woman that were very far past shame would take in great
disdeyne. To be short, in the Temple where Cinaras King of Ciprus was buried,
who was the first that interteyned her; surely I am ashamed that the Heathen
were not ashamed of such shamefulnes; but yet much more, that such as bear the
name of Christians, are not ashamed too make songs thereof in their books.

Let us proceed to the rest. Neptune (as their holy History reports) had
the Seacoast for his share, or (as othersome affirm) he was Jupiters Admiral,
in respect where of the Poets of our time call Admiralls, Neptunes. Pluto had
the government of low Countries, which they disguysing turned into Hell. Mars
had the Leading of Soldiers in the wars, and should have bin hanged at
Athens for a murder. What manner of Godds (I pray you) be these, which stand at
men's courtesy for their grace? And what is the Law of that Heaven, which
receives those for Godds, whom men would have hanged on the galowes upon
earth? Also Apollo became a Shepeherd for love, and of a Shepeherd, he became
Laomedons Mason. He played a feawe Iuggling tricks to deceive folk withal; but
in the end (as Porphyrius tells us) he was killed by Python, mourned for by
the daughters of Triopus, and buried at Delphos. Who ever saw a thing more
against reason, than the transforming of him into the Son, which is as much
as to shet up the Son into the earth? But yet such are the Godds of the
Greeks and Romans; that is to wit deadfolks, even kings and Queens whom love
or fear has made to be taken for Gods. And in good sooth, they did not any
thing to their Godds, which men do not at this day to their dead and to such as
are of reputation. They make them Temples, Chappells, and altars; they apparel
them after their age; they set them up Pensils and Penons according to their
degree or trade of living; they make them a funeral feast; they celebrate
Anniuersaries or Yeermynds all of one sort. Insomuch that (as Tertullian
says) the Obitfeast differs not from Jupiters feast, nor the wodden Can
from his Drinkingcup, nor the Cearer of deadfolks from the Birdgasers; for the
Birdgasers also had to deal with the dead. And therefore we must not think it
strange, that Alexander would needs be a God, since he knew that men
woorshipped such: Scipio Affrican in Ennius.
or that Scipio Affricane thought that the great gate of Heaven ought to be
set open for him: for his argument concluded the like; saying. If men for
slaughters made, to heaven admitted be;
Then should the greatest gate of Heaven be opened unto me.
Or that the gentle Ladies Larentia and Flora were Canonized at Room, for they
deemed themselves to have deserved as much by their profession, as Venus had
deserved at the hands of ye Cyprians: Or that Caligula took upon him to have
Altars erected and sacrifise offered unto him; for he was both more myghtie and
also more mischeuous than those whom he worshipped. Let this suffice for the
Great ones. And for the Little ones, we will content ourselves with Esculapius
alone, Esculapius. Julian against the Galilaeans.
whom the Emperor Julian, that great enemies of Christians, commends as his
savior above all the rest. He is (says he) the Son of Jupiter. Then (say I)
he is a man: for men begot not Gods. But he came down intoo the World by the
Son, and from the Son unto the Earth, for the health and welfare of men.
What Author, either in earnest or in jest, did ever say so? No, but he was
(says the History) the son of the fair Coronis renowned in these verses;
A goodlyer Lady was not to be found,
In all Emonia going on the ground.
This Coronis being with Child by Apollos priest, gave it forth, for the saving
of her honor, that she was gotten with Child by Apollo himself; whereby it
appears that her son Esculapius, was not the Child of Heaven as Julian
reports, but (as men said in old time) a Child of the Earth, that is to say a
bastard. And Tarquilius a Roman writes, that he was a Child found in Messine,
and learned the virtues of some herbs at the hand of Chyron the Centaure, and
played the Pedlar a while at Epidaure; and that afterward being stricken to death
(as Cicero says) with Thunder, he was buried at Cyuosures. To be short, what
miracle read we to have bin done by him, more than that he showed men the
herbs called Scordion and Asclepiodotes? By which reason we may as well Deifie
the bird Ibis for the Clisters, or the Stag for the herb Ditanie. But to
conclude, what a beastlynes were it to leave the Creator of all things, and to
worship a man for his knowing of some two or three of them?

Among other Nations of the world, the AEgiptians have upon the like reasons
Deified their King Apis; forbidding all men upon pain of death, to say he was
a man: and I am even ready to shudder at the remembrance of his mysteries.
Likewise the Babylonians deified their Bele; the Mawres their Judah; the
Macedonians their Cabyrus; the Latins their Faunus; the Sabines their Sa^cus;
and the Romans their Quirinus; that is to wit the first founders of their
Towns and Cities, or the leaders of them to inhabit in foreign Countries;
and the eldest of these their Gods, that is to say their auncientest Princes,
they called Saturnes, their Sons, Jupiters, their Graundsonnes, Xenophon in
his Equivocations.
Herculeses; and so forth; whereupon it came to pass, that in diverse Nations
there were diverse Saturnes, Jupiters, and Herculeses. Afterward the Emperors
deified themselves, and their friends, and some, their Mynions, as Alexander
did Ephestion, and as Arian did Antinous, and some their Children, and some
their wives. Cicero being but a Citizen of Arpie; was so prwd that he would
needs Deifie his daughter Tullia, and he sticked not to say to Atticus, that
he would make her to be worshipped as another Juno or Minerua, considering that
she was not inferior to them in any thing. But he came in too rough a time to
make Gods. What more? Even in one man were a thousand Gods to be found. For
they made Gods of faithfulness, of constancy, of wisdom, and of all the other
virtues; and likewise of Love, of Pleasure, of the instruments of pleasure, and
of all other vices; Also of fear, palenesse, gastfulnes, and all passions;
Likewise of Agewes, of the Hemerodes, of the Falling sickness, and of maladies
and diseases; Also of Dounghils, of Snow, of Blastings, and of the very Winds,
insomuch that the great Emperor Augustus did sacrifice to the wind Circius,
which trobled him in Gall. The cause of these absurdities is in two things, the
one is Gods just striking of men with blindness for their turning away from him
unto man, insomuch that whereas they will needs become equal with God, they
fall by degrees from point to point, even to the casting of themselves down
unto Beasts and Worms, that is to say, they become inferior to beasts. The
other is, that Princes vnlightened by GOD are so desirous of vainglorie, and
their Servants are such flatterers, that the Princes perceiving themselves to
have men at their commandment, think themselves to be more than men, and
their servants, to be made Idols themselves, do willingly make Idols of their
Princes. Hereof we read in the very Laws of the Christian Emperors, that
their answers are called Oracles, their persons Godheads; and their
countenances divine brightness. Who reading this can doubt, but that if such
Lawiers had come in the first ages, they would have made us good store of Gods?
Nay, would God we saw not still among us, great nombers of lively and
plainespeaking examples, of man's inclined disposition to the worshipping of
creatures, notwithstanding that our Law in every line thereof do reprove us
for it, and after a sort twich us every hour by the Cote, to pull us from it.
Now therefore, let the premises be a president unto us, both of the vanity of
the Godds, and of the blockishnes of men, which have both worshipped them and
made them. Cicero concerning the Nature of the Godds, in his book of Laws,
and in his Tusculane Questions.
And so let us commit the knitting up of this matter to Cicero himself, who
says thus. The conversation and custom of men (says he) has allowed the
aduanuncing of those men into heaven, both in reputation and in good will, by
whom they had received any great benefit. Of that sort are Hercules, Castor,
Pollux, Esculapius Liber, and such other; so as Heaven is peopled with mankind.
And if I listed to search and ransacke the Antiquities and Registers of the
Greeks, I should find that the same Gods whom we take for the greatest, have
had their original from among us. And for the verifying thereof, Inquire whose
the Tumbes are that are showed in Greece, and consider with thy self what
their mysteries and Ceremonies are, and thou having access thither, shall
understand without doubt, that my saying reaches very far.

The xxiij. Chapter.
That the spirits which made themselves to be worshipped under the names of
those men, were feends, that is to say, Devils or wicked Spirits.
NOw seeing that the said Gods were but men, yea and not Men, but Stocks and
Images of men, and that the same slocks, if they had been any more than Stocks,
should rather have worshipped men: we must needs say with Seneca, that the men
which worshipped them were become worse than stocks. But hereunto it will be
answered, that they gave answers of things to come, and that they wrought
effects beyond the reach of man; which showed that there was a life and power
in them, or else they had not seduced folk so long time. This is the second
part which I have taken in hand to prove: namely that although all the
ancient Philosophers agree, that there are both good Spirits and bad, the one
sort (whom we call Angels) Servants and Messengers of God; and the other sort
Devils, enemies to Gods glory and our welfare: yet notwithstanding, the
Spirits which were served in Stocks and Images as Hermes has told us, were
unclean and mischeuous Spirits. These Feends therefore (to purchase
themselves authority) did borrowe the names of men, and most commonly of the
wickeddest men. Yea and when they were asked what they were, they said in their
own Oracles that they were so: as for example, he that was worshipped at
Delphos, said he was the son of Latona, Esculapius, Porphyrius in his book
of the Answers of the Gods. Eusebius de praeparat. euangel: lib. 3. Cap.
vltimo.
the son of Apollo, Mercury the son of Jupiter and Maia; and so forth, as
we read in Oracles rehearsed by Porphyrius. But what honest man will not
refuse for never so great gain, to take upon him the name of a wicked man?
or rather abhor both the name and the very rememberance of him? And who then
will not conclude that those Devils which [to win themselves credite] clothed
themselves after that sort with the cases of so wicked men, were worse than the
men? Also they were drawn (says Hermes) into Images by Art Magic; yea and
(by the report of Porphyrius Porphyri^s in his said book of the Answers of
the Gods. Eusebius. de praepart: euang. lib. 5. Cap. 6. and. 7.
and Proclus) they taught men receyts wherewith to draw them thither and to
bind them there, as we read of Proserpyne, Hecate, and Apollo. Of whom, one
commanded to beset her Image with Wormwood, to paynt a certain number of
Rattes about it, and to offer unto her Blud, Myrrh, and Storax, to draw her
thither. Another commanded to wype out the lines and figures, to remove the
tuzzimuzzies of flowers from his feet, and to take the branch of Olife out of
his hand, that is to say, from his images hand, that he might withdraw
himself. Who sees not that they made themselves to be drawn in and driven
out by things that have no force at all, specially over Spirits? Iamblychut
concerning Mysteries. cap. 27. and 31.
That it say, that (as Iamblichus also perceived full well) their whole seeking
was to deceive us by their coming, and to go away again when they wist not
what to say; more desirous to lie, than we blockish to believe? And when they
obeyed us or pretended to obey us, let us see what service they required at
our hands: verily that their Images should be well painted and well coted, and
that they might be worshipped, prayed unto, and senced. Now, if they were the
Images of Spirits; what greater untruth can there be, than for a Spirit to be
resembled by an Image? And if they were the Images of men; what greater
beastlines (says Seneca) can there be, than to offer Sacrifize to a stock,
and to make the Caruer which made it, to eat at the second table, and to
kneel down before a counterfeit of his own making, or to make the Paynter
thereof to stand bareheaded unto it? Now then, what else were they but teachers
of untruth, whose intent was to turn men not only from God to his works,
but also to themselves, and finally into very stocks?

Apollo being asked what service was to be yielded to ye Gods, declared that
Sacrifize is to be offered to them all, as well them that dwell in the Air
and the Fire, as them that dwell in the Sea and in the Earth; to some, with
white Beasts, and to some with black; to some upon Altars, and to othersome
upon banks of earth: to some the foreparts of Beasts, and to othersome the
hinderparts, and such other like stuff. And because they would needs play the
Apes with God in all things: they required this service after the example of the
old Testament. For (as says Porphyrius) nothing delights them more,
Porphyrius in his book of answers etc. Eusebius. lib. 4. Cap. 4.
than to be esteemed as Gods: insomuch that the greatest of them all (whom they
call Serapis and we Beelzebub) will needs be worshipped as the souereine God.
But what resemblance is there betwixt them and the true God? God requires of
us the firstlings of our fruits and of our Cattle. And forasmuch as he has
created them for us; is it not reason that we should acknowledge our selves
beholde^ to him for our Corn, and for our increase of Cattle? On the contrary
part, these Gods require the acknowledgement of those things to be done to
themselves and to their Images. Gods inioyning of us to sacrifize brute
Beasts, is to witness the death that we deserve by our sin: but they bear
us on hand, that by the death of a Beast we be discharged from all sins. God
says unto us, your Sacrifizes are nothing worth, I will have obedience and not
Sacrifize: your Oblations loath me, and your Incence stinketh: the thing that I
look for is a broken and a lowly heart. The false Gods speak of nothing but
of the sheading of blud, without telling or knowing why or wherefore, without
end, without ground, without signification, and without coming any whit near
the heart. Now then, what are they else than slavish Roges and Rebels,
indeuouring to filch away the praise of our Creator? The Sacrifising of Men.
Enseb. lib. 4. Cap. 7.
And yet for all their disguysing of themselves for a time, they be not able
to conceal their own Denis of Halycarnassus lib. 1.
lewdness any long while. For they command us to Sacrifize Men, Maids, and
Children unto them. Had they ordained such things at their first coming in,
who would not have abhorred them? Diodorus of Sicilie lib. 20. Porphyrius in
his book of Abstinence. Histrus and Manethon cited by Eusebius.
But when they had once wound themselves into credit by some answers
delightful to our curious ears, and by some Iugglingtricks which seemed
wonderful to the weakness of our eyes: we suffered them to go by little and
little whithersoeuer they them selves listed, as though it had bin impossible
that they should have said otherwise than well, or that we should have done
otherwise than well in obeying them. According whereunto we read, that
Children were Sacrifized to Saturn, Tertullian in his book of Apology.
Erichtho in Lucane. The godly AEnaeas in virgill.
in Candy after the manner of the Curets; In Rhodomene, the sixth day of the
month Geitnion; In Phenice, in times of Plague, War, and Famine: and
likewise in Afric they Sacrifized men, until the Uiceconsulship of Tyberius,
who caused the Priests themselves to be crucified in the same Woods where
they were wont to do their Sacrifizes. Also they offered the like kind of
Sacrifize in Cyprus to ye Nymph Agrawlis, and to Diomedes; and in the I Will of
Tenedos unto Bacchus; and in Lacedaemon to Mars. And all these abominations
are reported by Porphyrius, who thereupon concludes, that all such Gods were
of the wickeddest sort of Deuilles. Moreover, we read that Aristomenes of
Messene Sacrifized three hundred men at once to Jupiter Ithometes, of whom
Theopomp King of the Lacedaemonians was one: And that the Latins Sacrifized the
tenth of their own Children to Jupiter; and that because they had
discontinewed the doing thereof, they thought themselves to be plagued with
dearth and diseases. That those false Gods themselves answered the
Carthaginenses, that the misfortunes which lighted upon them, happened for that
whereas they had used to sacrifize the choycest of their Children, they
Sacrifized none but the Rascalles, Chaungelings, Bastardes, and Bondlings. The
like was done by the Druides in Gaullond, Caesar in his books of his Wars in
Gaullond. Procopius. lib. 2. of the wars in Gothland.
by the Almanes, by the Scandinauians, by the Tawricanes and others; insomuch
that Chyron the Centaure had such Sacrifizes offered yearly unto him. So far
and with so passing supersticious cruelty was the Devils kingdom extended,
that the Devil and none other could be the fou^der thereof. Who can now doubt
after all this, but that those Gods were devils, which were workers of such
things as not only goodmen mislike, but also even wicked men cannot but
abhor? In deed we read that one Diphilus King of Cyprus, made the Idol of
Cyprus to be contented with an Ox in stead of a Man; and that Amosis King of
AEgipt appointed that in stead of the three youg men which were wont to be
sacrificed to Juno in Heliople, there should be offered three Calves: and that
afterward Pallas of Laodicea was contented with a Hynd: and that Hercules in
traueling through Italy, gave the^ men of Hay to be thrown into Tyber, but
surely it had been more to his commendation, if he had punished those Gods,
tha^ to have overcome the great monsters for which he is so renowned. Yet was
that custom observed still: Eusebius. lib. 4. Cap. 7.
Insomuch that even in Rome, every year the same day that men had been wont to
be sacrificed, the Altars were washed with man's blud, howbeit, about a
fowerscore years before coming of Christ, the Senate had condemned such
sacrifices at Rome. Now seeing that (as Seneca says) they required such a
service as Busyris or Phalaris durst never to have demanded: The year after
the building of Rome 657. Pliny, lib. 30. Cap. 1. Quintilian in his book of
Fanaticall things.
who will not conclude with Porphirius, (as great an enemy to Christians as
he was) that they were al devils and wicked feends? Or with Quintilian, that
such Gods could not be but witless and stark mad? And whereas the Senate
which worshipped them, did nevertheless condemn and abolish their Sacrifices,
was not their so doing a condemning of the founders of them also? I mean of
the wicked Feends themselves, which required those kinds of Sacrifices so
insta^tly, Shameful Services. Austin in his second book of the City of God.
Cap. 11.
and were so sore offended at the discontinewing of them? Labeo whom men took
for a great master of those Mysteries, said that the good spirits were to be
discerned from the wicked by this, that this latter sort became not favorable
but by manslaughters and deadly supplications, (which was a flat condemning
almost of them all: and that the other sort were pacified with Plays, Gamings,
Feasts and Banquetings, Momeries and Maskings, and such other things. But if
these good ones (as they term them,) delight in such things as wise men shun
and fools are ashamed of, what follows but that even those good ones are
worse than the worst men? Let us examine their Plays and shows, for it is the
difference that Labeo sets down. Austin in his first book of the City of
God. Cap. 32.
The Gods being sought unto in an extreme plague, commanded for asswaging
thereof, that they should ordeine certain Stageplaies. Contrariwise, Scipio
Nasica the Highpriest of those Feends, to the intent (as he said) to eschew
the Plague, forbade the setting up of the Scaffolds. Now of this Scipio or of
the Gods, which I pray you shall be found the wiser? The Stageplayes yt were
meant, were tales of love, of aduoutrie, and of lechery, interlarded with a
thousand filthy speeches, insomuch that the Housebands forbade their wives, and
the Parents their Daughters to come at them. Fools laughed at them, and wise
men blushed at them, and all men at their going away from them, did with one
common consent banish the Players of those Enterludes out of all good company,
and declared them to be infamous persons by excluding them from all Offices,
and by rejecting them from bearing any witness. Now seeing that the serving of
God is so commendable a thing; if these were Gods, why was it an infamy and
reproach to serve them? The requirers of those plays, are honored; and why
then are the plaiers of them reproched? Austin. lib. 2. Cap. 4. 5. 6. 13. In
infinite places in the Digests.
The Greeks step up to reason against the Romans, and say that such Gods are
worthy to be worshipped, their Stageplayers deserve to be reverenced too. This
proposition of theirs is well grounded, and apparent of it self. But the
Romans taking another ground as sure as that, affirm it to be impossible for
the Comedyplayers to deserve reputation, considering what they do and say.
Whereupon we are to conclude, that those Gods ought not to have been worshipped
at all. And so has Nasica gotten the better hand against his own Gods and
their Plays. And yet are they the selfsame Gods that were confirmed by so
many Oracles, Zosimus. lib. 2.
whom Zosimus that great enemy of Christians so much bewayleth, that he
affirms the welfare of the Roman Empire to have ended with the abolishing of
them by Constantine. And what else are the mysteries which he highly commends,
but remenbrances of the whoredoms, incests, murders, and deceites committed by
the men whose names those Diuelles did bear? And what man is so brazenfaced,
as that he will not be ashamed of his sin, and blush to hear it told unto
him? Nay who doubts that if those men were alive again, they would be both
ashamed and astonished at those things before the sta^ders by? And who then can
doubt that those Gods were of the worst sort of Devils, which not only take
pleasure in ill doing themselves, but also do bedaube themselves with the
evil which they did not? As for example, who would think that the goodly
Gossip whom they call the Moother of the Gods, but whom the veriest kaytife in
the world would be loath to have to be his Moother, could have heard the
vilanous speeches wherewith her feast was solemnised, and not have hidden her
self away for shame? And if Dame Flora could have read the Floralles of
Auleius, who doubts that she would not have done the like, and much more been
abashed to see so great a Clerk and so grave a Senator as Cicero, carried with
devotion to ye celebrating of them? For what else, at a word, are all those
mysteries, but Schools of Lechery, Sodomie, and Incest? And if the end of
Religion be (as Plotin says) to become like the party that is worshipped,
what else could be the mark that those Ceremonies amed at, than to make men
ripe in all sorts of wickedness? and what readyer way could there be to become
Diuils in deed, than to resemble them? For whereas they say that after their
spewing out of al those filthy things openly, they give some precepts of
vprightnes and modesty to their Scholars in secret: thereby their
naughtiness appears the more plainly to be altogether devilish, in that
they first corrupt the manners of a whole people, both by their Religious
Services and by their example, and afterward preach of modesty and temperance
to two or three, making as it were public Sermons of all naughtines, to lay
the Bridle in every man's neck, and then (too keep credit with a few that are
of more conscience then the rest) rowning them secretly in the Ear with some
little talk of virtue. For who has ever read that any of them did ever give
one good precept, or one good example to the people, whither it were for the
withdrawing of them from vice, or for the drawing of them to true virtue? And
yet notwithstanding to what end desire we to have God or his blessed Angels
conversant with us frail and weak men, but that they of singular good will,
should induce, lead, and guide us into the way of salvation?

But their defenders reply, saying: Yet notwithstanding, The Oracles of the
Gods were false, uncertain, vain and wicked.
they prophesied and wrought great and strange miracles. Let us omit that is
more natural to believe the party which preaches good things, without
diuinations and miracles, than to believe the party that keeps a School of
evils, though he prophecy and work miracles. But in the end what were the
Oracles and Miracles which they so highly commend? The Oracle of Delphos was
one of the greatest in reputation. The beginning thereof may be an argument for
the rest. A heard of Goats (says Diodorus) was the first mean to bring it in
credit. And afterward a young wench was set there, to utter forth the Oracles
which she received, (as they say) by her privy parts. And for the slanders
that grew thereof, it was ordained that the Wench should be a Maid of fifty
years old. By these circumstances a man may gather what manner a God that could
be. To Cresus therefore being desirous to know what should be the issewe of
his wars against the Persians, the Oracle answered. King Craesus passing over
Haty stream,
Shall overthrow the proud and stately Reame.
Cresus gathered hereof that he should overthrow the Empire of the Persians,
but in deed he overthrew his own; which thing the Oracle had provided for
aforehand, by making the answer so doutfull that it might be taken both ways
yet was there great reason that Apollo should have preserved Cresus: for of
singular devotion he had greatly inryched his Temple at Delphos. And unto
Pyrrhus (as Ennius says) he answered thus. I say the son of AEacus
The Romans sure shall overcome.
Presuming hereuppon that he should overcome the Romans, he himself was
overcome of them. Also he counseled the Athenians to flee before Xerxes: and he
foretold the Salaminians that they should be overcome by the Persians either in
Winter or in Summer. Who perceyueth not by these doutfull speeches, that Apollo
knew nothing certainly, and therefore that he ever left himself a backedoore to
scapeout, at all assayes? And as for the coming of these foresayings to pass;
who douteth that Themistocles perceiving so puissant an army to approach,
deemed not as much thereof himself, specially seeing yt before he had heard the
answer of Apollo, he counseled his Countrymen to wayt for their enemies upon
the sea? And what a number of wise Senators and good Capteynes were there
(think we) in those free Cities and kindomes, which would have given their
advice more to the purpose in that case?

Zosimus reports that when the Palmirenes asked couns^ll, whither they should
obtain the Empire of the East or us; an Oracle answered them in this wise: Go
get ye hence like guylfull folk and Couseners as ye be;
The things ye now do take in hand displease the Gods I see.
And some such other does Zosimus report, whereof he makes great reckening.
But what else are such wandering and general answers, but deceytfull douts, and
(as ye would say) shoes that will fit both feet, as agreeable to folk that
are furthest of, as to the parties that ask the Counsel? Therefore Oenomaus a
Philosopher and Orator of Greece, having oftentimes (as he himself confesses)
bin beguyled by the Oracle of Delphos, gathered a Register of the lies thereof
and did set forth a book against it, intytled the falsehood of Oracles. And
Porphyrius who likewise made a collection of them, even without adding
diminishing or changing so much as one word; says that upon examining of
them, he found them ordinarily false: and he adds the cause thereof to be,
Porphyrius in his books of the Answer of Oracles.
That their foretelling, of things is not by foreknowledge, but by conjectures
taken of natural causes, and of the mouings and meetings of the Stars, as
has appeared in many Oracles. For Apollo being asked by one whither he should
have a Son or a Daughter, answered, a Daughter; because (quod Apollo himself)
that at the time of the conception, Venus ouershadowed Arares. And being asked
another time whither that year should be unhealthful or no; he anwered yea,
because the constellation thereof was dangerous for the Loongs: and so of
other things. How many wise women and learned Phisicions would have answered
that matter better, and yet for so doing men would not have offered sacrifice
unto them? Nay, which more is, Porphyrius says that upon a time, Apollo of
Delphos being unable to conjecture by the Stars, desired folk to let him
alone, telling them flatly that if they were importunate upon him, he would
answer them with lies. And that at another time he answered flatly, that at yt
instant the course of the Stars could show him nothing. Now I pray you what
manner of Gods are these, which learn their wisdom of the Stars? Nay, which
worse is, how can they be said to be good Spirits, which threaten to lie, if
they be urged too far? And in good sooth such are the answers which the
coniured Deuilles do yield yet still at this day by these Sorcerers and
Witches; for the doing whereof, these servants of theirs are by all laws
condemned to be burnt, as he was that deceived Manfred when he was to fight
with Charles Duke of Aniow in the Realm of Naples, by this doubtful
construction of Grammar, Non, non Gallus superabit Appulum: which may be
Englished as doubtfully thus; No, the French man the Italian shall not
overcome. For Manfred considered not that in Latin two Negatiues may
counteruayle an Affirmative. Many such other like tricks there are, which we
may with less trouble read in Histories. And if they know not the certeyntie
of the things that are demanded of them; why do we either woorship them or
wonder at them? And if they speak that which they know not, are they not
deceyuers? And if they speak against their own knowledge, are they not liars?
And if it belong unto Gods to deceive and to lie; wherefore do we blame our
neighbors and beat our children for so doing? Nay (which more is) to lie and
to deceive in matters of such importance, where the case concerns the blud of
so many silly Souls, and the sacking of so many poor houses; who can deny
it to be the property of the Devil, who even from his first beginning has
been found to be does a Murderer and a liar? As for Birdgazers, I have
touched them in a word or twain before. The AEgiptians observed them after one
sort, and the Affricanes after another; the Greeks on the right side, the
Romans on the left: and Aristotle skorned them because they determined not the
time; and Pliny mocked them, because that even by their own doctrine, they
touched not them at all which had no regard of them. Yea and even the greatest
Birdgazers themselves, as Cato, Caesar, and Cicero made a mock of it. And if
at any time they happened to hit right upon a thing; it was but after the
manner of our Almanackes, the flat contrary whereof who so follows, shall
commonly come nearest the truth. Nevertheless, if their Gods foresawe any
Plague by natural Conjectures, as Philosophers, Physicians, Hunters, and
Shepherds also do; they feyned themselves to be angry at some State or
Commo^weale. And for what cause? Forsooth for omitting of common Plays and
Enterludes; that is to say, for shutting up the Schools of Lechery and
Ribaudrie: Or for that they had not made their wonted shows of Fensers and
Swordplayers; that is to say, of men that slew one another openly to please
them withal, and to make a whole state guilty of manslaughter and murder. And
if they judged by the season of the year that the Plague should cease; Then it
was the goodly Sacrifices that had appeased them, and that made men the
carefuller to continue them. Insomuch that when the Romans had lost the
bluddie battle at Cannas; it was said to be, because their Consul Varro had
put a fair young boy to the Galley. And when things went amiss in the City,
it was either because some Dauncer or Gambolder had displeased them at the
Gamings and Shows in the Kirk, or because some Malefactor had bin conveyed
that way to the Gallows. What a Godhead is that I beseech you, which is
provoked to anger by Modesty, and appeased by mischief? In the favor whereof
a man cannot stand, but by dealing wickedly; but is so straungely offended by
the doing of Justice?

But let us see further whether they be any better Divines than Prophets. The
Oracle of Delphos says thus: A God in sooth is Cleomede, and not a mortal
wight;
The last begot of heavenly race; an Altar to him dight.


This Cleomede was one of those that pleasured these Gods, by beating one
another with strokes of hand and foot; of whom we read that he slew his
adversary at one blow. But of such a one as Socrates, Plato, or Pythagoras,
he would never have said so much.

Again he says thus.

Archilochus is a very Saint and servant of the Gods: Yea verily of such Gods
in deed; for he chose the wickeddest and leaudest subject of whom to make his
verse. But of Theognis, or of a Phocylides which had exhorted folk to good
life, he would never have said so much.

Of Cypselus he said thus.

A happy man is Cypselus and loved of the Gods. If it be so: then what are
Busyris, Phalaris, and al other Tyrants? for there never was a greater Tyrant
than he. But the said Oracle said also, that Jupiter and Apollo had prolonged
the life of Phalaris, for his well handling of Cariton and Menalippus. Now, what
fitter mean can there be to make Tyrants, (that is to say, enemies of mankind
in the world) than to bear men on hand that such are beloved of the Gods?
Zosimus their great Patron, rehearses an Oracle which answered, That for the
appeasing of an Earthquake at Athens, it behooved them to honor Achilles as a
God. This was a plain turning away of man from God to the creature. The same
answered likewise to the me^ of Methymnus, that it behooved them to worship a
wooden head of Bacchus that was found by fishing in the Sea. And this was a
making of them more blind than the stock it self. And when they were demanded
concerning the manner of woorshipping and serving these Gods; they answered:
(...)


That is to say: Send you the heads to Jupiter, the lights unto his Sire.

The dubble signification of the Greek word (...) Fos, which signifies a man,
and may also signify a Torch or a Light, did cut off the lives of many folks.
Which doubtfulnesse of speech the Idol coueted, not of any intent to spare
them, but to have matter of excuse against such as made conscience to do it.
For being asked by the Athenians how they might make amends for their killing
of Androgeus; he willed them to send yearly to King Minos, seven bodies of
either sex chosen from among them all, to appease the wrath of God; and that
kind of Sacrifize continued still in Athens in the time of Socrates. Now then,
what else is all their doctrine than a serving of the Devil and of Creatures,
yea even with a service which in very deed is deuilish and horrible? Al these
Oracles are reported by Oenomaus a Heathen man, who sought them out: by
Porphyrie our enemy, who by them would induce us to make great account of
the^; who in the beginning of his book, appealeth unto GOD that he sets not
any thing down of his own head: by Chrysippus the Stoike in his book of
Destiny, who by those Oracles goes about to prove it: and by Zosimus himself,
who makes so great moan to see their mouths stopped and their Temples shut
up. And surely it is not to be marueled, though the Peripateticks putting the^
to trial, did utter great griefs against those Oracles: and that the
Platonists (which went to work more faithfully) were driven to conclude, that
not only the unclean Spirits, but also even their Gods whom they thought to
be pure, were subject to lying.

Let us come to their Miracles. False Miracles.
In the Temple of Venus there was a Lamp that never went out; and the Image of
Serapis hung vnfastened in the air. Diverse deceyts may be wrought in the like
case; and it is well known that the like wonders are seen even in natural
things, as a Fountain to light a Torch, and a Stone to hang by iron in the
air. And they which have the skill to use such things, and to gather together
the virtues of many into one, may wonderfully bleare the eyes, even of the
wisest. As for example, it has been seen that some have found out a devise
how to burn up one water with another; and to break open a strong Lock,
almost without touching it. And that the Feends (which know more than we) do
better serve their own turns with the wonders of Nature than we do, it is
not to be doubted: Insomuch that the Physician which knows the virtues of
Herbs, makes things of them which the Gardyner that sowed them and cherished
them up would wonder at and cannot do. But lo here a strange case. Accius
Nauius the great Birdgazer of Rome, did cut asunder a Whetstone with a Razor
in the presence of King Tarquine. What a number of Witches are daily burned
which do much more by their familiarity with the Devil? For they stop a
Tun that is pierced full of holes; they hold fast a Waterspout from running;
and they bynd the natural abilities: and yet notwithstanding they confess
that their so doing is by the wicked Spirits, and the wicked Spirits discover
not themselves otherwise than so unto them. And in very truth, the Angels
and the Feends differ not properly in strength and power, but in will and
practice: like as among men, the good men differ not from the wicked men either
in strength of body or in stoutnesse of courage, but in the applying of their
bodies and mynds. Also it may be that the Image of Feminine Fortune has
spoken, and likewise the Image of Juno Moneta, and such others: And that Castor
and Pollux have wyped away the sweat from the Horses of the Romans as they
traueled: And that the Lady Claudia drew the Ship wherein the Idol of the
Goddess Bona was, which so many young men could not once stir. Let us admit
all these things to be true, notwithstanding that Titus Liuius say that he
becomes old in reckoning them up. We stand not to dispute whither Spirits
can speak by Images or no: for we doubt not thereof. But I say that the
Spirits which speak in them be wicked Spirits, and turn us away to the
Creature, to make us offend the Creator. Neither do I hold opinion that
Spirits cannot take bodies upon them; nor that they be unable to do feats
far passing the power of men: for thereof examples are to be seen, yea more
than were requisite. But the thing that I uphold is this, that the Spirits
which seek to have the praise of a victory obtained, or of the asswaging of a
Plague, which is due but to the only one God; or which will have them ascribed
to Fortune, which is but an imagination; or to a Juno, which is but a Block;
or to a good Goddess the mother of the Gods, a mother whom the veryest
wretches in the world (as I said before) would disclayme to be their mother,
are very Deuilles. And in good sooth, whereas the Devil which took upon him
the name of that Goddess, suffered himself to be drawn by Claudia, who had so
ill report among all men: It agreed very well to the life which the Goddess
her self had led, and to the miracles of the Feends, and to the mark that
they shot at: namely, to give the more boldness to Claudia to continue her
leaud life, and occasion unto others to follow her.

Also one was counted a God because he drove away Grasshoppers; another because
he killed Frogs, Crickets, and Flies. And hereof it came that the Chananites
called their Beelzebub, and the Greeks their Jupiter, Jupiter. (...).
by the name of Scareflye. Another (says Zosimus) sent Birds to devour the
Grasshoppers. Admit that all these effects have not their particular causes: yet
what miracles are they to make Gods withal? For by that reckoning, why should
not those also which by certain receyts do kill Serpents, Rats, and
Feeldmyce, or which do moreover drive away vermin out of men's bodies, be
counted Gods? Nay, if we will see miracles, let us look upon the doings of
the only one God, which are utterly impossible, wonderful, and vncommunicalle
to any creature. He made the world, and he destroyed it. He made the Sea, and
he dries it up. He made the Sun, and he causes it to stand still. Yea and
(which is yet much more) he made all these things by his word, and with a blast
of his mouth he changes them as he lists. These are the miracles of the God
of Israel, which have not their like among the other Gods. And if they will
deal uprightly in disputing, they must as well believe our books for these
miracles, as we believe their books for theirs.

Also if we look upon the miracles of the good Spirits, and of the servants
of that one God; they be not castes of Legierdemame to dazzle men's eyes withal;
nor nimble tricks and sleyghts, nor wonders to no end, to no reason, to no
instruction: but when they strike, it is to chastize men; and when they heal,
it is to glorify God. If they speak, it is to teach; and if they appear to
us, it is to lead us to welfare. If they foretell, they do it as messengers
from God; and if they work miracles, they do it as executers of his power.
And they be so far of from being angry at a Song mistuned, or at a Gambauld
misbegun in the honor of them after the manner of the Heathen Gods; that (as we
read in our Scriptures) they be offended with nothing more, Marks whereby to
know Devils.
than when men thank them or honor them for the things which they ought to
thank and to worship the Creator.

By the tokens which the Platonists give us thereof, we shall percieue yet
better whether those Gods were good Spirits or bad, Porphirius in his second
book of Abstinence. In his Epistle to Anebon alleged by Eusebius. lib. 4. cap.
11. Iamblichus in his book of Mysteries in many places.
Angels or Diuelles; notwithstanding that that Sect was tootoo much overtaken
in the serving of them. The Diuelles or wicked Spirits (says Porphirius)
delight in bludshed, in filthy and rybawdly speech, in giving Poison, in
furnishing folk with charms of love, and in provoking them to lechery, and to
all vices. Yea, and they bear men on hand, that all the Gods and the very
Souereyne GOD himself, takes pleasure in such things; either feyning
themselves to be the Sowles of some deadfolkes, or taking upon them to be
Gods. Which of all these tokens have I not noted already in their Gods? Agein
(says Porphirius) They turkining themselves as much as they can into Gods,
that is to say, into Angels of light, to beguile our sense and imagination with
strange vanities: Insomuch that he that is the chief of them, will needs be
esteemed to be the souerein God. And yet notwithstanding, their foretelling of
things is but by guess, and all of them generally be subject to lying and
deceyuing. They be angry at every small tryfle; and are pacified again with
fond and vain things. Nevertheless they have beguyled some vain Poets and
Philosophers, and consequently by them have drawn the silly people to the
worshipping of them as Gods. What is all this but a description of the very
same Gods whom he himself worshipped? Likewise Iamblichus who makes an
Anatomy of them, Iamblichus in his book of Mysteries.
says thus. They transform themselves (says he) into good Spirits; but in
deed it is but a brag, whereby they pretend more than they be in deed. They
make a galant show, and daunt men with their words. They play the Gods, and
yet are troubled with light passions. Apulcius.
But the great Witch Apuleius says yet more. They be pacified with gifts
(says he) and wroth with wrongs. They be pleased with Ceremonies, and angered
with the want of them be it never so little. They take upon them the ruling of
Birdgazers and Bowelgazers, and of the Oracles and Miracles of Witches and
Wizards. To be short, they be unkindly wights, passionate of Spirit, reasonable
of understanding, ayry of body, and endless of time. To whom can these things
agree but to his own Gods? And what remains then, but that they were Devils;
so much the more miserable, as they be more vehement in their passions, and
immortal in their nature.

Now is there nothing behind but their own Confession, and thereof we shall
not yet fail. Apollo therefore as one upon the Rack, does in many of his
Oracles acknowledge the Souereine God, and to make the most of himself, he
terms himself one of his Angels, as appears by this Oracle of his alleged
before. We Angels are a parcel of the Souereine God of all.
And being asked upon a time by what name he would be called and prayed unto,
he answered, Call me the feend that knows all things to whom belongs all skill.
And in another; The witty Feend, the Harmony and Cresset of the World.
And ageine. We Feendes which run through Sea and Land, (...). Austin in his
ninth book of the City of God. chap. 19.
do tremble shrink and shake,
To see the Whip of that great God which makes the World to quake.
And yet notwithstanding, the Greek word Demon (which is the word whereby they
termed their Gods, and which in this place I english Feend) was so odious even
among the learned men themselves who knew the original thereof, that they
would have been loath to call a Slave so. But when as we read further that
these Gods do quake at the naming of the Stigian marris, that is to say of
Hell, insomuch that even Jupiter himself swears thereby, and is afraid to be
forsworn: what else is to be thought thereof, but that these Gods which feine
themselves to reign in heaven, are tormented in hell? Besides this, the
miracles and Oracles of these Gods are come to an end, and their Services and
Sacrifices are come to naught, and at length folk have acknowledged the only
one GOD the maker of Heaven and Earth, and ruler of the whole world, to be the
same whom the Jews have worshipped. And in that respect it is that Seneca
cried out, That the Slavish Jews had given law to the whole Earth. But who
can marvel that he which made both the world and man, should in the end make
men to acknowledge him to be as he is? So then, let us conclude for these last
three Chapters, That there is but only one God; That the same was worshipped,
served and called upon by the people of Israel: That the Gods of the Heathen
were men; That under the names of those men, devils were worshipped; and
finally that our first mark whereby to know the true God, is not to be found
elsewhere then in the Jewish Religion; whereupon it follows that all other
Religions were Idolatry and Uanitie. For whereas some allege in excuse, that
the serving of many Gods may well match with the serving of the only one; If
they be Gods in deed, that is to say Angels; they take themselves to have
wrong, for they seek nothing but the honoring of God. And if they be Devils,
then are they Gods enemies; and then the woorshipping of them is a rebelling
against God. To be short, as little agreement is between the service of the
true God, and the service of the Heathen Gods, as is between light and
darkness; the true goodness and utter naughtiness; most extreme holiness of
will, (which is in him) and extreme teaudnesse of will (which is in the^);
welfare and soulehealth, whereof we be desirous, and destruction and wretched
nesse, which they have purchased to themselves by their rebellion.

The xxiiij. Chapter.
That in Israel Godds word was the Rule of his Service; which is the second
mark of true Religion.
NOw have we seen by the former Chapters, how blind man is in matters
concerning God, and his own welfare; seeing that in sted of the true God his
maker and Savior, he has woorshipped not only the vilest and basest
creatures, but also the very enemies of Gods glory and of his own welfare.
And that ought to warn us the more, how needful this second mark that I have
giuenfoorth, is in religion; namely that Gods word is the Rule of his service.
For surely he that ouershooteth himself so far as to take, not a Star but
the very darkness itself for the Son: cannot but ouershoote himself much
more in discoursing of his own nature, course, and virtue. And like as he
that has missed his way at his first settingfoorth, the more he hastes him
the more he goes astray: so doubtless he that is ouerseene in the object of
Religion, that is to say, the true God; the more he talks of Religion and
divine seruis, the more shall he blaspheme the name of the everlasting, and the
further shall he wander away from his welfare. The heathen (as we have seen)
did woorship the devil in stead of the true God; and what service insued
thereof? Plays, Fables, Combats; which were Schools of whoredom, of Incests
and of murder; bluddie Sacrifices, and ordinary manslaughters. If their
godliness, were such, what might their vngoblynes be? These extreme
mischeeues made some to suspect that there was an abuse. But what did that
avail them? One sort said, seeing that Religion consists in such things, it
were meet to be banished quite out of the World: and thereof sprang the
School of Epicurus: and that is a falling from one breakenecke too another.
A^othersort sacrificed as the common people did; and hil^ opinion in their
hearts with yt wysest sort. Such were Aristotle, Cicero and others; of whom the
former be^ueathed a Sacrifice to Ceres by his last will; and the other
celebrated the shameful feasts of the Goddess Flora. What else is this, than a
mocking of God, a deceyuing of folk of set purpose, and a betraying of their
own salvation? There have bin some feaw who in their wrytings have let slip
some words against such ungodliness, and have taught that there is but only one
God, and that he was not served with such Ceremonies. But when they come too
give a rule of Religion, at what point are they? One speaks one thing and
another another, every man after his own fancy. They dispute and cry out one
against another too overthrow one another. But if ye take the whottest of them
aside, and let them cool theiheate a little; they will tell you that they be
scarce sure of that which they assure you; and that they be but the opinions of
men, and therefore are disputable on both sides; only they think they find more
likelihod of truth in their own, than in the opinion of their adversaries. To
be short, among all the things which the wisemen of the world have written here
and there of the service of GOD, ye may hap to find some one good saying in a
hundred years, and foam one other in another hundred: but when ye have gathered
them all together as diligently as ye can, yet shall ye not be able to make of
them neither Rules, nor Grounds, nor scarcely good Problemes. So greatly is man
by his corruption, both blinded in things concerning God, and rechelesse in
things that concern his own welfare. Yet is it sooth (and so have we proved,)
that God has set man in this world to serve GOD his Creator; and that Service
we call Religion. Whereupon it follows, that even since the first time that
there was any man in the world, there has also bin Religion. For the duty
which man owes unto GOD, is of the same date that man himself is; and the
duty which he owes unto God, is true godliness and Religion. Again,
Religion could not be the invention of Man: for the invention of men tending
to their own pleasure or profit, proceed from ground to ground, from
principle to principle, and from experience to experience, and at the first are
rude, and afterward are polished, not by the same man that found them out, but
most commonly a hundred year or twain after: whereas Religion (that is to
say, man's duty toward God) was not so much instituted as bred with man, for
his own welfare and for the glory of God. The thing (say I) without the
which, God should not have made man, and man might have been sorry that he had
been made; ought (even at the first beginning) to be perfect and fully
accomplished to his end: which thing Religion could not be, if it were devised
by man's brain, considering that after his fall he was stricken with ignorance
in his wit, and with frowardness and lewdness in his will. Needs therefore
must it be, that the rule of Gods service was given to man by God himself, who
alonly is able to utter his own will, What and where the true Religion is.
to make rules of his service, and to tell us what things do please him. Now,
true Religion is the true service of the true God: and the true God (as I have
proved already) was not known in old time elsewhere than in Israel. As for
the Gods of the Gentiles, they were Devils, and consequently their Oracles were
the word of Devils. Whereupon it follows that there is no seeking for the
true service of GOD and for the true word of God, but only among the people of
Israel; yea and that it must of necessity also be found there. For seeing
that of necessity there must needs be a Religion; and that in Religion there
must needs be a rule proceeding from GOD, according to which rule God will be
served; and that God was served in Israel and no where else: The Rule which we
seek must needs be found in Israel too. For as it is impossible that it
should be elsewhere, because the true God was not anywhere else: so is it not
possible that it should not be there, forasmuch as there was one there, and
that the true God also was there. Now therefore, the people of Israel had
always certain books which we call the Bible or old Testament, which books
they reverenced and followed as the very word of GOD, whereby he has showed
unto men after what manner he will be served and worshipped. And those books
have been kept continually from time to time, even since ye creation of the
world: and they have been of such authority among the true Israelites, that
they believed not any other books, and for the maintenauce of them have
endured wars, oppressions, banishments, remouings, deaths, and slaughters;
which are such things as are not to be found among other Nations,
notwithstanding that the Lawmakers of other Nations, in giving them their
laws, made them believe that they proceeded from the Gods, because it was a
thing as good as granted among al men, that the setting down of rules for
Religion and for man's Soulehealth, belo^ged only unto God. And therefore we
might well gather this conclusion, whereof the premises are proved heretofore;
That there is but one true God, one true Religion, one true Rule of serving
God, revealed by and from the true God. And that this true God was not known
and worshipped elsewhere than among the people of Israel. Unto Israel then was
the said word revealed, and that word must needs be the Bible or old
Testament, whereby the Israelites were taught the service of God. But forasmuch
as we have to do with folk that will sooner be driven to silence by
arguments, than persuaded by reason to believe, as though it stood God on hand
to persuade them for his honor, and not them to believe for their own welfare:
I will by the Readers leave, set forth this matter at large.

First of all, Marks whereby to discern Gods word.
forasmuch as there is a Service of God to be had; and that service should
rather be a misseruice than a Service, if it were not according to his will;
and his will cannot be conceived of us by conjectures, but must be manifested
unto us by his word; I ask them upon their conscience, if they were to
discern that word from all others, by what marks they would know it, that
they might not be deceived! This word (say I) is the rule of Gods service and
the way of welfare. Unto this service is man bound from his very creation, and
it is the mark whereat he ought to shoot from his very birth. Will it not
then be one good mark of this word, if it be auncienter than all other Laws
and Rules, than all other words, than all inventions of man? And will it not be
another good mark, if it tend to none other end, than the glorifying of God
and the saving of mankind? If (say I) it withdraw man from all other things to
lead him to God, and to turn him out of all bypathes? how great pleasure so
ever there be in them, to lead him to salvation? Nay I say yet more, If we
find things in the Scripture which no Creature could ever have foretold or
spoken; things which could never have come into any man's mind; things not only
above but also against our nature; Will any man be so wilful and so very an
enemy to his own welfare, as not to yield and agree, when he sees both the
hand, the sign, and the Seal of God? In deed I undertake a matter beyond my
ability; but yet the higher it is, the more will GOD aid me with his grace.
And first of all, That the Byis of more antiquity then all other writings.
forasmuch as the world was made for man, and man for God; and man could never
be without true Religion, nor true Religion without the word of God: I demand
of the great Nations and flourishing kingdoms that have given Laws to all the
world, and among whom the liberal sciences, arts, and learning have been most
renowned; whither any one of them is to be found that has had a Law set down
in writing, concerning the true Service of the true God? Yea or one word
either right or wrong that has bin believed to proceed from him, I mean from
the only one everlasting GOD the maker of Heaven and Earth? Also I demand of
them whither among the Assyrians, Persians, Greeks, and Romans, a man shall
find an History of Religion deduced from the first beginning of the world, and
continued so on from time to time, and from age to age? And on the contrary
part, whether there be any Heathen man which is not driven to confess, that
the very latest writer of our Bible, is of more antiquity than the auncientest
authors that are renoumed among the Gentiles? And whether that little which the
Gentiles have learned concerning God be not borrowed from other men; and finally
whether in matters of religion, they have not walked by groping, without light
and without any direction? This matter is handled at large by diverse ancient
writers. Nevertheless, for the ease of them which cannot read them all, I
will gather them here together in feawe words.

The Bible beginning at the creation of the world and of man, leads us from
time to time, and from Father to Son, even unto Christ. It delivers us a
division of men into Gentiles and Israelites, into Idolaters and true
worshippers of the Souereine God; and their coming together ageine into one
after a certain time, and by a mean appointed everlastingly to that end by
God. And the writers thereof are Moses, Joshua, the Chronicles of the Judges
and Kings, the Prophets every of them in his time, Daniell, Nehemias, and
Esdras; of whom even these latest were about three thousand and sixehundred
years after the creation, and yet were they before any Chronicles of the world
were in the residue of the world. I desire all the Antiquaries of this time,
which make so great account of the antiquity of the Greeks and Romans, or
of an old Coin, or of a whetherbeaten Pillar, or of a halfeaten Epitaphe, what
find they like unto that? Esdras is the latest in the Canon of the Hebrewe
writers, and yet lived he before the time that Socrates taught in Athens. And
what rule of Religion was there among the Greeks of his time, who condemned
him for speaking of the only one GOD? At the same time were Pythagoras,
Thales, Xenophanes, and the seven Sages which have borne so great fame in
Greece, who in their whole life time have said some good words concerning
manners, and conversation among men, but as for God, they have spoken nothing of
him but dreamingly, nor deemed of him, but ouerthwartly, nor known aught of
him but that little which they learned of the AEgiptians. Thither went Orpheus,
Homere, Lycurgus, Solon, Pythagoras, Plato, Heraclitus, Democrates, Thales,
Oenopis, and the residue of them to schole, as they them selves do highly
boast in their Books. And what learned they there but Superstition, as I have
showed before? And what else then could they bring into Greece? And what might
their ignorance be, seeing they were counted wise so good cheap? Of the same
date are the laws of Solon in Athens, and (anon after) of the twelve Tables at
Rome, which the Romans sent to seek in Greece by the aduyce of one
Hermotimus an Ephesian. Cicero in his second book of the Ends of things.
As touching GOD and his service, which should be the ground of all good laws,
scarce was there one word of very Justice in deed, further than peculiar
interest required, which was very little. But shall we seek the law of
godliness at the hand of the Greeks and Romans, Aulus Gellius in his 20. book
Cap. 1.
who a three thousand and six hundred years after the Creation of the world,
knew not whither there were many Gods or but only one? Denis of Halycarnassus
lib. 1. cap. 2.
Ne knew any further of Religion, than they had learned by their Traffic
into AEgipt? Pliny lib. 34. cap. 5.
Who in respect of others are of so late time in the world, and (which worse
is) had reigned three or four hundred years without inquiring after
godliness and righteousness? Pomponius ff. of the original of Law.
Surely we must hold us to this point, that since the very first breeding of
man in the world, there has always been Religion in the world. For he was not
bred in vain: neither could there be any Religion without revealing from God.
For (as the Philosophers say of nature) God fails not in things needful. And
therefore where men have been so lateward, and GOD so smally known; there we
shall not find them. For as for the Oracles, that is to say the sayings of the
Devils that abused them; if they were of elder time than the people, they spoke
not to them: and if they were bred after them, then were they new. And in very
truth, even by their own Histories, the first original of the false Gods of
Greece and of their miracles, took beginning about the wars of Troy, which
befell about the time of the Judges, toward the two thousand and eight hundred
year after the Creation of the world. The great Kings of Assyria be of more
antiquity than the Greeks; for they fell into the times of the Kings and
Prophets of Israel, whereas there was not any notable thing in the Story of
the Greeks before the Captivity of Babylon. But how will they show us any law
concerning the service of God, yea or how could they have any, seeing they
forsook the true God and worshipped false Gods? Nay, as touching those false
Gods, what memorial almost have we of them, but in the Bible, and that is of
the victories which the true God had against them, and of his Conquestes over
them, which are spoken of from leaf to leaf, to their overthrow and utter
confusion? Contrariwise, what be the Kings of Israel, but mainteyners; and the
Prophets but expounders of the law of Moses? These as publishers thereof from
time to time, to the intent that folk should not forget it, which thing we
see not in any other Nation; and the other as compellers of men to observe it,
as whereunto even Kings them selves are bound. But if we go back from the time
of the setting forth of the law of Moses; what have the Heathen of that time
to set against it? I say not only in respect of Godliness, but also for
Justice, and welnere for the common society of men? The Athenians will allege
Cecrops the founder of their City; and the Thebanes their King Ogyges. And of
them they term all things of antiquity, Cecropian and Ogygian: And
peradventure they will tell us, that at that time folk bred out of the earth in
the Country about Athens; as though they spoke of Mussheromes and Grasshoppers.
And when they say so, what shall we look for at their hands concerning the
service of God and heavenly things, since they think them to have been bred of
the earth? But yet they will not deny that this Cecrops was an AEgiptian, who
brought them certain laws for the ordering of Marriage; which is a sure proof
that they were utterly ignorant of the law of God and Man. Long time after him
came their Gods and Oracles; insomuch that all the Greekish History is (as ye
would say) tungtyde for many hundred years after, like a brook that loses
himself within thirty paces of his first spring. Among the AEgiptians and
Syrians there was more form of government; but as for Religion, they
worshipped the Heavens, the Planets, and the Stars, which are (in very deed)
made for man, and for man's use are put under certain laws by God, and
therefore much less are those Gods able to make men subject unto them. And if
there were any among them that knew more than others, it was the Birdgazers
and the Bowelgazers, which are a kind of Witches that turned men away from God
to the Creatures, and therefore in no wise directed them to Salvation. But what
shall we find among the people of Israel at that time? A Moses that
preaches but the only one God, and teaches from him how he will be served;
and a Law that sets the bounds both of Religion and Policy; and the duty
of man both toward God and his neighbor; which every seventh day is read
openly to all the people; which the Kings have before their eyes, the Priests
bear about them, the Fathers teach to their Children, and the Masters to
their Servants, and which the very walls and forefronts of their houses do
show both to strangers and to their household folk. At the happiest time that
ye can choose in Rome or Athens, (for I am willing to omit their
barbarousnesse) what have we, (I say not of Religion, but of Order in Justice
and state of Government) that comes any thing near to that? Contrariwise,
what law was there ever set forth among them, which was not abolished again
ere it was known to the people? Or who made account of it but the Lawyers? Or
who brake not the law before he knew it? To be short, where have we read that
any whole Nation were all Lawyers, and all skillful in the Laws of God and
men, but the people of Israel? And why was that, but because the same Law
contained the rule of welfare, the which it was meet that all folk without
exception should know and understand, because that naturally all men ought to
tend unto their salvation? And as touching the antiquity of Moses the setter
forth of that Law among that people; I will not have ye to believe me, but
the Gentyles themselves. The very ground of the antiquity of Greece (say
Diodorus and Denis of Halycarnassus, Denis of Hal^carnassus.
) was Inachus, who lived twenty Generations (that is to say, about four
hundred years) before the wars of Troy. And Ptolomie of Mendese a Priest of
AEgipt, (who gathered his History out of the holy Registers of ye AEgiptians)
said that Amosis King of AEgipt reigned the same time that Inachus reigned in
Greece; Appion in the fourth book of his History against the Jews.
and that in the time of the same Amosis, Moses went out of AEgipt with the
people of Israel. The same thing is affirmed by Appion the Grammarian the
great enemy of the Jews; and also confirmed by Berosus the Babylonian,
Eusebius li. 10. Cap. 3.
Polemon, Theodotus, Ipsicrates, and Moschus, writers of the Stories of the
Phenicians, cyted by Eusebius and Affricanus. Eupolemus in his book of the
Kings of Iewrie says, that Moses taught letters to the Jews; the Jews to
the Phenicians; and the Phenicians to the Greeks by Cadmus. And so by that
reckoning, Moses should be, not only of most antiquity in their Histories,
but also of more antiquity than all Histories. Numenius says that Plato and
Pythagoras had nothing but from the AEgiptians and Syrians, and namely from
Moses; insomuch that he recyteth his history almost word for word as we have
it in the Bible; saying that Moses was a great Divine, Lawmaker, and Prophet.
Also Diodorus of Sicilie says, that he understood by the AEgiptians, (who
notwithstanding were enemies to Moses and to all his race) that he was the
first Lawgiuer of all, and moreover a man of great courage, and of very
commendable life; and that the Jews esteemed him as a GOD, as well for the
knowledge that he had of GOD, as for his authority and pre-eminence. And he
(says Diodorus) gave a Law unto the people of Israel, which he said he had
received of Iah, for so do they call the GOD whom they worship. And who is
this GGD Strabo Strabo. lib. 15.
shows us sufficiently where he says, That Moses having rebuked the
AEgiptians for their vanities and follies, and for resembling God (who is to be
worshipped and served otherwise) by the Images of Beasts and Men; withdrew
himself from among them that he might serve God. Porphirius li. 4 Eusebius in
his book of preparation to the Gospel.
To be short, Porphirius in his fourth book against Christians, bears this
record of Moses, that he had written the history of the Jews truly, which
thing he had perceived by conferring it with Sachoniathon the Berutian, who
rehearses the very same circumstances; the which he had learned out of the
Registers of one Hierobaal a Priest of the God of Leuy, that is to say, of the
God of Israel, and out of the Chronicles of the cities, and out of the holy
books which were wont to be dedicated to temples. And this Sachoniathon
(says he) was somewhat after the time of Moses, about the time of Semiramis.
Now, Porphirius gives us here more than we ask. For we set Abraham in the
time of Semiramis, and Moses came certain hundred years after: Now then, the
books of Moses do lead us up from Son to Father unto Abraham, from
Abraham to Noe; from Noe, to the first Man, and from the first man to God the
Creator, beyond whom it is not possible to pass any further, as I have proved
already: and in treating of the Creation we must always needs come back
agein. And through out all this discourse Moses tells us of the things that
GOD has discovered unto men, and the laws which he has given after manner of
a covenant, to the intent they should be his people, and he should be their
God: The which Covenant it had surely been both a shame and folly for him to
have devised for that hardhearted and stubborn people, whom he burdeneth not
with any other thing, but that which was notoriously known unto them, and
thereby they were certified of their original nativity. Neither is it to be
suspected that he wrote these things (as some list to say) to get authority to
himself and his; for he brondeth his Graundfather Leuy with an open mark of
reproach expressed in these words of Jacobs Testament; Simeon and Leuy are cruel
instruments, Gene. 49. 5. 7.
in their vanquishings, etc. Cursed be their wrath, for it was shameful; I
will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel. etc. As who should say,
he meant to disgrade Leuy and all his race; to the saying whereof nothing
compelled him. Also he reprooueth Aarons idolatry and Mary's murmuriug,
notwithstanding that he was his Brother and she his Suster: and he repeateth
oftentimes, that for his own fault, God had told him that he should see the
land of Canaan, but not enter into it. To be short, he ordeineth and leaves
Joshua to be his Successor, whereas by reason of the authority which he had
among that people, he might by all likelyhod have set up his own sons. And
yet we see that naturally we conceal the faults of our Parents, and corrupt
their Pedegrees to make them the more virtuous, and our selves the more
commendable (...), and we be loath to acknowledge our own faults. (...) the
homeliest men of us all) except it be among our (...) freeds, and as late as we
can. Much less can we find in our hearts to publish them to the knowledge of
posterity. To be short, we be so desirous to leave honor and estimation to
our children, that such as would not have been ambitious for themselves, cannot
refreyne from being ambitious for their posterity. Now then, what may we
conclude thereof, but that he yielded the honor of his auncetors, and his own
too, unto Gods glory and the truth? And although we proceed not so far as
to conclude absolutely, that he wrote at that time as from God, and not as from
man: yet notwithstanding, forasmuch as in his writings he strippeth man's nature
naked, ought we not at leastwise to conclude, that he which made less account
of himself and his than of the truth, would not have preferred untruth before
it for any respect? Object. o^^.
Some miserable kaytife that is quarelous against his own welfare, will say
here, Admit that Moses, Joshua, David, Esaias and others were as ancient as ye
list: yet how shall I be sure that those books also were as ancient, and of
their writing? It were enough to answer him, How beleeuest thou that such
books or such were Platoes, Aristotle's and Ciceroes. Marry (say thou)
because they have been conveyed unto us from them from hand to hand? Use thou
the like equity toward the others, which as great a number of men do assure
thee to have come from them. But if that will not persuade them, yet want we
not wherewith to enforce them. First and foremost I appeal to the conscience
and judgment of all persons, which know what it is to indite, whether the
style of the Scriptures be not such and so peculiar, as it cannot by any
means be counterfetted or disguised. And if there be any that will needs
doubt thereof, I pray him to make a trial thereof but in some one side of a
leaf, be it in plainness of setting things down as they were done, or in
feruentnesse of praying, or in pitthinesse of Prophesying: and he shall
forthwith perceive, that as well in the matter it self as in the manner of
indyting, there is a certain new taste in sted of the old, which is peculiar
to all times, so as no man can atteine to the same natural vein, the same
zeal, and the same efficacy, unless he be led by the same hand, moved by the
same spirit, and pricked with the same spur that Moses, David, and the
Prophets were. To be short, if it be hard to father a book upon Plato,
Herodotus, and Hipocrates, but that he which shall have read them advisedly,
will by and by epsy it even a far of; So is it as impossible to father the
other books upon those which have a style sofarre differing from other
writings, unless a man will bear himself on hand, that such bastardbookes
were made in the same ages or near about the same times that those Authors
lived in. Let us see how it may be possible to have been done in the same
ages. Moses published the Law before all the people, and he curses the
party with death both of body and soul, which shall add, diminish or alter
any thing. He binds the people household by household, to take fast hold
thereof. His books are delivered to every Trybe, they be read openly every
Saboth day, they be kept carefully in the Arc, and the Arc is kept as
carefully by all the Trybes. And that this was done, it appears not only by
his book, but also by the effects that insewed thereof from time to time, and
by the footesteps thereof which are evident even yet among the Jews. If it be
possible for a book to be preserved from falsifying and foysting, what book
shall that be but the Bible? which was guarded by ten hundred thousand men, and
copyed out, not by some Scriueners only, but also by all the people? Afterward
came Joshua, who renewed the same Covenant, proclaimed the Law, and yielded
record unto Moses. Likewise the Judges succeeded Joshua, Samuel succeeded the
Judges, the Kings and the Chronicles succeeded Samuel, and the Prophets
succeeded them all. These books followed one another immediately and without
interp^^^^tion: and every one that followed, presupposed the things to be an
infallible truth which had been written by them that went before; neither was
there any that did cast any douts or reprove any of the former histories, as is
found to be done in other Histories; (as for example, Hellanicus reproves
Ephorus, Ephorus finds fault with Timeus, and consequently Timeus reprehendeth
them that wrote before him:) But Joshua gathers a certain and infallible
consequence of Moses, the Judges of Joshua, Samuel of the Judges, David of
them all, and so all the rest. And to speak of the Prophets, they be not like
the books of our Astrologers, which reform one another Calculations, and
control one another Prognostications: But as they shoot all at one mark: so
they agree in one thing, notwithstanding that they wrote in sundry times and
sundry places. Nay (which more is) we see that the people were so sure of that
Law, that from age to age they chose rather to abide all extremities, than to
give it over; insomuch that they defended it against the Chananites, the
Philistines, the Assyrians, the Babilonians, the Persians, the Greeks, and the
Romans. Who then durst be so proud and bold as to voilate or imbace the thing
that was hild to be so holy, defended with so many lives, and confirmed with so
many deaths? If ye say, the Heathen; Their intents was not to mar it, but
to make it quyte away. For what profit could have redounded unto them of that
pain? to what end should they have done it? or how could they have corrupted
it in the sight and in the knowledge of so many folk? Moreover, who knows
not that the Scriptures were carried by the banished Jews, into diverse
countries of the world before they came into the hands of the Gentiles, as of
the Greeks or Romans? As for the Jews; their shooteanker and felicity
consisted in the keeping of them, and the reward of corrupting them was death:
and what could it the^ have benefited them to have corrupted them? Nay, yet
further, which of them would have dyed afterward for a Law, which they knew
to be corrupted or counterfetted? And soothly we see throughout their
Histories, that there passed not so much as any one half hundred years
without persecutions and wars for that Law.

And whereas it might be said, that some suttleheaded fellow among the Jews
had done it to abuse the rest: how could that be ageine, seeing it was not in
the hands of four or five Prestes only, as the Ceremonies of the Hetrurians
and Latins were; but in the hands of the whole people, so as one syllable could
not be changed, but it was to be espied even by young Children. Considering
also that we read not of any king how wise so ever he were, that ever durst
presume to ad, diminish or alter any whit thereof; whereas notwithstanding, all
other Laws of the world were made by peecemeale, and Kings and Senats have
always reserved to themselves a prerogative to correct them and alter them at
their pleasure, specially when they limited their authority, and served not
for the mayntenance of their possession. And if any man to bereeue us of this
argument, will stepfoorth and say, that our Scriptures are as an History
gathered out of the Registers of many ages, by some one author; as we see
Berosus has done for the Chaldees, Duis for the Phenicians, Manetho for the
Egiptians, and such others; let him tell us then (I heartily pray him,) in what
age of the world that Author is lykely to lived. If in the time of Moses, of
Joshua, or of the Judges; how comes it to pass that he writes of the reigns
of the kings? If in the time of the first Kings; how writes he of the last
Kings? If in the time of the last Kings; how is it possible that the Jews
being before that time carried away into diverse places of the world, and
scattered abroad euerywhere like the members of Pentheus, should carry and
keep with them the books of Moses, which (by these men's reckoning) were not
yet made, according to which book both themselves did notwithstanding then
live, and also taught other Nations? I mean the ten Trybes by name, which by
three former remouings were scattered over the whole Earth, whereof the marks
are to apparent to be denied. The first in the the time of Achaz King of Judah,
and of Placea King of Israel, by Thiglath Phalassar King of the Assirians, who
carried away Ruben, Gad, and the half trybe of Manasses: the second in the time
of Ose by Salmanasar, who carried away Isachar, Zabulon and Nepthaly into
Assiria: and the third anon after by the same Salmanasar, who conveyed away
Ephraim and the other half of Manasses; as is witnessed both by the ancient
Records of many Countries, and also by the Chronicles of the Hebrews. And at
that time while Printing was notyet in use, what mean was there to disperse
those books so soon and so far of? Nay, which more is, what will they say
when they shall find the books of Moses to have bin kept from father to
son, even, in the utmost Coasts of Ethyopia, whither the Empires never came,
which books they say they have had there ever since the time of Solomon, that
they were brought thither by the Queen of the Province of Saba? Thus have I
spoken enough of this matter, both for them that are contented to be satisfied
with reason, (for if they do but read our scriptures, they have whereon to
rest,) and also for those which are otherwise: for it is hard to show him
aught, which by his will will see naught. But there are yet further which tell
us that in the time of the Machabees, Antiochus abolished the law of Israel,
and all the books of the Bible: and they think themselves to have made a great
speak, and hard to be resolved. I leave it to the consideration of all men of
judgment, whither it be easy for a Prince though he use never so great
diligece, utterly to abolish any manner of book whatsoever, seeing the nature
of man is such, that the more that things are sought to be plucked from him,
the more he streyneth himself to keep them. But when a book is once believed
and reverenced of a whole nation, not for delight of things done by men,
therein contained, but for the salvation of man therein revealed; for the
truth whereof men are not afraid to endure both death and torments, as was
witnessed by many in the time of the same Antiochus: what diligence of man can
suffice to abolish it? But let us put the case that it was abolished in Iewrie:
yea and that it was abolished throughout his whole Empire: what can yet ensue
thereof, seeing that the ten trybes (over whom Antiochus could have no
authority) had carried them and disperced them abroad to the uttermost bounds
of the world? And seeing that the removing of the other two trybes, had made
them rife among the Persians and Babylonians? And that the Ptolomyes c^^rished
the Jews right tenderly in Egypt, giving them open S^^agogs with franchyses
and liberty? And also that Ptolomie Ph^ladelph had caused all the Bible to be
translated into the Greek tongue by the three score and ten interpreters, and
had laid it up in his library as a Jewel? And to be short, that the Jews
were at that very time so dispersed among the Greeks themselves, as there was
scarcely any City which had not received them with their Sinagogs?

But although none of all these reasons were to be had; then, if the Bible was
lost and abolished, how was it found ageine so sodeinly in one instant? Who
could (as ye would say) cas^ it up whole out of his stomach at once? Or who
has ever red that the Jews made any moan for the loss of it, or took any
pain for the seeking of it out ageine? And to cut off superfluity of speech,
whereof then comes it, that of so many Gramarians being of opinion that
they should become wise men in one day, if they had Ciceroes books of
Comonweale to read; none of them all being more suttleheaded than the rest,
has undertaken to counterfeit them in his name? No no: let us rather say the
Scriptures are of more antiquity than all other writing; and the more they be
so, the more adversity have they endured: the rage of Tyrans has ouerflowed
them; and yet they could another drown them nor deface them: they have bin
condemned to the fire, and yet could not be consumed. Contrariwise, the books
of the greatest men, how great authority so ever they had, have bin lost, and
for all the pain that has bin taken to preserve them, yet have they often
come to naught. The Chronicles of Emperors (say I) be perished, when the
Chronicles of the small Kings of Iewrie, and of that poor outcast people, and I
wot not what a sort of vanished Shepeherds despised of the world and despysers
of the world, have continewed to posterity in despyght of the World. Therefore
it must needs be say, that the Scriptures have bin preserved by Gods singular
providence, both so long time and against so many injuries of time. And seeing
they be the only wrytings which only he has preserved from the creation of the
world unto our days; surely they were for our behoof. And seeing they have bin
rejected of the world, and yetnotwithstanding do live and reign in despyght
of the world; surely they be from somewhere else than of man or of the world;
that is to weet Revelations from God to man, continewed from time to time for
his glory and our welfare. And so by this discourse we gain this point, that
our Scriptures which are left us by Moses, Joshua, and the Prophets, are the
auncientest of all wrytings, and utterly void of all lykelyhod of mingling or
counterfetting: and that since that even from the beginning there has bin a
Religion revealed from God, and we find none other than this to have continewed
fromthe very Creation unto us; we may infer, that the Scriptures wherein we
read it, are of God, because that from line to line they conteyne his
Revelations made unto mankind. But let us pass from this antiquity which is
but the bark of the Scriptures, and let us come to the substance of them,
which will give us assurance of the place from whens they come.

Now then, let us read the books of men as well of old time as of our own
time, and what is the scope, The Bible tends altogether to the glory of God.
the ground, the form, and discourse of them, furtherfoorth than they either
expound or follow our Scriptures? Some write to celebrate the Kings and great
Capteynes of their time: these be but vauntings of men, rumors of people,
consultations to destroy one another, and subtle deuyces to disappoynt or
undo one another. Good men by reading them become malicious, and evil men
become worse. And by the way there must be some pretty speech of Fortune,
which swayeth the Battles. As for God who makes Kings and vnmaketh them
again, who holds both the enterances and issewes of all things in his hand,
there is not so much as one word in all a great volume. Who doubts that these
be books of men, which co^teyne nothing but the passions, the subtelties, and
the indeuers of men? Another sort write (as they themselves say) to make
themselves immortal. They write goodly discourses, to make themselves to be
had in admiration. If they chance to stumble upon some good saying for manners
or for the life of man; they turkin it a thousand ways to make it seem good
for their purpose. They deliver their words by weight, they drive their clauses
to fall alike, they eschew nycely the meeting together of vowelles: and what
greater childishness can there be in grave matters, than that? Yet
notwithstanding, they make books of the despising of vaynglorie, and their
books themselves are full of ambition: of the brydling of affections; and
their arguments are rank poison and contention. If they happen to speak of
the serving of God; it is by Sacrifieing to Deuilles, and to their own Lovers,
and friends, as we read that Socrates, Plato, and Aristotle did. Who is he
then which even by the first line or by the opening of the book, may not
perceive that they which speak be men, yea and but very men in deed;
considering that in all their books they speak but of man? Men (say I) that
seek the glory of men and not of GOD; Preachers of vanity, and not of man's
welfare?

On the contrary side, we hear how the Scripture says, In the beginning God
made Heaven and Earth. What is meant by this entrance, but that the Reader
should not in the rest of the discourse look for the follies of men, but for
the wondrous works of the Creator? And what other author did ever begin his
work so? Herodotus begins his History after this manner: Herodotus of
Halycarnassus has spoken these things. Though he had never said so, it would
never have been surmised that he had spoken any thing but of man. For what is
his whole book but vanity? Or what has he which is not inferior to man?
After the same manner does Hippocrates begin his books concerning the nature of
man; and likewise Timaeus of Locres his treatise of Nature and of the Creation
of the world: which Authors I allege as auncientest of all others. But if we
go through the whole Scripture from the one end to the other, we shall find
nothing there but that which is promised at the first word; that is to wit
lively letters, and impossible to be falsified, of a book that proceeds from
God, namely his own glory and the welfare of man. As for the glory of the
Everlasting, it leads us to the creation of the world, and of man; to the
sin of Adam, and the corruption of Mankind; the Flud of Noe that followed
thereupon, and the confusion of Tongues; the calling of Abraham and his seed,
the plagues of Pharao, and the wonders of AEgipt. What is there in all these
things, that sauoreth of man, or of the vanity that possesses him? What has
he there which makes him not either to stoop unto God or to sink unto Hell?
Again, on the other side, what else does that whole discourse show us, but the
highness of the Everlasting, his mercifulness toward the lowly, and his
justice and judgments toward the proud, when we see all loftiness of the
world cast down before him, and all the puissance of Empyres given over to
Catterpillers and to the worms of the earth? Afterward Moses comes to the
rehearsing of the law that God gave to that people. Whence came that
extraordinary wisdom, and why rather in Israel than elsewhere, in the time
when all other Nations were so rude? And what manner of law was it? Soothly a
law comprehended in ten Sentences, and yet those ten Sentences conteyne
whatsoever can belong to Godliness, Uprightness and Justice, whither it be
of service toward GOD, or of duty toward our neighbor: Insomuch that all
the great volumes of laws whereof the world is full, without ground, without
end, notwithstanding that they treat but only of Justice, are referred all to
that mark, and have not any thing more than is there. Again, all these ten
sayings are unfolded in two words: namely, to love God with the whole heart,
and a man's neighbor as himself. Let the Athenians show me the Laws of their
Draco, and the Romans the Laws of their twelve Tables; if there be one word
of true Godliness and Justice in them? Let the Greeks and Romans show all
that ever they wrate by the space of a thousand years; and see if ye shall
find so much thereof, as is contained in those two sayings only. And as for
our Philosophers, which make so great bragges of the ten Predicaments of their
Aristotle, which are but the seed of Sophistry and vain babbling; I ask them
(at leastwise if they have any eyes) what account they ought to make of this
Law, which has conveyed in so few words, both the matters of the world
which are infinite, and the matters of GOD, which are incomprehensible to man,
together. The Israelites come to take their journey into Chanaan under Moses;
they be brought in thither by Joshua; and they be ruled and governed there by
the Judges and Kings: And in this discourse there fall out many humane things,
many enterprises, surprises, Sieges, Battles, Uictories, and Conquestes. Here
it behooves us to enter into our selves, and by our selves into the natural
disposition of all men. When we go to give the onset, I mean the better sort
of us; what say we? Lord, we set our Battles in array, but thou give the
victory? After that manner speak the Christians at this day. Nay: but if God
prosper us, what will we say at our return? Mary, I won such a Hill, I brake
the Uauntgard, the Enemy was discomfited by my counsel: and herevppon rise
quarrelles who shall have the honor of the victory. But as for God, we shall
hear no more speaking of him, than if there were no GOD at all. The History
writers which describe their Uictories, are curious in naming even the meanest
Capteynes, for offending any man; and moreover in describing of the aduauntages
of the places, of the Sun, of the Wind, of the Dust, of him that led the
Soldiers to handblowes, and of the consultations of the Capteynes: so as he
balanceth the Battles after his own scoales; and as for men's sins which are
the procurers thereof, he never once thinks of them. Seeing then that the
Authors of our Bible are the auncientest of all others, whereof comes this
new kind of indyting, or w^^^ce have they learned it, that in all their
Histories they give the glory of the Battles and of all feats of Arms alonly
unto God, both before and after? Or whence come these ordinary words, God gives
them into our hands, God is our victory, God is as strong in a small number as
in a great? Whence also come the goodly Songs, which we shall not find in any
of the Heathen Writers; but of this, that they wrate the wars of GOD and the
victories of the Lord, yea and even in his behalf which was the doer of them?
If they wrate on man's behalf, why wrate they not in man's usual order of
indyting? dyting? Why wrate not Moses and Joshua, (say I) as Polybius and
Caesar wrate? Or who let them to take to themselves the glory of their high
enterprises? Or if they wrate for Kings and by commandment of Kings; why
find we no commendations of Joshua, David, Iosaphat, and Ezechias; as well as
of Themistocles, Miltiades, Alexander, and Traiane? For what other commendation
find we of them, than that they walked in the way of the Lord, that they
destroyed the high places, that they overthrew the Idols, and such like,
howbeit that we read of heroical and Martial deeds done in their times? And
what ought we then to conclude, but that, as all other books which tend to the
glory of men, and concern but themselves or some others, are the works of
men: so these books, which tend alonly to the glory of God, yea even by the
contempt of men, are the works of God, that is to say, inspired by GOD? As much
is to be said of the Prophets, who when they speak of any succor that was to
come to the people of Israel, or of any enemy that was to come suddenly upon
them: they said not, your friends shall succor you, or your enemies shall
run in upon you; but, the Lord will send Cyrus to deliver you, the Lord will
arm the Babylonians to scourge you. Uayne are all your dealings if your trust
be not in him: Uayne are the threatenings of your enemies, if you turn unto
him: and all this is to assure you, that all things are subject unto him;
insomuch that even they which think themselves to make war against him, do
fight for him and by him. To be short, if we inquire of them concerning the
state of the earthly Kingdoms; they answer us of the heavenly. If a man be
combered with this present life; they teach us the life to come. And oftentimes
a man would think that they spoke nothing material to our demands, because
they answer not directly to our demand, but to that which we ought to
demand. Let us consider somewhat nerely of what mind the Soothsayers are, both
by the Oracles of the Deuilles, and by such as make profession of Soothsaying.
The Deuilles require Sacrifices for their answering to curious questions. The
Astrologians are feign to seek out Princes. The foreteller of things to come
by Palmistrie, or by Phisiognomie, or by the inwards of Beasts, or by ye
signs of the Sky, do the like. And ordinarily who be more vain and more
puffed up with pride, than those kind of men? What iarring is there among them,
what disagreement in their foresayings? Nay, which of them have we see^^^;
which is not a money man? or that would rather dye than not declare Gods wrath
to a Prince? Or that has not soothed a Prince in his sins, to suck gain
out of him? Or that has given the glory unto God and not to his own cunning
and skill? Or refused the honor that was offered unto him, as a notable
injury? Witnesses hereof may Apollonius, Apuleius, Maximus, and such others
be; who by their foretellings never sought other thing than Images of
themselves to be set up in Halles of Cities, and Pensions in the Courts of the
most vicious and detestable Princes. And what is to be said then of these
folk, who go willingly to declare the overthrow of States, and the deaths of
Princes? Which for sake their apparent ease, to go and show forth Gods wrath?
Who of all their wonderful knowledge yield none other reason but this, The
Lord has said it unto us, nor seek any other reward than the glory of GOD,
yea matched oftentimes with their own death?

Let us come to the Poetries of our Scriptures, and let the heathen set theirs
against them, and who will doubt but that they shall blush for shame? To omit
the art, the measure, and the antiquity of them, which are but the outsides
of them, but yet more beautiful in ours than in the Poetries of the Greeks or
Romans. For what are theirs but the vauntings of men, counterfetted praises,
and discourses of Love Songs, not manly, but unmeet for men? One sings me
the rage of Achilles; another; the wanderings of AEnaeas, and a third the love
of Paris and Helen: And so far has this kind of dealing passed into custom,
that it seems impossible for man to be a Poet, a Divine, and an
Historiographer all together. So far are our mirth and songs estraunged
naturally from God and from truth. What shall we say then to the Poetries,
specially of David, considering that he was before all the Poetries of the
Heathen; but that those Poetries are not an imitation, but a simple affection?
If we seek there for songs of victory, we have of them; but they concern the
God of Hosts, If for Brydesongs, they be not wanting; but if they be of God
and of them that fear him; If for hurning loves; there be songs of the very
Love itself, howbeit kindled of God himself: If for Shepeherds songs, it is
full of them, but they concern the Everlasting for the Shepherd, and Israel
for the flock. The art of them is so excellent, that it is an excellency
even to translate them. The affections so lively, that they quench and choke
all others. If he had written in man's behalf, had he not as good a ground as
Homere had? what were his combat with Golias, his victories over the
Philistines, his love of Bersabee, and such others? Or think we that he was
not subject to the same passions, or made of the same mould that we be? Or
that he which wakeneth us so much, was drowzie himself? Or that he which
speaks of nothing but Love and Honor, was without them himself? No; but in
very deed it was another manner of Pulse that did beat in his Ueynes, than
beats in ours, and another manner of fire that burned in his marow. Which
thing no man can deny that reads his Psalms, so lively, so fervent, and so
full of affections: howbeit that he directs his love and his vehement desires
to another mark, as one that behild a far other beauty, coueted a far
other honor, and tasted a far other pleasure than of the world. For all
those books aim at none other mark than the honor of God, contrary to man's
nature, which robs God of his honor as much as can be, to cloth itself
therewith, and coueteth nothing so much as glory.

But let us come to the other mark which follows this successively, Man's
welfare.
namely the welfare of man. Forasmuch as I have said, that the mark whereat
man shoots in this life, is his own welfare: If God have left him any word,
or given him any revelation, to what end ought we to aknowledge the same to be
done, but to light him in the way of welfare, and to turn him from all
crossepathes and bywayes which might lead him from the end that he aims at.
Now let us hardely read all the Books of the Heathen, and there is none of
them which buzieth not our brains about Mooneshine in the water, making us to
spend night and day therein, as though we had none other resting place to
seek? whereas none other book than the Bible does put us in mind of our way?
Our welfare is our shooteanker, and the welfare as well of one of us as of
another, is to live immortally united unto God. How shall Aristotle put us in
mind thereof, who leaves us in doubt whether there be any immortality or no,
and which fetteth our shooteanker in I wot not what muzings, peradventure upon
Logic and natural Philosophy, as his own? Or how shall Plato do it, who
suffers himself to be carried away with the common error? Or Seneca Seneca in
his exhortations.
(how high soever he sore with his Wings,) who will have the wyseman to play
the fool, the harebraind, and the Lechor, and to give over himself to all
manner of vices, for the bringing of his affairs to pass, yea even to his own
harm, and to the blaspheming of God himself? But if we hearken to the holy
Scriptures, we shall perceive from time to time, that they be no untrusty
guides of our ways, neither such as stand douting at yt first four wayleete,
whither a man should take on the right hand or on the left, but they be sure
guydes, such as are able to draw us out of the mire, and to convey us through
the wyld Forests of the world, not only by leading us by the hand, but also by
serving our turns both for a guide, and for a Cresset, and for a path all
together. Therefore at the very first entrance they tell us that God having
created the world, made man of the dust of the earth, and that he made him
after his own Image and likeness, and gave him power over all the things that
he had made here below. And what else is this, but a teaching of man at the
first word, that he is indetted to God for all things, that his felicity
consists in serving God, and that he is made to another end than other living
wights; namely for God him self? From hence it leads us to our disobedience,
and to the punishment that insewed thereupon; to wit, that by seeking our
welfare elsewhere than in God, we fell into all mischief. As touching the
immortality of our Souls, and the Providence of God, forasmuch as they be
Schoolepoints to brawle upon, but vndoubted^^ grounds to as many as conceive
that there is a GOD, (which thing all men do) and such as men ought not to
doubt of or to be taught, but to practice and exercise all their life long, we
see no disputing there as is among the Philosophers. Henoch therefore endured
many hard things in that froward generation, for serving God; and by special
privilege was soon taken out of this life. And to what intent, but to have a
better. Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob wayfared from place to place upon the earth.
And did they so in yt hope of the land of Chanaan? Nay, who would have endured
so much hardness for his Posterities sake? Or for a promise that should not
be performed till four hundred years after? Then was it because they
grounded themselves upon a better inheritance: and that is the selfsame which
God meant when he said to Abraham, I am thy great reward. Moses came somewhat
nearer this promise; for he saw the Land, howbeit but from the top of a high
mountain. And wherefore languished he forty years in the wilderness among a
thousand grudgings, at the point to be stoned every hour by his own
countrymen, and yet was feign to dye at the instant of obteining his hope?
Soothly he had seen another country nearer him, whereunto he aspired; and
far better (which he was to possess in the life to come) then he forewent in
this present life. The like is to be said of Joshua, of ye Judges, of Samuel,
of David, and of the Prophets; whose whole life was not a schoolediuinitie like
unto the Philosophers, but a continual practice of this faith: namely, that
man's shootanker is not in this world, nor our welfare to be sought here: but
that it behooves us to seek it in God, and to turn again to him that we may
inioye it. To that end tend these precepts which are given to men in the Law,
Thou shall love God with all thine heart, with all thy Soul, and with all thy
strength. To what end? To be oppressed by Pharao, turmoyled up and down in ye
Desert, beaten by the Philistines, overthrown by the Assyrians, carried away by
the Babylonians, and trodden under foot by all Nations? If the love of God
bring us no better reward than so, what gain we by being his people? Nay, it
is to show us, that our welfare dwells not here below; that these Hosts
which welcome us into our Inn with smyling countenance, do cut our throtes in
our beds; that the reward of such as serve God, is not the world nor any
worldly thing, but the very maker both of man and of the world. Then follows
there another precept; namely, Thou shall love thy neighbor as thy self. What
would Carneades have said, or rather what would he not have said, if he had
examined this Commandment? This Philosopher being sent Ambassador on a time
from Athens to Rome, made an Oration of Justice before Cato the Censor, whereof
he spoke wonders. The next day he made another, wherein he proved that it was
but folly and fondness; or that the Romans should be feign to come back
again to their Cotages, and that all traffic and whatsoever else it be
whereby Cities are made to flourish, would come to naught. What is to be said
then of this law, which extends so far as to say, not only, do not that to
others which you would not have done to your selves; but also, do that for
others which you would have done for your selves? And surely if our welfare
consist in this world, what goodlier law can there be, than for a man to love
himself and his own, and to wrest all his neighbors affairs to his own
profit? And contrariwise what greater fondness, than to be another man's
Baylie, that is to say, to procure oftentimes a man's own loss? But the
Philosopher was ignorant that godliness is the root of Justice, and that
Charity is nothing else but a rebounding back of the love which we owe unto
God, upon Mankind which is his Image. And the aiming point of this
Commandment, which being restreyned within one word spreads it self
throughout the whole law of Israel, is none other than to show us that our
chief dwelling place is elsewhere than here, and that whereas we love all
things here for our own sakes, we ought to love other men as our selves, and
our selves for Gods sake, who is our sole and only welfare. Hereunto do all
the Scriptures guide us, be it by authority of the law, or by example of
holy persons, or by the exhortations of the Prophets: and there is not that
line which twitcheth us not by the ear, to waken us out of the sleep of this
world; and which plucketh us not from the stool and the table, and from the
glewing vanities that stick so fast to us; to bring us back to glory and to
the inioying of God who is our welfare. Seeing then that naturally we think so
little upon this glory of God; what a book is that, which speaks of
nothing else? Seeing we be plu^ged so deep in the world, and the world in us;
what a book is that, which withdraws us from it every hour? And what would
become of man if he had not another spirit than the spirit of man and of the
world, which bids battle both to man and to the world? Soothly we may well
say therefore, that the Scriptures are verily of Gods inspiring, which have so
express resemblances of him, and so contrary to the hand, stamp, print and
writing of the whole world.

The xxv. Chapter.
That through out the whole process of the Bible, or old Testament, there are
things which cannot proceed but from God.
WE have learned heretofore by perusing the universal world, that all things
tend too Godds glory; by the examining of man, that his only and whole
welfare is to cleave unto GOD. Now therefore fith we see that the Scriptures
preach unto us the same thing that we have read both in the world and in
ourselves; ought it not to be a good proof to us, that he which made both the
World and man, has also made the Scriptures to rule them by? And that he which
has spoken to all Nations by his Creatures, has also voutsafed too show
himself more nerely too them by his Scriptures? Agein, seeing that the
Scriptures command us to love God with all our heart, and that the Creatures
have heretofore declared us to be bound thereto; so as the Creatures teach the
selfsame thing which the Scriptures command: what can we say but that both
those books have one selfsame author? Howbeit forasmuch as our eyes be so
daseled by our fall, that the Creatures were unto us as a clasped book, or as
a thing written in Ciphers; God to apply himself to the weakness of our sight,
has given us his Scriptures: and that forasmuch as our wills are wholly turned
from him, it behooved us to be commanded our own welfare, which (were we
according to our first creation) we should covet and follow earnestly at the
only sight of the first book. But forasmuch as it may still be said, that
these books are rather the woorks of good men and of such as feared God, than
of God himself: let us see if they have not in them some proper and peculiar
marks of Gods spirit. I mean such as no creature can be partaker of, but by
inspiration from God. For like as in his doings there are certain miracles,
wherein even the wickeddest acknowledge the finger of God: So in his words or
Scriptures, there may undoubtedly be some such thing, as cannot proceed but
from God himself. Let us begin at the Style. The Style of the Scriptures.
In men's affairs we have two sorts of writing. The inferior sort and men of
equality, indeuer to persuade folk by apparent reasons; for they know they
have no authority to give them credit. But Princes will of their mere
authority look to be believed whatsoever they say: for they think they have
the world at their commandment, and that they may speak what they list: and
they suppose it to be some derogation to them to allege any reason. Also in
humane Sciences the case is all one. For the Physician is believed of his
Patient without alleging why: but of an other Physician he is not so. Likewise
the Schoolemaister is believed of the Scholar, yea even in things which were
disputable for him with one of his fellows. So much more therefore shall this
rule take place in matters divine, which surmount both the understanding of the
learner, and the skill of the Teacher himself. Again, we see how the
Philosophers do mount up from things evidently known to things less known,
and from Grounds and Principles, to Conclusions. And therefore Aristotle
intending to prove that there is a God, made a whole score of books of it: and
Plato speaking of things divine, will have the ancient Oracles to be believed,
and not his own sayings: which argeweth that even by nature men know well,
that they deserve not to be believed, further forth than they make proof, no
not even in the least things; and therefore that they be worthy to be laughed
at, if they think their sayings to be authority in matters divine. Now then,
since it is so that the Style is such both of all men in their common
discourses, and of all the Philosophers in high matters: what shall the Author
of our Bible be, whose will and meaning is to be believed upon his bare
word, even in the things which exceed both the natural belief of such as
hear them, and the understanding of all men which take upon them to speak of
them? GOD created Heaven and Earth: Man is fallen from his original state by
sin. If thou be a man that say it, who will believe thee unless thou
prove it? And yet notwithstanding it appears that he wrate it to be
believed: for he commands it to be believed. Therefore his speaking is of
authority, and not by persuasion. Yet notwithstanding no body is believed upon
his bare word, saving in things which lie in his own power and his own
knowledge. Whosoever then in things surmounting man, (I mean in matters
concerning GOD and man's salvation) will look to be believed of authority,
only because he says it; yea and to be more believed without proof, than
others upon proof; must needs be the Prince and Father of man and not a man.
Now, who sees not this course kept throughout all the Scriptures; and yet where
is there any one Syllogism or Demonstration in them? saving such as these
which soothly be more firm than any Syllogism, and more needful than any
Demonstration; namely, The Lord has said it, and it is done; the Lord has
spoken it, and he will be believes. And what other book find we which
proceeds after that manner, howbeit that some deceivers have long time since
presumed to immitate the same?

Also we have many books of manners written by the Heathen. How proceed they
against Uice? or how deal they with Virtue? They define, they distinguish,
they dispute of the general and of the vnderkind, of the mean and of the
extremes. It is spoken (say they) from one Countermatch to another. And if they
offend the Laws of Logic, they be afraid of reproof. The laws and
commandments in the Scripture.
The Laws of God speak a little more plainly: He that steals shall pay
fowerfold: He that kills shall be punished with death, Which is as much to say,
as that the authority of the one depends upon their power, and the authority
of ye other depends upon their proof. To be short, even our speech extends
ordinarily no further than our power: and therefore the Teacher speaks after
another manner then the Learner, the Prince than the Subject, and the Senator
than the Orator. What manner a book then I pray you is this, which speaks to
all men alike, to Kings as to Subjects, to Great as to small, to old as to
young, to learned as to unlearned; saving that it surmounteth the capacity of
the one as well as of the other? neither entreating nor persuading any man, but
absolutely bidding or forbidding al men. Another (which more is) does it say to
any man, Thou shall live as a recluce within ye precinct of thine own house
all thy life long, or thou shall lie in continual prison; but thou shall live
or dye for ever without end. In what other book read we such
commandments? Ye in what book read we such punishments and such rewards?
And if every bodies speaking be according to the ability of his power; from
whom is this speech which dares pronounce or threaten everlasting things, but
from the party him self that is euerlasing? If it be a creature that speaks
it, either it is a good creature or an evil. If it be an evil creature, why
forbids he evil so rigorously? and commands good so expressly? or (to say
better) how comes it to pass, that the mark which he aims at is Gods
glory and our welfare? Or if it be a good Creature, how happens it that he
chalendgeth to himself that which belongs to GOD, and which cannot be
imparted to any Creature, which is the very sin that ouerthrewe both the
Devil into Hell, and man into destruction? And if it be no Creature neither
good nor bad; what remains then, but that it must needs be the Creator? Now
what leaf is there in the whole Scripture, where we meet not with such
matter? And herewithall we see that thing in the obseruers of that Law, which
is not read of any others: namely that they have yielded their lives, and
incurred the hatred and disdeine of the whole world, rather than they would
break or despise it. Uerily even in this respect and none other, that they
were sure that they served such a Lawegiuer, as not only had power over the
bark of man and over this present wretched life as other common Lawgiuers
have; but also was of power to give either everlasting life or endless death.
The same appears yet more, in that the laws which are given to men in the
Scriptures, are not enjoined alonely to the outward man; but do pearce even to
the heart of man. In deed they require Sacrifices; but yet they prefer
obedience. They inioyne fasting; but that is from sin. They inioyne
Circumcision, but it is the Circumcision of the heart. To be short, for a
Summary of al Sins, they forbid lusting and covering; which thing (as I have
said before) is not to be found in any law of the Heathen. Who I pray you
knows the very anatomy and secret conceyts of our hearts, but he that made
them? Or who can look into Man, but the maker of Man? And who is he either Man
or Devil, that ever durst presume to inioyne a law to men's thoughts? But all
these things come still to this point, that the party which speaks so upon
authority, threatening things that exceed man's ability, and making a law for
the things whereunto we cannot come; must of necessity be of more power than
we.

Agein, what a number of things have we taught us in the Scriptures, The
doctrine of the Scriptures exceeds the reach of man.
which cannot breed of man's brain, nor come from elsewhere than from about?
And if they cannot breed in his mind, how can they come from his hand or from
his mouth? We can well say there is one God; for if we enter into our selves
we find him there; and if we go never so little out of ourselves, we meet
him every where. But that in one Essence there should be three persons, the
Father, the word, and the Spirit; how can it breed in the imagination of man?
Or who could ever have thought of it? Also, from the Creatures we come to the
Creator; from moving to a rest; from novelties to a beginning: and there man's
reasoning stays. But although the first man might know when he was created;
yet how could he have known when the world was created? And although that by
the new things therein, we deem it too be new: who ever durst to have limited
the first day and the first hour thereof? Or how could that Chymera have come
in any man's mind? And yet in very deed we have diverse Chymeras among the
ancient writers, concerning the Creation of the world according to the
diversities of opinions that were among the Philosophers, and the diversities
of imaginations among the common people. But was there ever any before this book
of the Bible, that began his account of times or his history, at the first day
of the world, thought he were of opinion that the world was created? And seeing
that the intent of al writers of stories is to be believed; what else had this
beginning of an history at that point bin, but a cracking of his credit at his
first entrance in, if the majesty of the Author had not served for a warrant?
Likewise, that man, to attain to his appointed end, needed the handywoorke of
God himself; It ap^eareth unto us by the weakness of our nature. But that for
the appeasing of Gods Justice, God himself should be feign too come down and
to take man's flesh unto him; who would say it but only God? and who could be
believed in that case but only he? So is it also concerning the conception of
the Uirgin, concerning the promises that were not to come to pass until four
hundred years after, concerning the coming of the Messiah, and such like
things; which would never have come in a man's head to have written: so far of
are they from man's wit, I mean as of it self and without imitation. And I dare
boldly say, that whosoever reads ye Scriptures advisedly and with intent to
mark them; shall in every book find many matters, which even by his own
judgment had never come in man's mind, notwithstanding that they be spoken by
wise men, who both believed them firmly, and meant to be believed in speaking
them.

What shall we say then to the Prophesyings Prophesies sowed throughout all the
Bible.
or true foretellings which are sown euerywhere in the Scriptures, that is to
wit of Gods spirit which is shed forth from the one end to the other; I say
not in scattered leaves as the Prophesies of Sybil were, but aiming al at one
point, notwithstanding that they were uttered both at diverse times, by diverse
persons, and in diverse places? I omit the first Prophecy concerning the woman's
seed that should crush the Serpents head, and such like perteyning to the
redemption of man by the Messiah, because that that doctrine shall have his
proper place hereafter; and I will allege none other things than such as are
already proved and out of controversy. Unto Abraham was given this promise:
Gene. 15.
They seed shall do service in a strange Land, and be hardly entreated there
four hundred years; and then will I judge the Nation whom they shall have
served; and in the fourth generation shall they come hither again. What Oracle
did ever foretell a thing so precisely, so manifestly, and so long aforehand?
And yet was that Prophecy fulfilled at the appointed time: and it cannot be
said to be a counterfeit; for Moses in leading the people of Israel through so
many turnagaines, grounded himself upon none other thing. And it stood him on
hand to speak of a Prophecy that was common among them, and delivered from
hand to hand, considering that he takes it for his theme and ankerhold, both
to speak upon and to work upon. And soothly, as it was received by Abraham,
so was it received by Moses, and put in execution by Joshua. Jacob made his
Testament in AEgipt; wherein there are as many Prophesies as words: not for his
own Children only, but also for the Trybes that should come of them.
Nevertheless I will stand but upon one of them. Thou Judah (says he) thy
brothers shall commend thee, Gene. 49.
and thy fathers Children shall yield thee reverence. And the Scepter shall not
be taken from Judah, nor the Law maker from between his feet, until Silo
come. The effect hereof is, that the Scepter shall remain with Judah, and that
he shall have souereine jurisdiction, until the time of Messiah: and so do the
Hebrews interpret it. Yet were Ruben, Simeon, and Levy the eldest brethren of
Jacobs house; and therefore his doing was against the order of nature. And
Moses who led the people of Israel out of AEgipt, was of the Trybe of Levy.
Joshua who brought them into the Land of Canaan, was of Ephraim: The Judges were
raised up one while out of one Trybe and auother while out of another: and
Saul the first King chosen by the people, was of the Trybe of Benjamin, which
was the yoongest of all. These things therefore were a cursed shaking to the
Prophecy. In the mean while the Scepter passed from Saul to David, from a
King to a young Shepherd of Judah, and there was settled for ever,
notwithstanding the murmurings of the ten Trybes against it, and the falling
away of Israel, and the Captivity of Babylon. And whereas he says, until
Silo come, it sufficed until another time, that by the sapce of two thousand
years, the house of Judah reigned still in Israel, and had the eldership,
together with a direct observed pedigree: which thing we read not of any
other stock in the world. Here they will say, who shall assure us that Jacob
spoke those things? If I should ask them as much concerning their Histories,
what know they more of them? And what should Moses have gained by the
devising thereof, being himself of the Trybe of Levy, and giving over his
charge to one of the Trybe of Ephraim, which had rather been an occasion to
make Judah (which was the strongest of all the Trybes) to grudge against him,
seeing that that Trybe had been authorized both by Jacobs last will and by
answer from God? Or if he did it to greatefie Judah, why was he not afraid to
displease Ruben, Simeon, and Levy: or rather why made he not the Prophecy to
fall upon Levy to authorize himself? Nay, what gratefying of Judah could it
yet be, considering that Judah was excluded from it at that time, and came not
to it a thousand years after? Surely (the foresaid circumstances being well
weyed) either there was never any Prophecy incorruptly reported, or if ever
any were, this must needs be it. And as touching these good Philosophers,
which will have prophesying to proceed of a conjunction of the understanding
which they call Possible, with an understanding which they term Separated, by
mean of imagination: and that old men cannot Prophecy by reason of ye
weakness of their imaginatiue power: what will they say here to Jacob, who was
an older man tha^ any of their time, Rabbi Moses upon the book Abubacher.
and yet notwithstanding saw so clearly and so far of? For if their doctrine
be commonly true, and yet notwithstanding, old Jacob prophesied; does it not
follow that his prophecy is extraordinary, and comes from a higher power
than the said pretensed understanding; that is to wit from God? And if his
prophesying was according to their rule; does it not follow that their
doctrine is false, that is to wit, that prophesying comes not of the force of
our imagination, nor of our selves, considering that it weakeneth not with us,
but that it comes by inspiration from God? In the blessings that Jacob gave to
his posterity, the matter ought not to be passed over so lightly, where he
speaks of the parts that should be allotted to every of his Children in the
Land of Canaan, as if he had made them himself, assigning to one the Seacoast,
to another the Cornecountrie, and to another the vynegrounds, even after the
same sort that they were divided unto them certain hundred years after by
lot. For how could he come to the knowledge thereof, but by him that ouerruleth
all Lots? And seeing that the foretellings of Astrology are a mean between
necessity and casual as Ptolomie teaches; and nothing is more casual than
lots, what manner of Astrology is this, which judges of lottes both so long
aforehand and also so certainly? But when as in the chapter going next before,
we read that Jacob in blessing the Children of Joseph, preferred Ephraim the
younger Son before Manasses who was the elder, and being warned thereof by
their Father, answered ageine that he was not deceived, but that the younger
brother should be the greater, and that his Seed should grow to a multitude
of people: what art moved Jacob to say it, or what profit moved Moses to
contriue it? If ye say Phiznomie or Iudiciarie, the good old man was blind. But
what lineame^ts can foreshew for a whole race, or what Constellations can show
what shall befall to whole Nations that are yet unborn? If it be said that
Moses loved the one better than the other: The two of whom he speaks were
already dead at that time, and the people that were to come of them, were but
then in coming. And yet was that prophecy fulfilled; for the Trybe of Ephraim
was always mightier than the Trybe of Manasses, as appears throughout the
whole process of their Histories, and in the end the kingdom of the Ten
Trybes was grounded chiefly upon that. And in confirmation of this word, as often
as Moses, Joshua, the books of Kings, or the Chronicles speak of those two
Children, the youngest is ever named before the eldest: which thing undoubtedly
the Trybe of Manasses would never have endured without taking exceptio to it,
if they had not thought themselves to have rested upon the will of GOD, and not
upon the fancy of man. What shall we say of Moses? He speaks to the people
continually of the Conquest of Chanaan, according to that promise, and therefore
it must needs he that it was a prophecy very commonly known among them. And
in deed Joseph picked out a long time for it before his burial. Nay, moreover
Moses deuideth the Land unto them in mind; appoints them arbitrators to make
their partitions; gives them Laws to settle themselves upon; appoints them
what orders they should keep there, sets them down the platformes of their
Cities, Suburbs, and houses; inioyneth them the tilling of their grounds, the
resting of the se^^^th year, their Feasts and Solemnities, and appointest them
their Cities of refuge for casual manslaughters. A man might say that his
speaking of these things was as if a Father should dispose of his goods that he
had gotten, and which he had already in his hand. What lykelyhod hereof was
there, at such time as they burned Brick in AEgipt? or when they lingered in
the wilderness? yea or at the return of the men that were sent to spy out the
Land, when they reported nothing but hardness to the people? I pray you, if a
man should at this day part Italy or Greece among us in his imagination, to
every of us share and share like; would we not say accxsording to the proverb,
that he parted his Uenison before he had caught it? And yet what a number of
men have passed the Alps under the Standard? And since it is so that Moses
entered into that Land, and those which waited for it dyed in the way, and yet
that at the time appointed, the Chananites gave place to that people: who sees
not that of necessity the same people were driven by some other than man to
follow Moses, yea Moses himself to take upon him the leading of them through
so many distresses; both of them being grounded (say I) not upon man's fancy,
but upon express promise which they by infallible records believed to be of
God? But he proceeds yet further. For as he foresawe them in Chanaan before
they came there: so foresawe he them there to offend God by serving Baal after
they came there. I say he saw them forget GOD, and God myndfull of them in his
wrath: he saw them dispersed and scattered over the four quarters of the
World, and trodden under the feet of Strangers: To be short, he saw the
Gentiles called of God into his Church in their place; yea and he saw it so
clearly, that he foretold it to them all in his Song, Deuter. 32.
which he willed them to preserve from hand to hand, as a witness against
them and a discharge to himself. Though from the top of Mount Nebo he could
behold the land of Chanaan to speak so fitly thereof: from what mountain
could he see the things that were yet in the reins and hearts of men as then
to come, yea which lay hidden yet many hundred years after; or in what book
could he have seen them and read them; but in the book of life, that is to say
in God himself? The word that was spoken by Moses was performed word for word
by Joshua, without adding or diminishing any whit, contrary to the ambitious
mind of man which lyketh not to follow another man's lure; which thing was no
small sign that Joshua did not so much obey Moses, as God speaking by Moses.
And this curse that Joshua Joshua. 7.
pronounces in his book, against the man that should build Jericho ageine, is
not to be forgotten: He shall lay the foundation thereof upon his firstborne
(says he) and set up the gates thereof upon his youngest son. That is to say,
he shall be punished with the suddein death of all his Children. 1. King. 16.
verse 34.
For about fiuehundred years after, in the time of Achab, Hiel of Bethel
builded up Jericho, the which he founded upon Abiram his first Son, and hung
up the gates of it with the death of Segus his youngest son, and the book of
Kings says there, it was according as the Lord had spoken by the mouth of
Joshua the Son of Nun, to show that Gods word is everlasting, and that it
never ouerslippeth the time. And in very deed it lies overthrown at this
day, and was never repaired since that time, howbeit that the beautiful
situation thereof might have allured every man, as we read in the ancient
Geographers. In the books of Joshua and of the Judges we see the things
performed which were foretold by Moses, and the coming to pass both of the
promises and of the threats that were made by him. For accordingly as the
people of Israel did either turn away from God or return unto him; God
raised up Tyrants in Chanaan to punish them, or deliuerers in Israel to
deliver them. And as for the books of Samuel, of the Kings, and of the
Prophets; either they be prophesies of effects to come, or effects of
prophesies forepast. To be short, in all the discourse of the Bible, there is
not any season to be found without both Prophet and Prophecy, as well in
prosperity as in adversity: Whereby we might see both the heauenlines and the
truth of them the more clearly, if we could set the places, persons, and
state of that time before our eyes. But out of this continual prophesying, we
will draw some peculiar points, so evident as cannot be gaynesaid, which
will undoubtedly be of credit among all indifferent persons. 1. King. 13.
At such time as Jeroboam the sonnne of Nebath made the ten Trybes to fall
away from Roboam the Son of Solomon; to the intent they should have no
occasion to return again to their former state by resorting to Jerusalem to
woorshippe there: he reered an Alter in Bethell contrary to the Law of God.
Then came a man of God (says the history) to Bethel by the commandment of
the Lord, and said to Jeroboam; Behold, a Son shall be born of the house of
David, whose name shall be Josias. He shall sacrifise upon thee the Priests of
the Hillalters which offer incense upon thee: And this shall be the sign
thereof, 2. King. 22. verse. 15. 19.
Thine altar shall ryue asunder, and the ashes that are thereon shall be powered
down. This Prophecy was fulfilled in all points by Josias three hundred
years after. And when Josias (says the history) had so done, he saw a
certain tumbe, and asked whose it was, intending to have burnt the bones of
him that lay there, as he had done of the other preests in Bethel. But it was
told him that it was the tumb of the man of God, which had foretold those
things so long ago: whereupon he forbade any man to touch it. Now they that
know how those books of the Kings were disposed, wilnot call the history in
question. For the histories of the Kings were written by the priests and
Prophets, according to the measure of the time that they reigned, and were
holden so holy, that it was felony to touch them. Furthermore, seeing if this
Prophecy was written before the coming of Josias, it could not be falsified:
for who could have hit upon his proper name? And if it were written after, and
devised upon the event: how came the said Tumb to be made at the same
instant? Or was there none other devise wherewith to have disguised it, without
taking any further pain? Might it not have suffised to have said, One Josias
shall come etc. without speaking either of the death of the man of God, or of
his meeting with the Lion, or of the talk which he had with the Prophet of
Samaria; but that he must take pain to be found a Liar by the Samaritans which
knew the original of ye Tumb, or could at leastwise have inquired it? But in
very deed this Prophecy which does so set down the name, the place, and
the circumstances in the doing; is such as cannot be fathered but upon God, as
unto whom alone things absent or to come are present. And to show the
vncorruptnesse of the Scripture the more clearly, it co^cealeth not that the
same man of God by whose mouth God had uttered the said Prophecy, was slain
by a Lion for going back ageine to eat with the Prophet of Samaria contrary
to the word of the Lord: which does us to understand, that men are nothing of
themselves, but only so farforth as they be Gods tools and instruments. Now
then by what conjecture can we deem that man to have bin the deviser of a lie,
who to tell the truth, sticked not to dishonor the remembrance of so great a
Prophet, whose sincerity appeered by so many circumstances?

Wonderful is Esaias in the things that he foretells concerning the kingdom
of the Messiah and the calling of the Gentiles for he seems rather an
Evangelist than a Prophet. Also when he threateneth Jerusalem with the
captivity of Babylone, or cheereth them ageine with hope of their deliverance:
his manner of inditing shows, that he speaks as one that saw them both; and
in that respect also were ye Prophets called Seers. And in very truth, he
says not, the Lord will do, the Lord will call, the Lord will destroy, and
so forth: but, he does, he calls, he destroys: Yea and oftentimes, he has
done, he has called, he has destroyed, and so forth; as though he spoke not
of things that were but only near the execution or performance; but of things
already come to pass. After that manner did he foretell things, in the time that
the people prospered and trusted in the alliance of the Chaldees, and that all
likelihods were to the contrary. But I ask of such as doubt of our
Prophesies, Esaias. 44. and 45.
by what spirit could Esaias say; I am the Lord that does things in deed,
which do say unto Cyrus, Thou art my Shepherd, thou shall fulfill al my will:
and which says unto Jerusalem, Thou shall be builded ageine; and unto the
Temple, Thou shall be founded agein. And ageine: Thus says the Lord to Cyrus
his anointed, whom I have tataken by the right hand to subdue the Nations
before him, and to weaken the reins of Kings. I will go before thee, and
level the crooked ways. I will break open the Brazen gates, and wring asunder
the iron bars, and so forth, that thou may know how that I am the Lord
the God of Israel which calls thee by the name. For love of my servant
Jacob, and for Isreal's sake have I named thee by thy name, and called thee
though thou knew me not, etc. How many wonders shall we find in these few
words, if we list to examine them? At the same time that the people of Israel
triumphed under their alliance with the Chaldees, Esaias threatened them with
destruction by the selfsame people. This is somewhat.

But some will say that man's wisdom may reach as far as that. Yea, but he
foretells, not only the captivity of that people, the sacking of the
City, and the overthrow of the Temple: but also the destruction of the
Chaldees by the Persians, and the building up of Jerusalem and the Temple by
them again. Well may man's skill wade into Weeks and months; but considering
the uncertainty of worldly matters, it can never wade into years, and much
less into hundreds of years, and into the whole continuance of a mighty and
long lasting Monarchy, as Esaias does there. In so much that he names Cyrus a
hundred years before he was borne. And before his Graundfathers were named in
the world, he calls him by name to deliver Israel. And in another place he
summoneth the people of Cethim (that is to say of Macedonie) to the destroying
of the Persians. And in his eight Chapter he takes Vrias and Zacharias the
sons of Iebarachias by name to be witnesses of his Prophecy, who were
unborn a hundred years after. Let the greatest enemies of the truth enter
into their own consciences, and tell me what humane skill or cunning there
could be in those things. They cannot say here, that these Prophesies were
forged by some man upon the event. For by the removing of the Jews unto
Babylon, the Laws, Prophesies and Scriptures of Israel which were common
among that people, were conveyed into diverse places of the world; among the
which they had this Prophecy before Cyrus was borne: and being in diverse men's
hands, it was impossible to be falsified. And in good sooth, since we see that
the Kings of Persia being conquerours, caused the Temple to be builded ageine,
it ought to be a mark unto us, that in the Idolatry out of which they came,
they had seen wonders of the God of Israel, and that according to Esaies
saying, they perceived themselves to be called by him. The same is to be
considered of us in Icremie and Ezechiell, who being in places far one from
another, the one in Jerusalem and the other in captivity at Babylon, foretell
the selfsame things, as sure Registers of one Court. But Jeremy Jerem. 15.
16. 17. 18. 19. 20. etc.
is the more wonderful in this behalf, in that he prophesies expressly that
the people which were carried away prisoners, should be brought home again at
the end of threescore and ten years, contrary to all likelihood, and yet with
such assuredness, as a man would verily have said, that he had led them home
again by the hand into Jerusalem. And in very deed, at the threescore and
tenth years end, the people were conveyed home again at the forenamed
instant, as though Cyrus had been bent of set purpose to verify the Prophecy,
or as though he had been waged by the Prophet. And it appears by the nineth
Chapter of Danyell, (where this prophecy is alleged,) that it was common
among all the people. As for Danyell Daniel. 9.
himself, who being borne under the first Monarchy, seems rather an
Historiographer than a Prophet, as in respect of the Monarchies and things that
insewed; (for he speaks of the Persians, Greeks and Romans, of the
tyranny of Antiochus, of the unhallowing of the Temple, and of other things
that were done six hundred years after his time, as of things already come
to pass): like as he closes up the Prophecy from the creation of the world
to the coming of Christ; so ought he to stop all men's mouths that will speak
against him. For if a man will not believe the Jewish Chronicles, in that they
report that the Prophecy of Danyell was read unto Great Alexander at his
coming to Jerusalem, to show him what was foretold of him: yet is it evident
and cannot be denied, but that when Prolomie caused the Scriptures to be
translated, the Prophecy of Danyell was then extant, and was translated with
the residue; which was long time before the Tyranny of Antiochus, the which he
describes to the eye. And therefore if it could not be falsified in that
behalf, as little could it be falsified in all the rest, considering that all
of it does equally and infinitely exceed the reach of all creatures, and
cannot proceed from any more than one Spirit. Now then, let us look upon the
things that are in this Prophet; and whence could he have them, Daniel. 5.
but from him that makes and vnmaketh Kings at his pleasure? He forewarned
Balsasar the son of Nabugodonozor, that he should have a fall, because he had
not taken example at the chastisement of his father, but had advanced himself
against God. It will perhaps be said, that it is the saying of wise men, that
when pride goes before, shame comes after. But when as Balsasar was slain
that same night in the midst of his iolitie; it was a marking of the thing
more precisely, which had bin foretold by the former Prophets also. Esaias. 13.
2^. 47 Jeremy. 50.
But in that which follows there is no shift at all. Behold, Darius was but
newly entered into the Monarchy, when even in the first year of his reign
Danyell said unto him, Three Kings shall stand up yet in Persia, and the fourth
shall be enriched with great riches above them all; and when he is so
increased, Daniel. 15
he shall stir up every man against Greece. These four or five words
conteyne the history of seven or eight score years. We have great learned
men, which by reason of their long experience, have made (as it were) an
Anatomy of our state: but which of them I pray you durst ever take upon him to
tell how many Kings should come after, and much less to foretell what should
be done by the fourth King that was to come as Danyell does here, who makes
express mention of Darius voyage against the Greeks? Let us hear him yet
further. But a mighty King shall rise up (says he) and reign with great
authority, and do whatsoever he will. Who sees not here how Alexander comes
out of Greece against Darius, and subdueth the Persians? And when he is in all
his royalty (says he) his kingdom shall be broken and divided to the four
winds of the air, how beit not to his own race, but unto strangers; for his
kingdom shall be plucked up by the root. He could not have painted out
Alexanders Monarchy more lively, which was but as a flash of lightening that
passes from the West into the East, and took end in it self, and was
divided into many Kingdoms, as Macedonie, Thrace, Syria, and AEgipt, among
Princes that were not of his race. Whosoever would have made an Abridgement of
the whole History of the Monarchy of Greece in few words; he could not
lightly have done it in other than these. Nevertheless, it is a glauncing
overthwart through two Monarchies and two whole hundred years, whereas all the
wisdom of the world put together, could not ouersee so much as two years, no
not even in the commonest affairs of a household. Now, the story of the
Macedones was not the thing that he aimed at: but the chief thing that he
sought into, was the state of the Church to come among the Jews; and therefore
he lets the rest of the branches alone, and goes on but only with the
Kings of Syria and AEgipt. Therefore let us read the residue of the Chapter.
There he paynteth out the wars of Antiochus King of Syria against the Jews,
the resistance of the Machabees, the oppression of the righteous, and the
defyling of all holy things, so lively and manifestly, that he which were not
told of it before he reads it, should not be able to say whether it were a
Prophecy or an History. Daniel. 7.
In his eight Chapter he describes a battle between a Ram and a Goat. The
Ram (says he) that had two horns, is the King of Medes and Persians, because
those two states went jointly together. The Goat is the King of Greece; and
the great horn that he had between his eyes, is the greatest King, that is to
wit the great Alexander: and yet none of them both lived six score years
after. Daniel. 8.
In the seventh Chapter he describes all the four Monarchies, but specially
the Roman; which had (says he) teeth of iron, wherewith it brake and
devoured all the rest. And he purseweth it so far, that he declares himself
to have had a sight in his mind, both of the breeding, of the proceeding, and
of the decaying thereof. If we consider what Rome was at that time, it was then
scarce hatched: and a great while afterward, Alexander having but a small cut
over the Sea that is betwixt that and Greece, Daniel. 9.
knew it not. To be short, in the nineth Chapter he foretells that at the
end of threescore and ten weeks, (accounting from the day that the word was
uttered by Jeremy for the buylding up of the Temple again,) Jerusalem should
be destroyed by a prince of the people that was to come, that is to say, by an
Emperor issewing from the Commonweal of Rome, which at that time was not in
being: which thing I could show here to have come to pass at the instaut
aforenamed, according to the Prophecy. But forasmuch as this point perteyneth
properly to the coming of the Messiah, whereunto we reserve many things that
may confirm us more and more in the holy Scriptures, it shall be treated of
in his peculiar place. Now then, we have here a continuance of wonderful
Prophesies, from the creation of the world even unto Christ, uttered and set
forth a long while before hand, and come to pass just in their times; not
general, but marked with their circumstances; not doubtful, but such as
express the things and persons by their names. And therefore to knit up this
matter withal, I demand unto what we may attribute them, but to the
inspiration of GOD^ Some in stead of holding themselves within their bounds,
will needs ouerleape them, by denying al. But besides the reasons before
alleged, seeing that at the same time that the Israelites worshipped their
God, the Nations about them had Oracles which answered unto all questions; and
that man is so inquisitiue of things to come, that if he cannot be certified
at home, he seeks euerywhere abroad: I would have them to answer me, whether
this people were of another nature than all other Nations, whom we know to be
yet still at this day more given to prophesyings than any other Nation? And how
being so given thereunto and not having aught at home wherewith to satisfy
their curiosity, they could in the midst of so many miseries, hold
themselves to the serving of the one GOD, who alone of all others did not
speak, but alonly had kept silence to all their requests? For if it seem
strange and myraculous unto us to have had Prophesies: much more strange and
myraculous ought it to be, to have made more account of a God that gave no
answers at all, specially in so many distresses and oppressions; than of the
Gods of the Heathen which did nothing else.

But forasmuch as none of the men of old time was so impudent as to deny them,
Objections.
but all were enforced either to wonder at them, or to allege causes to
diminish the estimation of them, Let us examine the reasons which they give
them. One says that they were tied to the Stars, and yet they mocked at the
diuinations of the Chaldees every where. Now then, of so many Astrologers as
were among the Gentiles, and have made books thereof, name me any one that
has foretold the doings, not of an Empire, but of some one man: not a hundred
years aforehand, but a year aforehand, saving that the devil now and then by
Gods sufferance, has executed the same evil which he himself foretold upon
the party that asked counsel of him. But Ptolomie will say, the foretellings
of the Astrologers are a mean between necessity and chance: for they
foresee not the euentes or fallings out, but ouely the inclinations or
dispositions of things, and as many as promise any further, do but abuse men.
What think we then that this Ptolomie would have said, if he had read these
prophesies, so particular, Ptolomie in book of the fruit.
that they seem rather stories of things past, than foretellings of things to
come. Surely he would have said that they could not have proceeded but only
from God, as he sets down and deemeth very well in letter things: And that
they which foretell particular things must needs be inspired of God: And
agein, that the judgments of such as gaze upon the Stars, are doubtful,
howbeit that they which foretell the good part, approach nearer the truth, by
reason of a certain power that bears sway in their Soul, although that
otherwile they have no skill at all in the art. And in very deed, the best
Astronomers have rejected Judicial Astrology, as in vain and without
foundation, yea even after they have well tired themselves in it. But in Israel
we read of a Neateheard called Amos, whose Prophesies were no less evident
for the matters they treated of, than were the Prophesies of Daniell and Esaias.
Auerrhoes and his followers have a peculiar opinion of man's Soul, namely that
we have a certain capacity of understanding, which they term an
understanding in possibility, the which informs and teaches by the working
of an universal mind, which by the particular imaginations of every man,
comes to be joined to the understanding in possibility that is common to
all. The same thing does Moises of Narbon say upon the book of Abubacher, and
Auempare.
And therefore they say that Prophesying proceeds properly of that
Conjunction in men that have a strong and lively imagination. If it be so, I
would have the disciples of Auerrhoes (who had so goodly an imagination,) to
imagine this, to show me some Prophecy of their Masters or of their own.
Also let them answer me how it happens that our Prophets for the most part
have commonly bent old men, seeing that (after their doctrine,) old men cannot
Prophecy by reason of the feeblenes of their imagination? But forasmuch as
these men do preach unto us that the world is eternal; how happens it
that Prophesying has not been instilled into men by the said conjunction,
everlastingly concerning time, and in all times, seeing that to become a
Prophet, there needs no more but to have a very strong imagination? forasmuch
as the separated understandings are evermore ready and disposed to the said
Coniuntion? How happens it also that a man being come to that point,
Prophesies not of all things that he can imagine? But hereby we see manifestly
that this Prophesying of theirs is not an habit, but a passion that fades a
way like the sound of a Lute, when the player ceasseth to strike. Or if they
say that a man must first get him both the active and the contemplative habits,
Roger Bacon in his book of the Six sciences of experience, and in his
abridgement of Diuini^^e.
and then the said understanding matcheth it self with our imagination, as the
form of a thing matcheth with the substance thereof, whereof comes it that
David being a Shepherd and Amos a Neteheard, did prophecy so wonderfully?
Some will have it, that Prophesying is derived into man by the Stars,
conditionally that he be disposed to receive it. Hereupon they prescribe him a
certain diet; whereby he must make his body equal and euenly counterpeysed by
Alchimie; and afterward he must gather together the Beams of the Sky into a
mirror, which they call Alchemusie, made according to the Rules of Catoptrik:
and finally he must stellifie by Astrology as well the man himself, as the
food that he uses. And they say that Apollonius of Thianey prophesied after
yt manner. These are Toys to be laughed at, rather then worthy to be
answered. And let every man consider, whether our Prophets being Shepherds,
Neateheards and unlearned, were framed with such curiousnes, to Prophecy
according to diet. Nay when his wits be somewhat well wakened, he shall
perceive that they were inspired with things which the Stars could neither
do, nor betoken, nor know, forasmuch as they be still in the hand of the
first cause, and are not come down so low as to be subject to the second
causes.

The Platonists therefore come somewhat nearer the truth, specially Iamblychus
and Porphyrius by name. For they say that the foretelling of things far of
aforehand, cannot be done another by art nor by nature, but only by inspiration
from God. Howbeit forasmuch as they speak of many Gods, and took the devils
for Angels it may be objected against us, that our Prophesies proceeded either
from devils or from Angels. But if we call to mind the Oracles of devils,
and compare them with our Prophesies, there will appear as much difference
betwixt them, as is between the discretion of a wise man, and the tittlecattle
of a fool. Therefore let us hear what they say. The Gods (says Porphyrius)
foretell natural things by the order of natural causes which they mark; and
they foretell things that depend upon our own will, by conjectures taken of our
doings. But forasmuch as they be swifter than we, they prevent us and outrunne
us, and that in such sort, that as natural things are deceyuable, and men's
cases are variable and uncertain; so they both, as welthe good as the bad, be
subject to lying. What else is this to say but that they can foretell nothing of
us furtherfoorth than they learn by our doings; nor of natural things
furtherforth than they read them in nature, that is to say than they read
them as in a book, howbeit with a sharper and swifter eysight than we? But
another devil nor Angel can read that in the Stars which is not there: nor
in men, that which men themselves know not, specially considering that the
greatest learned men do hold opinion that they enter not so far. In the
Stars they could not read the names of Josias, Vrias, or Cyrus: niether in
the hearts of Josias, Vrias; and Cyrus themselves, (who were not at that time
in the world) could they read the deeds which they were to do certain
hundred years after. For only unto God are those times present which are to
come; but as for to Angels and us there is no more of the roll of time known,
than it pleases God of his gracious goodness to unfold unto us. It follows
then by the doctrine of these Philosophers, that our Prophesies being so
clear, so particular, and so near to things a far of; could not be in
spyred from many Gods.

Yet notwithstanding, all Prophesying (say they) proceeds either of art, or of
nature, or of some Spirit, or of God himself. Of art, as by Astrology; of
nature, as when man's nature is ready to receive the influences of the
universal; and of some Spirit, as by some league or covenant made with him.
But of none of all these three could the Prophesies of the Hebrews proceed,
as I have showed evidently before. It remains therefore that those Prophesies
are of God; and consequently that their Scriptures are Gods word; which is
nothing else but either those Prophesies themselves, or the effects of those
Prophesies. And to shut up this Chapter, it will not be amiss to rehearse this
record of Porphyrins, that the Religious sect of the Essens among the Jews, by
reason of their occupying of themselves in those Prophesies, made a profession
of Prophesying, and seldom times missed. For in deed there is great
lykelyhod, that if we understood all the Prophesies of the Bible (which thing
is impossible for us because we cannot lay the states of all times together;)
we should find there many things which are dark to us at this day, and yet
were clear, well understood, and easy, even to the very common people, every
one in his time.

The xxvj. Chapter.
That the things which seem most wonderful in our Scriptures, are confirmed
by the Heathen themselves: and a solution of their chief Objections to the
same.
NOw that we know that it is God that speaks in the Scriptures; there
should remain no more for us to do, but to hearken unto him with silence. For
seeing he has made al things by his word; his word cannot have said any
thing which he has not been able to do. And if we crouch, and lay our hand
upon our mouth at the sight of a Kings Seal: surely it were more reason that
we should dispose our mynds to believe, and our wills to obey without
scanning, wrangling or gaynsaying, when we see the express signing and seal
of God in his Scriptures. Howbeit, to the intent we may leave no cause of
doubt to the Reader: forasmuch as some have presumed to object, I desire that I
also may have leave to assoyle their demands. Now therefore, let us see what
is objected against us, as well by the Infidels of old time as of our days. An
objection concerning the witness of the Greeks.
First of all, As great account (say they) as you make of your Scriptures;
there is no record yielded unto them by any of our ancient Authors Greek or
Latin, as Plato, Aristotle, Theophrast, and the rest of so many Philosophers,
The Answer.
Historiographers, and Poets. This is even as much as if a man should ask
witness of the men of Perow, concerning the Histories of France or Spain.
For in the times whereof our Scriptures speak, what were the Greeks and
Romans in respect of the Jews, but silly savage people that fed upon Mast?
Or soothly it is all one, as if a man should ask a child of the things that
were done before he was borne; considering that the latest Histories in our
Bible, are of more antiquity than the Schools of Greece, or the use of
reading was in Rome. Nay moreover, from the time that the Greeks knew there
was an AEgipt, they went thither to School, and there had communication with
the Jews, (as I have proved already) at whose hands they reaped that little
knowledge which they had concerning the true God, the creation of the world,
and the fall of Man. Insomuch that Plato alleges our Authors under these
words; As the authors of old time report, or as it is reported in the ancient
Oracles. And Numenius having espied that Plato could not get that skill from
elsewhere than out of Moses, terms him Moses speaking in ye language of
Athens, that is to say, translated into Greek. The Histories of Greece begin
about the time of Cyrus. But (says Aristobulus Aristobulus writing to Ptolomy
Philo^netor. lib. 1.
) the law of Moses and the departing of the Israelites out of AEgipt, were
translated into Greek before ye reign of Alexander, yea or of the Persians
themselves. Which is as much to say, as that the Greeks even from their first
vpspring, or at leastwise from the first time that they began to know
themselves, heard speaking of our Scriptures and were desirous to have them.
And Hecataeus Hecateus concerning the Jews.
the Abderite who attended upon Alexander in his Conquests, made a book
purposely of the Jews, which thing he did not of any of all the flourishing
Nations which he had seen in his voyage. Also Herennius Philo Herennius Philo
concerning the Jews.
having read the said Philosopher, saw him so wonderful in the things that he
had learned of the Jews, that he believed him to have been become a Jew, and
to have been converted to their law. Anon after, when the time of the calling
of the Gentiles approached, that it behooved the Prophesies to be made known to
the whole world; to rid away all suspicion of contryuing them upon the events;
God did put into the heart of Ptolomie Philadelph King of AEgipt, to make a
Library, in the which (by the counsel of Demetrius Phalareus a Disciple of
Theophrastus) it was his will to have the Bible of the Hebrews, and therefore
at his great charges caused it to be translated into Greek. The History of
this translating is set out by one Aristaeas a Chamberlain of King Ptolomies;
who with another named Andrew, was sent to Eleazar the Highpriest of the Jews
to fetch the Bible and six men of every Trybe that were learned in both the
Languages, to translate it. And he says that Demetrius Phalareus made report
unto the king, that these Scriptures were the only writings that were divine
in deed; Aristaeas concerning the translation of the Threescore and Ten
Interpreters.
and that thereupon the King asked him in his presence, how it happened that he
had not those books sooner, seeing he spared not for any cost, and that
Iewrie was so nere hand? Whereunto Demetrius answered, that they were written
in a peculiar language, and therefore that it behooved him to write to the
Highpriest to have Interpreters: according to which advice, the King sent
Ambassadors with letters and presents to Eleazar, (of which Ambassadors he
himself was one): And that by the consent of all the people, Eusebius in his
eight book of the preparation to the Gospel.
the threescore and twelve Interpreters were sent into into AEgipt. Yea and in
this History (which is extant still at this day) ye may see the Copies of the
letters that were written from Demetrius to Ptolomie, from Ptolomie to Eleazar,
and from Eleazar to Ptolomie. And the said Aristaeas adds, that when the
Bible was once translated and perused in the presence of the chief Peers of
his Realm, the King caused a solemn curse to be proclaimed with loud voice,
against all such as should ad any thing to it, take aught from it, or alter
aught in it. And afterward (says he) when the King upon further reading
thereof, did marvel that of so many things and so worthy of remembrance, there
was no mention made by the Historywriters and Poets of Greece: Demetrius
Phalareus answered him, that it was a divine law, given of God, which ought
not to be touched but with clean hands, (as Hecataeus himself writes)
affirming moreover that Theopompus a Disciple of Aristotle's had done him to
understand, that whereas some had gone about to disguise the Scriptures of the
Jews with Greek eloquence, they were stricken with amazedness for their
labor, and upon prayer made unto God were warned in a Dream, that they
should forbear to unhallow or defile those heavenly matters, with the gloss
of their own inventions. Yea and that Theodotus a Tragical Poet had told him,
that because he intended to have intermingled some matters of the Scriptures
with his Tragedies, that is to weet, by drawing grounds of his Poetries out of
the Bible, as other Poets had done with the wars of Thebes and Troy: he had
suddeinly forgone his sight, which was afterward restored again unto him upon
continual prayer and long repentance. Origines in his fourth book against
Celsus.
And this befell just in the same time that the Greeks and Romans did but
begin to deal with Philosophy. Also Numenius the Pythagorist, whom many
prefer before Plato, made so great account of the Scriptures, that his book
of Welfare, of Number, and of Place, and his book intytled The Lapwing, were
full of texts alleged out of Moses and the Prophets with great reverence: And
he is the same Philosopher whom Plotin had in such estimation, that he
voutsafed to write a Co^mentarie upon him. But I would that the Greeks should
but show me the like record of their own writings and of their own laws, not
in our books, but even in their own books; and I believe that no indifferent
person would refuse that offer.

Here follows another objection: An Objection concerning the style.
Namely that the Scriptures have a simple, bare, and gross style: but if they
were of God, they would speak far otherwise. The Solution.
I demand of them, whither men's styles ought not to be according to the
persons that speak, and whither the grace of eloquence consist not in
observing seemelynesse; as namely whither the eloquence of a Subject, ought not
to differ from the eloquence of a King; the eloquence of a child, from the
eloquence of a father; and the eloquence of an Advocate, from the eloquence of
a Judge; or whether by the Rules of Rhetoric, that which is eloquence in the
one, shall not be foolishnes in the other? Therefore if the Lawyer or Advocate
will plead eloquently, he must move affections: to the intent he may move
other men, he must first move himself. The Judge must utter his words
gravely, and he must also be unflexible and vnintreatable, without moving and
without affection. The King must simply and absolutely command; for he is
both the voice of the Law, and the rule of the Judge. But if either the King
come to persuade, or the Judge to debate cases; then must the one put on the
state of an Advocate, and the other the state of a subject, and lay aside the
state of a King and Judge. What then I pray you shall become of the law of God
the King of kings, who is infinitely further above ye greatest Monarkes, than
the greatest Monarkes are above their meanest Subjects; and who exceeds alyke
both the Judges and the parties that are to be judged? We would have him to use
Inductions as Plato does, or Syllogismes as Aristotle does, or pretty sleightes
as Carneades does, or outcryes as Cicero does, or fine conceits as Seneca
does. We would have him to utter his words by weight, that they might fall in
just measure and sound; and to interlace some far sought words, some
allegorical matters, and some strange devises wherewith common use is
unacquainted. If we should see a Kings Proclamations set forth in such a
style, which of us would not by and by note it as smelling to much of the
Inkhorne; and which of our Ears would not rather glowe at it; than like of
it? Surely then, the simpler that Gods Law is, the better does it beseem the
Everlasting; considering that the simpler it is, the more it resembles the
voice of him that can do all things; yea and (which more is) the simpler it
is, the better does it fit all people. For the Law that is ordained for all
men without exception, ought to be as an ordinary food, or rather as a common
kind of bread applied to the taste and relishe of all men. But what will you
say if the Scriptures have in their lowlynes more statelynes, in their
simplicity more profoundnes, in their homelines more allurance, and in their
grossness more lively force and sharpnes, than are to be found any where
else? We read in the first chapter of Genesis, God created heaven and earth;
God spoke, and the waters were severed from the earth; He commanded, and the
earth brought forth herbs. There is not so very an idyot or so simple a man,
but he can understand these things, I mean so far as is requisite to his
Salvation, yea and consent at the very hearing of them, that the things must
needs be as it is said there. But if a man will wade deeper into the matter,
as how God has in all eternity chosen (as ye would say) one instant whereat
to begin this work, without stuff or matter to work upon; and how he made
it by his only bare word: they be such bottomless deepes, as will make even
the stoutest afraid, and enforce the wysest to stoop to the skill of the
lowly and little ones, so excellent is the simplicity of the Scripture, both
to instruct the lowly, and to confound the proud both at once. In our Bible we
have Histories, and in Histories what desire we? A truth: for that is the
very substance of them. Now what greater proof of truth can there be, than
simplicity? A style or manner of indyting that sets down things past before
our eyes, as if they were presently in doing? What greater token would we have
thereof, than (in our reading) to feel the very same affections which those
felt of whom we read: Let the hardest hearted men, and the most untoward in
the world go read the Histories of our Bible, as how Isaac was led to be
sacrifized, how Joseph became known agein to his brethren, how Iephthe was
vexed with the meeting of his daughter, or how David was grieved at the death
of Absalon: and (if they will say the truth) they shall feel a certain
shuddering in their bodies, a certain yirning in their hearts, and a certain
tender affection all at one instant, far greater than if all ye Oracles of
Rome or Athens, should preach the same matters whole days together. Let them
read the same stories ageine in Josephus, to whom the Emperor Titus caused an
Image to be set up for the elegancie of his history, and they shall find that
after his enriching of them with all the ornaments of Rhetoric, he shall leave
them more cold and less moved, then he found them. And that is because that in
very deed, true beauty desires no peynting; but the more naked it is, the
more it allureth; and (as Iewellers and Lapidaries say) the fayrer that any
Precidus Stone is, the less does it need both of Gold and of woorkmanship.
And soothly to set up our Scriptures upon high words, is nothing else but to set
up a well proportioned tall man upon a Scaffold, which diminishes somewhat of
his natural proportion, and yet adds not any whit to his stature.

Also in our Scriptures we have Prophesies, and in those Prophesies we have
threatenings, exhortations, and vehement speeches. And it is in such matters,
that the Orators are wont to thunder and to mount up into their lofty
speeches, In this kind, the Latins make great account of Cicero. But I report
me to al such as have read both of them with like judgment, what comparison
there is between him and Esaias? between his flattering insinuations with
chyldish excuses of ignorance, and the enterances of Esaias, lively, grave, and
full of majesty? Between his long Periods too the which he herkeneth so
devoutly; and the others cutting words which are as thounderstroks dubbled, to
daunt the stowtest stomach that is? But among all the Greeks, Cicero Ci^ero in
his Tusculane Questions.
himself wondereth at AEschines against Demosthenes in acerteine place, where
he lays open his injuries, and passions against him, in deed more like a
bedlem than a man in his right wits. And what eloquence, what force, or what
percing has that place (I beseech the Readers with all my heart to read both
the one and the other) in comparison of this beginning of Esayes? Harken ye
Heavens (says he) and give ear thou Earth; for the Everlasting has said, I
have norrished Children and brought them up, and they have rebelled against me.
The Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his masters cribbe: but Israel has
not known me, my people have no understanding; Ah sinful people, people laden
with iniquity, too what purpose should ye be chastysed any more, since ye
heap sin upon sin? The whole head is sick, and all the body is full of
sores. From the sole of the foot to the crown of the head* there is not any
sound part. What abundance of kindness, and eloquence, of humility and
haultines, of reasons and affections, is there in these feawe words? And how
much greater should we find them in their own Language and in their own
accents? Osorius the Portingale.
Truly some great learned men of our time (which thing I think not to be any
abatement of their commendation) have undertaken to make Paraphrases upon this
Prophet and others, full of goodly sentences, and humane eloquence, which have
served fitly to give him the greater grace. And if our Rhethoritians fin^ fault
with those similitudes as over homely: I would have them to tell me to what use
Similitudes serve, but to make things clear; and what is the mean to make
matters clear, but by taking Similitudes from things best known? And what
manner of ones were the Metaphors of the Romans, but at the first rude and
homely, and afterward taken from wars, and in process of time taken from
pleading and oratorie, according as they grew to be more corrupted? And what
else are ye Similitudes of Cicero himself in his treatise of old age, but
lykenings taken from husbandry and Uynes, because he himself delyghted in
those things? To be short, when it comes to the pursewing of a Similitude
evidently, to the setting down of a Desolation lively, too the reproving of
vices sharply, or to the promising of deliverance bravely: our Prophets do
setfoorth every thing so naturally, so presently, so forcibly, and so lively;
as that it appears manifestly that they had the persons, the places, the
times, and the things themselves whereof they spoke, al present before their
eyes: yea and that manner of indyting is common to all our Prophets universally.
Of all these things I require none other witneses, than our verrie despysers of
God themselves, whose contempt of our Scriptures, which they never had leisure
to read, enters for the most part under this color, that some master of
art which never red any more than his Cicero, ne can skill to discern what
beseems either others or himself, has skorned the things which he has not
the skill either to peyse or to praise. From such people (say I) springs the
contempt of our Scriptures, specially in Italy; who being out of their Schools
are not able to say one word to the purpose, no nor scarcely so much as simply
to talk. Politian (says Viues) did altogether despise the reading of the
Scriptures. Therefore let us see what he commended. He spent his whole life in
scanning whether a man should pronounce Vergilius or Virgilius; Carthaginenses,
or Carthaginienses; Primus, or Preimus: and if he had any further leisure, he
spent it in making some greek Epigram in the commendation of Lechery and
Sodomy. A grave judgment soothly for us to set our mynds upon. Another called
Domitius Calderinus, turned young men from the reading of the Scriptures: but
what goodly matter took he to occupye himself withal? Forsoothe he passed his
life in making a Comment upon Virgills Priapus, a book which all men that have
any piece of manhod in them are ashamed even too speak of. But what greater
proof of the praise of our Scriptures would we have, than that such persons
do despise them? Contrariwise, Marsilius Ficinus, and John Earl of Mirandula
the honor of Italy and of his age for skill in all sciences, having read all
the good authors in the world, came at length to rest themselves in our
Scriptures, and were in the end out of lyking with all others; but as for these
they could never have their fill of them. If there were no more but ye
affirmation of the one, and the denial of the other; unto which of them I pray
you ought we rather to yield? Nay, I dare say, and I will maintain it among
all such as know what it is to speak to the purpose, and accordingly as may
best beseem every man; that our scriptures are written in such wise, as may
most fitly beseem both God the author of them, and the matters that they
treat of, and the parties to whom they be spoken; and that a more seemly
style than that cannot be imagined, either for God; (for he is our Prince; and
it beseems not Princes to persuade): or for the matters; for they be holy and
grave, and grave matters (as says Aristotle) should not be peynted: or for
the parties to whom they be spoken; for they were folk of all sorts without
exception; and like as all of them were bound to believe and observe them, so
was it behooffull that al should understand them.

But now enter they into the matter of them. The Scriptures Objections
concerning the vncrediblenesse of things in the Scriptures.
(say they) do tell us things impossible and incredible, more like the fond
fables of Poets, than the reports of sound Histories. I would have them tell
me to whom they be impossible, and to whom they be incredible? seeing they
father them not but upon God the maker of Heaven and Earth, to whom all things
are alike easy? The Poets say that Jupiter thundreth above, and that Neptune
turmoyleth the Seas, and rowleth up the Earth: and we know that both Jupiter
and Neptune were men as we be: and therefore we say justly that they report
Fables; for they father things upon men which are above the ability of man to
do, and which surmount the power of all Creatures. But when things that are
impossible to Creatures, are reported of GOD, whose power is infinite: although
men doubt whether they were done or not; yet can they not deny but that he
was able to do them. And if their suspecting of them be because they read
the like things in their own Fables; I have proved already, that these things
were written long time before they had either writers of Histories, Poets, yea
or any writing at all. And therefore they ought to think that their Fables
were devised upon our Histories, and their Leasings upon our truethes. For like
as a man has been before his portraiture, good Coin before counterfeit Coin, a
true Seal before a forged Seal, and a true Copy before a forgerie: so also was
the true declaration of things before Fables: according to this rule of the
Philosophers, That evil has not any being of it self, but in another thing,
ne is properly a substance, but a corruption of a substance. Therefore we
believe not the Fables of Homere, nor the Inventions of Euripides and
Sophocles, made upon the battle of Troy; and yet we deny not but there was a
War of Troy. As little also do we believe the Romans which vaunt of the
twelve Peers of Charles the great the King of France; and yet we doubt not
but there was a great Charles that did great things in his time, and had
great store of Noble Parsonages in his service. To be short, had there never
been any Dog, Horse, Bear, or Lion in the world; neither Poets had feined,
nor Peinters had peinted us any Cerberus, Pegasus, or Chymere. Likewise, had
there not been a truth of the things whereon the Poets made their Fables, we
should not have had at this day any Fables in the World. The Creation of the
world and of Man.
Let us come to particularities. In all the whole Scripture there is not a more
wonderful thing, than the Creation of the world and of man: And if we admit
those two points, nothing ought to seem strange unto us in the residew of
the Bible. For all the miracles which we wonder at, are but sparks of the
infinite power which uttered it self at that time in the creating of all
things. Now I have proved already both by lively reasons, and by witness of
the ancient writers, that the world and al things therein were created, and
that they were created by the only will of God, at such time as pleased him;
and that it cannot be otherwise imagined. Upon this truth have the
Phenicians and AEgiptians fashioned their Fables; saying that in the beginning
there was a darkness, and a spiritual Air, and in an infinite Chaos; that
this spirit covered the Chaos: and that of the conjunction of them twain, was
bred a certain Moth, that is to say, a certain slyme, whereof all living
things were engendered. It can not be denied but that this was a mistaken Copy
of the holy and native Copy written by Moyes.

Concerning the creation of Man, the AEgiptians say he was created both Male
and female. Hereupon Plato gathers that he was a Manwoman or Herkinalson: and
the Scripture had said that God had created them Male and female. So befalls
it properly to a Portrayture that is drawn by another. That which is taken at
the lively image, loses a little of his nature. That which is taken at the
Pattern, loses somewhat more; And so from one to another, they varry in the
end so far from the very original, that a man can scarsly find any
resemblance thereof. The fall of Man.
The fall of man has been proved of me by many reasons, and approved by all
the Philosophers, and even by the very feeling of our corruption. All men are
enforced to confess it. But Moses is the only man that sets us down both
the History and the cause thereof. Hereupon the Emperor Julian quareleth,
thinking it strange that a Serpent should speak, which is no more but that
the devil spoke by the Serpent. And what is there herein, which befell not
daily among the Gentyles? devils, to deceive men, spoke to them from out of
Images. The Feend of Dodon spoke out of an Oak. Phylostratus says that an Elm
spoke to Apollonius of Thyaney: A River (says Porphirius) saluted Pythagoras.
Even Julian himself and his Philosopher Maximus, heard the devil speak in
diverse voices and in diverse manners: and in all this gear there is thought to be
no straungenes at all. For seeing that the devil of himself is not visible to
our eyes; must he not be feign to put on a borrowed shape? And if he borowe
one, why should he rather take some other shape than the shape of a Serpent?
And if he speak; why should he not speak as well by the mouth of a Serpent,
as of another living wight? and as well of a living wight, as of a thing that
has no life? Nay further, this creature has a manifest figure, in that it
trayleth upon the ground, and lives of the dust: and in that we by our
winding away from God to the base and Earthly things, are brought to the same
point at this day.

We read of the men of the first age, The ege of the first men.
that they lived seven, eight, or nine hundred years: which thing some thinking
to be incredible, have imagined that those years were but months,
notwithstanding that in the history of the universal Flud which insewed, the
month is set down to be of eight and twenty days, and the year to be
twelve months, and that otherwise we must be feign to admit, that they begat
Children at less than ten years of the son. And yet is that one of the
griefs which they conceive against our Scriptures; as who would say it were
not as easy unto GOD to extend our lives unto ten thousand of years, as to a
hundred, to God I say who has made both the life it self, and the years, and
the worlds of years. Yet notwithstanding, Manethon the AEgiptian, Berosus the
Chaldean, Moschus, Hestiaeus, and Hierom, who wrate the Stories of the
Phenicians, do confirm the saying of Moses concerning the first men. Also
Hesiodus, Hecataeus, Acusilaus, Hellanicus, and Ephorus agree thereunto:
affirming that they were ordained to live so long time, as well for to study
the Sciences, as to invent the Handycrafts; and specially for the finding out
of Astronomy, because (say they) if they had lived less than six hundred
years, their observations had been in vain, because the great year continues
so long. To be short, the matter was so clear, and so common in all ancient
Histories, that Varro passes it not over as a light thing, but labors to
yield a cause thereof.

For the punishment of Mankind there flowed a general Flud. The general Flud.
What Nation has not believed it, and what Author has not spoken of it? Among
the AEgiptians, Phenicians, Greeks, and Romans nothing was more common. And
because they had heard that it befell in the primetyme of the world, and were
ignorant in the accounts of yt times; every writer of Histories did set it
down in the time which he thought to be of most antiquity: as for example,
the Thebanes referred it to the time of Ogyges, the Thessalyans to the time of
Deucalion, and so forth of others. Moreover, in Brasilie, in the new Spain,
and in the Florida, the belief thereof is common, and all of them impute it to
man's sin, and to the wrath of the highest powered out upon mankind. But let us
come yet to more particular points. God commanded Moses to make an Arc for
the saving of himself and his household, and for the preserving of the seed
of the world there. And he reckons up unto us all the whole length, breadth
and depth thereof: which is a proof that he had the truth it self, whereof
the residue had but the fame. Yetnotwithstanding, Alexander Polyhistor, and
Abydene do write, Alexander Polyhistor. Abydemus alleged by Cyrill in his
first book against Julian.
that Saturn foretold unto Xysuthrus the Flud ere it came; and that he made
him an Arc, to save all kind of Cattle with him: That he preserved his holy
writings by ingrauing them in certain pillars at Heliopolis in AEgipt, and
sailed in his Arc toward Armenie: that after certain days he sent forth
certain Birds, which found no dry ground: that at the end of certain other
days, he sent out certain other Birds: and that in the end perceiving dry
land, he came down out of the Arc in Armenie, where (by their saying) the
remnants of the Arc are diligently kept by the Inhabitants, who help
themselves with it in many diseases. And their talking of Saturn is according
to the manner of the Greeks, who surmised ye Jews to have worshipped Saturn,
because they kept holy the seventh day. And it may be that Xysuthrus may in
the Assyrian tung betoken as much as Noe, who in diverse places had diverse names
as we read. Nevertheless, this difference serves us for a proof, because we
see it is not a simple supposall, but a firm tradition from the Father to the
Son. The same thing is reported by Berosus, Josephus in his first book of
his antiquities. chap. 3.
not the counterfeit Berosus, but the same Berosus whom the ancient writers
allege; and by Ierom the AEgiptian, Mnaseas the Phenician, and others. Yea and
they ad further, that the place where Noe came down out of the Arc was called
Saleh Noah, in Greek (...), that is to say Noes coming down; and that it was
at a certain Mountain called Baris or Paropanisus, which (according to their
language at that time) seems to come al to one. In his treatise that beasts
are capable of reason.
Also Plutarke speaks expressly of the Dove that Deucalion sent out of the
Arc to seek dry land: and Phauorinus and Stephanus speak of the place where
the Arc rested; which cannot be understood of any particular flud of
Thessalie, which doubtless was contrived out of the other universal flud. Now
therefore not knowing what to replye in this behalf, they pick a quarrel at
the measure of the Arc, imagyning it hard for God to do that which they
themselves can not do. But besides that the Arc was a figure of the Church
whereinto all Nations should one day be gathered and saved; Origin shows to
Celsus the Epicure by the Geometrical Cubit, that it was of a marvelous
greatness and capacity. And Buteon a Mathematick declares expressly in a
book, what it contained foot by foot. To be short, since we read that the
Flud was universal, considering that that could not be but by Gods
appointment, who notwithstanding intended to save those that were his: the
sight of such a miracle ought to make all the residue credible, without
alleging of measures in a power which is without measure. For whereas some will
needs impute that Flud to a certain great Conjunction of Planets which was at
that time; I send them to the Earl of Mirandula, John Picus Earl of Mirandula
against Astrologers.
who not only proves that there was not then any great Conjunction at al, but
also that although there had been one, yet they could not assign it to the
named point; but rather that by their own rules the Conjunction was such at
that time, that it betokened rather an universal burning than an universal
drowning of the world.

At the going away of this Flud, the Scripture tells us of a Ham or Cham Cham.
which discovered ye shame of Noe his father. The Chaldees say it was
Zoroastres, who would with his Charms have made him barren. The Greeks after
them feyned their Jupiter Hammon to have gelded him. Thus turned they the
History into a fable. Likewise Iaphet is none other than the Iapetus of the
Poets, who took the renewing of the world after the Flud, for the very first
creation thereof. Then follows consequently the confusion of the tongues. The
confusion of tongues or languages.
It is a very clear case that languages are to no use, but in respect of the
diversity of them; insomuch that if there were no more but one in all the
world, it were mere foundnesse to know any more than that. Therefore like as
reason has led us to one first man, so ought it also to lead us to one first
language; which was but one alone, like as there was but one man alone with his
wife. If the diversity of them consisted as now, but in propriety of phrases
and form of words, it might be said that they had been altered by process of
time. But it is well known that there are many Languages, whose very original
words are far diverse and utterly unlike one another, saving in some few
words that have been brought out of other Countries by Travelers and trade of
Merchandise, which have every where retained still the same names they had in
the place from whence they came. Ye will say then that men invented them when
they conveyed Inhabiters abroad to people other Countries. But what a vanity
had that bin? What life of man could have suffised to do it? What benefit
could have insewed of it, either to ye inuenters themselves, or to their
followers? Nay, who sees not that it had been a public misery? not a
knowledge, but an ignorance; not a pleasure, but a hell to posterity?
Certesse, we say therefore that reason leads us to that which the Scripture
says; namely, that at the beginning there was but one language: That the
dividing of Languages came not of men, but that the dividing of men came of the
division of Languages: and that it was not a device of men (who at that time
were sufficiently occupied in the needful knowledge of nature, and in the
finding out of profitable Arts and Sciences) but a punishment cast of God upon
mankind. Let us see how the ancient writers do further these reasons. The
common opinion is (say Abydenus and Alexander Alexander Polyhistor. Abydenus.
Sibylla. Eusebius. lib. 9. cap. 4. de prepar.
) that men being bred of the earth, and trusting in their own strength, would
needs in despite of the Gods go rear a Tower up to the Sun, in the same
place where Babylon now is: and that when they had raised it very high, the
Gods ouerthrewe it and cast it down upon their heads with a great wind: and
that at that time began the diversity of Languages: whereupon, the Hebrews
called that place Babel. Of these things speaks Sibill also in her verses in
the selfsame terms. And Hestiaeus and Eupolemus do ad, that the Priests
which escaped from thence, gate themselves with the mysteries of their Jupiter
(the same was either Nembrod or Jupiter Bele) into the Plain of Sennaar, from
the which place men departing by reason of the confusion of tongues, began to
sever themselves abroad to people the rest of the world. Here it pleases
Julian to fall to scoffing. For (says he) a great sort of such globes as the
whole earth is, being heaped one upon an other, were not able to reach half
way to the Sphere of the Moon. Genes. 11.
But the reason of this enterprise of theirs is evident; namely that their
intent was to have had a refuge against the height of the waters, if any flud
should come ageine, that is to say, to make a bank against Gods wrath, which
it had been better for them to have pacified by prayer. And this pride of
theirs is not to be thought so strange a matter, considering how we read in
the Histories of the Greeks, that one Xerxes sent letters of defyance to the
Sea: and in the Histories of the Romans, that one Caligula undertook a
quarrel against Jupiter. And Julian himself was not a whit wiser, when he
would needs take upon him to impeach the kingdom of God, by prohibiting the
Christians to read Poets. And whereas Celsus will needs bear himself on
hand, that the said History was taken out of the fable of the Aloides: all men
know that Homer was the first Author of that fable, who came a long time after
Moses. And in good sooth, these particularities of the confounding of Tongues,
of the dispersing of men abroad, of the place where it befell, of the naming
of Phaleg who was borne at the very time of the division, and such other
circumstances; do evidently show that Moses speaks not at rouers: whereof
there is also this further proof, that the Originals of Nations according to
the dividing of households at that time, are not read of in any other Author.

As vain also is this saying of theirs, that the burning up of Sodom is taken
from the tale of Phaeton, Sodom. Galen in his book of simples. Pausanias in
his Eliaks. Solinus in his Polyhistor. Tacitus in his last book.
which is in deed as far from it as Heaven is from the earth. For even at
this day there are yet still to be seen the remaynders of Gods wrath, noted
by Strabo, Galen, Mela, and others: namely the bitter Lake wherein nothing can
live; the banks thereof lived with Bitumen; the Stones stiuking and filthy;
the trees bearing fruits fair to the eye, but falling to Cinder and smoke in
the hand; which things we read not of to have bin seen any where else, and yet
in a valley most beautiful to behold, where stood at that time five Cities,
or according to Strabo thirteen, which were all consumed with fire for sin
against nature. And Josephus says that the Image or pillar of salt whereinto
Loths wife was turned, was to be seen there even in his days. These are the
greatest woonders of the book of Genesis. The residew thereof consists in
the history of Abraham and of his Children. As for the Princes of those days,
we have another Pedigree nor history of them among the Heathen writers: and
therefore it is the more to be woondered at, that they have spoken of our
Shepherds. Eusebius. li. 9. de praepar. Cap. 4.
For Berosus says that about a ten generations or descents from the
universal Flud, there was among the Chaldees a great man that excelled in
Astronomy. And that by him Berosus meant to betoken Abraham, Eupolemon
Eupolemus in his book of the Jews.
declares: for he says that in the said tenth generation, Abraham Abraham and
his race.
was brone in Camerine a Town of Babylonie, otherwise called Vr or Caldeople;
who inverted Astronomy among the Chaldees, and was in the favor of God, by
whose commandment he removed into Phenice, where he taught the course of
the Moon, of the Sun, and of the Planets, whereby he greatly pleased the
King: notwithstanding that he says he had received it from hand to hand from
Enoch, whom the Greeks (says he) called Atlas, unto whom the Angels had
taught many things. Also he rehearses the Battle that was made by Abraham
for the recovery of Loath, the interteinment of Melchisedek, the ouerthwarts
that Abraham endured for Sara his wife in AEgipt, and the Plague thot God did
cast upon Pharao to make him to deliver her to Abraham agein. And Artabanus
Artabanus in his History of the Jews.
in his story of the Jews reports almost the selfsame things; adding, that
of Abraham the Jews were called Hebrews, wherein the neerenesse of the names
deceived him. Melon Melon against the Jews.
in his books against the Jews, wrate that Abraham had two wives: and that by
the one of them which was an AEgiptian, he had twelve children, among whom
Araby was parted, which even in his time had twelve Kings still: (Those were
the twelve Sons of Ismaell the Son of Abraham by Agar the AEgiptian, which
are set down by name in Genesis,) And that by the other (which was a woman of
the Country of Syria,) he had but only one Son named Isaac, who likewise
had twelve Sons, of whom the youngest was called Joseph, of whom Moses (says
he) descended. Also Alexander sets forth Abraham's sacrifice at length, and
the children that he had by Chetura. And in his history he alleges one
Cleodemus a Prophet, otherwise called Malchas, whom he affirms to agree with
Moses in the History of the Jews. Ageine, Hecataeus the Abderite having been
in Iewry, did purposely make a book of Abraham's life, which thing he had not
of his own master King Alexander. To be short, that which Orpheus says of
a certain Chaldee unto whom only God manifested himself, seems to be
spoken of Abraham. For he had bin conversant in AEgipt, where the renown of
Abraham was so great, that even in their Coniurings they made express mention
of the God whom Abraham had worshipped. The same Alexander writes the fleeing
of Jacob for fear of his brother Esawe; his abode in Mesopotamia; His seven
years service; his marying with two Sisters; the number of his Children; the
rauishing of Dina; the slaughter of Sichem; and likewise the selling of Joseph;
his imprisonment, his deliverance for expounding of Dreams; His authority in
AEgipt; His marying with Askeneth the daughter of Pethefer the Highpriest; His
two Sons by name which were borne of her; the coming of his brothers into
AEgipt; the Feast that he made them; the five parts which he gave to Benjamin
(whereof this Historiographer intends to yield a reason) the coming of Jacob
and of his whole household into AEgipt; of what age every of them was; and how
many Children every of them had. And so he brings us down from Noe to the
Flud, from the Flud to Abraham, from Abraham to Levy, and from Levy to
Moses; howbeit ever among with faults in reporting the things done, with
differences in accounting the years, and with some additions of small
importance here and there; which serve to show that he had not those Histories
immediately out of the Bible, but out of some other books which he had seen
elsewhere. The selfsame things did Theodotus convey into his Poetry: and
likewise Philo Biblius, Nicholas of Damasco, Aristaeus, and others. Of whom
this latter made a peculiar description of the story of Job, how he was
tempted as well by the Devil as by his neighbors; affirming him to have been
the Son of Esawe dwelling in the marches between Idumea and Araby, which
thing he could not have red in the Scripture. To be short, the places which
bear the name of Abraham both in Damasco, in Chaldee, and in the Land of
Chanaan; and of Joseph in Egypt, together with the well of wonderful
antiquity near to Ascalon, do give us assurance both of their abode in
Palestine, and of their removing into Egypt. And Manethon the Historioghapher
of Egypt sets us down their original, and their coming down into Egypt,
terming them in his language Shepeheredkings, which was, because that as we
read in the Scriptures, their wealth consisted in Cattle. But of all these
ancient writers we have but fragments, such as we could gather together out
of ancient Authors.

Now let us come to Moses. Alexander says that he was the son of Amram the
son of Elat, the son of Levy, the son of Jacob, and so forth: that is
to say, a natural Israelite and not an AEgiptian. But let us hear Artabanus
Artabanus concerning the Jews.
concerning his first coming up, and the discourse of his whole life. He says
that Meris the son of Kenephris King of AEgipt, being unable to have
children, adopted a child of the Jews called Moses, and instructed him in
the laws; who afterward gave letters to the AEgiptians, and was reputed of
them as a God and named Mercury: That Kenephris being envious of his
reputation, sent him into the wars against the Ethyopians, with an army of
Jews vntrayned, to the intent that both he and they might have perished
together: And that Moses demeaned himself so wisely, that the Ethyopians being
overcome, had him in such estimation, that they received Circumcision of him:
That at his return, great countenance was made unto him, howbeit that he
perceiving it to be done upon an evil mind, withdrew himself into Arabie,
where he married the daughter of Raguel a King of that Country: In ye which
mean time, the King of AEgipt that had oppressed the Jews with so many toils
and (to the intent he might the more safely kill the^) had appointed them a
certain Liuerie; dyed very suddenly of a Leaprosie. These things are not
reported by Moses; for he wrate not any thing to the advancement of himself,
but treated altogether of Gods victories, and not of his own. But in the
selfsame Author there follows the calling of Moses. This Moses (says he)
was occupied in continual prayer to God for the deliverance of the people: And
one day as he was earnest in praying, there issewed a fire out of the earth,
where was not any fit matter to burn, and a voice told him that he should
deliver the Jews and bring them into their Country. Whereupon without raising
of any force, he by the counsel of his wives father, declared the will of God
to the King, who by and by committed him to prison. But the prisondoores were
opened unto him by miracle, and he went to the Kings bedside, and summoned him
again to obey God. And when the King had asked him the name of the GOD, Moses
told it him in his ear, whereat he fell into a swound, but Moses raised him
up again by the hand, and the Priests that made a scoff at it dyed out of
hand. He declares afterward that the King required signs, and that Moses
turned his Staff into a Serpent: That he smote the river of Nyle and made it
to ouerflowe: That he struck it again, and it returned within his banks: That
thereupon the Priests of Memphis were commanded to do the like matter upon
pain of their life, and that they by Art Magic brought forth a Dragon, and
changed the color of the river: by means whereof the King became so proud,
that he hardened his heart against the Jews: That then Moses smote the earth
with his Rod, and the earth brought forth first venomous Flies, next Frogs,
then Grasshoppers, and afterward other strange things: Whereupon (says this
Historiographer) there has grown a custom of keeping and reuerencing a Rod
in their Temples ever since, because they hold opinion that Isis is the Earth,
which being stricken with that Rod, brought forth those things. In the end
there was (says he) such an Earthquake over al AEgipt, that the King
determined to let that people go. But in this point the Priests disagree. For
the Priests of Memphis say that Moses marking the tide passed the Sea at a low
water. But the Priests of Heliople say, that the Kings intent was to pursew
the Israelites to recover the Jewels which they carried away with them out of
AEgipt, and that Moses being warned of God struck the Sea, which gave place to
him and al his people, and that the AEgiptians were partly destroyed with
thunder and lightening, and partly drowned in the same waters. When they were
passed the Sea, they lived thirty years in the wilderness and were fed with
a certain Snow, which God did rain down upon the^ from heaven. And this
Moses was a man of a tall stature, brown, with long hear on his head and a
long beard, and a countenance full of majesty; and when he did all this work
of his, he was fowerscore and nine years old. We read the same things written
by Demetrius and Eupolemus Greek Historiographers, who do ad many
particularities more: and Manethon names the King Tethmosis under whom these
things were done. Also Numenius the Pythagorist says, that he had read the
life of Moses in Histories worthy of credit: and he rehearses how he was
taken out of the water; how he was brought up in the Court; that before he was
Circumcised, he was called Iehoiachim; Secundum Mystas.
howbeit that by report of such as professed the knowledge of Mysteries, he had
a secret name in heaven, to wit Melchi; that he wrought great miracles before
the King of AEgipt; and that certain Magicians called Iannes and Mambres would
have done the like: which are things that are not set down in our Scriptures,
but must needs be had of them out of the holy Registers of AEgipt. And in very
deed, in the Coniurations of the AEgiptians, Origines against Celsus lib. 4.
they used these words to the Devils, The God of Israel, the God of the
Hebrews, the God that drowned the AEgiptians with their King in the red Sea:
which shows evidently that the matter was commonly known and out of al
doubt. And I remember not any Author that denies Moses to have conveyed the
people of Israel out of AEgipt with great miracles. For soothly it had bin a
miracle of all miracles, to have made them to suffer so many adversities
without miracles. But yet some Authors have attributed those miracles to
Magic, and othersome to natural reasons. There is (says Pliny) a kind of
Magic, which depends upon Moses Moysessis Miracles.
and the Cabale; but yet had Magic never so great scope (says he) as under
Nero, neither was it ever found to be more feeble and vain. And in truth,
what likeness is there between the Illusions of a Magician, which vanish away
in the twinkling of an eye, and ye leading of a mighty great Nation through
the Sea, and (which more is) the mainteyning of them from hunger and thirst so
long a time? But yet has the Scripture provided against this slander. For no
law else in the world does so expressly forbid Magic, as does the law of
Moses: and the Cabale whereof Pliny had heard speak, In sted of Cabala,
Pliny has Iocabela.
is further of from such doings, than either Arithmeticke or Grammar. And
whereas others do report, that Moses marked the ebbing of the water that he
might pass the red Sea: surely they make the counsel of the AEgiptians very
grossewitted, in casting themselves away so rashly. Nay I say further, that if
it had been so, the waters that drowned the one people would not have spared
the other. But every man knows that the Gulf of Arabie is not subject to such
tides as those are: and though it were, yet cannot the like cavil take place
in all the residue of the miracles that are attributed unto him. As unmeet
also to be admitted, is the slander of Iustine the Historiographer and
others, That Moses was driven out of AEgipt because he was a Leaper, and that
he carried all the Leapers of the Realm away with him. For it is a clear case
by record of all ancient writers, that the people whom he carried away, was a
stranger in AEgipt: and when he himself rehearses openly the benefits which
that people had received at Gods hand, You know (says he) that there has not
been any sickness or disease among you, since the time you came out of AEgipt.
And on the contrary part he menaseth them with the Plagues, Byles, and Botches
of AEgipt, if they offended God. Insomuch that whereas in any other ancient
laws, there is no mention made of any order for them that are infected with
the Leaprosie: in this Law (as though GOD had meant to prevent that slander)
they be separated from the company of men, their clothes are to be laid away,
their houses to be scraped, and certain other things are to be done; which is
a sufficient proof, that those which governed that people and had authority
over them, were no Leapers.

This people then went out of Egypt: Exodus 12.
and the Scripture says that they were Sixhundred thousand men on foot,
besides women and Children. The number of the children of Israel.
Hear ageyn they krye out: They were but threescore and ten when they went
into Egypt; and how then is it possible that they should be so many at their
going out? I wilnot allege any miraculousnes, though the Scripture declare
that that people increased very greatly; insomuch that it terms them by the
word Frye, as though it spoke of Fisshes. But I beseech them to make somewhat
a nearer reckening, not with the largest, but after the ordinary manner, what
number might rise of threescore and ten persons in four hundred years or
thereabouts, which was the time that they were in Egypt; and they shall find
their full number before they come to Twohundred and fiftye years. After the
same manner do we see that Threescore households of Arabians, passing into
Africa in the time of the division under Calis, had peopled it throughout in
less than threehundred years: insomuch that even at this day, the Provinces
bear the names of Beni Megher, Beni Guariten, Beni Fensecar and so forth;
that is too say the Children of Megher, of Guariten, and of Fensecar. And there
was not that Family which peopled not some one Shire or other. Also the West
Indyes which have not bin known unto us above one hundred years, will within
one hundred mo be peopled with Spaniards. To be short, Viues says, he saw an
honest man in Spain, which had peopled a village of a hundred houses with the
issew of his own body, so as the names of kindred failed. And this present
year there dyed a noble Lady in Germany, which had seen a hundred and
threescore Children borne of hirself and hirs; and yet the one half of her
Children dyed before they were married; and those that are married are of age to
have many mo. Their saying therefore bewrays a manifest ignorance, like as
theirs does who being ignorant of progression in Arithemetik, will easily
bargayne for a horse or some other thing, to give every day doble for it during
a whole mooneth, beginning with a pennye: who by that time that they come but
too the midds of the mooneth, begin to perceive that which no reason could have
beaten into their heads before, namely that all the goods they have are not able
too serve the turn.

After Moses succeeded Joshua, Joshua.
who brought the people into the promised Land, so as ye Chananytes did partly
flee before him, and partly were made tributaries unto him. He that shall read
the voyage of this people from journey to journey, and consider the bounds and
coas^s of their porcio^s; will byandby judge the truth of the story. But yet
Procopius in his history of the Vandales, Procopius in his second book of the
wars of the Vaudales.
leaves us a notable mark thereof in these words. All the Country ( says he)
which lies from Sidon to Egypt, was in old time called Phenice; and they that
wrate the History of the Phenicians, report that in old time it was all under
one only King. In these costs dwelt the Gergesites, Iebusites and other
nations, who at such time as they saw the great army of Joshua coming toward
them, removed into AEgipt. But within a while after, because that Country could
not bear them, they passed into Afrik, where they builded many Cities and
peopled the whole Country even to the Pillars of Hercules, and their language
is half Phenician. Also in Numidy (among other Cities) they builded Tingit, the
seat whereof is very strong, where are two Pillars of white stone to be seen
nere unto a great Fountain, wherein are graven these words in the Phenician
tongue: we be those that fled from the Robber Joshua the son of Nun. Such (
says he) is the original of those Nations, whom we call at this day
Maurusians. And Eupolemus says that Joshua Prophesied a hundred and ten
years, and placed the Tabernacle in Silo. From thence he leapeth to Samuel,
and form Samuel to Saul, whom he affirms to have bin anointed at Gods
commandment; and so to David, whom (taking the one for the other) he calls
the son of Cis.

But between Joshua and Saul, we have the time of the Judges; in the story of
whom some have marked, that the mighty deeds of Hercules are feyned out of ye
doings of Sampson, and the vow of Agamemnon out of the vow of Iephtha. David
Saul. David.
(says ye same Author) subdewed the Ammonites, Moabites, Itureans, Nabatheans
and other nations that extend unto the River Euphrates, and made the King of
Tire and the Phenicians tributarie to him. Afterward and Angel called Nathan
showed him the place where the Temple should be builded, for the which he
prepared woorkemen, and rigged forth Ships at the City of Melan in Araby.
and sent them to an I Will of the red sea called Vrphen, from whence he fetched
great quantity of Gold, Copper, The Scripture of the Prophet.
Ceder wood and such other things. Notwithstanding (says he) the Angel
would not that he should buyld the Temple, because he had been steined with
blud in the Wars; and so that work was reserved to Solomon his Son, who
came to the Crown at the age of twelve years. And of how great riches David
was, Josephus libr. Antiquit: 15. Cap. 16. and lib. 16. cap. 11. and of the
Jewish wars. lib. 5. cap. 2.
it may appear by his tumb, wherein after the custom of those times, he did
lay up great treasures. For about an eighthundred years after, Hircanus being
assailed by Antiochus the godly, took three thousand Talents out of one vault
to content him withal. And within a while after, Herod opened another vault
and found as much there. What notable things read we of Solomon? Solomon.
First his building of the Temple, which is described (says Josephus) as well
in the Chronicles of the Tyrians, the Competitors of the Jews, as in ours. And
in their Treasorie are kept the Letters of Solomon to Hyram King of Tire, and
Hirams letters unto him; Josephus in his antiquities. lib. 8. cap. 2. Eusebius.
lib. 9. cap. 4.
which make mention of the great number of Carpenters that Hiram sent unto him;
of the order that Solomon took for the finding of them by imposts, and of the
Contribution that every Province made to that end; which things are reported
at length by Eupolemus also, and likewise by Alexander Polihistor, Hecataeus
the Abderite, Dius a Phenician, and diverse others, yea and that so particularly
and with such care, as that there is not that measure, vessel, tool or
instrument of the Temple, which they have not noted, which thing we read not
that they have done in the behalf of any of their own Temples. Yea and the
Tyrians do note the very year and the day thereof in their Chronicles; to
wit, that it was a hundred forty and three years and eight moonethes before
their buylding of Carthage. Secondly the Scripture makes great commendations
of Salomons wisdom; insomuch that the Queen of Saba came from a far to see
him. And we read in Plutarke, Plutarke in his feast of Seven Sages.
that it was a custom among the Kings of old time, to put questions one to
another, to try the ability of their wits, and that a certain praise was
appointed for him that won the victory. Josephus li^ cap. 2.
And Dius an Historiographer of the Phenicians, rehearses the Riddles and
Questions that Solomon sent to King Hiram, saying that it cost Hiram very much
because he was not able to assoyle them, until at length he found a young man
of Tyrus named Abdemon, who decyphered unto him the most part of them. And as
touching the Queen of Saba, who came from the I Will of Meroe to see Solomon; the
Chronicles of AEthiope report that her name was Makeda, The History of Ethiop.
Makeda.
and that she had a son by Solomon, which was named first Meilirh, and
afterward David, whom she made her Heir of that great Empire which we now
adays do call Prester John's Land. Likewise it reports that she carried with
her twelve thousand Jews, of every Trybe a thousand. And because the noblest
men of that Country, do vaunt themselves to be of the blud of Israel;
although they have received the Gospel, yet do they retain Circumcision; not
that they think it necessary to salvation (say they;) but to keep still the
prerogative of their blud.

What remains yet further? The Sailing of Salomons Ships; which lasted
three years; and that seems unto them incredible. And so by that rule, let
us always be at this point, never by our good wills to believe that which we
understand not. But who is he at this day whom the Spaniards and Portingales
have not persuaded that? Specially the Portingales, which are a year and eight
moonethes a making their voyage, notwithstanding that they have both the use of
the Compass, and better knowledge of the Seas, and more certain Harboroughs,
and a shorter cut. And surely it is not to be passed over lightly, ^. Chron.
3.
that the Gold that was brought home by the said Nauigations, is called in
Hebrew in the duall number Paruaim, as if a man would say, brought from the
Perous, or from the Indies as well the East Indies as the West Indies, Gilbert
Genebrand in his Chronology.
as a certain learned man of our time has noted. So is the wood Brazill
called by the name of the country of Brasill from whence it is brought: and
Machoachan the Drug, by the name of Machoachan the country, and so forth of
other things. For as touching the Navigations to the Indies by the red Sea, it
was over common, both to employ so much time about it, and also to make so great
a matter of it.

In the Histories of the Kings following, The remouings of the ten Trybes. 1.
Kings. 15.
the chief things that are to be marked, are the three remouings away of the
ten Tribes of Israel, the first under Phacea the Son of Romelia and Oseas
Kings of Israel, by Tigbath Phalassar and Salmanasar Kings of the Assyrians.
The manner whereof was that the Israelites were carried away into far
Countries, 2. Kings. 17. 4. Esdras. 13.
(specially the best sort of them,) and other Nations were placed there in
their stead. For the Israelites were conveyed thence into Media, and received
the uninhabited Countries to dwell in, and of them came partly the Cholchians
who in the time of Herodotus Herodotus li. 2.
caused themselves to be circumcised; and partly the Tartarians, who about the
year of our Lord a thousand and two hundred, overwhelmed the earth like a
waterflud under the leading of Cingi, and afterward did set up the Empire of
the great Cham. And in very deed they were Circumcised before they ever heard
of Mahomet; and they yielded willingly to go to his Law, so much the rather
because it seemed to hold of theirs. And the word Tartars or Totaras signifies
Remnants or Leauings in the Syrian tongue. Uerily even among the Hordes of the
Tartars, in the furthest part northward, there are which have retained still
the names of Dan, Zabulon and Nepthaly; and therefore it is not to be wondered
at, that there be so many Jews in Russie, Sarmatia, and Lituania, and so the
nearer to the Tartarians still the mo. The same has no less lykelyhod of
truth concerning the Turks. For the word Turk in Hebrewe, signifies banished
men, and is taken in way of reproach. And it is very lykely, that Mahomet to
eschew the offending of those so great Nations, which at that time began to
awake, held still Circumcision, and the Cleansings, and the Ceremonies of
Moses Law.

As touching the remoouing away to Babylon, which was peculiarly of the trybe
of Judah: Alexander Polihistor says expressly, that in the time of Ioachim King
of Judah, Jeremy was sent unto them from God, to foretell them of extreme
calamity, because they worshipped an Idol called Baall; Ioachim commanded
him to be burned quick; and that Jeremy said further, that the King of Assyria
should make them labor to dig a Channel to sail out of Euphrates into
Tygris: The Deliverance by Cirus
and that upon that hope Nabuchodonozor putting himself in Arms with all his
power, spoiled Samaria, took Jerusalem, and led away Ioachim prisoner. The
same thing is witnessed by Diocles, and likewise namely by Berosus the
Chaldean, who says that the said captivity endured three score years and
ten. Alpheus adds that Megasthenes an ancient Author writes, that
Nabuchodonozor at his return home, was stricken with madness, and dyed crying
incessantly to the Babylonians, that a great mischief was near them, which all
the power of their Gods could not stay. For (quoth he) a Hafeasse of Persia
shall come and make us his thralles. The man that he spoke of was Cirus;
Josephus in his Antiquity. lib. 8. cap. 4.
who (as Alexander Polyhistor and Hecateus the Abderite do witness) builded
up the Temple of Jerusalem ageine.

As concerning Sesakes voyage against Roboam, Herodotus speaks evidently
enough, albeit that he name him not, declaring that he crept upon his belly to
AEgipt, Syria, and Palestine. And the story of Sennacherib is there under that
selfsame name, and how he was slain at his coming home, 1. Kings. 14.
Herodotus li. 2
and that an Image was set up unto him with this inscription, Learn by me to
fear God, for a memorial of Gods judgment against him. Moreover, Menander an
Ephesian made mention in his Tyrian History, of the great Drought that was in
the time of Achab, 1. Kings. 18.
and of the abundance of rain that was obtained by the prayers of Helias:
after ye imitation whereof, the Greeks feyned the like of AEacus. And Josephus
witnesses that he had read the story of Jonas in many Commentaries; the
which is rife in rememberance yet still among the Arabians of Afric. And as
touching the greatness of Niniuie, it is described fully alike in Diodorus.
Diodorus li. 3.


The token that God gave to Ezechias by making the Sun to retire back
certain degrees, was registered in the Chronicles of the Babylonians, and of
the Wisemen of Persia; Esaias 38. Denis in his Hierarchy.
the which token (some say, and not without some ground) was given so unto him,
because he delighted in Astronomy, and had reformed the Hebrewe Calender. But
many ancient books are lost, which might tell us much more of these matters.
Nevertheless, I would feign have these controllers of our Scriptures, to tell
me if they have any History among the Heathen, that has more witnesses of the
trewnesse thereof, than the History of the Jews. And whether any, even of the
greatest Empyres of the world, be so confirmed by the Histories of friends, as
the History of that little Nation is confirmed by his enemies.

And whereas they object, that we see no such miracles in our days: I will
prove unto them in another place, that the like have been seen since, which
have proceeded from the same power. But it is enough for me at this time to put
them in remembrance, that if true miracles had not been wrought in the world,
we should not have had so many false miracles among the Heathen. Nay, I say
more, we should not have so much as the very name of Miracle, which could not
have been given at the first, but to things that exceed the ability of man,
yea and of all other Creatures, as things rightly worthy of that name.

Now remain the Absurdities which they will needs find, because they
understand not the reason. Objections concrneing Absurdities.
That law of yours (say they) stands talking of Beasts, of Pastures, of Oxen
that dosse with their horns, and of such other things. These are too base
things for the word that proceeds from GOD. Why say they not likewise, that
they were too base things for God to create? And wherefore are Laws made, but
for the benefit of man? And although they might seem vile in respect of God;
can they deny them to have been profitable in respect of men, at that time
when men for the most part lived by grazing? But of these nice fellows I would
know what the Laws of Plato were, and what the Laws of the twelve Tables
were, at such time as the Romans were Tilmen and Grazyers? or what the Laws
of Venice were, when they were but Fishers? Yet do we reverence those Laws for
their antiquity; insomuch that if we find but some old fragment of them, we
think we have a Jewel: and the Emperors of Rome being in their chief glory,
raced not out of their Digests the Laws that begin thus, If Cattle: nor the
Venetians their Statutes of Fisshing: nor the Frenchmen their ordinances of
Hunting and Hawking; which might in many Countries seem matters to be laughed
at in our days, and yet there were even then which carried them into other
Countries, as necessary to appease strifes in their due time and place. To be
short, as long as Rome was champyonground, it made Laws against the harms of
Cattle. But when it fell once to building, it made Laws for Gutters, Channels
and Sinkes. When it began to seek the ruin of other men, it made Laws of
Battle, of Warfare, and of the sacking of Cities. And when it listed to
destroy it self, it made Laws of Rebellions, prescriptions and banishments.
All the which were alike behoofull and necessary in their times: and the first
Lawmakers were no less honored than the latter: howbeit that the state of the
Commonweal was worse and more corrupted in the latter time than in the other,
because that whereas in the former times it had to do but with the repressing
of Beasts, in ye latter times it had to deal with the brydling of men worse
than wyld Beasts, or to speak more truly, men that were become wood beasts
themselves.

They ad, God (say you) created all things: and yet notwithstanding Moses
denounces some beasts to be clean and some unclean. Whereto may these be
good? They ought to consider, that oftentimes the things which of themselves
are clean, become unclean by the abuse of them, like as the thing that is
good and wholesome by nature, becomes evil and unwholesome by excess or
surfeting. And in that respect has Wine bin prohibited among many people, and
there are few which have not abhorred some Beasts or others; after which
manner we see that at Rome, such as had murdered their fathers or their
moothers, were put into a Sack with an Ape, a Cock, and a Uiper, and cast into
the water; a thing whereof it were uneasy to yield a reason. But the said law
of Moses, not being unprofitable, ne tending any higher than this present
life, did not without cause put a difference between brute things. Origin
against Celsus lib. 4.
For if we look well to it, it denou^ceth al those brute things unclean,
whereby the AEgiptians made their diuinations or took their foretokens, as the
Woolfe, the Fox, the Dragon, the Hare, the Sparehauke, the Kyte, and so
forth. And that was to make the people of Israel to abhor the vanities and
abominations of AEgipt; like as if a man would keep his children from fire,
he would prohibit them even the Chimney. And because those abuses were known
among them; the end and aimingpoynt of that Law, was the redress of them. And
therefore upon this point, I desire our despisers to suspend their judgment
in the things they understand not. For as in that time no fault was found with
this difference in the Law of Moses; so should no fault be found with many
others at this day, if we could set before us the same time again. I omit
concerning the things that lived upon pray, that over and besides that men
took foretokens at them, they had this doctrine in them without much stepping
aside from the letter, that men should not take away one another goods. And
as touching the Swyne, it is well known that for the invention of Tillage
which he showed to the AEgiptians by wrooting up the ground with his groyne;
they worshipped him as a God; in consideration whereof he was declared to be
abominable: besides the which thing, there appeared this evident allegory,
that men should not bemyre them selves in the dirt and dung of this world.

As for the Sacrifices, I have touched them heretofore, and will treat of them
more at large hereafter, forasmuchas they did put men hourly in rememberance
of death dew for sin, and of the necessity of a sacrifice to cleanse away
the same, namely of ye sacrifice of Jesus Christ then to come, which should
serve for the clensing of all mankind. But admit that God to bring us to
obedience, had listed to give us Laws whereof we could not conceive the
reason? What is it more than many Princes and Lawemakers have done, as Plutark
says? Or than we our selves do to our Children and Servants? And yet who will
think it meet that they should ask us a reason why we do so? Surely I desire
no more, but that they which come to our Scriptures, should yield at leastwise
the like regard that they yield to Homer or Virgill. If they find in them any
dark sentences; they say they will mark them with crosses and leave them too
Grammarians too martyr themselves withal. Therefore let them not think it
strange, that God has left such things in his Scriptures, to humble the mynds
of divines withal. If in the Poet they meet any Solecismes, that is too say,
incongruities of speech; byandby they be elegancies or figures. Let them
consider in the Scriptures also, that the thing which they think does disagree
at the first sight, wilbee found very fit of him that understands the
figure. To be short if a Poet have spoken a word that seems needless or
without reason; the Schoolemayster turns it into al senses to find some sense
in it: the Scoller is out of patience if his Master find none: and the
Scholar will rather find fault with his Master, and the Master with his own
ignorance, than confess any imperfection ar oversight in the Poet. Now then if
in these books confirmed with so many Miracles and proceeding from so great
authority, we m^^ offe^th things which to our fleshly wit seem unprofitable
or absurd; it ^ere good reason that we should be the more diligent and
heedfull in serching them and in turning them into al senses. And if in the end
of all this, we find not wherewith to satisfy us; let the hearer confess his
dullness of understanding, and the teacher acknowledge his own ignorance; and
let us pray God to voutsafe to inlighten us with his Spirit.

Now I think I have sufficiently showed, by the antiquity, the style and the
matter, by the end also and by the particularities of our Scriptures; that
they be of God, and that they cannot proceed from any other than him. By
antiquity; for they be the first of all writings, and God has bin revealed
in them ever since there were any men. By their style: for they instruct the
lowly, and pull down the highmynded, speaking with like authority to all men.
By their matter: for their only treating is of Gods doings and of his
communicating of himself to men. By the mark whereat they aim: for they
tend not to any other thing than Gods glory and man's welfare. And by their
singularnesse: for there are things without number, which cannot be bred in
the mind either of man or Angel. The absurdnesse which we suppose to be
there, is but a seeming so to our ignorance: and the impossibility which to
our seeming is in them, is but in comparison of our disabilitie. The truth of
them is witnessed unto us in Histories, at leastwise if the case so stand that
Gods word have need of man's record. He that is the Child of God knows his
fathers voice: but yet it may be that for the better confirming of him, my
writing hereof shall not be in vain. Who so refuses that, no man can
persuade him thereto: but yet shall this serve to convict him; and (by Gods
help) a great sort which as yet have had their ears so dulled with the noise
of this world, that they have hitherto but ouerheard it, shall hereafter
incline both their ears and their hearts thereunto. Now I beseech the
almighty who spoke the word and the world was made, to speak effectually in
our days, and that the world may believe him. And because the mark that
belief shootes at, is the welfare of man: let us see what welfare we find in
this word; which is our third mark of Religion, and shall be the matter of the
Chapter next following.

The xxvij. Chapter.
That the mean ordained of GOD for the welfare of mankind, has been revealed
always to the people of Israel; which is the third mark of Religion.
Ow remains the third mark of true Religion to be examined: which is, that
it teach the true and only way ordained of God for the salvation and recovery
of mankind; without the which (as I have showed already) all Religion is
vnauailable and vain. Howbeit forasmuch as this Doctrine imports the welfare
of the world, and I have interlaced many things by the way, which may dim the
remembrance thereof: Let us here call ageine to mind how needful this mark is
in religion. And soothly it will be one further mark of the heauenlynes of our
Scriptures, if we find that they teach us the necessity of that only mean,
and also direct us to it from the beginning foorthon from time to time. The
needefulnesse of this third mark.
We have read in the book of Nature, that Man is immortal: that his
happiness is not here beneath, but in the endless life: that the blessedness
of that endless life, is to enjoy God above: and that the mean to atteyne
thereto, is to serve and honor him here beneath with all our heart. But the
same book has taught us also, that by sin we be fallen from our original:
that we be fallen from Gods favor into his wrath: that we be infinitely
departed away both from serving him and from sticking to him: and consequently
that we be gone a^tray from the happiness which we should seek and cannot
find elsewhere tha^ in him. What remains then for us, but utter despair? And
whereto serves the said endless life, but to be turned into endless death?
And the everlasting happiness whereunto we were created, but to our
everlasting grief? unless some Board be left us at hand to save us from our
shipwrecke: I mean unless God do make us some way, both to appease his
wrath, and to come ageine into his favor. In this extremity therefore we
meet with Religion, which directs us to the true God. But what else is that,
than a sending of an offender to his Judge? or a laying of Straw to the fire?
considering yt God is infinitely good, that is to say, infinitely contrary to
evil, and if contrary to evil, then also unto us, whose thoughts, sayings
and doings are altogether evil. The same Religion has set us down the
Scriptures, wherein we read the will of our Creator: But what have we yet
found there? That mankind is corrupt from his root, and as it were rotten at
his Core: That all the imaginations of man's heart are always utterly evil:
and yet notwithstanding, that God commands us to love him with all our
heart, and our neighbor as our self; behighting to them that do it
everlasting life, and to them that do it not, everlasting death. Which of us
feels not a stryuing in all his members against the will of God? And
consequently who is he that ought not too feel a very Hell, when he enters
into himself and into the scriptures, to read his Arreignement and
Condemnation? And so, what is Religion but vanity, and what is the Scripture
or Gods word but a harthyting, if we find not there the Charters of grace and
remission, which reconcyle us to God, and knit us ageine unto him, and by that
vnyting do restore us the happiness whereunto we were created? So falls it
out, that God cannot be disappoynted of his purpose, and that the Religion
which he has graued so deeply in man's heart, cannot be in vayn. Needs then
must it be, that in the true religion and in the Scriptures we must find our
grace and the mean thereof, which is the third and chief mark that we seek.

Let us express this Doctrine yet playnlier, for it is the very knot and form
or inshape of all Religion. The happiness of man is to be united unto God, and
the way to be united unto him, is to stick unto his will. The first man being
created free and capable of good, disobeyed GOD, and by his disobedience became
a bondslaue to sin. So was he far removed from God and from his own
welfare, and (had not grace stepped in) he had bin in extreme misery, which we
call Hell. Of this Rebel are we all borne, and his flesh has begotten us both
fleshly and bondslaues of sin as he was. By Nature than we can look for none
other than the wages of sin, which is death; neither can we have any other
inheritance than our Fathers, who has left us nothing else to inherit but
damnation. Now let us see what we our selves have brought to this decayed
succession. In sted of discharging our Obligation, we run on further in
arrerages: and lyking well thereof, we da^lie increase our debt. For none of us
al discharges himself to Godward, of the things which he requires of us
justly in his Law, and therefore we continue still behind hand. Nay, there is
none of us which offends not the Lord infinite ways daily in thought, word
and deed, by means whereof we plundge our selves in ever deeper and deeper.
Now then, though we found not our succession so decayed; yet do we our selves
make it such by our excessive debts and continual offenses; which in effect is
all that we can bring thereto. And against whom see we these offenses? Even
against God, against our father, against our maker; al which is a great
aggravating of our fault: namely, that the Child should rebel against his
father, or that a thing of nothing should turn away from his creator; yea and
(which worse is) take wages of the Devil to fight against him. The crime is so
out of al measure great, that it cannot nor ought not to be inhaunced. But
were there no further matter than this, that forasmuch as God is infinite, the
offense is multiplied according to the person against whom it is committed: our
offense against GOD cannot but be infinite, and consequently so must our
punishment be too. Now therefore we poor wretches subject to infinite pains
without number, which by our continual misdeedes do daily multiply the
infiniteness of our punishments still even to the uttermost; have need of a
remedy. And what shall that remedy be? Gods mercy? Nay, mercy may not be
contrary to his Justice. What then? Gods Justice? No, we have need of
mercy. By what mean may GOD execute his Justice without disanulling his
mercy; or exercise mercy without prejudice of his Justice; so as both of them
may be verified, as well that God is infinitely gracious, as that he infinitely
hates all evil, both together? If he show mercy absolutely to an infinite
offense, where is his Justice? Or where is his universal government, whereby
he yields good to the good and evil to the evil? Yea, and where is our own
Justice become, which is but a shadow of Gods? Again, if he execute mere
Justice, what shall become of Mankind after this life? Or rather, why has he
mainteyned him ever since his first fall, that his Justice has not deuowred us
of all this while, us I say in whom is not any thing which burns not before
his wrath? It remains then, that to appease his wrath and to make way to
mercy, which wrath of his is nothing else but a just intent to punish, and
which mercy of his is likewise but a just intent to forgive: there must come
some satisfaction between God and Man, without the which there would be (as ye
might term it) an utter Emptiness in the world, whereunto nature it self
cannot agree. But what a depth is here yet still, considering that the fault is
infinite, and the punishment must be proportionable to the fault, and the
satisfaction likewise to the punishment, that is to say, that satisfaction
infinitely infinite is required at our hands? Let man offer the whole world
unto God; and what offers he but that which he has received of GOD, and that
which he has lost by his disobedience? And since GOD has created this world of
nothing; how should a thing of nothing multiply so infinitely, as to satisfy
for an infinite offense? Let Man offer himself; what offers he but
unthankfulness and disobedience, blasphemy and froward deeds? That is to
say, what shall he else do but provoke Gods wrath more and more against him?
Nay, let the very Angels step in, the Creature to pacify the Creator; the
thing that is finite in goodness to cover an infinite evil; the indebted in
all respects, to discharge another more indebted: and what else will this be,
than a covering that (as the Prophet says) does but half cover; and a
plaster infinitely too little for the sore? One Mediator God and Man.
Surely, let us say therefore that God himself must be feign to step in
between his Justice and his mercy, and as he created us at the first, so to
create us new again; and as he created us then in his favor, so to acquit us
now from his wrath; and as he uttered his wisdom then in creating us, so to
imploye the same now again in repayring us; and soothly so much the more (if
more may be) because that in our creation nothing resisted the goodness of
the Creator, whereas in our reparation our naughtiness withstandeth him as
much as is possible. Out of one bottomless deep we go still into another:
but God be praised, they be the deepes of his grace. Who then (say you) shall
be this Mediator, God unto God, Infinite unto Infinite, and able both to
discharge the bond, and to assuage the infinite punishment? Here let us
bethink us again what has been said before in the fifth and sixth Chapters. I
have declared there, both by reason and by record of all antiquity, that in
God there are three persons or Inbeings in unity of one essence, and that the
same are coeternall and coequall in all respects: The Father as the ground and
welspring; the Son, as the everlasting word and wisdom of the Father; and
the holy Ghost as the bond of kyndnesse and love, whereby the Father and the
Son are linked together: and I pray the Reader that for the refreshing of his
memory, he will voutsafe to read over those Chapters again upon this point.
Needs then I assure you must one of those three persons step in betwixt Gods
wrath and our infinite Fault. And since it is so, which of them should rather do
it than the wisdom, considering that the case stands upon the new creating
of us again, and that we were created by the same at the first? or than the
Son, seeing we be to be adopted, that is to say, to be admitted to an
inheritance? Nay moreover, it behooved this Mediator to step in for ever. For
inasmuch as the world was created for man, and man is fallen away from God:
neither the world nor man now after his fall, could have abidden before God one
moment of an hour. Behold, in the manner of this mediation, there is again
another incomprehensible Mystery, howbeit such a one, as when it is once
revealed unto us, we deem it impossible to have been otherwise. We have God
infinitely just, and Man infinitely sinful. The infinite Justice due to so
infinite offense, could not be satisfied, but either by infinite punishment,
or by an infinite reparation: and this infinite reparation could not proceed
but from him that is infinite, that is to wit from God himself. It behooves
then that our Mediator be God, and of his gracious goodness such a one have
we. But this infinite Godhead is not to recompense our disobedience otherwise
than with obedience; nor our vndesert, otherwise than with desert; not our
stubbornness otherwise than with lowlynesse: neither again is he to purchase
us grace, but by punishment; or life, but by death. And to the intent he may
obey, he must abase himself; to deserve, he must serve; to become lowly, he
must stoop down beneath himself; to suffer, he must become weak; and to dye
he must become mortal. Certesse we say therefore, that it is convenient and
behoofull, that our Mediator should be both God and Man. Man, to be borne
under the Law; God, to perform the Law: Man, to serve; God, to set free:
Man, to humble himself to the uttermost; God, to exalt himself above all
things: Man, to suffer, God to overcome: Man, to dye; and God to triumph over
death. Nay moreover, forasmuch as he submits himself willingly to such
things, for our sakes say I, and not for his own: needs must his obedience
become a discharge for the disobedience; his desert a discharge of the
vndesert, and his lowliness a satisfaction for the stubbornness of them that
believe in him; yea and moreover, a purchase of obedience, desert, and
lowlynesse unto them; so that look what is due to his obedience, that is to
wit, love; to his desert, that is to wit, reward; to his humility, that is to
wit, honor; to his sorrow, that is to wit, joy; to his death, that is to wit,
life; and to his victory, that is to wit, Triumph; the same is purchaced and
given by him, and imputed and made due at Gods hand to all such as honor that
great benefit, and call upon the father in his name. From this point we may
proceed afterward to other conditions and circumstances requisite in the
Mediator God and Man, seeking him always as may be most convenient and
agreeable, both to Gods Justice, and to the office and dignity of the
Mediator. Man borne without Corruption.
It is necessary for our welfare say I, yt the Mediator should be man to bear
ye punishments of men, and to reco^cile Mankind. And if he were not a man; then
like as we should have no part in him nor he in us: so should he not avail us
any whitte, neither in way of satisfaction, nor in way of desert. Meet it is
therefore that he should be borne of our race, and that he should be flesh of
our flesh and bone of our bone, to the intent that as in Adam we be al become
bondserua^ts to sin; so in him we may be delivered and set free from the
reward of sin, which is death. Ageine, forasmuch as he was to overcome sin,
it behooved him to be without sin; and forasmuch as it was for him to make us
clean, it behooved him to be without uncleanness. For we know that all of us
are conceived in iniquity; and borne in uncleanness and corruption; and
therefore it behooves him to be such a man, as is conceived after an other
manner than man is. And this after so many wonders ought not to be counted a
wonder: for he that derived woman out of man without help of woman, can also
derive man out of woman without help of man. To these particularities we shall
come time enough hereafter, and if suffizeth at this time, that Gods Justice
and man's offense have even by humane reason directed us to a very necessity
of a Mediator God and Man, able to discharge man of everlasting death against
God, and to purchase him the souerein felicity of life. And this is it that I
meant in the beginning of the chapter; namely that this mark is so of the very
substance and inshape of Religion, that Religion without that, should be
utterly vnauaylable and vain. The Heathen seem to have perceived this
necessity by many examples. They knew that man was created to live for ever,
The opinion of the Heathen concerning the cleansing of Mankind.
and that he could not enjoy that benefit, but by turning again unto God. But
in this they fell short, that they considered not that from us to God the way
is impossible to man, if God himself be not our way whereby to come thither. It
may be that they have heard, that it behooved a man to dye for the sins of the
world. And thereupon the devil did put in their heads to sacrifice men, and so
to lay the sins of a whole City or country upon the back of some one poor
wretch. And look who was the greatest offender of all others, and whom they
had vowed to the gallows for the multitude of his misdeedes; him did they put
to the pacifying of Gods wrath toward them. Such are the accustomed Apish
toys of the Devil. But how shall he that is in Gods displeasure, appease his
displeasure? And what shall the worst do, if the best can do nothing? The
Emperor Julian could not tell how to rid his hands of this necessity in his
disputations against the Christians. By reason whereof, perceiving that there
must needs be a mean between God and man for the cleansing of men's Souls,
he bare himself on hand, that Esculapius the Son of Jupiter was manifested
to the world by the lively ingendring of the Son, and that he showed him
self first in Epidaurus, and afterward in diverse other places, to heal men's
Bodies and to amend their Souls: Which is a proof, that the impossibility of
the Incarnation of the Son of God, which is pretended by some, seemed not to
him to be impossible, forasmuch as the Iucarnation of Esculapius the son of
Jupiter, God (in the opion of Julian,) and the son of God, seemed to him not
only possible, but also come to pass. And in very deed, why should it seem
strange that he which has knit the Soul of man being a spiritual substance,
unto his body being an earthly; should be able to unite himself unto man? But
I have showed before, that this Esculapius was a man; and that the spirit which
abused his name, was a devil, and that both of them were wicked creatures. And
moreover, who ever believed or setfoorth this Fable of Esculapius, but only
Julian? Nay verily, Porphyrius has outgone all antiquity in this behalf.
Saint Austin concerning the City of God. lib. 20. Cap. 9. and 23. and 32.
For having laid this foundation, That the souereine welfare of the Soul is to
see God, That it cannot see him unless it be first cleansed from the silth
thereof, and therefore that by Gods providence there must be some mean
procured to cleanse mankind: when he comes to the seeking of it out, he
says, That the Arts and Sciences do well clear our wits in the knowledge of
things, but they cannoth so cleanse us, that we may come unto God. And whereas
many men deceived themselves in seeking this cleansing by Magik and Theurgie:
he said that imagination and common sense might well be helped thereby in the
perceiving of bodily things; but they atteyned not to the purging of the
understanding of the Soul, neither could they make a man to see his GOD or the
truth it self. Again, whereas some Philosophers sought this clensing in the
Mysteries of the Son, and of Jupiter, that is to say, in communicating (as
they surmised) not with Devils, but with such as were esteemed to be good Gods,
he declares that there was as small likelihood thereof in their Mysteries, as
in the Mysteries of the rest: and moreover that those things extended but to
very few men, whereas this clensing ought to be universal to the benefit of
all mankind. In the end, having rejected all other clensings; his conclusion
is, that the Beginnings only and none others, can work and be the mean to
work this universal Clensing. What he means by the Beginnings, the
Platonists can tell well enough: and I have declared it by many sentences of
his in my fifth and sixth Chapters; that is to wit, the persons or proprieties
that are in God, whom Porphyrius calls expressly the Father, the
understanding of the Father, and the Soul of the World. He could not almost
have come any nearer us, unless he should have met iumpe with us: and surely
he seems to have had this of the Chaldees, from whom he acknowledges
himself to have received many divine Oracles concerning this matter. But it is
enough for us that we have gained these points of him, That there must of
necessity be some mean ordained of GOD for the clensing and saving of
mankind: That none can work that Cleanness, except it be some one of the
Beginnings, that is to say, except it he God himself; and that he never met
yet with any Sect in all Philosophy that sets forth the mean thereof.
Therefore it stands us on hand to seek it; not in Philosophy, but in our
Scriptures. For seeing they be of God, and are revealed for the welfare of
Man, they ought to direct us to the only mean of the Salvation which we long
for. And like as Religion was bred and borne as soon as Man, as I have said
before; so must it needs be, that the mean of Salvation was revealed as soon
as Religion, and set forth in the holy Scriptures from time to time. And if we
find it so; it will be an infallible testimony; both of our Religion, and of
our Scriptures together. The Mediator promised in the Scriptures, from the one
end of them to the other.


Let us then begin with the Creation of man. The Scripture says that as soon
as he was created, God gave him this Law: If thou eat of the tree of the
skill of good and evil; thou shall dye the Death. That is to say, If thou
turn away never so little from the obeying of me, thou shall fall into my
displeasure, and from my displeasure into endless death. Byandby after, man is
seduced by the Serpent, that is to say by the devil, and breaks the Law of
his Creator; by mean whereof he is in his displeasure, and by sin is become
subject to endless damnation. Now seeing that this man was alone; and that the
world was made for him; what should have followed but the utter destruction of
the world out of hand, and the burning of man everlastingly in Gods wrath? But
see how Gods wisdom stepped in for the saving of man, and for the preserving
of his own work; and sin was no sooner bred, but the scripture immediately
shows us the remedy thereof. I will set emnitie (says the Lord to the
devil) between thy seed and the woman's seed. Genesis 3.
Her seed shall crush thy head, and thou shall byte it by the heel. That is
to say, I will cause one to be borne of the woman's seed, which shall subdew
the devil: and the devil shall do his indeuer to trip up his heels by
tempting him all manner of ways; but he shall tread the devil under his
feet, and make him to yield up his weapons, that is to wit, Sin and death.
Now, who sees not that to overcome the devil, it behooves him to be God; and
that to be borne of a Woman, it behooves him to be man, that is to say both God
and man, as I have said before? Christ is a spiritual King, contrary to the
opinion of the Jews of our time.
Here begins our controversy against the Jews of these later times, who
hold opinion that the Messiah or Christ, whom we uphold to be the Mediator
between Gods Justice and Man's sin; shall be some great Emperor that shall
deliver them from bodily oppression; whereunto I have answered at large
heretofore. Let the reader bear in mind once for all, that the word Messiah in
Hebrewe, and the word Christ in Greek, signify both one thing, namely the
Lords Anointed.
Howbeit, they cannot deny, but that by the death which God threateneth to
Adam for his transgression, Rabbi Moses Ben Maimon understands a spiritual
death, that is to wit, the death of the Soul wounded with sin and forsaken
of her life which is God: and that by the venoume of the Serpent, he means
sin it self, which shall cease (says he) under the Messiah; and that the
same is also the Interpretation of the ancient Cabalists: and likewise that
the Sinagog of old time understood the said text to be meant of the Messiah, as
the Interpretation of the threescore and ten Interpreters, and the ancient
Translation of Jerusalem itself, The Thargu^r of Jerusalem
do give us cause to believe. For (says this Latter expressly) so long o
Serpent as the woman's Children keep the Law, they kill thee: and when they
cease to do so, thou stingest them in the Heel, and have power to hurt them
much. But whereas for their harm there is a sure remedy, to heal it, for thine
there is none. For in the last days, they shall crushe thee al to pieces with
their Heels, by means of Christ their King. Now if the death be spiritual,
and the enemy spiritual, and his weapons spiritnall: how can it be denied that
the battle between him and the Messiah who is to vanquish him, is likewise
spiritual, his power spiritual, and his Kingdom spiritual? Moreover, what
were Adam, Henoch, Noe, and Abraham benefited by this promise; if it extend no
further than to temporal things? Which of us would endure here a thousand
miseries, under pretense that certain thousands of years hence, we should have
an Emperor borne which should he redouted euerywhere? Now like as the
scripture begins with the promise of the Messiah, that is to say of the
deliverer of our Souls: so does it show evidently, that it aims not at any
other mark than that. For leaving the great States of the world, and the
breeding of Kingdoms and Principalities, which are things whereon Histories
stand so curiousely; it leads us directly too the birth and offspring of
Abraham, whereof the Messiah was to be borne. And unto the same Abraham does
God repe(...) promise often times; that in his seed al nations should be
blessed; (...) is to say, that one should be borne of his seed, by whom
Salvation should be proffered to all nations of the Earth? And age in, that in
Isaac the seed should be called unto him: which thing surely is not spoken of
the Posterity of his Son Ismael, notwithstanding that GOD told him that his
fleshly posterity should be very flourishing. But this preface which the Lord
makes, shall I hide any thing from my servant Abraham etc. Shows evidently
how it is a mystery that passes al understanding of man, and whereunto
Abraham had no less right than his seed. From Abraham this promise passed by
hand to Isaac, from Isaac to Jacob, and Jacob left it by his last will too his
children with these words; The Scepter shalnot be taken from Judah, nor the
lawgiuer from between his feet, until Silo come; and unto him shall the
Nations resort. Which words were spoken to Judah by name, because the said holy
seed was to come of his stock. And that the same saying was meant of the
Messiah; the Thargum of Jerusalem and the Onkelos which are books of cheef
anthoritie among the Jews, do assure us. For they translate it thus, until
Christ or the Anointed come; whereunto is added this; too whom the Kingdom
belongs. And the school of Rabbi Sila being demanded in the Talmud, The
Talmud in the Treatise intytled Sanhedrim, in the Chapter Melee.
what should be the name of the Messiah; answers, Silo is his name: for (say
they) it is said, until Silo come. Albeit now that the said kingdom be other
than a temporal Dominion; yet is the text formal in that place. For the Jews
wayt that the Messiah or Christ should come of the Trybe of Judah, and that at
the time of his coming the Scepter and the Lawgiuer should both be taken from
Judah. Surely the thing that Israel looked for as then, was not to subdue other
Nations, seeing that Israel himself was not to reign at that time. And
wretched had the hope of other Nations been, which looked for him also,
according to this text, if his coming should have been but to spoil them and
make havoc of them. But he was to reign, yea even over all Nations, yea and
to the benefit of all Nations. His reigning then shall be according to the first
promise, namely over men's Souls, the which he shall deliver from the bondage
of Sin and the tyranny of the Devil. In the Law of Moses, the Sacrifices
and Ceremonies do represent unto us ye satisfaction which Christ was to make
for the sins of the people by the sacrificing of himself. But specially the
Passover Lamb, the Sacrifice of the red Cow, the sending of the Scapegoate
into the Wilderness, and the raising up of the brazen Serpent for the heali^^
of diseases, were all of them Memorialles for the people, to put them in mind
both of the coming of the Messiah, and to what end he should come. For
whereas we read that the doorepostes of the houses were besmeared with the
blud of a Lamb, to the intent that the destroying Angel should not touch them:
that the Ashes of a Cow without spot were kept for the sins of the
Congregation: That the Highpriest laying his hand upon a Goats head,
acknowledged the sins of the people over him, and the Goat went away with
them into a place vninhabitable, to the intent (as ye would say) he might never
be heard of any more: and that as many as beheld the brazen Serpent, were
healed incontineutly of the stinging of Serpents: seeing that the things which
were employed to those purposes, could not of their own nature serve there
unto: we must needs conclude, that they were signs; signs (say I) of
spiritual and inward matters, like the Scripture it self, which is spiritual
and serves for the inward man: That is to wit, That the Devil has no power
over those which are reconcyled to God by the Sacrifice of the Messiah who is
charged with their Sins: and that those which have an eye unto him, are by
and by healed of the Serpents deadly sting. And whereas some think it strange
that so great a thing, should be figured by so vile and base things: the
figure is the more profitable, and the less dangerous in that it is so. For
had so high things been figured (...) foretokened by things approaching to their
highness: men might have been deceived by the^, and have taken the figures for
the things themselves, and so have rested upon the gayness of the sheath,
without looking into it. As for example, if in stead of the Goat, they should
have Sacrificed the man of greatest reputation in the Congregation: Men, being
given to yield too much unto man, would have mistaken him for the very
Mediator himself. But when the figure of our reconcilement unto God, and of
the forgiveness of our sins, is taken at a brute beast which has nothing
suitable thereto, saving that he is giltlesse and capable of death: we be
taught that it is but a figure, and that it behooves us to ^ade into the thing
it self: and that so much the more, because those Sacrifices are so solemnly
and so expressly commanded to posterity, as things which for the welfare of
mankind, ought to be always in remembrance, or rather present before men's eyes.

But yet the Hebrews held opinion that Asar, Midrach Thehilim.
Elcana and Abiasaph the three sons of Chore mentioned in the sixth Chapter of
Exodus, A tradition of the Hebrews.
were authors of diverse of the Psalms that are gathered into the second book
of David's Psalter, and so is Moses also of some one or two in the third book;
whereby they comforted the Fathers in the wilderness, assuring them of the
coming of Christ. Unto David (who was of the Trybe of Judah) God himself
const^^ieth the said promise, 2. Sammuel. 7. 1. King. 5. 6. 1. Chron. 2v, Plal.
89.
telling him that the blessed seed should come of him. I will raise up (says
he) thy seed after thee, which (...) come one of thy loins; his kingdom will
I stablish for ever; I will be to him for a Father, and he shall be to me for
a son, And although this may seem to be meant of Solomon David's son, who
was in deed but a figure of Christ; yet notwithstanding the often repeating of
these words eternally, everlastingly, and for ever, gives us to understand,
that it cannot be (...) but of the thing figured, that is to wit, of the
eternal or everlasting King. And in very deed David shows well in his
Psalms, that he has looked further with the eyes of his mind, than to his
son Solomon. Psalm. ^. and 45 and 47. and 67. and 72.
For in the second Psalm, Thou art my son (says the Everlasting,) this day
have I begotten thee. I will give thee the Gentyles for thine inheritance, and
the utmost coasts of the earth for thy possession. And in the five and
fortieth Psalm, speaking of the marriage of this Son, with an extraordinary
preface, Thy Throne o God (says he) is from everlasting; and the Scepter of
thy kingdom is a Scepter of righteousness. And in the seven and fortith, The
princes of the Nations are assembled together (says he) to be the people of
the God of Abraham. And in the threescore and seventh; Thou shall judge folk
righteously, Thy saving health shall be known to al Nations, and thou sha^t
direct the Nations of the earth. And this later clause is shet up with this
word Selah, which the Hebrews are not wont to use, but in some profound
mystery. To be short, in the threescore and twelfth Psalm, after he has
said. All Kings shall worship him, and all Nations shall serve him: He
adds, for he shall deliver the poor that cry unto him, and the distressed
that has no help. Yea and which more is, All Nations shall report themselves
to be blessed in him, and they shall also bless him. David is full of such
sentences, which show that he speaks of a King, howbeit of another than
Solomon his own son. For Salomons kingdom extended not much further than his
fathers, neither did the Nations meet together under him; and as for his
kingdom, it ended which his beath, and within day or twain after was rent in
pieces. And therefore the ancient Synagog did always understand those texts
to be meant of Christ, who was to be borne of the seed of David, as we may
perceive by the Chaldee translation, which interprets them to be spoken
concerning the same party. Howbeit since it is not said in any of the Psalms,
Rejoice thou Israel, for thou shall reign over the Gentiles; but, Reioyceye
Gentyles, be glad ye Nations and Kings, for I will give you a King: surely it
is evident that the joy which he reports to be so great, is not for that
they should have a Jew to be their king, for every Nation had lever to have
one of their own country; or for that this King should have a souereine
Monarke above them all to control them, for every of them had lever to reign
by himself alone: but rather because this King should be of a far other
nature and quality than all other Kings, namely a King of souls, a deliverer
of men from the bondage of sin, and a spiritual Monarke. Also the Song of
Songs is an express poetry co^ceruing the union of Christ and his Church, and
has been so understood of the Jews, as it appears by the Chaldee
Paraphrase thereof which we have. As for the Prophets, we find nothing else in
them almost line by line, but foretellings of Christ to come, of ye Nature of
his Kingdom, of the calling of the Gentiles, of the stablithing agein of
godlynes, and such other matters; as well to put ye people then present in
remembrance of them, as to prepare the aftercommers to receive them. Insomuch
that if the Prophets speak of the return from Babylon, of the stablishing
ageine of the kingdom, of the building ageine of the Temple, and such other
things? by and by within two or three verses, ye shall see them carried away to
the spiritual kingdom of Christ, and to the true Temple which is the Church:
as though they had meant to say unto us, that we must not rest upon these
temporal things which are but shadows; but remember that we be men, that is
to say Souls; and that our welfare consists not in living, in governing, and
in reigning here, but in serving God that we may be united unto him, and ruled
by him, howbeit not so as we should reign in the world, but that God should
reign in us by the Scepter of his word, and by the power of his spirit, and be
obeyed of us. It shall come to pass (says Esaias) Esaias. 1. Micheas.
that in the latter days the hill of the Lords house shall be set up upon the
top of the mountains, and that all Nations shall come flocking to it, and
many folk shall say, Come, let us go up to the Lords hill, and to the GOD of
Jacobs house. This text is spoken manifestly of Christ and of his reign, and
of the blessing that was to be shed out upon all Nations by him. But let us
read further. He will teach us his ways (says he) and we shall walk in his
paths. The Law shall come from out of Sion, and the world of the Lord from
Jerusalem. He shall judge among the Heathen, and reprove the Nations. They
shall turn their Swords into Culters, and their Spears into Sythes. Here is
no speaking of wars, of fighting or of force; but the Law of Gods word, and
of teaching. And in the fourth Chapter, At that day (says he) Esaias. 4.
shall the Lords branch be much made of, and glorious, and whosoever abides
in Jerusalem shall be called holy. If this glory were not expounded, some
would thereby behight here a triumph. But at the same time (says he) the Lord
will wash away the filthynes of the daughters of Syon, and cleanse away the blud
of Jerusalem from the mids thereof, by the spirit of judgment and the
spirit of burning. It is then a glory, yea and a true glory, but yet a far
other glory then the flesh understands. Now the Jews understand this text
of the Messiah: for whereas the Hebrewe has Branch; the Chaldee Interpreter
has translated it the Lords Anointed or Christ. Esaias. 9.
In his nineth Chapter he says that he shall be called the Prince of peace; (and
the Chaldee Paraphrast has translated it the Christ or Anointed of peace) and
that his kingdom shall be increased, and that there shall be no end of his
reign, and that he shall execute Justice upon the throne of David for ever. If
he shall be a Prince of peace, where shall war become? Esaias. 11.
And if there be no war, what shall this increase of his kingdom be? That
does he show us apparently in his eleventh Chapter. He had said a fore, that
the high Cedars should be cast down, that is to say the great Princes. And
against those Cedars he sets expressly this little bra^ch of the root of
Iesse, or Isay. This Iesse or Isay was David's father.
A blossom shall spring (says he) out of the stock of Isay, and a branch
shall grow out of his root. The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him, the
spirit of wisdom and understanding, the spirit of counsel and strength,
the spirit of knowledge and of the fear of the Lord. He shall smite the earth
with the rod of his mouth, and kill the wicked with the breath of his lips.
The Goat and the Lamb shall dwell together, and the Leopard with the Kid. The
Earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord as with an ouerflowing of the
Sea, and the Gentiles shall inquire after the root of Isay, which shall be set
up as a Standard for people to resort unto. The Conquests then of this Emperor
shall be of men's Souls; his tributes, their worshippings; his armor and
weapons, the spirit of the Lord; his peace, the uniting of all folk together
into one Church in the favor of their Maker. Also in the five and twenty he
(...) shall destroy death for ever, and take away the (...) at hydeth the face
of all people. Esaias. 25. 35. 42 49.
And in the five and thirty, The eyes of the blind shall be opened, and the
ears of the deaffe shall be unstopped. And in the two and forty and the nine
and forty: He shall be no outcryer nor loud of speech; his voice shall not be
heard in the streates. He shall set judgment on (...) and the Isles shall wayt
for him. He shall be a maker of leagues among people, and a light unto the
Gentiles. Some shall come from the North, and some from the South; so as the
land shall be to narrow for them. The Kings themselves shall be foster^ fathers
to my people, and Queens shall be their Nurces. Which of all these things can
be understood otherwise than of a spiritual kingdom? On the contrary part,
let us see how the same Prophet speaks of Cyrus the great Emperor, which was
to deliver Israel by the force of arms out of the hands of the Chaldees. I
have taken thee by the right hand (says the Lord) to make Nations subject unto
thee, and to weaken the reins of Kings; to set open the doors unto thee, and
to unlock the gates against thee. I will break open the gates of brass, and
burst asunder the bars of iron. I will give thee the hoorded treasures, and
the things that lie hid in secret places. What likeness is there between this
manner of speaking and the other, and consequently between the deliverances or
the deliuerers them selves? But in the two and fifty and three and fifty,
Esaias. 52. 53.
he takes away all doubt. Behold (says he) my servant shall behave himself
happily, and be exalted and advanced very high. As how? He shall be despised
of men (says the Prophet) and thrust out of their company. A man full of
sorrow and heaviness shall he be, and every body shall hide his face from
him. He shall be wounded for our misdeedes, and smitten for our sins. The
chastisement of our peace shall lie upon him, and by his stripes shall we be
healed. And he says afterward, Although there was not any vnrightuosnesse in
him, yet was it the Lords will to break him with sorrow. And because he shall
give his life for sin, the will of the Lord shall prosper in his hand, and he
shall see the labor of his Soul, and enjoy it. For by his knowledge he shall
make many rightuous, and he shall take their iniquities upon him. Now this text
is interpreted expressly of the Messiah by the Chaldee Paraphrast. In the Talmud
in the treatise entitled Sanhedrin in the Chapter Helec.
And in the Talmud, Rabbi Jacob being asked the name of the Messiah, says he
shall be called Leaprous; and there he brings in this text to prove it. By
which reckoning his life should be but languishing and pain, saving that he
tryumphed over the Devil and Death, and that we understand it spiritually. To
be short, in the five and fifty he is called the Law giver of the Gentiles:
Esaias. 55. 59. 61. 62.
and in the nine and fifty, The Redeemer: And in the threescore and one, The
Physician of the helpless, and the Proclaymer of the acceptable year of the
Lord: And in the threescore and two, The Savior, and the League or Atonement
which he brings to the people; not that he Lordeth it, but that he is holy;
nor that he gives laws to other Nations of the earth, but that he has the
word of GOD in his own mouth and in the mouths of his seed; saving that in
the kingdom of his Christ, God will give a better place to strangers then to
them.

As for all the other Prophets, like as they shoot not at any other mark, so
have they not any other voice. Nevertheless we will content ourselves with a
feawe of their sayings, which shall give credit to all the rest; and so much
the more, because their writing was commonly both at sundry times, and in sundry
places. We have seen how the Messiah was promised to the issew of David and to
David himself. ^ere. 23. 30. 33.
Thus therefore does Jeremy speak thereof conformably to that which we have
said heretofore. I will raise up a branch unto David (says the Lord), and
he shall reign as King, and prosper, and execute Justice and Judgment upon
Earth. And if ye ask the Prophet what manner of prosperity this shall be: It is
(says he) that in his days Judah shall be safe, and Israel shall dwell without
fear, and the name whereby he shall be called, shall be the Everlasting, our
Ryghtuousenes; that is to say the Iustifier of us. For (says he) the Lord
has said it. David shall never want a Successor sitting upon his Throne,
neither shall there ever want a Priest of the Priests the Levites to offer
sacrifice before me: Neither is it any more possible for you to break this
covenant; than to break the covenant that I have made with day and night. Now,
the Jews cannot deny, but that even by the record of their own Paraphrast,
this text is meant of Christ, and yet notwithstanding, that there has not
wanted a Successor both to David and to Levy; and that both the Kingdom and
the Preesthod are come to an end; and therefore that he speaks here of
another Kingdom and of another Preesthod: Likewise says Ezechiell, Ezcehiel.
34. 17.
I will set a shepherd over my flock, which shall feed them, namely my
Servant David. I will be their God, and he shall be their Prince among them. I
will enter into a Covenant of peace with them, and make noysom beasts to cease
from the earth. I will raise them shortly a plant of Renown, and they shall no
more be the iestingstock of the Gentyles. And if we ask, how? They shall
no more be defiled (says he) with their Idolles, nor with their abominations,
nor with their misdeedes: but I will save them from all their sins, and make
them clean, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God. And that this
text also is meant of the Messiah, the Jews cannot deny. For in their very
Talmud Talmud in the ^reatise intytled, Sanhedrin, in the chapter Helec.
Daniel. 2. 7. 9.
they say that the Messiah is called David, because he was too be borne of
David's race: and they allege this present text and others for the same
purpose. Daniel in his second and seventh Chapters expounding Nabugodonozors
Dream, treats of the four great Monarchies, which should rise up in the
world every one in his time: the which are betokened there, under these four
Metalls, Gold, Silver, Brass, and iron. But when the Dream represents us
the stone heawen without hand, which stryketh the Images iron feet and
breaks them apeeces: it is as much as if it had told us, that the Kingdom of
the Messiah shall seem to be of small stuff, without stay and without force
of man; and yet that it shall endure for ever, because it is set up by God. And
therefore whereas he adds in another place, That all People, Nations and
Toongs shall serve that Kingdom, it is to be understood of another kind of
service than the ordinary. But in his fifth Chapter he shows wherein the
same peculiarly consists. It is (says he) in bringing disobedience to an
end, and in sealing up sin, to cleanse away iniquity, and to bring
ryghtuousnes into the world; to close up prophesying and visions, and to anoint
the holy of Holyes. Yea and it is so little meant that Jerusalem should be the
seat of that kingdom, that it was to be destroyed anon after by the Romans.
The number of the Children of Israel (says Ose Osec. 1. 2. 3.
) shall be as the sand. And where it has bin said, you be not my People; there
it shall be said, ye be the people of the living God: which is as much to say as
that many people should become Israelytes. And this shall be done (says the
Lord) not by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle: but because I will show
mercy, and save them by their Lord God, and marry them to me of my compassion.
Iewry (says Joel) shall be inhabited, everlastingly, and Jerusalem from
generation to generation. Yet had they great overthrows afterward, yea even
in the Prophets own time. But yet he adds, I will wype away the blud from
those whom I have not yet cleansed, that is to wit, the Gentiles, and the Lord
shall dwell in Syon. Then speaks he of another Iewrie and of another Syon,
that is to wit, of the spiritual one, which is the Church. To the same end
tends Amos Amos. 9.
when he says, I will set up the Tabernacle of David again, and stop up the
breaks thereof, and amend the decays, that he may possess the remnant of
Edom, and of all other nations. And Micheas Micheas.
says that many Nations shall come to the Lords Hill, and talk there one with
another, saying as follows; namely, that the name of the Lord shall be
called upon over them, and that the Law shall come out of Syon and the word of
the Lord out of Jerusalem, which shall teach them his ways. And to the intent
we should not think, that whereas Micheas says that the name of the Messiah
shall shortly be magnified to the uttermost parts of the earth; Israel shall
triumph after the manner of the world: The Assyrians (says he) shall not cease
to come into our Land, and to walk up and down in our Palaces. That is to
say, the good and virtuous folk shall not cease to be persecuted for all
that: but yet howsoever they fare, Idolatry shall be overthrown, as he says
afterward, and the Anointed shall reign through the power of the Lord, and he
shall be our peace. And Sophonie Sophonie. 2.
foretells to the same effect, That God will starve all the Gods of the
earth, so as every man shall worship in his own place throughout all the Isles
of the Gentiles: that is to say, That Jerusalem shall not be the only place
to worship in, but rather that God will have every place to be a Jerusalem. In
Zachary Zachary. 3. 6. 9. 13.
the Lord having said I will make my servant Branch to come; adds
immediately, and I will wipe away the wickedness of this land in one day. And
having said, He shall reign upon his seat: He adds forthwith, that the
Highpriest also shall sit there with him, That is to say, that Christ shall be
both King and Priest. He says in deed, Be glad thou daughter Sion and
triumph; For thy King comes: But see here with what furniture; A righteous
Savior and a lowly, sitting upon an Ass, even upon an Asses colt, which is
the Chariot of Ephraim and the Horse of Jerusalem, and the bow of war. He
shall speak myldly to all Nations, and yet shall he be obeyed from the oneside
of the earth to the other. If there be no greater triumph than this, what
needs so great joy? But he expounds himself in these words following. Thou
shall be saved by the blud of thy covenant, and I have let out thy prisoners
from the waterlesse pit. Now, that this text is meant of Christ, In the treatise
Sanhedrin: cap. Halec.
it appears by Rabby Samuel and Rabby Joseph in the Talmud. And Rabby Selmoh
ben Iarchi (as great an enemy as he is to us,) expounds it not otherwise.
Agein, In that day (says he) a Welspring shall be opened to the house of David,
and to the Inhabiters of Jerusalem, to wash away their sin and their filth;
and I will root out the names of the remembrance of ydols from the earth says
the Lord of Hosts. All this is nothing else but the clearing of men from their
sins, and the abolishing of Satan's reign. To be short, Malachie tells us
of Christ, That he shall bring us an Atonement between GOD and us. And of the
Ambassador whom GOD meant to send before him to prepare his ways, He says that
he shall turn the hearts of the Children to their Fathers, and the hearts
of the Fathers to their children. By the preparation of the Ambassador, we
judge of the Office of his Master: namely that his coming is properly to
reign in our Souls, seeing his Ambassador prepares them for him, exhorting
us to turn away from our sins. Now of this long but yet needful discourse,
we gather two things. The one against the Gentyles, which is, that the mean
of cleansing mankind has bin promised and preached even from the fall of Adam,
and that the same promise is from time to time brought to our remembrance by
our scriptures: to wit that it is done by Christ, who was to be borne of the
woman's seed by Abraham, Judah, David and others. The other is against the Jews
of our time, who look still for a Christ to come: which is, that the
deliverance promised by him, is not meant of the tyranny of some earthly Prince
over us; but of the Tyranny which the devil exercises in our Souls by the
unrighteousness of sin, the reward whereof is everlasting death. The Gentiles
of old time yielded unto these texts, when they had once embraced the
spiritual kingdom of Christ: and it may be that if we had to do with the
Jews of elder time, the matter should soon be dispatched. The Jews of old
time looked for a spiritual King. Misdrach Has^im.
For all the forealledged Texts have been understood of the Messiah and of his
reign, both by the ancient Rabbines and by the Chaldee Paraphrasts. Moreover
it is very manifest, that ye Cabalists who wrate long time before the
Talmudistes, and who (as they say) do pearce into the very Marowe of the
Scriptures, whereas the Talmudists do but grate upon the bark of them: have
understood that the cleansing away of sin and the heating of the contagious
venom which the Serpent did shed into Adam, and by him into the whole offspring
of man: was to be wrought by the Messiah. Yet for all this, notwithstanding al
ye forecasts of man's wit, we want not some even of the newer sort of Writers,
which have understood it after the manner aforesaid. Ballet. Cap. 1. verse. 14.
and cap. 4. verse. 4.
The exposition of Salomons Balett upon these words, A Grape of Copher, makes
this allusion; Eschcol Haccopher, That unto the Church, Christ is a man of full
atonement, who shall be borne of the Children of Abraham, and shall make
satisfaction for sins, in such sort as he may say to the measure of
Judgment, It is enough: that is to say, he may stay Gods wrath and punishment;
and God (says he) will lay him to gage and deliver him for those that are his.
And upon the fourth Chapter where it is written thus, A thousand sheelds hang
there, that is to say, in the Tower of David, the said exposition has these
words: Often have I (says the Lord) taken my people in in protection, for the
dezert of one that was to come after a thousand generatio^s, And I have made
them to succeed one after another, to bring the Sheeld at the last unto him,
which is the only desire of my Children, and shall defend them better then a
thousand Sheelds. Also the Rabbines say, That the Creatures which are grown
out of king by Adams fall, shall be set in their perfect state again by the
Son of Perets, and according to their accustomed fondness, for proof
thereof they bring in a Text of Ruth and another of Genesis, Rabbi, Barachias
in his Bereschith. Rab ba Misdrach. Exodus 21.
where this word Toledoth is written very plainly, that is to wit, with two
Vaus. And as thouching the said Son of Perets, every man knows among them
that it is the Messiah, whom they looked for to come of Judah by his son We
call him Phares.
Perets. Concerning the calling of the Gentiles, the Talmud makes this
comparison, That the Horse shall be set in the stall of the halting Ox. Which
words Rabbi Jacob and Rabbi Selomoh expound thus; Thalmud in the treatise
Sa^hedrin, cap Helec.
namely that forasmuch as the Jews shall have forsaken the Law, God will put
the Gentyles in their place, and yet not drive them away afterward, though the
Jews turn again unto him: which is a thing very far of from the Monarchy
which they imagine as often as there is any speaking of the calling of the
Gentiles. To be short, the notablest of their Rabbines are ashamed of the
feastings and extraordinary pastimes, which the Jews behight themselves at
the coming of the Messiah; and conclude with Rabbi Moses ben Maimon, (of whom
they report that since Moses himself until this Moses there was none so
like unto Moses) that the felicities and pleasures of that time, ought to be
understood according to this saying of Esayes, Esaias. 11.
That the earth shall be as it were ouerflowed with ye knowledge of the Lord, and
that every man shall be occupied in seeking and in knowing GOD. But Rabbi
Hechadoseh says yet more plainly, That the Messiah shall by his death save
Adams race, and deliver men's Souls from Hell; Reasons against the Jews of our
days.
and therefore shall be called Savior.

Let us yet further by reason overcome the wilful sort, if it be possible. It
is the 13. article of the belief of the Jews Rabbi Moses ben Maimon.
They hold it for an Article of their faith, both by Scripture and by
tradition, that there shall be a Messiah. He that denies that (say they) denies
the Law and the Prophets, and is condemned to Helfyre. And therefore (say
they) he that denies the coming of the Messiah, cannot be saved. If he which
is to reign in Israel and to give them prosperity, be a temporal King:
what skilles it me greatly whether I know him and believe in him, or no? or
what joy can it be to me, since I cannot see him? Nay rather what a grief is
it to me that I shall not see him, and what a peine is it to pyne away in
waiting for him? Ageine, what goodness is it in GOD to have foretold us it: if
by believing it we fare never the better, and yet must dye everlastingly for
not believing it? In ye Articles of their faith, they believe in ye only one
God. There is great reward in believing well. They believe a blessed life. As
it is the Soul that believes; so does the reward redound unto her. And even
so is it with all other things which are no Articles of faith, furtherfoorth
than a man has benefit by believing them. But as for this Article of the
Messiah, what booted it Abraham, Moses, so many Kings, so many Prophets, and
such a number of people; if there were no further secret in it? Why was it
foretold so carefully by the Prophets? Why was it so often repeated, no less in
the prosperity than in the adversity of that people, and no less under the
good Kings than under the Tyrants? Nay, which more is; why was it more, yea
far more carefully repeated to those which were not at the time when he
should come, than to those which were to be borne in his time; if the Messiah
be not certainly more than simply a good King, and the prosperity another
manner of prosperity than any is on earth, and the joy another manner a joy than
is conceived by the senses? And yet for all that, unto a Jew it is an Article
of faith, and of the necessity of salvation. We say therefore, that the Messiah
is not a King of temporal delights, but the King of Salvation and welfare.

Agein, they believe that the Scriptures are of God, and that they teach them
the way to Salvation. Now the ordinary voice of them is against the Pomp, the
bravery, and the vanity of the world: saying that God will turn them into
sorrow, mourning and dung. Herewithall, the same Scriptures turn us away from
all other delights, to talk of that, and from all honor and reputation, to the
atteynement of that kingdom. Who sees not therefore, that this joy which the
Scriptures do so much commend, is of another kind, than the joy which they
discommend, and that the kingdom which they make us to covet, is to be
possessed in heaven and not on earth? Be glad O Daughter Sion (say the
Prophets) rejoice thou Jerusalem, sing ye nations and peoples. And wherefore?
For certain thousand years hence, there shall rise up a great King in Israel.
What greater fondness can there be than this? He shall make a good peace say
they: what pass I for that, if I my self be in War? He shall open the
Prisons: what is that to me, if I in the mean while do rotte there? He shall
triumph over all the Nations in the word. What am I ye better for that, if in
the mean season other Nations trample me under their feet, and lead me in
triumph over all the world with my hands bound behind me? The father [say
they] rejoices for his Sons welfare: yet is that but a light and flightfull
joy, and who is he that will be moved for the afterspring of his children that
are long hence to come? And who would not count him a fool for rejoicing
thereat, and much more for believing it? Surely, then does this joy extend
farther, so as even the foretellers thereof do feel it themselves and are
cheered therewith, and the hearers thereof do taste of it and find themselves
comforted: and both of them in their Souls enjoy the Fraunchises and Freedoms
of that kingdom aforehand, ere the said King whom they look for he borne
into this world. Let us put the case farther, that they which shall attend upon
the Messiah, shall be rewarded abundantly with all the pleasures of this life:
what shall become of him in the end? He shall dye (say they) and his
generation with him, and therevppon they keep a sore contention how many
years he shall live. How far of is this geere from that which the Prophets
speak of, concerning a joy that shall never have end? What if they pass a
hundred years in all joy? what is it but a long feast, which as soon as a man
sleeps is quite and clean forgotten? And if ye dye altogether, what
remains of it any more? And if ye live out of the world, what remains
thereof but greef? And what reason have the Fathers to rejoice so much at that
flash of Lightening, which passes away in a moment? Soothly much less tha^
for a Mariagefeast, at leastwise which is accompanied with the birth of some
children. In very deed these things are toys to laugh at, but yet among the
Jews they be earnest matters, and they rest upon them at this day like silly
souls as they be, as though there were none other life for man than this, or
as though they should ever be babes still in this life. But some to shun this
absurdity, have fallen into another, namely that all they which have hoped for
the Messiah, shall come to life again as they were before, yea and even the
wicked sort too, that they may burst for spite and sorrow. They that be in
the glory of God shall come back again to see the glory of that man. They
that are free from this Prison of sin, shall be shut up again in it to see
this licentiousnes. They that live everlastingly in all felicity above, shall
come down to eat of fat beasts. What is this but a tittletattle of Children,
which in their conferences can go no higher than Tartes and Iunkets, nor
conceive any higher pleasures than those? And what else in effect is all this,
than to rise from Bed to Board, and from Boorde to Bed ageine to sleep? But if
all this must be done in Palestine, so as all that are spoken of before shall
come thither: How will Palestine or Iewrie suffice to receive them, or what
Leuiathan The Jews of our days say that this Leuiathan is a Whale powdered for
the feast of the Messiah.
will suffice to feed them? And if the Gentiles also shabe admitted thither, as
they say: what manner a Temple shall there be? And if all men shall bring their
Sacrifices thither, what shall Jerusalem be, but a continual slaughterhouse
of beasts, and all Iewrie an universal stream of blud? Who sees not then,
that (as the Prophets declare unto us) the Gentiles shall not in very deed
be gathered in Jerusalem, but Jerusalem shall be spread out among the
Gentyles? And that they shall not come ronning from a far to the Temple, but
that they themselves shall be the Temple, I mean their hearts, where God shall be
served and worshipped: And seeing that GOD so greatly refuses our sheadings of
blud, our fat Muttons, and our perfumes: who can think that those shall be the
feast which he will prepare to chere us withal.

The xxviij. Chapter.
That the Mediator or Messiah is promised in the Scriptures to be both God and
Man, that is to wit, the everlasting Son of God taking man's flesh unto him.
Ow then, let it stand for a point concluded, That the Christ our Messiah
promised in the holy Scriptures is a Redeemer from spiritual bondage. But
forasmuch as I have proved, that he ought not to fetch us out of prison without
Ransom; nor could pay the Ransom being infinite, unless he were God and
Man; Man to suffer, and God to overcome: it follows that I must show, that
Gods word has promised us that he shall be such a one: and that shall serve as
well against the Gentyles, as against the Jews. Now, if we had none other
proof thereof than this, that Christ's office is to undo sin and death, and
to appease Gods wrath against mankind, as I have said; seeing that these things
are such as no creature can do, nor ought to presume to do: as often as we
read that his office is such, we must needs conclude that the Messiah must
needs then be God. For (as the Gymnosophist of India said unto Alexander) he
is God in very deed, which does that which no creature can do. But the
Scripture That by the Scriptures, Christ the Mediator is both God and Man
intending to succor our infirmity, the elder the world waxes, speaks ever
the more manifestly thereof unto us; and surely after such a sort, that the
skilfullest among the Jews of late time become most unskillful when they go
about to darken it. First of all at the making of the promise in Genesis, it is
said that this seed, that is to say this Christ, shall crush the Serpents
head: and this Serpent (as I have said before) is the Devil; and his venom is
sin: Genesis 3
and by means of sin we be all become thralles to the Devil, against whose
power we know that no force of man can do any thing. It follows then that
this Christ must have another nature than man's, yea or than Angels: For the
Angels and the Devils differ not in power, that is to wit, divine. Afterward
where the promise is repeated to Abraham; of what man can it be verifyed, In
thy seed shall all Nations be blessed? Deuteronomy. 21. ver. 8
Or who can bless so effectually but only God, who commands his blessing
(says he diverse times) and then does it shead it self out upon us and our
works. But as the Prophets do preach the Messiah unto us, so also do they
describe us his natures and qualities, so as we need not any other Commentary
upon that promise, than the Prophets themselves. Unto David therefore it was
renewed, and in his issew was it to be accomplished. See here how he speaks
of it in the 45. Psalm. Psalm. 45.
My heart (says he) intends to utter good matter, and my work shall be to
speak of the King, (that is to wit of the Messiah, and so does the Chaldee
Paraphrast himself interpret it:) Thou art more perfect than the Children of
men. This might be meant of a man: but let us read further: O God (says he)
thy Throne is from everlasting to everlasting, the Scepter of thy Kingdom is
the Scepter of Righteousness. Thou love righteousness and hate
wickedness: And therefore God thy God has anointed thee with the oil of
gladness above thy fellows. These so express words cannot be spoken,
(specially among the Hebrews who were not so lavish of Gods name as other
people are) but of one that is very God and very man both together. In the
hundred and tenth Psalm, Psalm. 110.
The Lord said unto my Lord (says David) sit thou at my right hand, until I
have made thine enemies thy footstool. And a little after, Thou art a Priest
for ever after the order of Melchisedeck. To sit at Gods right hand, and to be
a Priest for ever, cannot be attributed to a man. Nay (which more is) David who
knew well that there is but one Lord, calls him his Lord. And we read that
with this selfsame text Christ stopped the mouths of the Pharisees. Now, that
the fathers of old time understood these things to be spoken of the Messiah,
it appears by the translation of Ionathas, cited in ye book of Collections;
for he translateth it, The Book sepher kibbutsim.
The Lord said unto his word: and it is alleged to prove, that the Messiah
should sit on the right hand of God. Insomuch that the Jews Commentary upon
the second Psalm, Midrasch The hilim upon the second Psalm, verse. 7. Esaias. 9.
says expressly that the Mysteries of the Messiah are rehearsed in the
hundred and tenth Psalm. And Esaias in his nineth Chapter says thus: A Babe is
borne unto us and a Son is given unto us, and his kingdom shall be upon his
shoulder. Ye see here the birth of a man. But he says further, His name shall be
called, the wonderful, the Counselor, the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace. Needs then must this selfsame man be also God.
And whereas he is said to be the Prince of Peace; Ionathas tra^slateth it the
Christ (or the anointed) of Peace. And Rabbi Ioses the Galilaean, says upon
the Lamentations, Lament. 1. ver. 16.
that the Messiah shall be called the father of euerlastingnesse, Bereschith
Rabba upon Genes 55.
the Prince of peace and so forth: and for confirmation thereof, he alleges
this text, and so does also the Commentary upon Genesis. And the holy Rabbi
Rabbi He^adosch.
(as they term him) says expressly, that the Messiah in that he should be
both God and Man, should be called Emanuell; In that he was God, the
wonderful and the Counselor: In that he was mighty, Gheuer, that is to say
Strong: In that he was Everlasting, the Father of euerlastingnesse; In respect
yt peace should be increased under him, The Prince of peace: In that he should
deliver men's Souls from Hell, The deliverer out of bondage: and in that he
should save men, Jesus that is to say, The Savior. For whereas Rabbi Selomon,
to conueye these titles to Ezechias, interprets them after this manner: And
God, the wonderful, the Counselor, and the everlasting father, has called
Ezechias the Prince of peace etc. Besides that the Hebrewe Grammar and the
phrase of that tongue are repugnant to that Construction: it is well enough
seen that such things cannot be verified of King Ezechias, and that it is but
a device of this late borne Jew against the opinion of al antiquity to escape
from this text which is so express. Esaias Esaias. 7.
in his seventh Chapter says thus. Behold, a Virgin shall be with child and
bring forth a Son. Here ye see that Christ shall be a man. And thou shall
call his name Emanuell, that is to say, God with us. Then shall he be both God
and Man, Christ is called Jehovah, that is to say, the everlasting God.
that is to wit, God dwelling among men as a man. But unto this and such like
texts, they answer us that the El, that is to say GOD, is imparted to Princes
and Judges: And therefore let us hear further. In that day (says Esaias Esaias.
18. and 28. and. 1.
) the Lord of Hosts Jehovah tsebhoath, shall be in sted of a crown of glory and
of a Diadem of honor to the residue of his people. The Chaldee Paraphrast
interprets this concerning the Messiah. And again; In that day shall the
people that were harryed away and rent a pieces, be brought for a present to
the Lord of Hosts. Bereshith Ke^ana.
The Commentary upon Genesis understands this also to be spoken of the same
person. This is another: I will wayt for the Lord who has hidden his face from
the house of Jacob, and I will attend upon him. The Disciples of Rabbi Hija
apply this in the Talmud to the Messiah. And yet in all these places
wheresoever is the word Lord, the Hebrewe has the word Jehovah, that is to say
the Beeer or he that is, which is the unspeakable or unutterable name of the
Creator, and in opinion of the Hebrews is not to be imparted to any Creature.
In the treatise Sanhedrin. cap Dine Mammonoth.
Whereupon it enseweth, that the Messiah, to whom it is imparted, should be the
very everlasting God; and that the ancient writers who attributed those
sayings to him, looked that he should be such a one. In the three and twenty
and in the three and thirty of Jeremy we read thus: Behold, the days shall
come, that unto David I will raise up a rightuous branch, and he shall reign
as King. These words belong to Christ's Manhood. But by and by after he says,
And in his days Judah shall be saved; and behold, the name whereby he shall be
called, shall be Jehovah, the Everlasting, our Righteousness. Here again is
the foresaid uncommunicable name of God, which the Jews do so greatly
reverence. Yet notwithstanding, the threescore and ten Interpreters, who were
all Jews, understood it so. And Ionathas interprets it of Christ in both
respects. As touching the latter Rabbines, who will needs correct the text,
and in stead of ijkreo, do set down ijkra, to the intent that the sense might
be, He that calls him shall be the Everlasting: I report me to all their
own Grammarians, whether it be not both a corrupting and a racking of the
text. And truly in the three and thirty Chapter the Prophet says the same
thing in diverse words: whereunto this forgerie cannot be applied. Lament 1.
verse. 16.
That is the cause why Rabbi Abba upon the Lamentations of Jeremy demands
what shall be the name of the Messiah, and afterward answers Jehovah schemo,
the Everlasting is his name. And to that purpose alleges he the selfsame
texts of Ieremies. And the Commentary upon the Psalms says, Midrasch Tehilim
upon the 23. Psalm. verse. 1.
Seeing that none of the Subjects of a King of flesh and blud, that is to say
of a temporal King, is called by his name (that is to say King): How happens
it that God imparteth his own name to the Messiah? and what name is that?
Soothly Jehovah is his name according to this saying, The man of war, Jehovah
[that is to say the Euerlasting] is his name. And Rabbi Moses Hadarsan R.
Moses Hadarsan upon Genesis ca. 4^.
expounding this saying of Sophonie, to call upon the name of the Everlasting;
says thus: Here Jehovah is nothing else but the King, the Messiah, [or the
anointed King.] And the same thing is repeated in the selfsame words in the
Thalmud. And whereas some, to disappoynt us of the consequence of these texts,
do say that in Ezechiel, Jerusalem is called by that name, where it is said
thus Jehovah schammah, Thalmudi^ the treatise Sa^hedrin, Cap. Helec.
[that is to say] the Everlasting is there; that is to say, the Everlasting
has chosen his dwelling place in Jerusalem: They by changing the Hebrew
vowels do make him to say Jehovah schemo, [that is to say] the Everlasting is
his name. But besides the consent of all Copies repugning to this
unshamefastness; Ionathas can assoyle the case, who translateth it expressly,
God has placed his Godhead there. Now, besides the said texts, which show
that the Jews of old time waited for a Messiah that should be both God and
Man: we have also great tokens thereof in those few writings of theirs which
remain dispersed here and there, notwithstanding yt the Jews hide the^ from
us or else corrupt them as much as they can. The Commentary upon the Psalms
says, Midrasch Tehilint, upon the fortith Psalm.
Because the Gentyles cease not to ask of us where is our God; the time shall
come yt God will sit among the Righteous, so as they shall be able to point him
out with their fingar. In the book intytled Siphrei upon the 26 of Leuiticus.
And whereas it is so often said, I will walk among you, it is all one (say
they) as if a King should go walk in his Gardyne with his Gardener, and his
Gardener should always shrink behind him: and the King should say, shrink not
back, for ^o, I am like thee: even so will GOD walk among us in his Gardyne
of pleasure in time to come. The book Mechilia upon the 14. of Exo. The
Ballet. 8. verse. 1.
And therefore another says that the Everlasting shall one day be as a
brother of Jacob, that is to say in the time of the Messiah, according to this
saying of the Ballet, I would feign that thou wast to me as a brother. And the
Commentary upon the Ballet says in another place, That God himself who is
the Husband of the Church, should come in his own person to marry her.
Leuit. 25. verse. 25.
Upon the xxv. of Leuiticus, where mention is made of one brother that
redeemeth out another, in the year of Iubilee; The book Tan huma^. Midraseh
upon Leuiticus. Rabbi Moses Hadarsan upon
many make an Allegory, that that brother is Christ. And the Commentary
affirming the same, says that Israel shall be redeemed of God, who shall come
in his own being, and that Israel shall no more be brought in bondage. And
upon Genesis, Genesis 49.
Rabbi Moses Hadarsan alleging this saying of the Psalm, Psalm. 49.
I will show him the Salvation of God; says thus: This is one of the Texts of
Scripture of greatest weight, that the Salvation of Israel is the Salvation of
God. For God will be the price and payment of Isreal's Raunsom, like as if man
having but a little Corn of the second Croppe, Midrasch sir Hasirim cap. 1
Rabbi Eleazar unto Zohar.
should redeem the same. Hereof came this Tradition, that God left some
portion imperfect on the Northside, to the intent that if any reported himself
to be God, he should fill up that want, and that thereby his Godhead should be
known. And all men know that ordinarily by the North, they meant the Evil,
which should be remedied by the Messiah. But the Cabilists were far more
spiritual in this behalf than the Thalmudists. And first of all Rabbi Simeon
ben Iohai The Cabilists. R. Simeon. B. Iohai upon Gene. 1. ver. 17. and cap.
17. ver. ^.
in his Commentaries upon Genesis in the language of Jerusalem, says that the
fear or mercy of the Lord should take a body in the Womb of a Woman, and be
Crowned King the ancient of days for ever. And that it was decreed that a
holy body and a woman should be incorporated together, In the book of
Shamefastnes.
and (for proof whereof he alleges an ancient book whereof he took it) the
same should be accomplished in the third age, that is to say, in the third
Period of the Church; The same upon Genesis. ca. 10.
and that then the higher world should by the said holy body be united to the
inferior world: so as God should be sanctified beneath as well as above, and
the holy Ghost should come as out of a sheathe, that is to say, should be
showed forth openly; and that all this is but one, namely the Everlasting
himself. And to be short, that the Woman of whom the holy word should take his
body, and out of whom the said faithful was to come; should be holy and
blessed above all other women. Now it appears that hereby he meant the
Incarnation of the Messiah. In the treatise Sanhedum. cap. Helec. Jeremy. 16.
For in the Talmud, the School of Rabbi Hamina being demanded the name of the
Messiah, answered Hamina, that is to say, Mercy is his name. And in the
Prophets, they betoken the Messiah by the name of mercy. Another Cabilist
says, The book of Faith and Reconciliation.
That sin shall be brought to end by the Messiah, who shall be the power of God,
even by the spirit of wisdom wherewith he shall be filled. And another says,
that the mystery of Messiah the King, is that his operation consists wholly
in he, vau, and iod, he, In the book Hecadma vau, He, Iod, He.
(which is the mystery of the seventh day) that is to say in calmness of
mind, without force; and that his name whole together shall be composed of these
letters, to wit, Jehovah, the Everlasting. But the holy Rabbi upon the 9.
Chapter of Esaias where Christ is called ye everlasting father, In his book
intytled the Gate of light.
plays the Philosopher yet further upon the letters of that name. Like as the
letter he (says he) is made of daleth and vau, Cap. 1.
(as appears by the shapes of those letters) so shall the Messiah be of the
nature of Man, Rabbi Hecadosch.
and of the nature of God. And like as the double he consists of a double
daleth and two vaus: so be there two Sonships in the Messiah, that is to say,
two sorts of being Son, the one in respect that he is the Son of GOD, the
other in respect that he is the Son of a Prophetisse, as it is said in Esaias
8. And as those shapes are distinct in one selfsame letter, and yet are both
one letter: so shall the natures of Christ or the Messiah be distinct, and yet
shall make but one Christ. I stand not upon the foundation which he takes of
the letters, which I make none account of: but the only thing which I mean to
gather, both by this text and by the former texts, and by all others that may
be gotten together, is that the expectation of the Jews in old time, was of a
Messiah that should be both God and Man: and that they have not bin able to
race it out of their books to this day, for all the diligence that they could
use in that behalf.

And for as much as I have said that in God there be three persons in one
substance, the Father the Sun and the holy Ghost: it follows that we must
see which of these three the Church of Israel waited that the Messiah should
be. And as we have found it meet that he by whom God created us (to wit the
son or the word) should be the mean to create us now agein; That the Second
Person took flesh.
so also shall we find by the Scripture, that the same second person is he that
was promised. In Genesis the Messiah is called Silo, and promised to be of the
stock of Judah. Now the word Silo (says Kimhi) Kimhi in his book of
Rootewordes.
signifies the Son of him, and is deryued of a word which signifies a
woman's Afterbirth as they term it, which thing is not to be passed over
lightly. And therefore David repeateth and expounds the same promise in these
words; I will be his Father (says the Lord) and he shall be my Son. And in the
lxxxix. Psalm Psalm. 89.
he adds, I will make him my firstbegotten, and souereine of all the Kings of
the earth: which word Rabbi Nathan expounds concerning the Messiah and thus
does David himself expound it in the second Psalm: Psalm. 2.
The Lord has said unto me, thou art my Son, this day have I begotten thee.
And ageine, Kiss the Son o ye Kings and Rulers of the Earth and happy be
they which put their trust in him. Surely it appears yt in all that text he
speaks of the Son of God, and not of the son of a man. For otherwise he
that has said unto us, Cu^sed be he that trusts in man, and a fool is he
that leans upon the Princes of the earth, would not say unto us, Blessed are
they that put their trust in him. But yet further Rabbi Selomoh ye son of
Iarchi, and Aben Esra (as much enemies as they be unto us) also do witness
that the said Psalm was understood in old time to concern the Messiah;
neither do they themselves expound it otherwise. Insomuch that Aben Esra says
expressly, that Bar signifies a Son in that place as well as in the xxxj.
Chapter of the Proverbs. And the exposition of the Jews upon that Psalm,
Midrasch Thehilim upon the second Psalm.
is that there God resembles a King that would destroy a ^oune in his anger,
if he were not pacified by his son. In the lxxij Psalm, Psalm. 72. verse. 17.
where the reigning of the Messiah is manifestly descrybed, His name (says
he) shall continue for ever, his name shall be everlasting as long as the Son
indureth. Am the Hebrew word Ijnnon which he uses, comes of the word Nin.
Which signifies a Son, as if a man would say Sonned or Sunnified. In the
Commentary upon the fowerscore and thirteenth Psalm, Psalm. 9. verse. 2.
these words Thy throne is from everlasting to everlasting, are expounded to
concern the Messiah. In the treatise Sanhedrin. Cap. Helec.
And the paraphrast (which is reported to be Rabbi Joseph the blind,) agrees
thereunto. And in the Talmud, the School of Rabbi Ianai being asked the name
of the Messiah, answers, Innon is his name; for it is said in the Psalm,
before the Son was in the sky, Innon is his name. Esaias, Jeremy and Zachary
in the texts aforealledged, do call him Impe and in all those places the Caldee
paraphrast translateth it the Lords Anointed: and Joshua the son of Levy
says that Impe is his name. But least we should think that this Impe were
but an Impe of David; Rabbi Joshua ben Leui in his Echa Rabethi, Cap. 1. verse.
16.
he is called there, the Lords Impe the Impe of the Everlasting, and the
Everlasting himself. Now there is not a nearer nor a properer metaphor tha^ to
term a son an Impe, or an Impe a son. This son we call moreover the
word; wherein the Jews dissent not from us. In the xlv. of Esaias Esai. 45.
ver. 17
it is said, Israel shall be saved by Jehovah (that is to say by the
Everlasting) with endless, salvation: which saying Ionathas translateth, by
the word of the Lord. In Ose, Osee. 1. verse. 7.
I will save the house of Israel (says the Lord) by the Lord their God: which
saying the said Ionathas translateth By the word of the Lord their God, and so
forth ordinarily in all other like texts. And it is not to be douted but that
by the said word they meant the Messiah. For in the Hundred and tenth Psalm,
Psalm. 110.
(which as they themselves affirm, conteyneth the mysteries of the Messiah)
upon these words, the Lord said unto my Lord etc. Ionathas says, The Lord
said unto his word, sit thou on my right hand. And Rabbi Isaac Arama upon
Genesis, Genesis 47.
expounding this text of the Hundred and seven and fortith Psalm, Psalm. 147.
verse. 18.
The Lord sent forth his word, and they were settled, or as others translate
it, were healed; says e^mes^^ that this word is the Messiah. Yea and Rabbi
Simeon the son of Iohai, the cheef of the Cabalists, writing upon Genesis
Genesis 10.
and by the way expou^ding there these words of Job, Job. 19. verse. 26.
yet notwithstanding I shall see my God in my flesh: says that the mercy
which proceeds from the highest wisdom of God, shall be crowned by the word,
and take flesh of a woman. But let us hear Philo Philo the Jew in his book of
the banished.
the Jew upon this point; Hardly can I say (says he) what time is appointed
for the return of the banished Jews For men hold opinion that it shall be at
the death of a high priest, which as some think is at hand, and as othersome
think is far hence ^^t my opinion is, that this high priest shall be the word
or spe^^h of God, clear from sin as well willing as unwilling, who to his
father has GOD the father of all, and to his mother has the wisdom whereby
al things in the world were created. And therefore his head shall be anointed
with Oil, his Majesty shall shead forth beams of light round about him, and
he shall be clothed with light as with a garment. For the ancient word of him
that is, is clothed with the world, etc. Also in Malachie Malachy. 5. verse. 8.
where it is said, I will send mine Ambassador before my face; Rabbi Moses
the son of Maimon expounds it, Before Christ the Anointed. And in Osee
Osee. 6. ver. 2.
where it is written, We shall live before his face: Rabbi Moses Hadarsan
says it is Christ the King. And in the 17. Psalm Psalm. 17. ver. vit.
where it is said, I shall behold thy countenance in righteousness, and be
satisfied at the rising up of thy likeness: Rabbi Nehemias says, I shall be
satisfied with the sight of thy Messiah, who is thine Image. And to the same
purpose might a great many more be alleged. The thing which they say is all
one in effect with that which we say, namely that the Son or word of God is
the image of God, and the brightness of his countenance. To be short, we say
that the Son is light of light, and they say the same of the Messiah. In Echa
Rabathi cap. 1. verse. 6.
For upon the Lamentations of Jeremy, Rabbi Biba being asked the name of the
Messiah, answers in the end, that it is Nehira, that is to say Light,
according to this saying in the second of Daniel, Dan. 2. ver. 22. Genesis 1.
Light is with him. And upon the place of Genesis where it is written, Let
there be light Rabbi Moses Hadarsan says that it is the Messiah, according
to Rabbi Abba, and Rabbi Iohanan upon the 36. Psalm, Psalm. 36. ver, 9.
where it is said, We shall see light in thy light. Oftentimes (say they) has
the light of Israel been quenched and kindled again, when they were one while
subdewed and another while delivered. But in the end he says, it is not to be
required that flem and blud (that is to say a mortal man) shall inlighten us,
but God himself in his own substance will do it. According whereunto it is
said in the 18. Psalm, Psalm. 18.
God has been our light. And likewise in Esaias, Esaias. 45.
Israel shall be saved by the Everlasting. To be short, like as we say that
the Son as in respect of the Father, is as a River in respect of the Spring,
or as Reason is in respect of the Mind: so say the Cabalists that the light of
the Soul of the Messiah, In the book entitled the Gate of light. cap. 2.
is in respect of the living God as Reason is in respect of the Mind; and that
the living God, as in respect of the Messiah, is as a Fountain or Welspring of
living water, in respect of the stream or river of life that flows out of it.

Now then, we have in our Scriptures a Mediator that is both God and Man. But
reason has led us to two circumstances more: The one is that this Man must be
of our race; and the other is that he must be borne after another manner than
we be; the one for our behoof, And of a virgin.
the other for his own dignity; and therefore let us enquire yet further of
the Rabbis concerning these points. As touching the first point, it is evident
enough of it self, and needs no long proof. For Christ is promised to come
of the seed of Adam, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Judah, and David; and the Jews
have believed it so certainly, that even during the time of their Captivity at
Babylon, they chose their Resch Caluta, that is to say, the chief Capteyne of
their Banished folk, out of the house of David, as from whence they looked for
a deliverer. And as touching the second point, Behold (says Esaias) Esaias. 11. 14.
a Virgin shall conceive and bear a Son, and call his name Emanuell; which
is as much to say, as that the Messiah shall be the son of a Uirgin, and that
he shall be begotten without fleshly copulation. The late writers of the Jews
say it is not written a Virgin or maiden, but a wench or young woman. I will
not urge them that the Hebrewe word Alma is taken ordinarily for a young Maiden
or Uirgin, as in the four and twenty of Genesis where. Rebecka is so called;
and in the second of Exodus where it is spoken of the Sifter of Moses. And
even in this place, the threescore and ten Interpreters translate it in Greek,
idou he Parthenos, yt is to say, Behold a Virgin etc. But I would have them to
tell me what the token is that is given here to the house of David, and whether
a token ought not to be some special and notable thing, and whether it be
not a matter of earnest, since it is God that gives it, who says expressly,
Ask me a token, whether it be from beneath or from above? I beseech them what
strange sign or token is there, in that a young woman bears a Child? What
thing is more ordinary in the world, and consequently more fond to be given
or taken for a miracle? Nay, the ancient Rabbines have well waded even into
the depth of this matter. And therefore Rabbi Moses Hadarsan writing upon the
85. Psalm, R. Moses Hadarsan upon the 85 psalm.
upon these words, Truth shall bud out of the earth, says thus. Rabbi Ioden
notes here, how it is not said here, shall be borne, but shall bud, because the
begetting and birth of the Messiah shall not be after the manner of other
worldly creatures, but he shall be bred without company or copulatio^. And it
is certain that no man names his father, but he is concealed and kept secret,
until he himself come and reveal him. And upon Genesis, Upon the 25. of
Genesis.
You have said (says the Lord) we be fatherless: and so shall the Redeemer be
whom I will give unto you, according to that which is said in the 4. of
Zachary, Zach. 4. verse. 7.
Lo, this is the man whose name is Branch; and according to this which is
said in the 110. Psalm; Psalm. 110.
Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedech. Also he reports
that Rabbi Berachia gathers the like. But Rabbi Simeon ben Iohai says yet
more expressly upon Genesis, Genesis 2.
That the spirit having bin shut up in a [womans] womb, should come forth
with great force to be the highest Prince, which is Messiah the King. And the
holy Rabbine proceeds so far, Hacadosch.
as to seek out by the proportion of their Cabalie, what should be the name of
the Israelitish Uirgin that should bear the Messiah. There remain many other
things to be treated of concerning the time, the place, the life and the death
of the Messiah, which are reserved for another place, peradventure more
convenient for them. Let it suffice us for this time, That in the Religion of
the Israelites, there was promised from time to time even from the beginning,
the Mediator between Gods Justice: and Man's Sinfulness, the Savior of men's
Souls, and the Author of the selfsame clensing which the very Heathen
themselves deemed to be so needful; namely Jesus Christ, God and Man, the
everlasting Son of GOD, borne of woman in his due time, without sin, free
from [desert of] Gods wrath as in respect of himself, and able to appease it
toward others, clean in his humane nature, and sufficient through his divine
nature to cleanse ours. And this is the third mark which I have showed to be
so needful in Religion, and so peculiar thereunto, that wheresoever the same
is found, there is Religion, that is to say, a way to Salvation; and
wheresoever the same wants, there is no Religion at all.

Sothen, in the Religion of Israel we have all the three marks of the true
Religion, The conclusion of the three Marks of the true Religion in Israel.
namely, the true God, the Law of God, and the Mediator of Salvation. And I
beseech all men to sooke well about them and to see whether they can find them
elsewhere in any other of the Religions that have bin of old time. Nay, asfor
in them, in sted of the true God, we shall find devils, men, and Stocks. In
sted of Gods word to inlyghten us to Soulehealth, we shall find doutfull
Oracles and answers of Idols, vain, fond, without ground, without end, which
speak not a whit of Gods glory nor of man's welfare. Insted of a sufficient
Mediator, we shall find a sort of wasshings that pass no further than the
skin; we shall find manslaughters, and sacrifising of wretched kaytifs
condemned for their misdeedes. But how should there be any religion, where is
no God? Or how should Religion be certain, where God speaks not? Or how
should it be a healthful one, where he himself is not the mean of atonement?
Certesse therefore let us say, that only in Israel was the true Religion; and
that Israel was as a School or Universitie founded by God, wherein he himself
voutsafed to teach, that men might learn their own Salvation.

But behold here is yet one objection against God. Objections*
How happens it (say they,) that this school was among this people only? why
was it not in all Nations? Why was it not (at leastwise) in some other as well
as in that? O man, it becomes man to hold his peace when God speaks, and to
yield to whatsoever he will have done. Thou art ryghtuous but so far forth
as thou do rightuous deeds: but as for God, it is far otherwise with him:
for with him, things are not rightuous furtherfoorth than he does them.
Nevertheless, I pray thee what can thou say? That in Adam, God the Creator
made all mankind: and in Adam al mankind is forlorn. But the wisdom of the
Creator stepping in byandby, reuealeth his word, and utters the promise of
the mediator to all men. Here now thou see no distinction of Nations or
people. Of Adams Children, some embraced the service of God and the promise;
and some forsook it, and regarded i^ not. Some (say I) took part with the
Devil; and othersome stacke to the gracious goodness of God. What haste thou
too allege here against the Rightuousenes of the Creator? After this follows
a general corruption of mankind; and God exhorts them by Noe to repentance,
threatening them with his wrath if they did otherwise. Still they refuse Gods
mercy, and for so doing are all drowned by his Justice, saving only Noe and his
household, who were saved in the Arc. Now were not all men hitherto only one
people still? And so; were not Gods word and the revealing of himself directed
still to al men? Ageine, ye see that in the Arc al mankind was gatherd ageine
into one Howsehold. At that time there was no difference of circumcysed and
vncircumcysed, of Jew or Gentyle. Anon they turned away unto Idols and
forsook the Covenant that God had made with them. Who has not cause here to
honor the patientnes of God in bearing with them, and to wonder, not that he
suffered men to take their own ways, but rather that he voutsafed to reserve
any men alive in the world? Yet notwithstanding, even at that time he chose
Abraham out of the mids of Idolatry, manifested himself new ageine unto him,
uttered his secrets unto him, delivered him his promises in pawn, and entered
into covenant with him and his seed. All which things were not done alonly
for him and his seed, but to bless all the Nations and kinreds of the earth
in the party that was to be borne of his seed, and to renew his Covenant with
them. Who then sees not here, both that the covenant was offered to all
Nations, howbeit that all of them had refused it; and that when God of his
infinite mercy renewed it with Abraham, he renewed it in effect with all men?
Thou desire that God should be just; and yet would thou also continue
still. Were he just after that manner which thou would have him just, thou
had been undone in Adam; thou had, been swept away with the flud; thou
had been destroyed in ye ouerflowing of vngoddlines and Idolatry after ye
flud; thou had (say I) been either utterly fordone, or continued forlorn for
ever. Thus desire thou things both contrary in themselves, and contrary to
thine own meaning. And therefore appeal not to Gods justice, but cry unto him
for mercy with both thy hands. And yet in thy desiring of this his mercy, or
grace there is yet another error; in yt thou will needs appoint him the manner
and measure thereof; and thou will have him to do it at thy pleasure: whereas
notwithstanding, if he should do it according to thy device, thou would find
fault with him for it; and if thou had liked well of it, another man would
have misliked it. But what advice could thou have given him for the creating
of thee, who as then wast not? Or what counsel would thou give him for the
recreating of thee, who art but ye worse for that which thou have already? Thou
would that God should have revealed himself alyke to all men. He did that at
the beginning. Well, such Revelations tend to a Mediator, and the same Mediator
must be God and man: and to be man it behooves him to be borne of some one
stock or other. And thou see that that privilege must needs befall to some
one certain stock: for he that is to save all men cannot be borne of all men.
If thou be a Roman, the gloriousenes of thy City will seem to deserve it:
But yet will Babylon and Niniue stand in contention with thee for it, and
Athens will think to be no less regarded for her learnings sake. How much
speedyer way were it for us, to cut of this strife by yielding unto God who
says, The case here stands not upon merit, but upon mercy: and to the
intent al men may perceive it to be so; I will have the welfare of al kingdoms
too come of a Hillocke that is hidden in the midst of the world, in the
digging down whereof they have taken so much peynes and pleasure. And less
this same Hillok itself should grow proud, I will make it to spring, not out of
the top, but out of the foot thereof; nor out of the head City, but out of a
little village that is unregarded. Yea and moreover, (as we shall see
hereafter) where it springs up, there shall it be refused, and strangers
shall set it on fire; Objections.
insomuch that where the foundations of the Kingdom thereof are laid, one
stone shalnot be left standing upon another. Let all the wise men of the world
wey these Circumstances, yea even according to their own wisdom; and seeing
that Salvation is a reward of free favor, and not a recompense of desert; a
thing that concerns Gods glory which is the final end of all things, and
not man's vanity: let them tell me where the Mediator of man's Salvation could
be borne, or where the Mysteries of his coming ought rather too be bestowed,
than in Israel? Yet notwithstanding if we consider still all circumstances;
the world shall still be found inexcusable. For the first Kingdoms were in
Siria, Assiria, Persia, Arabie and Egypt: upon the borders of all which
Kingdoms, Jerusalem stood as a Watchtower, for them to look at, or as a
Lantern to give light to all those nations round about it. And as the Empires
began to remove further of, into the Lesser Asia, Greece, and Italy; we see how
Gods providence did disperse the Jews and their Sinagogues into them
throughout the whole world as Preachers of the true God, Schools of his
service, and Heraults of the Mediator that was to come, to bring salvation to
all mankind. Now forasmuch as the end of Religion is man's Salvation; and the
end of our Scriptures is Christ the Mediator the bringer thereof: we must
henceforth see how he has bin promised from time to time since the first
beginning, and whether he have bin exhibited to the world in the time
aforelimited unto him. And that is the thing which we have to treat of in the
Chapters next following.

The xxjx. Chapter.
That the time whereat the Mediator was promised to come is ouerpast, and that
he must needs be come, as well according to the Scriptures, as according to
the traditions of the jews.
WE know already by our Scriptures, that there is a Mediator, we know his
office, his Nature, and the intent of his coming: and we know these things,
not only by our scriptures, but also by the Commentaries of the ancient
Jews. Now follows that we see whether he be come into the world or no,
which is the point wherein lies the chief difference and disagreement
between the Jews and the Christians. The marks and tokens of Christ's coming
Genesis 49.
The Jews look for him still, and think long for his coming. The Christians
believe he is come already, and put their trust in him: and both of them
ground themselves upon the same presidents, yea and oftentimes upon the same
clauses. In the Talmud. under the title San hedrin, the Cha. Helec.
Let the Scriptures therefore be judges of this case, and let us see what time
they behighted for his coming, and what tokens they give us of his coming.
First of all, The Scepter (says Jacob) shall not be taken from Judah, nor the
Lawgiuer from between his feet, until Silo come. This text is expounded of
the Messiah, by the Zohar The book called Zohar. Kimhi upon Genesis, and in
his book of Roots.
of the Cabalistes, and by the Talmudistes in diverse places, by the Chaldee
Paraphrases, and by Rabbi David Kimhi himself. And the Sense is clear; namely
that the souereintie and cheef authority of government, should continue in
the Trybe of Judah until the coming of Christ, The Kingdom is cessed
Bereschith. Rabba.
as the Onkelos and the Commentary upon Genesis expound it. Whereupon Rabbi
Hama the son of Hauina says in the Talmud, The son of David shall not
come, so long as any souerein authority be it never so small remains in
Israel: The Talmud in the Chapter Chelek.
and to the confirmation thereof he alleges a text out of the eighteenth
Chapter of Esaias. Esaias. 18. verse. 5 and 7.
Also Rabbi Mili alleging Rabbi Eliezer the son of Rabbi Simeon, Esaias. 1.
verse. 25. and 26.
says that Christ shall not come, until there be a clean riddance of all
Judges and all Magistrates in Israel. Which thing he will needs gather
likewise upon the first Chapter of Esaias. Therefore when they once saw that the
souereintie and all manner of Jurisdiction ceased in Jerusalem; they should
have taken it for a sure token, that the Messiah was at their doors. Now
therefore let us see if this alteration be come to pass, and the very peculiar
time when it came to pass. Saul (say some of their new Rabbines) was chosen
King in Silo of the Trybe of Benjamin, and it may be that these things were
spoken of him. Nay: for it is said, The Scepter shall not depart from Judah. And
seeing that the Scepter had not as then been in Judah, nor was to come into that
trybe, until David was afterward anointed King: the Scripture should rather
have said, The Scepter shall not be in Judah, until it have been taken from
Silo. Whereby it appears that the said text cannot be meant of Saul. 1.
Kings. 12.
Others say that Jeroboam the Son of Nabath removed the state of Ephraim from
the subjection of Judah, by the Rebellion of the ten Trybes, and was crowned in
Silo. Yea say we; but the Scepter remained still in Judah, Sedar Olam* Zura.
and the chief Senate in Jerusalem; and the state of Ephraim was brought to
ruin long time before Judah was carried away unto Babylon: Origin in his 4. book
of Princes.
yea and Jeroboam was crowned in Sichem, and not in Silo. Agein, what manner of
interpretation is this, until Silo come, The Talmud in the treatise Sanhedrin,
Chapt. Dine Mammouoth. Rabbi Moses the Egiptian in the preface of the
Maiemonims.
that is to say, until Ieroboa^ come who is crowned in Silo? Some therefore by
the word Silo, will needs understand Nabuchodonosor. For (say they) he took
Jerusalem, carried Judah away to Babylon, and destroyed the Temple; and by that
means they think to shift of the said Prophecy. But even in the time of the
captivity, the Jews had a Reschgaluta, that is to say a Cheef or head
governor of their Captivity, whom they chose of the Tribe of Judah, and
peculiarly of the house of David, as their own Histories do testify, wherein
they set down the succession of their Princes very carefully from Zorobabell
forth. This Hillel was a great Doctor among them out of whose School issewed
many great learned men in the Law.
And therefore the Talmud says, that by the Scepter, we must understand the
heads of the Captivity; and by the Lawgiuer, the Sons of Hillell, that is to
say the disciples of Hillel; of whom ye two cheifest were Ionathas the son of
Vziel the author of the Chaldee paraphrasis upon the Prophets, and Simeon the
rightuous of whom mention is made in S. Luke. To be short, the Machabies them
selves who held both the Souereintie and the Priesthod in Israel, were (as
they themselves report) of Judah by the Moothers side, Rabbi David Kimhi upon
Haggeus.
and of Leuy by the Fathers side (for those two Tribes were wont to go
together by alyance) or rather (as othersome report) of Judah by the Fathers
side, and of Leuy by the Moothers side. And as for the Sanhedrins, that is to
say, the threescore and ten Judges, (who in the opinion of Rabbi Moses
Hadarsan, Rabbi Moses Haddarsan upon Genesis. chap. 49.
were not to cease before the coming of the Messiah) they continued still even
under the captivity of Babylon, and under the Dominion of Machabies. Hitherto
therefore the Messiah could not be come: and besides that, it were an utter
wresting of the Text, to convey it any other way then to the coming of the
Messiah, against the whole consent of all Israel. But (says Josephus Josephus
in his first book of the wars of the Jews. cap. 5. and 25. lib. 15 cap. 9.
and 10.
the Jew) after the Wars between Aristobulus and Hircanus the last of the
Machabies, the Romans being Lords of Iewrie, did set up one Herod the son of
Antipater an Edomite, that is to wit a mere Stranger) to be King there. Which
Herod for the easier stablishing of his state, married the daughter of Hircanus
then prisoner in Parthia. Afterward when he saw that Hircanus (who only
remained of the stock of the Machabies, was returned home; fearing least the
Jews, Sedar Olam.
who bare an affection to him, should set him up again in the kingdom: he
killed both him and his daughter whom he had taken to wife, and also the
Children whom he had begotten of her. And not contented with that outrage, he
rooted out as many of the house of Judah, as lived in any countenance or credit,
defaced their styles and tytles, and burned their Pedegrees. Also he made High
Priests whom it pleased him, but not according to the Law, nor according to
their Trybes. Finally (as says Phylo Philo in his book of Times.
the Jew) he slew all the Sanhedrin, that is to wit the Threescore and twelve
Senators of the house of Judah, which were assistents to the king, and did put
Proselites and Strangers in their place; insomuch that having by his cruelty
abolished both the Priesthod and the Senate, and vttterly confounded the whole
state; he brought to pass, that at length about the thirtieth year of his
reign, he was accepted of all men for King, and ruled all things as he listed
himself. This is the time (say I) wherein the Souereintie and Jurisdiction of
Judah did cease; and that not like an Eclipse for a few hours, days or
years, but for a continual time. Insomuch that from that time forth (which
is now above fifteen hundred years ago) there has not risen up any one man in
all the world, being a Jew borne, that has any where had any authority
great or small among the Jews. Nay further, Vespasian, Titus, Domitian,
Adrian, and diverse other Emperors of Rome, have indeuered to root out the
whole house of Judah; and they of the Trybe of Judah have sought to co^ceale
themselves, and manifestly to corrupt their own Pedegrees, to rid themselves
from the rigorous inquisition that was made for them. Insomuch that at this
day, there is not a Jew (I report me to themselves whether I say not true)
which can vaunt that he has his pedigree certain, yea or which can show any
lykely conjecture that he is of the Trybe of Judah, that is to say, of the blud
Royal of the which Christ was promised. That which I have said appears
sufficiently by the present state of the Jews, which have so long time
continued, and yet still be without King, without Governor, without Priest,
without Judge, without Genealogy, and without certain succession. But
forasmuch as they refuse the witness of the whole world; let us hear their
own. In the 17. Chapter of Deuteronomie Deuteronomy. 17.
where mention is made of the King, it is said thus: Thou shall set him over
thee to be thy King, whom the Lord thy God shall give thee from among thy
brethren, and thou shall not set a stranger over thee. And the custom was to
deliver the Law to the King to read therein, Midrasch upon Deuteronomy
as is expressly commanded there. Now (says the Commentary upon that place)
when Herod's Agrippa who was a Jew in Religion, came to the reading of that
verse, he fell a weeping. Nevertheless, all the people bad him be of good
courage, and told him that he was their brother, notwithstanding that he came
of the stock of a bondwoman. And in another place it is reported, that at the
time of this change, In Bauabathra cap. Hasutaphim.
there was heard a voice from heaven saying, Now shall the servant prosper
without doubt, which steppeth up in Israel against his master: Whereby Herod
the great, took courage to pretend title to the Kingdom: And that as touching
the Sanhedrin, (that is to wit the Senate of Israel,) Herod the great slew
them euerychone save only one whose name was Bota, In the Talmud of Jerusalem
in the chap. Sanhedrin.
who could not create any more Senators, because it could not be done without
the laying on of the hands of more than one: And that a while before, the
Romans had driven them out of the Palace of Jerusalem, and that therevppon
they took themselves to Sackcloth and Ashes, and cried out with passing great
sorrow, Rabbi Ass and Rabbi Rahamon.
Woe unto us, for the Scepter is taken away from Judah, and the Lawgiuer from
between his feet; and yet for all that, the Son of David is not yet come.
In the foresaid place of the Talmud.
Thus ye see that the time of Christ's coming fell out in the reign of
Herod, in whom the Kingdom was conveyed to Strangers, Seder Olam.
and the Jewish Senate was utterly rooted out, which thing had never happened
at any time before.

Here follows another mark of his coming. We know there had been in
Jerusalem two Temples: The overthrow of thesecond Temple.
the first builded by Solomon and destroyed by Nabugodonozor; the second
builded by Zorobabel under the protection of Cyrus and Darius Kings of Persia,
and destroyed afterward by the Emperor Tytus. Haggeus. Cap. 2. verse. 4.
Now, of the second Temple thus speaks the Prophet Haggeus who was one of the
builders thereof; Who is left among you that saw this house in her first
beauty? But what think you by it now? Is it not in your eyes as a thing of
nothing? This does us to understand that the second Temple was nothing
comparable to the first in Majesty and stateliness. And in deed we read in
Esdras, that the good old Fathers which had seen the first, could not forbear
weeping when they behild the second. Also the Rabbines Rabbi Samuel in the
treatise Sanhedrin. In the Talmud of Jerusalem. R. Aha in his book of Days.
do report, that there wanted chiefly five things in the second which were in
the first: namely, Fire from heaven that consumed ye burntofferings, the glory
of God among the Cherubins, the manifest breathing of the holy Ghost upon the
Prophets, the presence of the Arc, and the Vrim and Thumim. And they affirm,
that to the same end it is said in Salomons Ballet, We have a little Sister,
etc. Midrasch on the Canticle. Cap. 8. verse. 8. Seder Olam.
which they say is meant of the Church under the second Temple, which in
outward show should not match the Church that was under the first Temple. To
be short, the Chronicle of the Hebrews beginning the History of the Church
of Israel under the second Temple, says these words: Hitherto the Prophets
have spoken by the holy Ghost: but henceforth bow down thine ear, and
hearken to the voice of wise men: which is as much to say, as that in all the
time of this second Temple, we see not one Prophet rise up. Yet
notwithstanding, the same Prophet says thus also; Rab. Selomoh upon the first
of Haggaeus, in the word ^eiccabhedah where he wants
The glory of the latter house shall be greater than the glory of the first.
And therefore he exhorts Zorobabel and Joshua the son of Iosedec and all the
people to be of good cheer. It was meet then that under this second Temple,
there should be some peculiar and extraordinary gift given of God, which should
excel both the Arc, and the Vrim and Thumim, and the Prophesying, and
whatsoever other glorious thing the former Temple had.

Some say that of the new things the stuff was much richer than of the
former. Admit that the first was of Silver and this latter of Gold. What is
there herein that can match the gift of Prophesying? Another says, that the
fashion and workmanship thereof was more curious. What is that to the presence
of God, who showed himself so openly in the first? Some (because the text is
flat against them) have accounted that the second Temple continued longer than
the first by ten years, the second having stood four hundred and twenty
years, whereas the first stood but four hundred and ten years. What can be
more vain or more cold, or less beseeming, either for God to teach, or for a
man that has any wit, to hear? I say, for God before whom a thousand years
are but as one day; or for Man, whom one day of adversity in his lifetyme does
more grieve, than a thousand years continuance of his buildings can pleasure
him after his death? Moreover, who knows not that this second Temple was
oftentimes defiled, and spoiled by Antiochus, by Pompey, by Crassus, and by
others? But the Prophet speaks shirle enough to them that list to hear. As
yet (says he) there remains a little time says the Lord, and then will I
remove both Heaven and Earth; I will remove all Nations; and they shall come;
the desire of all Nations shall come, and then will I fill this house with
glory. Genesis 59.
What is this desire of all Nations? We know it is Christ, of whom it is said
in another place, that he is the hope of the Gentiles, and that they shall be
blessed and happy in him. And the Chaldee Paraphrast has transtated here, the
Anointed. Also in the Talmud, Rabbi Akiba understands that text of Christ's
coming, howbeit that he mistake his person. Malachie. 3. In the Talmud, in the
Treatise Sanhedrin, Chapt. Helec.
And the Prophet Malachie who prophesied at the same time, expounds it in
these words. The Lord whom ye seek, and the Ambassador of the league which
you desire, shall come incontinently into his Temple. The very meaning hereof
is, that under this second Temple, the Church of Israel shall have the good
fortune to see Christ the Lord whom they looked for so long time. Now at the
same time that the kingdom of Israel failed, that is to wit in the reign of
Herod, about a forty years before the destruction of the Temple, The Talmud in
the Treatise Pirkei auoth: and in the Treatise Iomach.
the little beauty that was in it did utterly cease. For the spirit of the
great Sinagogue (say yt Jews) which after a sort supplied the want of ye
Prophets, came to an end in Simeon surnamed the Rightuous (of whom mention is
made in the first Chapter of Saint Luke.) And then also ceased all the
special blessings of the second Tereph Becalpi.
Temple reckoned up in the Talmud. Yea and God showed visibly that he abhorred
them, in that (say they) the ordinary appearing of an Angel at the entering
in of the Sanctuary, was turned into an ugly and black Bugge. And whereas
aforetymes thirty men could scarce open the door of the Temple; now it opened
of it self, whereat Rabbi Iohanan Ben Zaccai one of Hillels Disciples was very
sore amazed. And in the end, the Temple was so destroyed, that one stone was
not left standing upon another. And notwithstanding that the Jews had leave
to buyld it again, Ammianus Marcellinus, lib. 23.
specially under the Emperor Julian the deadly enemy of Christians, who of
his own purse gave greatly to the building thereof: yet could they never bring
it to pass; but (as the very Heathen writers of that time do witness) fires
issewed out of the earth, and thick Lightenings from the Sky, and burnt up the
workmen and beat down the works which they had begun with so extreme pride
and so excessive cost. Soothly we may well say therefore, and hardly can the
Jews geynsay it, that the second Temple is destroyed long ago, without hope of
recovery; and that Christ was promised to come before the destruction thereof.
Therefore it must needs be that Christ is already come into the world. And that
the hope of Israel was so, it appears yet further. For upon the last chapter
of Esaias Esaias. 66. verse. 7.
where it is said, Before her pangs came upon her, she brought forth a manchild:
Rabbi Moses Hadarsan says, The Redeemer of Israel shall be borne before the
birth of him that shall bring Israel in bondage. Rabbi Moses Hadarsan.
And Ionathas the great Disciple of Hillell says upon the same text, Israel
shall be saved before her extremity come, and the Anointed shall be showed openly
before the throws of her Childbirth come. Also Rabbi Moses of Tyroll, and
Bioces, both according to this Text and by their own reckoning upon Daniell,
do look for this thing toward the end of the second Temple. Likewise the
book which they call Bereschith Rabba Bereschith Rabba.
makes this Parable, As a certain Jew was at plough, an Arabian passing by
heard one of his Oxen low: and hereupon willed him to unyoke his Oxen, because
the destruction of the Temple was at hand: In the treatise Barachoth. In the
Talmud of Jerusalem.
and that byandby the other Ox lowed likewise: whereupon he bad him again
unyoke out of hand; for the Messiah was already come. And Rabbi Abon having
repeated the same in another place, says thus: What need we to learn it of
the Arabians, In Echa Rhabathi upon the lamentation of leremie.
seeing the text it self declares it? Surely I pass not for their Parables,
which have no very good grace with them, and oftentimes bewray that they wanted
wit in very deed: but my intent is to gather of them, that it was a common
opinion among them, that Christ or the Messiah should come into the world a
little before the destruction of the Temple.

Let us hear what the Angel Gabriell says to Daniell: Daniels Weeks.
for he goes nearest of all to the matter. Threescore and ten weeks (says he)
are determined upon thy people, Daniel. 9.
and upon thy holy City, to make an end of the disobedience, and to anoint the
Holy of Holies. Know thou therefore and understand, that from the going forth
of the commandment for the building again of Jerusalem, unto Christ the
Prince, there are seven weeks, and threescore and two weeks; and then shall
the streates and the broken walls be repaired again in short time. And after
threescore and two weeks, Christ shall be slain and nothing shall remain unto
him. And the people of a Prince that is to come, shall destroy the City and the
Sanctuary; and the end thereof shall be as with an ouerflowing, and it shall
be dug up with desolations to the end of the war. And he shall stablish
his covenant with many in one week, and in the mids of the week shall he
cause the Sacrifice and Oblation to cease, and for the spreading out of
abomination he shall lay it waste, etc. This only one Prophecy is enough to
convince the Jews, and therefore it behooves us to examine it from point to
point. First, that this text is meant of the Messiah, it is so evident and
absolute, that it is a stark shame to deny it. And so is it applied by Rabbi
Saadias upon Daniell, by Rabbi Nahman of Geround, and by Rabbi Hadarsan, who be
the notablest among them. For as for Rabbi Selomoh, who understands it of
Cyrus; or Aben Ezra, who applied it to Nehemias; or Rabbi Leui the son of
Gerson, who understands it of Joshua the Highpriest: there is not that word in
this text, which does not disprooue them; In the treatise Sanhedrin in the
Talmud of Jerusalem,
besides that the Anointing which is spoken of here, must needs be a
spiritual anointing, considering that there was not any more anointing at all
under the second Temple. There are (says he) threescore and ten weeks. Let us
see what manner of weeks they be. The Scripture tells us of weeks of days,
and of weeks of years; and examples of them both are in Leuiticus Leuit. 23.
and 2^.
and in diverse other places. The weeks of days serve for ordinary matters;
and the weeks of years for matters of great weight and of long continuance.
But Daniell Dan. 10.
may be his own expounder. For in the next Chapter he speaks expressly of
mourning three weeks of days; whereas here in a matter of estate, which
passes with slower steps and requires larger measure; he speaks of weeks
simply without addition. And in very deed Jerusalem could not be builded
again in seven weeks of days; but it was to be builded again in many weeks
of years. After that manner are they taken by Rabbi Saadias, Rabbi Moses, and
Rabbi Selomoh also, unto whom all the best of them consent: and there is not
any one of them (to my knowledge) which takes these weeks to be weeks of
days. But as for the yoonger Rabbines, whenever they be pressed, they say
these weeks conteyne either ten years a piece, or fifty years, yea or a
whole hundred years a piece; a thing without reason in this text, and without
example in all the whole Scripture.

It follows, from the going forth of the Commaundment for the building again
of Jerusalem to the anointed Prince, are seven weeks and threescore and two
weeks. That is to say, (as the Prophet himself expounds it) for the
building up of the City of Jerusalem and the Temple, seven weeks, which make
nine and forty years. And from the building again of Jerusalem unto Christ,
threescore and two weeks, which make four hundred thirty and four years;
all which together amount unto four hundred fowerscore and three years. And
in good sooth, if we begin (as the Prophet teaches us) to account the weeks
from the day wherein the word was spoken that Jerusalem should be builded
again, that is to wit from the threescore and tenth year of the Captivity,
Jeremy. 29. ^, Esdr. 1.
or from the first year of King Cyrus when Jeremy wrate to the prisoners at
Babylon, assi^ring them of their deliverance, at which time Cyrus gave
commandment for the building again of the Temple, unto the time of Herod
King of the Jews, or of Tyberius the Emperor of Rome: we shall find that in
that very time were fulfilled the four hundred fowerscore and three years, yea
and the very threescore and tenth week wherein Christ was to stablish the
Covenant of God with men. And it seems that Daniell or rather the Angel meant
in these threescore and ten weeks, to allude to the threescore and ten years
spoken of by the Prophet Jeremy; as if he should have said, At such time as ye
were led away captive to Babylon, Jeremy assured you that you should be
delivered from that temporal Captivity within threescore and ten years, and
ye see it is so come to pass. And now I tell you that within threescore and
ten weeks of years, ye shall be delivered from the spiritual captivity, by
Gods covenant made unto you, whereof the Anointed shall be the Mediator. I am
not ignorant how some writers begin the account of these weeks at the first
year of King Cyrus; and some at the second year of Artaxerxes; and othersome
at the twenty year of the same Artaxerxes, because at that time there went
out another Proclamation in favor of Nehemias, by reason that the building of
the Temple had been stayed. But which way soever they go to work, 2. Esdr. 2.
the end of these weeks falls still upon the time of Herod and Tyberius,
and meets iumpe with the prophesies that went before. And it can not be
denied but that they were accomplished according to the circumstaunces set
down here by the Prophet. For the Prince of the people that was to come,
destroyed the City; that is to wit, the Emperor of Rome did overthrow
Jerusalem and beat down the Temple, and abolish their Sacrificings through
the whole Land of Iewrie, and bring upon them the extreme desolation that is
spoken of here by the Prophet. And therefore some of the Rabbines being unable
to shift of this text, have presumed to say that Daniell had said well in all
the rest, but that he ouershot himself in this account.

The very traditions The traditions. Moses of Geround.
of the Jews themselves do bring us to this tymer At leastwise there is not
any whose date is not out long ago. In the Talmud The Talmud in the treatise
Sanhedrin, Chap. Helec, and euerywhere else.
is this saying of the school of Elias so greatly renowned among them. The
world shall endure Sixthousand years; Two thousand years empty, that is to
say without Law; Two thousand years under the Law; And two thousand years
under Christ. And Rabbi Jacob says hereupon, that the first two thousand
years ended in the time of Abraham; the second about the destruction of the
Temple (which thing he proves by an account of the times) at the end of which
latter two thousand he says that Christ should come and deliver Israel from
captivity. The Talmud in the treatise Auodazara.
Thus far he agrees with us. But he adds, for our sins sakes his coming
is deferred. This gloss marreth the text. For in other places it is said
flatly, that the time of the coming of the Messiah is past now seven hundred
and forty years ago, which thing they lament in both their Talmuds. And upon
this verse of Esaias, I will make have to do it in his time, which is spoken
expressly of Christ and of his Kingdom: Talmud in the treatise Sanhedrin.
Chapt. Helee.
Rabbi Joshua the son of Leuy apposeth these words, I will make haste, against
these other words, in his time. I will make haste says the Lord, at leastwise
if they be worthy [addeth Rabbi Iosua] In his time, [sayth the text] that is to
say, even when they would not, [addeth Rabbi Iosua] which meaning of his he
might have expressed much more fitly in saying, That Gods grace geinstandeth
our sins in such sort, as that all our iniquities cannot stop or stay the
course thereof.

We have another Tradition upon the ninth Chapter of Esaias. Talmud in the book
Sabbath, and in the treatise Sanhedrin.
where he sets down this excellent Prophecy concerning Christ, A Child is
borne unto us, etc. In that place are written these words, lemarbeh hammisrah
concerning the increasing of his kingdom, with the Hebrewe Letter ^ Mem closed
in the mids of the word, notwithstanding that the said Letter which as our M,
For so M is called with the Hebrews.
is not wont to be written so, but in the end of a word. Here therefore
according to their custom, they fall to descating upon the letters, and
because the ^ Mem is here closed up, whereas it ought commonly to be written
open thus, ^: they say there must needs be some great mystery hidden and
shut up there: and that as Rabbi Tanhuma was seeking the reason thereof, a
voice from heaven answered him, razi li razi li, that is to say, I have a
secret: which by the consent of them all, concerned the Messiah. But some of
them pass further, and say that this cyphred Letter imports six hundred,
that is to wit, six hundred years, which are to be reckened from this
Prophecy unto the Messiah. And in very deed, from the fourth year of the
reign of Achas, at which time the Prophecy was uttered, we shall find by
account that they fall not out long after the time of Herod. Another is read in
the Talmud in these words: Rabbi Elias says to Rabbi Iehudas brother of Rabbi
Sala the Essene, In the treatise Sanhedrin. Cap. Halec. Rambam in his Epistle
to the Jews in Affricke.
The world cannot have any mo than fowerscore and five Jubilees, that is to
say, Four thousand two hundred and Fifty years, and in the last Iubilee,
shall the son of David come without doubt; but whether in the beginning
thereof or in the end thereof I cannot tell. Rabbi Ass is of his opinion in the
same case. To be short, R. Moses Ben Maimon says in his Epistle to the Jews
of Affricke, R. Moses of Geround upon the five books of Moses.
that there is an ancient Tradition that Christ should be borne in the year
of the World four thousand four hundred seventy and four. The which
according to their own account should be past, now more then nine hundred
years ago. In the Capter Halec, of the treatise Sanhedrin.
And Rabbi Moses of Geround and Leuy the son of Gerson speak of another,
which behighted it in the year of the world five thousand one hundred and
eighteen: which by their own account is expired more than two hundred years
since. Finally after much alteration and vain expectation to no purpose, the
conclusion of the greatest Rabbines comes to this point, That it is needeles
to calculate any more for the coming of Christ, That all the times limited by
the Prophets are already past, and that there remains not any thing else than
repentance and good works.

Over and besides the time, they do also deliver us certain tokens of Christ's
coming, in their traditions. R. Iohanan. R. Judah, and R. Nehoray in the
Chapter Halec.
When the Messiah comes (say they) there shall be few wise men in Israel,
and many Seducers, Inchaunters and Wizards. The wisdom of the Scribes shall
stink, and the Schools of Divinity shall become Brothelhouses. Good men in
Israel shall be abhorred, and the countenances of the men of that age shall be
full of unshamefastness. Is not this a lively description of the manners of the
Jews, yea even of the Pharisees themselves, in the time of Herod and of ye
destruction of the Temple? Let us hearken what Josephus Josephus in his
Antiquities. lib. 20. cap. 6. and 8. and in his wars. lib. 6. cap. 15. and
lib. 7. cap. 9.
their own History writer speaks of them. Iewry was at that time (sathi he)
a Den and Harbor of Thieves, of Murderers, of Inchaunters, and of Seducers of
the people. And doubtless God was offended at their extreme ungodliness;
insomuch that he abhorred both Jerusalem and the Temple, and brought in the
Romans thither to purge the^ as it were with fire. Yea, and I believe (says
he) that if the Romans had stayed never so little to come to destroy them;
either the earth would have swallowed them up, or some great waterflud must
have drowned them, or else they had bin burned up as Sodom was. For that
generation was much worse than ever Sodom was. Thus then as well the writings as
also the notablest Traditions of the ancient Jews, do point us to the time
of Herod. And truly, Tacitus, Suetonius, Tacitus and Suetonius in the life of
Vespasian.
and Josephus himself (witnesses void of suspision) report that in that age it
was bruted every where, that out of Iewrie should come a King that should
reign over all the whole world; and that this saying was graven in a very open
and renowned place of ye Castle at Jerusalem; Ios^phus. lib. 7 Cap. 12.
which thing caused the Jews to be so ready to rebel, and so loath to serve
the Romans. Hegesippus. lib. 3.
And it appears by the whole History of that age, that all the people, yea
and Herod himself had their eyes and ears ever open waiting and watching for
the Messiah, the one to embrace him and the other to destroy him. For as in
all the former times, we read not that any man took upon him to be the
Messiah, False Christ's in that age.
and much less that any was received as he: so in this age there scarsly
passed any one year, but some one or other stepped up to be he, verily because
that (to their seeming) they had the disposition of the people, and the very
time it self answerable to their intent. Herod therefore who perceived himself
to have been but newly proclaimed King by the Romans, fearing to be
dispossessed of his Crown, did what he could to destroy the blud royal of
Judah, defacing their Genealogies, and not sparing even his own sons. Yea and
there stepped up certain Courtyerrabbins, which would needs make the world
believe that Herod was ye promised Messiah, whereof some will have the
Herodians to proceed which are spoken of in the Gospel. And this sect was
greatly furthered by the opinion of the fleshly sort, which by the Messiah
looked for a restitution of their State; that is to wit, of Uineyards, of
gorgeous buildings, of precious Stones, and of all things saving of themselves.
Also about the same time stepped up one Judas a Gawlonite, who called the
people to liberty, and mainteyned with some assistence of the Pharasies, that
they ought not to pay tribute to the Emperor. Josephus in his Antiquities.
lib. 18. cap. 1. and 2. and. lib. 17. cap. 8. lib. 20. chp. 2. and 6.
So also did another Judas the son of one Ezechias, a Capteyne of Cutthrotes,
and a certain Shepherd named Athrouges, whose pretense was no less than to
be Kings, and to deliver their followers from the yoke of bondage. Likewise
under the government of Faelix, and in the reign of Agrippa, a certain
AEgiptian taking upon him to be a Prophet, led certain people up to Mount
Oliuet, and made them believe that from thence they should see the walls of
Jerusalem fall down, and then they should go in thither. Again, under the
President Cuspius Fadus, one Thewdas undertook the like enterprise. Al which
are signs that they took advantage of the time, and abused the hope of the
people to the maintenance of their own ambition. But (which more is) we read
in ye Talmud, Talmud in the Treatise Sanhedrin Chapt. Halec.
that in the time of Agrippa one Barcozba (which name signifies the Son of
Lying) stepped up among the people, and pretending to be Christ, was taken so to
be by the Rabbines themselves, and reigned thirty years and a half: R.
Moses ben Maimon in his Sentences.
yea and that as Ramban reports in his sentences of Kings, they required not
any sign of him; insomuch that the great Rabbine Akiba the wisest of all the
Talmudists, became his Harnesbearer, and applied unto him the second Chapter of
the Prophet Haggeus expounded heretofore; until at length after long and
pernicious abusing of them, when he could not deliver them from the yoke of the
Romans, in the end they knocked him on the head. Yet notwithstanding,
afterward again, about a forty years after the destruction of the Temple,
another of the same name gathered into the City of Bitter all the Jews
Beresc^^itl^ Raba. R. Iohanan.
that were thereabouts; and of him they report wonders, as that he should have
a hundred thousand men about him, which upon trust of their invincible
strength, did cut off one of their fingers; that going to battle he was wont
to say, Help us not thou Lord of the world seeing thou have forsaken us, etc.
And that the Rabbines which had been deceived by the former, Talmud in the
treatise Col. Israel.
(so greatly were they persuaded of the time) received this man nevertheless,
and made him also to be received of others, applying unto him this text of the
book of Nombers, A Star shall come out of Jacob, because the Hebrewe word
Cocab signifies a Star; and saying that in stead of Cocab it ought to be
written Cozab or Cozba, which was his name. And this is written by their own
Histories, and confirmed afterward by ours, and also by the very Heathen
writers which wrate the life of the Emperor Adrian. Yet for all this, they
were still the more wasted, and carried away into Spain, and Jerusalem was
peopled with other Nations, and the whole Land of Iewrie made utterly heathen.
And as many as went about afterward to abuse the Jews under that pretense, (as
one did not long since in Italy) were by and by destroyed and welnere wyped
clean out of rememberance. Let us add yet further, that since that time
(which is now above fifteen hundred years ago) they never had any Prophets,
any comfort from GOD, any extraordinary gifts, no nor any knowledge of their
Tribes: which is a most evident token, that the Prophesies which amed chiefly
at Christ, are fulfilled, and that in him the Church is comforted and indewed
with the gifts which it hoped for; and to be short, that he for whose sake
the pedegrees were to be kept certain, is not now to be borne. And therefore
we see how some of them do say with Rabbi Hillel, That the days of Ezechias
have swallowed up the Messiah; that is to say, that he is not to be looked for
any more; and that folk have made themselves unworthy of him: and that some
others through extremity of despair, do pronounce them accursed which
determine any certain time of the coming of the Messiah.

Thus then we see now that the holy Scripture and the ancient interpretation
thereof, do meet together in the time of Herod, to show us the Messiah
there: and thereupon it is, that we see the people in the Gosphell so ready to
run after John Bapthst and Christ; and to move these ordinary questions, Art
thou he that should come? When will thou restore the Kingdom of Israel?
Shall we wait for another yet still? and such other. But But let us see what
startingholes stubbornes has inverted against the things aforesaid. The vain
answers of the Jews.
The Messiah (say the new Rabbines) was borne at the very same time, and in the
very same day that the second Temple was destroyed, that this Prophecy of Esaias
Esaias. 66. ver. 8.
might be fulfilled, Before her throws or pangs came, she was delivered of a
Manchylde: Berecs^hith Rabba upon Genesis cap. 30.
but he is kept secret for a time. For so do we read upon the xxx. Chapter of
Genesis. And in the Talmud, The Talmud, treatise Sanhedrin. Chapter Helec The
Children of Core were three brethren, which were Prophets at the same time
that the Israelites were in the wilderness.
Rabbi Joshua the son of Leuy says, that it is a Revelation that was made
unto Elias. I would feign then have them to show me what one Text in all the
Scripture gives any incling thereof. They ad that he shall be hidden sower
hundred years in the great Sea, eight hundred years among the sons of
Coree, and four score years at the gate of Rome. And Rabbi Joshua the son of
Leuy says in the Talmud, that he himself saw him there lapping up his sores
among the Lazermen. What are these things (even by none other witness then
them selves) but tales contrived upon pleasure, of purpose to mock folk? Some
say he shall be set up in great honor next unto the Pope, and that in the end he
shall say to the Pope as Moses did to Pharao, Let my people go that they may
serve me, and so forth. If he be borne so long ago, and keep him self
secret (as they say in their Talmud) but till he be called to deliver them;
what cause is there why he should keep himself away still, seeing they have
called him so much and so loud and so many hundred years, seeing also that the
time is expyred, yea and almost dubble expyred, and finally, seeing that even
according to their own exposition, it is said. I will hasten them in their
time? They answer yet still, there remains but a good repentance. Tooto^
miserable surely were we, if God should not prevent our repentance with his
grace. For the very repentance of the best men, In the treatise Sanhed^in. ca.
Helec.
is but a sorynesse that they cannot be sorry enough. But let us here a pretty
Dialogue of two Rabbis disputing in their Talmud of this matter. It is written
says Rabbi Eliezer, Turn again ye stubborn Children, Jeremy 4.
and I will heal you of your stybbornesse. Esaias. 24.
Yea, but it is also written says R. Joshua, Ye have been sold for nothing, and
ye shall be redeemed with money: that is to say, ye have been sold for your
Idolatryes, which are nothing, and ye shall be redeemed without your repentance
and good works. Yea but it is said says R. Eliezer, Turn ye to me, and I
will turn to you. Malachy. 4.
But let us also read says R. Joshua, I have taken ye in marriage as a wife,
and I will take you one of a City and two of a Household, and give you
entrance into Sion. R. Eliezer replyeth thus: It is said, ye shall be saved in
calmnesse and in rest. Nay says R. Joshua, it is written in Esaias, Esaias. 2^.
thus says the Lord the Redeemer of Israel to the despised Soul, and to the
people that is abhorred; that is to say, that your wickedness shall not stop the
course of Gods decree. Daniel. 1^.
In the end, Eliezer says, what means Jeremy then to say, If thou turn thee
ageine o Israel: seeing it is a conditional manner of speaking? Nay says
Rabbi Joshua, what meant Daniel then by this Text, I heard the man that was
clothed in linen and stood upon the Water of the River, and he lifted up his
right hand and his left hand up to Heaven, and swear by him that lives for
ever, and it shall be for a time and times, and half a time? And the Talmud
says that at this tert R. Eliezer was blankt and held his peace, which was as
much to say as that he condescended to that which R. Joshua had said, namely
that the offenses of Israel should not stay the coming of Christ, but that
God would prevent Israel with his holy grace. Agein, if the want of a general
Conversion do withhold the coming of the Messiah; then considering that the
punishment which lies upon that Nation is universal, and their banishment of
so long continuance and so far from whom, In so much that their Temple,
City and Country be destroyed, and they may not so much as once see them a
far of; what is the crime that is so exceeding great, so universal, and so
continual among them? I mean what is the fault peculiar to that Nation, and
not common to them with all other Nations of the world? The first Temple (say
they) was destroyed for Idolatry, for superfluity, and for sheading of
giltlesse blud, and specially the blud of Zachary and Esaias. Yet
notwithstanding they wanted not Prophets in the time of their Captivity; nay
they never had mo than then; so mercifully did God measure his comfortes to
them according to their afflictions. What is too be said then, seeing ^^at now
in so many hundred years they have not been comforted at all, no not even at
this day when they be both less given to Idolatry, and (to all seeming) more
constant in their Law; and in effect less given to Royot and less bluddy
than ever they were? Nay further, seeing that under the second Temple they
showed so great zeal against the Romans, that they admitted not any
Idolatry among them, but chose rather to dye a thousand deaths, than only to
receive either the Emperors Image, or the Romayne Standard peinted with an
Eagle; insomuch that they left the breach of the wall of the City unguarded,
rather than they would break their Sabbath day: What might be the cause that
God should withold the open manifestation of the Messiah, whom they affirm to
have been borne at that time, or multiply their miseries so extreemely? Some
say it was for their worshipping of the Golden Calfe in the Wilderness, that is
to say for a fault that was committed a two or three thousand years ago, when
as (notwithstanding) the people were then presently punished for it out of
hand, and many recoueries and overthrows had ensewed since in the mean while.
Others say it is for the selling of Joseph by his brethren; and thereupon some
of them bring up again the fleeting of Souls fathered upon Pythagoras. Why
do they not rather acknowledge herein their own cold absurdities? The book
Mechilta.
nay (says one of their books) it is for a fault which they know not, and
therefore it is not foretold them when they shall be delivered, as it was to the
Captives of Babylon. If they know not the fault, then can they not acknowledge
it; and if they cannot acknowledge it, in vain are all their Penances and
Repentance. And yet in very deed they have from time to time (and that not
long ago) done public and open penances, much more exactly to outward
appearance, than ever they did; of purpose to hasten their Messiah, who
notwithstanding (by the report of their Talmud Talmud in the treatise
Sanhedrin. Chapter Helec.
) is so near and ready at hand, that (by their saying) he wilnot stay one day,
if they turn unto God according to this saying of the psalm. Psalm. 90.
Tooday if ye hear my voice. But we say, that forasmuch as their punishment
is so universal, so long, and so extreme; their fault must needs also be so
too: And that seeing the former Idolatries and unrighteous were pacified in
the destruction of the first Temple, as they themselves say; It must needs be
some greater matter, that continues their punishment still after so many
desolations. And thereupon I conclude, both that Christ is come at his
foreappoynted time, and also that they have refused him; so as God has sent
them salvation in ye selfsame m^^er ye he promised it them by his Prophets,
and they have trampled it under their feet.

The xxx. Chapter.
That Jesus the Son of Mary came at the time promised by the Scriptures, and
that the same is Christ.
NOw then, in the time of the first Herod, wherein both the Prophesies of the
holy Scriptures and the ancient traditions of the Jews do meet, let us
examine who could have been the Messiah. For at that time (as I have declared
before) many pretended themselves to be he, of whom both the lives, the
doctrines and (almost) the names also are now worn out of mind,
notwithstanding that they were vphild by great multitudes of people, and
authorized by the chief Doctors among them. Nevertheless, in the same time,
and even in the selfsame year that Herod was accepted of the Jews for their
King, Philo in his book of times.
Jesus the Son of Mary was borne, whose whole life was nothing else but a
teaching of Salvation to that people; and whose end was to be crucified by the
Synagog; and yet for all that, his doctrine and name continue still through the
whole world. He it is whom we call Christ, and whom we affirm to be the
Anointed. And therefore let us see first how all the prophesies are come to
effect in him, and how he has fully performed the office of the Messiah.

Here let us call to mind the circumstances which we have noted hertofore. Esap
9.
The Prophets have told us that he should be borne of a Uirgin. Jeremy. 34.
The Gospel affirms Mary his mother to have bin such a one; and yet the
Jews which have come afterward, The Prophesies fulfilled i^ Jesus.
have written that she was taken in adultery. Well, seeing that in all their
doings they show so great rage against her Son; forasmuch as they had to
deal but against a sily woman that had no stay to stand unto, and their Law
is so express and peremptory against aduontryes: why did they not indyte her
of it, Borne of a virgin.
which would have quasshed the reputation of her son and of hirself both
together? Or why say they not rather that he was the son of Joseph; but that
Joseph knew and said the contrary? And seeing that Joseph disclaymed him for
his son, had they not the more advantage to have made him party and
playntif against her adultery? But she lived safely by them, both after her
sons death, and without sifting in his lyfetyme. And what greater proof of
her chastity desire we, than to see so many Pharisees, and so many Judges
enraged against one sily woman, Suidas upon the word Jesus.
and yet not daring to charge her with any crime? But the talk of one
Theodosius a Jew with a Christen Merchantman named Philip in the time of the
Emperor Justinian, is worthy to be noted in this behalf. In the Temple of
Jerusalem (quod the Jew) there were two and twenty ordinary Priests; and as
soon as any of them dyed, the residew chose another in his place. Now it
happened that Jesus for his singular Godlynes and doctrine was chosen by them.
And to the intent they might know the name of his father and moother, and
inregister it according to their custom; they sent for them, and Mary came
thither alone, because Joseph was then dead. She being asked the name of the
father of Jesus, answered upon her oath that she had conceived him by the Holy
Ghost, and reported to them the words of the Angel. Moreover she told them
the names of the women that came to her labor unlooked for; upon dew
inquisition whereof, when all things were found to fall out true, they
registered his name in the Register of the Priests in these words. JESUS THE
SON OF THE LIVING GOD AND OF THE VIRGIN MARIE. And this Register (quod
Theodosius) was saved at the sacking of Jerusalem, and afterward kept in the
City Tiberias, where it is preserved in secret, and I have seen it as one of
the chief among the Jews, and as one from whom in respect of my degree,
nothing was restreyned. And I believe thereby that it is not ignorance that
holds me in the Jewish Religion, but the honor which I have among my
Countrymen, the like whereof I could not have elsewhere. Now there is great
lykelyhod that this should be true, considering that Jesus (as we see) did
preach in the Temple, and went sometimes up into the Pulpit, which thing the
pride of the Pharisees would hardly else have endured. And the holy Rabbine R^
Haeadoch, in the third Question.
also says expressly that the moother of the Messiah should be a virgin, and
that her name should be Marie; and he gathers it after the art of the
Cabalists, out of these words in the nineth of Esaias, Esaias. 9.
Lemarbeh hammisrah. And Rabbi Hacanas the Son of Nehumia says that this
Marie was of Bethleem the Daughter of Iehoiakin Eli, of the line of Zorobabel,
of the trybe of Judah, which was the trybe whereof the Messiah should come. And
of a truth, we read not in the Gospel, that Jesus was vpbrayded by his
coming of the trybe of Judah, or of the house of David; but rather that he was
the son of a Carpenter; for the long continued adversities of yt house of
David, had brought some of his posterity to low degree. The Talmud, the
treatise Sanhedrin: Chapt. Nigmar Hadin.
And Rabbi Vla says that Jesus of Nazareth by name, being of the blud royal
(that is to say the son of David) was crucified the day before the Passover.
And seeing the Messiah was so precisely promised to be of that race; let us not
doubt but that the Scribes would willingly have verified the contrary, if they
had could, for then had the Goal been won on their side. To be short, to
come back again to the virginity of Mary, she was not a woman of such
kindred, alyance, and wealth, as might be bold to hope that her single word
would be believed without trial: neither were the people to whom she spoke,
besotted with ye opinion of the Heathen, who forged tales of their Gods to make
themselves to be the easelyer believed: but the thing was so true, that the
very truth thereof imboldened her. And in very deed, that is the very cause
why Simon Magus (to the intent he might not seem any whit inferior to Jesus)
denied not the same point, Clemeus in his Recognitions.
but rather granting it to be true, was desirous to make his Disciples
believe, that he himself also was the son of a Uirgin. The Prophet Micheas
Micheas, 5. verse. 2.
says, And thou Bethleem Ephrata which art but little to be counted among
the families of Judah, out of thee shall come to me the party that shall reign
over Israel, and his foorthcommings are from the beginning, and from the days
of eternity. Here again we have two births of Christ; the one in time, the
other everlastingly before all time. And therevppon rise these far differing
speeches of the people in the Gospel, saying one while; When Christ comes,
we shall not know whence he comes; In Berhleem. John. 7. ver. 42.
and another while; Is it not written that Christ shall come of the seed of
David, and of the town of Be^hleem where he dwelt? Now, that it was so
understood by the Fathers of old time, the Chaldee Paraphrase gives credit,
Jonathan ben vxiel.
where it is translated thus: Out of thee shall Christ come which shall hold
the souereintie over Israel. And Ionathas the author of the said Paraphrase, a
principal Disciple of Hillels, was yet alive at the same time that Jesus was
borne: and the holy Rabbine and Rabbi Selomoh consent thereunto. And that Jesus
was borne in Bethleem, even after such a fashion as was not looked for, I see
not that any of them denies it. Moreover, there was to be seen the Stable
wherein Christ was borne, heawen out of a Rock; which place Origin Origin
against Celsus.
reports to have bin singularly reverenced of the Infidels in his time.

The Gospel tells us that Jesus certain days after his birth, was carried
to Jerusalem to be offered to the Lord according to the Law, and that there
a man named Simoen, Simeon,
a man that was rightuous and feared God, being certified by the holy Ghost
that he should not dye until he had first seen Christ the Lords Anointed;
took him in his arms and praised God, saying; This day have I seen thy
salvation, etc. Luke. 1,
Here I charge the Jews before God, to bethink themselves well of the things
which they both write and read of this Simeon: namely, how that the Disciples
of Hillel should never fail til Christ were come: That this Simeon surnamed
the Rightuous, and Jonathan the son of Vziel were two of the chief of those
Disciples: That in this Simeon the spirit of the great Synagog did utterly
fail and cease: That God himself did then show by all signs, that he
abhorred that Synagog and the Sanctuary, and that all should go awry, and
that all things were full of darkness there. Talmud. treatise Pirker auouth.
and in the treatise Iomach. Chapt. Tereph Becalpi.
Whereof comes this change which they themselves do mark so advisedly, but
of their contempt of Christ? And whereas they say further, that the Temple
opened of it self, and that Rabbi Jonathan Ben Zaccai fellow disciple with
Simeon being astonished thereat, bethought him of this saying of the Prophet
Zachary, Zachary. 11.
Open thy doors thou Libanus, and let the fire consume thy Cedars: what is it
but the same that Simeon foretold unto Mary, saying; Behold, this child is sent
to be the overthrow and the raising up of many, and to be a sign that shall be
spoken against? This Child is named Jesus, Jesus.
that is to say Savior: and the Gospel adding the cause thereof, says; For
he shall save his people from their sins. Who ruled and directed his birth,
to be of a Uirgin, in Bethleem, and unthought of, to make it meet just with
the Prophesies going before, and to make his name now to agree both with the
Circumstances going before, and with all the whole course of his life? For of so
many men that had borne the name of Jesus before, as well in the time of the
first Temple as of the second; in which of them shall we find all these
things to concur as they do here? Neither is this naming of him so, in vain.
For like as neither Abraham nor Moses did bring the Israelites into the land
of Canaan, but Jesus the son of Nun: so neither the law of Nature nor the
law of Moses, could bring us into our true Canaan, that is to wit our
spiritual inheritance, but only grace by the true Jesus. And therefore the
Saint Rabbi says; R. Hacadoch.
That because Christ shall save folk, therefore he shall be called Jesus; and
because he shall be both God and Man, therefore he shall be called Emanuell,
Esaias. 9.
[that is to say, God with us.] And in another place, The Gentyles (says he)
shall call him Jesus. Genesis 49.
And he draws this name out of the nine and fortith Chapter of Genesis by a
certain rule of the Cabale which they term Notariak, by taking the first
letters of the words Iabho schilo velo, which make the word Ieschu: Psalm. 72.
and likewise of these words in the 72. Psalm Ijnnur schemo veijthbarecu: and
also of these in the 96. Psalm, Psalm. 96.
iagnaloz sadai vecol: all which are texts that are meant expressly of the
Messiah. Although I force not of these their doings, yet have I alleged them
against them selves, because it is their custom to show the cunning of the
art of their Cabale. And after the same manner have the Machabies also their
name, that is to wit, of the first Letters of the words of this their device,
Mi camocha baelim Jehovah; that is to say, Which of the Gods is like thee o
Jehovah? That the name Jesus should be revealed unto them, it is no strange
matter, considering that in the third and fourth books of Esdras, Jesus Christ
the son of God is named expressly and diverse times, and the time of his
coming precisely set down according to Daniels weeks. For although the Jews
account those books for Apocriphase, and the Primative Church has not
granted the like authority to them, as to the other Canonical books: yet is
it a clear case, that they were written before the coming of Jesus Christ, of
whom nevertheless they speak by name.

Now the Scripture promised also a Foreronner, A Forerunner.
that should come before the manifesting of the Messiah to the world. For
Malachie Malachy. 3. verse. 1.
says, Behold, I send my Ambassador to make way before him, and by and by
after shall the Lord whom you seek, enter into his Temple. And in the next
Chapter following, he is called Elias, by reason of the likeness of their
offices; and this text (as I have showed before) is understood by them
concerning the Messiah. R. Moses Ben Maimon in his Sentences. Mark. 9. ver. 1^.
And soothly we have certain footestepes thereof in these words of the Gospel,
The Scrybes say that Elias must first come. And in another place, Art thou
Christ, or Elias, or one of the Prophets? A little before that Christ disclosed
himself, John the Baptist stood up in Israel, The Ghronicle of the Princes of
Israel under the second Temple.
and was followed by such a multitude of people, that all the great ones
grudged at him: and he is the same man who^ by way of prerogative, the
Chronicle of the Jews calls Rabbi Iohanan the great Priest. Concerning this
John the Baptist, forasmuch as they suspect our Gospel, let them believe their
own Storywriter. Iosepus. lib. 18 Cap 7.
There was (says he) a very good Man that exhorted the Jews to virtue, and
specially to Godlynes and vpryght dealing, inuiting them to a cleanness both
of body and mind by baptim. But when Herod perceived that great multitudes of
people followed him, which (to his seeming) were at his commaundment; to avoid
insurrections he put him in prison, where anon after, he cut of his head. And
therefore it was the common opinion, that when Herod's army was afterward
overcome and utterly put to the sword, it was through Gods iustiudgement for
putting of John Baptist unjustly to death. By this witness of Josephus, we see
what his office was, namely to preach repentance and to Baptize, or (as
Malachie says) to turn the hearts of the Fathers to their Children, and the
hearts of the Children to their Fathers. But the thing which we have chiefly
to note here, is that having the people at commandment, yet when Jesus came,
he gave Jesus place, and humbled himself to him, and yielded him the glory:
the which thing man being led by affection of man would never have done.
Insomuch that after that Jesus had once showed himself, the Disciples of this
great master showed not themselves as his disciples any more; and that was
because his trayning and teaching of them was not for himself, but for Jesus.
And as touching the peculiar act of Baptizing, it seems that the Levites
waited for some special thing upon it, in that they asked of John, How
happens it that thou Baptizest, if thou be neither Christ, nor Elias the
Prophet?

But let us come now to treat of the life of Jesus, not according to our
Gospells, but according to such Histories as the Jews themselves cannot deny:
and what else is it than the very body of the shadows of the old testament,
and the very pith and substance of the words that were spoken before concerning
the Messiah? Let us call to rememberance to what end he came, namely to save
Mankind: and the nature of his Kingdom, The kingdom of Jesus is spiritual.
how it is holy and spiritual. Whereof are all his Preachings, but of the
forgiveness of sins, and of the Kingdom of Heaven? his Disciples were
always importunate upon him in asking him, Lord when will thou set up the
Kingdom of Israel agein? In sted of contenting their fancyes, he answers them
concerning the Kingdom of Heaven. They Imagined some Empire of Cyrus or
Alexander: that their Nation might have been honored of all other nations of
the earth. One of them would needs have sit on his right hand and another on
his left. What answers he to this? Nay (says he) whosoever will be greatest,
let him be the leaft; and if I being your Master be as a Servant among you,
what ought you to be? Ye shall be brought before Magistrates: that is far
from reigning. Ye shall be persecuted, imprisoned, tormented, and crucified:
that is far of from triumphing. I will give you to understand how great things
ye be to suffer for my names sake: yt is very far from parting of Countries.
Yet notwithstanding, happy shall you be when you suffer these things, and he
that holds out to the end shall be saved. Who can imagine any temporal thing
in this kingdom, whereof the first and last Lesson is, that a man to save his
life must lose it? and to become happy must wed himself to wretchedness? The
people follow him for the miracles which he woorketh: and the Jews deny not
but he did very great ones. But let us see whereto they tended. He fed a great
multitude of people in the wilderness, with a feawe Loaves. This miracle was
matter enough for him to have hild them with long talk; but he preaches unto
them of the heavenly bread which feeds unto everlasting life. Also he
heals all sick and diseased folk that come unto him: howbeit, to show that
that was but an appendant or rather an income to that for the which he came;
Thy sins (says he) be forgiven thee. To be short, from Abraham's Well, he
directs the Woman of Samaria to the Fountain of life. Being showed the
goodly buildings of Jerusalem and of the Temple, he foretells the overthrow
of them both. Being required a sittingplace at his right hand or at his left;
he answers of a Cup that such a petitioner is to drink. When men go about
to make him King, he steals away from them. And whereas his Apostles look for
some great triumph; his accomplishing of it is after the manner that the
Prophet Zachary speaks of, namely by ryding upon a she Ass, even upon the
Colt of an Ass. And yet nevertheless Herod the King trembles at him in his
throne, the whole Counsel of the Realm are in a perplexity, and all the
people are astonished. And in his doings he makes it to appear sufficiently,
that he has the hearts of all men in his hand, and that if he himself listed
he should be obeyed both of the greatest persons and in the greatest matters.
Surely then we may well say, that the mark which this Jesus and the mark
which the Messiah leueleth at, are both one; namely to draw men from the
earth, and to make them to plant their whole hope by his means in heaven.

It follows that to this office which he did evidently take upon him, he
brought the qualities requisite to the executing thereof, that is to wit, that
he was both God and Man: I say, God as the Son of God, and Man God and Man
as borne of a woman, without sin, and such in all points as he was
forepromised to be. Of this hope we have some footesteppes in the Gospel. For
some say, We have heard say that Christ endures for ever. John. 12. verse. 34.
And Nathaneel himself says, Sir, Art thou the Son of GOD and the King of
Israel? That is to say, art thou the Son of GOD whom we look for to be the
King of Israel? To the same purpose may we set his two natures here one
against another. He himself was hungry; and yet he fed many thousands with
a feawe Loaves. He suffered thirst; and yet he gave other men living Waters
that ouerflowed. He was weerie, and yet he said come unto me all ye that are
weerie. He paid tribute, but he commanded the Fish to pay the Tributemony for
him. He was dumb as a Lamb, but yet was the very speech itself. He yielded up
his spirit and dyed, but he told them he had power to take it to him again.
To be short, he was condemned, but he justifies: He was slain, but he
saves: He prayed; but his praying was for us, and he hears our prayers. For
these countermatchings and the like do we read of in our Evangelists, in
whom we have the doings of both natures distinguished, and yet
notwithstanding joined together in one person. But if they will utterly deny
our Gospels; then shall we in that point be more upright than they: for we
will not deny al their writing. Now they agree with us that he was man; and
for all their casting up of their Foame against him in their books, yet are
they not able to charge him with any vice even in his private life: and
therefore the chief thing that we have to stand upon, is the proof of his
Godhead.

Jesus (says our Gospel) wrought miracles. The Miracles of Jesus.
He healed the sick, restored Limbs to the lame, gave sight to the blind,
and raised the dead unto life: and that not in one or two places, but in many:
nor in a corner, but in the open sight of the world: and there are many
thousands of men which will rather dye upon the Rack than deny him, yea or not
preach him. I ask them upon their consciences, if they will deny that he
wrought any miracles. If they deny it: then what a mirac^e is this, that so
many people do follow a poor abject without miracles, and are contented to
dye for his sake, even when he himself is dead? And if these miracles of his
(as namely the restoring both of sight and life, and such others) were not very
great and far surmounting all nature of man; yet who would lose his life, but
for a better? and how could he give the better, which could not give the
other? And if it be a miracle to work upon a man by touching him, and much
more without touching him, and most of all without seeing him: what a miracle
is it to work in the hearts of whole Nations far of, without seeing them;
and to touch them without coming at them; and to turn them to him without
touching them? And if the bones of Elias be commended for prophesying in his
Tumbe; what shall this Jesus be for ouercomming so many people, and for
conquering so many Nations after his death, yea and (which is a greater matter)
even by the death of his servants, who preached nothing but his death? But the
Rabbines saw welly nough that the miracles of Jesus could not be denied. And
truly R. Iohanan says in the Talmud, The Talmud of Jerusalem in the treatise
Auodazara.
that a Neuew of R. Joshua the son of Leuy had taken poison, and that being
adjured by the name of Jesus, he was healed out of hand: and this is a
verifying of that which Jesus himself says, Mark. 16.
namely that if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them: And Rabbi
Ioses says, that when a Serpent had bitten Eleazar the son of Duma, Midrasch
Coheleth.
James the Disciple of Jesus would have healed him, and Rabbi Samuel would not
suffer him. Joseph in his Antiquities. lib. 18. Cap. 4.
And Josephus their own Storiwriter speaking of the miracles of Jesus, finds
them so wonderful, that he cannot tell whether he ought to call him Man or
God. And they ought not to think it strange that he should work miracles,
considering that they believe the miracles of Moses, of Elias, of Eliseus, and
diverse others. In the Talmud, treatis^ Sanhedrin. chap. Dinei Mammonoth col:
lib. 20. Iap. 6.
But some of them did attribute his miracles to Magic, and some to the power
of the name of God which they charged him to have usurped: in the examining of
both which points, I beseech them to join with me without affection.

As touching Magic, they say that their threescore and ten Senators whom
they call Sanhedrin, were very skillful in it; and so says R. Selomoh also,
the better to convince the Inchaunters. And we read in Josephus, that Magic
was never more frequented in Iewrie then it was among the Doctors at this time.
Now if their meaning was to convict Jesus as an evil doer; why did they not
put him to shame? why did they not use the rigor of the Law against him? How
happens it that in their accusing of him, they charge him not with any
Magic at all? Or if they meant to overcome him by the art; why did not some
one of them work the like things or greater? Why did not their miracles
swallowe up his? Nay contrariwise, whereof comes it that Josephus calls
Jesus a worker of miracles, and the other sort Magicians and deceitful
Cowseners? And that his miracles work still even after his death, whereas
theirs vanished away before they were dead? But like as in the time of Moses,
God suffered great Magicians to be in AEgipt, that he might make his own
power the more evident in Moses: so at this time there was great store of them
in Iewrie, to the intent it might appear what difference is betwixt that which
man can do by the Devils abusing of him, and that which the fingar of God
himself can do in man. And in good sooth I dare well say, there is not any
art in the world, that does more clearly verify the miracles of Jesus, than
Magic does. For by Plinies report, there were never mo Magicians, than in the
time of Nero, (which was the time that Christ's Disciples did spread his
doctrine abroad) neither was the vanity of that Art ever more apparently
known (as he witnesses) than at that time. And even among the Jews of our
time, that science is more common at this day, tha^ among al other people. For
they make books thereof, specially in the Eastpartes of the world. But what
are they else than casts of Legierdemayne or Iuggliugtrickes, and toys for
Babes to play withal? And as for the Magicians which the Princes of
Christendom maintain in their Courts, to the shame of us all and to their
own confusion; what are the things which they do, but (to speak fitly) mere
illusions that vanishe away out of hand, as which consist in some nimble tricks
in playing at Cards and Dyce, or in slipper devises of slight and vain things?
Of which kind of folks and dealings, I say not who would willingly dye for
them, but who would not be ashamed to live with them? As for Jesus, we see it
is far otherwise with him. He wrought very great miracles in the world: and
although he was crucified, yet (says Josephus) his Disciples forsook him
not: and therefore even after he was gone from them, they wrought miracles
still: and what manner of Miracles? Surely even such as within the space of
twenty years or thereaboutes, filled all the world full of Christians: and
that miracle continues still unto this day. The Empires which had not heard
any speaking of Christ, were converted to the Kingdom of Christ, and believed
him for his doings before they heard of his name. The Emperors under whom he
had been crucified, and his Disciples diversely persecuted, are glad to do him
honor, and to build Temples unto him. Let the Jews tell me what Magician
they ever heard of, that wrought such miracles after his death? If they say
that Christ's Apostles and Disciples also were Magicians; then seeing that no
man which is well advised, does any thing but to some end; let them tell me
what gain the Apostles could get by exercising this Magike, which procured
them nothing but hatred, sorrow, imprisonment, torments, and cruel death? And
seeing that Magicians do hyde themselves and conceal their art when they be
pursued for it: what kind of Magic is this, which will needs be known and
exercised, even in despite of Princes, and of the world, yea and of death; that
is to say, even in despite of the man himself (if I may so say) that does
practice it? If it be further replied that some extreme vainglorie led them:
how happens it that every of them did not cause himself to be worshipped
alone? And that they did not their works in their own names, but referred all
to Jesus, yielding unto him the power, the honor, and the glory of all? If
they say (as of force they needs must) that the power of the crucified Man
wrought still in them and by them: Let them say also that the same man lived
still even after his crucifying, yea and a far other life than all other men
(considering that after this life he makes men to be more than men) that is to
wit, a life not only free from death, but also everlasting and diuin^ in
deed; and so is far of from the punishment appointed by them to Magicians,
that is to wit from being in Iayle and under torture, or (as they themselves
term it) in endless death. But as soon as they perceive themselves stopped
on that side, by and by they seek to escape out another away.

Jesus (say they) wrought his miracles by virtue of the unutterable name of
God, which he minded. And thereupon they fall to an account, which shows (as
many other in their Talmud do) that in Gods matters they wanted not only the
spirit of God, but also even the humane wit and reason: and God knows I would
be ashamed to rehearse it, but for their own welfare. Their saying then is,
that in Salomons Temple there was a certain stone of very rare virtue, wherein
Solomon by his singular wisdom had engraven the very true name of God, which
it was lawful for every man to read, but not to cun by heart, nor to write
out: And that at the Temple door were two Lions tide at two Cheynes, which
rored terribly, that the fear of it made him to forget the name that had
committed it to memory, and him to burst asunder in the mids that had put it in
writing. But Jesus the son of Mary (say they) regarding neither the curse
annexed unto the prohibition, nor the roaring of the Lions; wrate it out in a
bill, and went his way with it with great gladness: And least he might be
taken with the thing about him, he had a little opened the skin of his Leg
and put it in there, and afterward wrought his miracles by the virtue of that
name. Now ye must think that if I was ashamed to repeat this geere, I am much
more ashamed to stand confuting of it. Neuerthelater, seeing that the
sumptuousnes of Salomons Temple is described so diligently unto us, and yet no
mention is made either of that rare stone, or of those Lions that were so
zealous of Gods name: whence I pray them have they this so fair tale? And how
comes it to pass that Josephus was ignorant thereof, who had so diligently
perused their matters of remembrance; or how come they to the first knowledge
thereof, so many hundred years after? Ageine, where became those Lions at such
times as the AEgiptians and Bahylonians spoiled Jerusalem and defiled the
Temple? How found they them ageine in the second Temple? Or if they were
immortal, where became they afterward? Nay further, how happens it that
Solomon that great king who consecrated and ingraued the said Stone, wrought
not the like miracles himself, specially since we read not that he wrought
any miracle at all? And what godlynes had it been for him, to have concealed
and kept secret that name, which would have cured so many diseases of body and
infirmities of mind? whereby folk might have been turned away from idolatry,
and the whole world might have been won unto the law of God? But if I must
needs answer fools further according to their folly; then if Jesus be the
servant of the living God, and use his name to his glory, why do they not
believe him? Or if he served not GOD, how was it possible that the name of God
should be waged by a mortal man, against the glory of God? And what a
blasphemy is it to^ uphold, that the power of God is so tied to his name, that
his enemies may (whether he will or no) serve their own turns, both with his
name and with his power, to the overthrow of his kingdom, and to the
stablishing of theirs? Nay rather, let us say according to their own teaching,
that Jesus did great miracles, In the treatise Sanhedrin. chapter Helec.
both in the name of God and in the power of GOD, and that God gave power unto
his name, and not the name unto God. Jesus therefore was certainly the servant
of God, and endewed with such power from God.

Now, whereas some deny that Christ should work miracles, when as
notwithstanding, the Scripture says the contrary, and the Jews in the Gospel
do continually exact signs and miracles at his hand, and their Talmud
reports that Christ should discern good from evil by the only sent or
savor, by the want of which property they say that Barcozba was bewrayed not
to be the Messiah; and whereas they affirm that the wild beasts should lay
away their woodnesse, and that Jerusalem should be hoyssed up three leagues
into the air, and such other like: I confess in deed^ that the chief end of
Christ's coming, was not to work miracles, accordingly also as we see that
his doing of them was but as by works and upon occasion; and I esteem more
of those which do hear his word and keep it, than of those which remove
Mountains. Nevertheless, Rabbi Hadarsan R. Hadarsan upon the Psalm. 74.
says he had learned of Rabbi Natronai, that Christ should come with very
great signs and miracles, and that the Pharisees should attribute them to Art
Magic, and to the names of unclean Spirits, according whereunto we read in
the Gospel, that they said thus, He casts out Deuilles by the name of
Beelzebub. And the Commentary upon the book of the Preacher says, Midrasch
Coheleth. Capt. 1. Talmud. treatise Baracoth. Chapt. Memathai korin.
that all the miracles which went before, are nothing to the miracles of the
Messiah. Also the Talmud in a certain place says, That the miracles which
shall be wrought in the time of the Messiah in the kingdoms of the Gentyles,
compared with the miracles that were wrought in AEgipt, shall be as the substance
to the accident.

Unto Miracles is joined Prophesying, The Prophesyings of Jesus,
as a thing to be numbered among the chief miracles. That Christ should be a
Prophet, they will not deny: for they take the text of Deuteronomie Deuter. 8.
and 18.
where a Prophet is promised them, to be meant of Christ: and thereupon rises
this common demand in the Gospel, Art thou the Prophet? And whereas they say
in their Talmud, that the Messiah shall judge of things by their only smell; it
cannot be soundly understood of any thing else, than of an excellent gift of
Prophesying. To let pass a thousand particular Prophesies, and a thousand
texts whereby we perceive that Jesus read things in the hypocritish hearts of
the Pharistes, and saw things in the hearts of his Disciples, which they
themselves neither saw nor perceived: who will not wonder at these which we
see so peremptorily come to pass, namely, Ye shall be brought before the
Princes and Magistrates of the earth; men shall think they do service unto
God, when they murder you for my names sake; that the glad tidings of his
kingdom should be preached through the whole world, notwithstanding all
impediments; That Jerusalem should be destroyed; That all things should be
wasted and unhallowed there; That of the same Temple which they reverenced so
much, one stone should not be left standing upon another; And that the time
wherein these things should be done was then so near hand, that even those
which led him to death, had cause to bewail themselves and their Children? For
what I pray you could those poor Fishermen think, when he spoke to them of
being led before Kings; and (which more is) when he told them that they should
drive Nations like flocks of Sheep before them at the hearing of the Gospel?
What likelihood was there hereof in his own person or in theirs, considering
the lowliness of his life, and the reprochfulnesse of his death? And as
touching the destruction of Jerusalem which befell about a forty years
after; since we read expressly in their own Histories, that the Emperor Tytus
offered them peace, sought the preservation of their Temple, granted them the
free use of their Religion, and during his seege did seek as it were by
intreatance to them being beseeged, that he might save and preserve them; and
yet notwithstanding (as Josephus reports) they would needs perish whether he
would or us, and wilfully cast themselves into the same extremities whereof
Jesus had forewarned them: who can say that he was ignorant of the
unchangeable determination of God, notwithstanding that to the sight of Man,
the matter was as likely to have fal^e out otherwise as ever any was, specially
considering that the enemies themselves, on whom the whole case seemed to
depend, labored by all means to turn the destruction away from the beseeged?

Now, albeit that as well Prophesying as Miracles, have either of them their
peculiar and uncommunicable marks of Gods spirit and finger, The Doctrine of
Jesus.
whereby to discern the one from the other: Yet certesse, doctrine is the
touchstone of them both. Deut^ron: ^^.
For, if there rise up a Prophet (says the Law) and give thee a sign or
miracle, and therevppon he come and counsel thee to turn aside to strange
Gods: thou shall not hearken unto him. Therefore let us see what doctrine Jesus
matched with his signs and miracles. Let us read the Gospel from the one
end to the other, and we shall see nothing there but to love God with all our
heart, and our neighbor as our self. Also he came not to abolish the Law,
but to fulfill it; nor to destroy the Temple, but to purge it. The Pharisees
had extended the Law but to the outward man; he condemns their hypocrisy,
and brings it back again to the inward man. They said, hate your enemies:
but he said, if ye love none but your friends, what are ye better than the
Publicanes? They said, Thou shall not commit adultery; thou shall not kill:
But he said, If thou look upon a woman to lust after her, thou have broken the
Law: and if thou say to thy brother, Racha; thou have already killed him. To
be short, a neighbor by their interpretation, was but in Jericho or near
thereabouts: but he told them that a neighbor was in Samaria, in idumea, and
in all the corners of the world. Also if a case concern God, he taught men to
forsake Goods, Preferments, Father, Moother, Wife, Children, and all that ever
is, for love of his service. As for Salvation and Welfare, he taught men to
hoord up treasure in Heaven, and to shake off the world in this life, that they
may be clothed with glory in another. What is there in all this, I say not
which turns a man away, but which sets him not in the right way, and which
tends not in effect to the glory of the true God, to the doing of our duty
toward our neighbors, and to every man's own salvation and welfare? By the
way, this doctrine is not a declaiming, nor an exercise of Philosophers, who
(as Seneca affirms) pretended slaves by their tytles, and contained poison
and venom in their boxes: but it is expressed in his life, and read in his
Disciples, whom neither Jew nor Gentyle have ever blamed, but for their
simplicity and innocence: Insomuch that Philo Philo concerning the
Contemplative life.
the Jew made a book expressly thereof for a wonder. For whereas Celsus the
Epicure obiecteth, that Jesus chose Publicanes and men of wicked conversation
to be his Disciples: even therein peculiarly has he showed the effectualnes of
his doctrine in the curing of men's souls, as a Physician does in healing those
that are sorest sick and furthest past hope of recovery in a City. To be
short, at his word the Nations that worshipped Deuilles, Men, Planets, Stocks
and Stones, turned to the only true God. The Devils that had abused them, hid
themselves away, and their Oracles lost their voices, as shall be said hereafter.
But as for the law of God and the holy Scriptures, (I mean even those (ye
Jews) which you your selves believe and reverence;) they come to be read,
embraced, and expounded through all ye world and in all Languages. If this
doctrine then be of the Devil; by what mark shall we know the doctrine of
God? And if to give authority to the Bible over all the world, be the
destruction thereof; what shall we call the stablishing thereof? And if Jesus
have by his doctrine stablished the service of the true God, authorized the Law
of Moses, and rooted up the service of the Devil by the bottom: how can it
be said that the Devil has either inspyred him, or assisted him in his
miracles and Prophesyings, both for the kingdom of God, and against the Devils
own Tyranny?

Yea (say you) but he professed himself to be the Son of God. An objection.
So much the rather (say I) ought you to embrace him, seeing that by the record
of your auncetors, the Messiah ought so to be. And in reporting himself to be
so, if you read your own Doctors well, ye shall find that he turns you not
away to diverse Gods, nor yet to strange Gods. Look the 6. Chapter heretofore.
For according to your own Scriptures and Traditions, these three, namely the
Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, are but one God. I would know but this
one thing of you; whether you take him for a true Prophet, or for a false
Prophet; for the servant of God, or for the servant of the Devil. You have
said heretofore that he used the power of the name of God in his miracles,
whereby ye have granted me very much: and I also have proved unto you, that
such particular and special Prophesies as these, cannot proceed but from God
himself. But what a servant is he to the Devil, which overthrows his
master? How is he not an ouerthrower of him, which saves us? How is he a
false accuser of us, which justifies us? How is he a deadly enemy, which
sets us again in life? For what else has the doctrine of Jesus done
throughout the whole world, but destroyed the Altars of the Devils, beaten
down their Temples, broken their Images in pieces, abolished their gamings,
their feasts, their Sacrifices; and moreover withdrawn the rest of men from
Murder, Whoredom, Theft, and all other abominations wherein they were
plunged, and from the vain services whereabouts they occupied them selves, and
wherewith they deceived their own Consciences? If ye say he was the servant of
GOD; the very Turks confess as much. Therefore proceed yet further, and
grant that since he is the Prophet and servant of God, he is to be believed.
For God the Creator being altogether good and wise, would not lend him his
spirit to deceive us. And if we ought to believe him, we ought also to hear
him: and if we hear him, he tells us that he is Christ the Anointed, that
he is the truth, that he is the way, that he came from God his father, and
that the father and he are but one. And in deed, one while to show that he
was sent of his father, he prays unto him: and anotherwhile to show that he
is equal with him, he commands absolutely and of himself. Surely therefore
we may well say, that this Prophet Jesus being assisted by Gods spirit, both in
his Prophesyings, and in his Miracles, and in his Doctrine; and being borne of
a Uirgin, in Bethleem, and at the time appointed before hand by the Prophets; is
Christ the Lords anointed, GOD and Man, even such as he was declared and
behighted us in the holy Scriptures, as I have showed already.

But lo here the stumblingblock of the Pharisees and the Jews. The stumbling
block of the Jews.
What likelihood is there (say they) that our Christ by whom we look that
Israel should be so renowned, should be so bace and abject a person? Nay
moreover, if he be both God and Man (as you Christians say he is) what can be
imagined more against all reason, than that he should be buffeted, whipped,
crucified, accounted among thieves, and in the end reprochfully killed, as your
Jesus was? Soothly, to folk that have imagined and reckoned upon a Monarchy
of the whole world, and behighted themselves places among the chief in the
same; it must needs be a great corsie and grief to be defeated of that
hope. But had they well chewed and digested this text of Zachary: Zachary. 9.
and 12.
Behold, thy King comes unto thee, rightuous, Sauiourlike, and lowly, ryding
upon an Ass, even the Colt of an Ass: which text their Rabbines expound of
the Messiah, and we read it to have been fulfilled in Jesus at his coming
into Jerusalem: they would not think it so strange that in the same person
also should be performed this saying of the same Prophet in another place, I
will power out the spirit of grace and mercy upon the house of David, and upon
the inhabiters of Jerusalem; and they shall look upon me whom they have
pierced: which text likewise the Rabbines expound of the Messiah, as well as
the other. Now I have showed heretofore, that the Messiah should reconcile us
unto God, by the satisfaction and amends which he should make unto him for us:
and also how agreeable the said amends was both to Gods Justice and mercy,
which cannot be contrary one to another, and also to the order of dealing
that is among men. For in as much as man would needs through his pride become
equal with God, and by his disobedience be as God: it was meet that his
Surety should be abaced even beneath man, and yield perfect obedience, even to
the most reproachful death that could be. Again, to turn man again and to
restreyne him from sin, nothing could be more effectual, than to make him
know the horriblenesse of his sin, by the greatness of the penalty and
satisfaction thereof: neither could any thing be more forcible to allure him
to the love of God and of his neighbor, than to see God redeem him from
wretched thraldom by ye death of his own Son God and Man; and the same his
own Son crucified and dying for the ransom, not of his brethren, but of his
enemies whom he voutsafeth to admit to be his brethren. But forasmuch as the
Jews believe the Scriptures, they will not refuse them in this point, and
therefore let us examine them here together.

As touching Christ's Lowelynesse in abacing himself, I have treated thereof
heretofore, and all the whole scripture teaches it us sufficiently. At one
word, in the place where it is said. The Scepter shalnot be taken from Judah;
it is added byandby, Tying his Assecolt to the vine, and the foale of his
sheeasse to the hedge. Upon which text Rabbi Hadarsan says thus; Genesis 49.
when Christ comes to Jerusalem, R. Moses Hadarsan upon the xl^x. of
Genesis.
he shall gird his Ass with a girt, and enter into the city very poorly and
lowelely, even after the same manner that is spoken of in the nynth of Zachary.
But to avoid often repetitions, let us bear in mind what has bin said before,
that it may lead us the more gently to the passion of Christ, which is our
only welfare and their utter stumbling block. We have in the Law a great
number of Sacraments and Sacrifices, The passion of Jesus foretold in the
Scriptures.
as well solemn at set feasts as continewall and ordinary, and among them,
the Easterlambe, the Sacrifice of the red Hekfar, the sending of the Scapegote
into the Wilderness, and such other like: of all the which it is said, that
their blud wassheth and cleanses away the sin of the congregation, and that
the sprinkling thereof turns away the Angel of destruction from their
houses. Now forasmuch as this was done with so great solemnity, expressly
commanded to be observed, and conveyed over from age to age and from father to
son: I ask them upon their consciences, whether they be signs and figures
of a sacrifice too come which should cleanse away sin; or whether those
sacrifices themselves had that virtue. If they say the Sacrifices had that
force in themselves: what virtue is there in the blud of a Lamb or of a Hekfar,
against Sin? And wherefore says God so often unto us, I will none of your
sacrifices, I will none of the blud of your Bulls and Goats, al such things
are but smoke and lothlynes in my sight? And at such time as they were
prisoners at Babylon, or scattered abroad in the world, where they might not
by their law offer any Sacrifice; was there then no forgiveness of their
sins? Yes surely: and therefore they were signs and figures of Christ as
then to come, who was to dye sor our sins: which signs do now cease and have
ceased now these many hundred years through the whole world, euersince the
coming of him that was betokened by them, namely of the Lamb of whom it is
said in Esaias: Esaias. 53.
He was led to the slaughter as a Lamb and he hild his peace without opening
his mouth, as a sheep before the Shearer: which text the Rabbines also do
interpret to be meant of the Messiah. And as concerning the red Heckefar, the
Cabalists do make a Case of it, and ask why in the book of Nombers, Nomb. 19.
the death of Marie is joined immediately to the Law of the red Cow: and
thereout of they will needs draw the death of Christ to come. And in very
deed Jesus the true Easterlambe was crucified on the very day of the Passover,
as witnesses Rabbi Vla in the Talmud. In the treatise Sanhedrin, Chap. Nigma^
Hadin.
Also as Esaias had said of the Lamb Christ, He is slain for the sin of the
People: so John Baptist says of Jesus, Behold the Lamb of God which takes
away the Sins of the world. Agein, as they were forbidden to break any boane
of the Easterlambe; so were Christ's legs left unbroken, when the legs of the
thieves that were crusified with him were broken. To be short, as the red Cow
accompanied with all the people, was conveyed out of the Host and burne^
without the Camp; so also was Jesus led out of the City accompanied by the
people, and crucified without the City. Esaias. 53.
But let us read the History of the life and death of Jesus whole together
out of Esaias. There was neither favor (says he) nor beawty in him, neither saw
we any fayrenesse in him that was to be desired. He was despised and thrust
out from among men, a man full of infirmities and inured to sorrow by reason
whereof we accounted him so vile, that we hid our faces from him. Yet in very
deed he bare our infirmities, and was laden with our sorrows: but we thought
him to be wounded and stryken of God, whereas he was wounded for our misdeedes,
and smitten for our sins. The punishment of our peace was laid upon him, and
by his strypes are we healed. Al of us went astray like sheep, and turned
aside every man after his own way: and the Lord has cast upon him the
iniquities of us all. Being misintreated and smitten, he opened not his mouth.
As a Lamb was he led to be slain, and yet hild his peace as a Sheep before
the shearer. He was lifted up from prison and judgment, and yet who is he that
can reckon up his generation? He was plucked up from the living upon the
earth, and covered with wounds for the sin of my people. His grave was given
him with the wicked, and with the Rich in his death, Although he never
committed vnryghtuousenes, nor any gwile was found in his mouth; yet was it the
Lords will to break him with sorrow; that when he had given his life in
sacrifice for sin, he might see a longlasting seed. Which deuyce of the Lord
shall prosper in his hand, and with the labor and travel of his Soul shall he
get great Riches. My ryghtuous servant (says the Lord) shall with the
knowledge of him make many men ryghtuous, and take their sins upon himself.
I will give him a portion among the great ones, and he shall divide the spoil
with the mighty ones; because he yielded his Soul unto death, and did muster
himself among the transgressers, and took upon him the sins of many, and
prayed for the offenders. Who sees not in this text, both the apprehension and
the sorrows and the wounds, and the death of Jesus? Yea and his meekness,
Lowelynes, and innocence? His apprehension, turning to our deliverance; his
sorrows, to our joy; his wounds, too our health; his death, to our life; his
ryghtuousenes to our inrightuousing; and his punishment, to our obteynement of
grace? And when we read, He was abhorred of men, and we made none account of
him; do we not see men spitting in his face? Also when we read these words, We
took him to be wounded of God; do we not here the Jews saying to him, If thou
be Christ the chosen of God, save thy self? Ageine when he is outrageously dealt
withal and yet he opens not his mouth; do we not note his innocent holding
of his peace? Finally, whereas he was nombered among the transgressors, and yet
prayed for them, notwithstanding that he bare the sins of other men: what is
it else but the crucifying of Jesus between the two thieves, and the very
speech of the repentant thief which said, As for us, we receive worthily
according to our deeds; but as for this man, what evil has he done? Yea and
the very prayer which Jesus made upon the Cross, saying, Lord forgive them,
for they know not what they do? Now, that the said text was understood of
Christ by the old Rabbines; the Jews cannot deny. For Ionathas the Chaldee
Paraphrast the Son of Vziel, who lived about that time, R. Moses Hadarsan.
expounds it of Christ by name. Genesis 24.
And whereas it is said, In very deed he bare our infirmities, Ionathas
translateth it, He shall be heard at Gods hand for our faults, and for the love
of him our sins shall be forgiven. And upon these words, We hid our faces
away from him: He says thus; as though the countenance of the Godhead had bin
withdrawn from him, because he seemed so to our sight, and we considered not
what he was in deed. Whereupon Rabbi Vla says thus in the Talmud: Treatise
Sanhedrin. Chap. Helec.
Let him come, but let not me see him: and his so saying was for the extreme
pains which he knew that Christ should endure. Midrasch. Ruth.
And therefore they feyne that he sits bynding up of his sores at Romegate.
Rabbi Ioses in the book Siphrei.
Also in a certain place where they inquire of the name of Christ, they say
he shall be called Whight, as one covered with sores of Leprosy; and they
ad, according to this saying of Esaias: In very deed he bare our infirmities and
took our sins upon him. R. Jacob and R^ Hamina. Cha. Helec.
And we took him as a Leaper, and as one wounded and cast down of God.
Nevertheless, that the Jews (notwithstanding the euidentnesse of this
Prophecy) should not for all that believe; the Prophet himself does prophecy
in the same Chapter. For before he enter into the matter of Christ's passion and
death, he makes this preface, saying: Esaias. 53.
Who has believed at the hearing of us? or to whom has the Lords arm been
discovered? And on the contrary part he says to the Gentyles: Many men shall
wonder for the love of him, Esaias. 52.
and Kings shall shut their mouths before him, They that have not been told
of him shall see him, and they that have not heard of him shall think
advisedly on him. Upon this so clear a text, let us hear the inventions of
persons that have imbatteled themselves against their own Salvation. To turn
this text from Jesus, Rabbi Selomoh and David Kimhi (before whom the said
wilfulness of opinion was not among the Jews The fond shifts of the Jews,
) have turned away from all the writers of former time, whom (notwithstanding)
they confess to have understood it of Christ; and they pass not what they
say, so they may stand upon denial. This text (say they) is not meant of
Christ, but of the Jewish people afflicted by the Chaldees and the Romans.
And this serves well to show what odds is between the judgment of Reason
and of Affection. For I presume so much upon their understanding, that if they
had been borne in the time of Ionathas the son of Vziel, or at leastwise at
any time before the coming of Jesus, they would have been utterly of another
mind. Then if the Prophet speak of the afflicted children of Israel when he
says, He was despised of men, and we hid our faces from him: Of whom I beseech
them is that said which follows without change of person, namely; In very
deed he bare our infirmities, and we took him to have been wounded of God?
That he was despised, is meant (say they) of the people of Israel. Then, that
he bare our infirmities, must needs (say I) be meant of the people of Israel
too. And what can be more fond, than to say that the people of Israel bare
the infirmities of the people of Israel? specially since it is said immediately,
And by his stripes are we healed: which saying puts and apparent difference
between the Physician and the Patient, between the Sufferer and him that is
eased by his suffering? Again, what People or what Nation was ever benefited
by the sufferings of the Israelites? To what purpose serves this out^ry of the
Prophet, Who has believed our word, if he have no further meaning than that
the Children of Israel bare their own pains? All of us (says the Prophet
forthwith) have gone astray like Sheep. Who ^ee these Sheep that have gone
astray, but the Israelites, and among them the Prophet himself? And upon him
(says he) has the Lord cast the sins of us all. If he cast them upon
Israel, what cause of wonder is there in not believing it? For who doubts
but that every man is worthy to bear the blame of his own fault? But will
any man gaynsay the Prophet himself, who expounds his own meaning so plainly
afterward? He was plucked up out of the land of the living (says he) and
covered with wounds for the sins of my people. For who sees not here a
manifest countermatching between the people that are healed, and the party
that suffers for the healing of them? between Israel whose sores are
brought to a scarre, and the party that bears away his sores? The Prophet
adds, There was no unrighteousness in him, neither was any guyle found in
his mouth. Surely there is pride in men, yea and even in these men; and yet I
can hardly believe, but that they would be ashamed to challenge the verifying of
this text upon them selves. And as for the people of Israel that were
afflicted by the Chaldees; the Rabbines affirm that their first Temple was
destroyed for their Idolatry, Superfluity, and sheading of giltlesse blud.
And concerning the second Temple which was destroyed by the Romans, they say
the cause thereof was the peoples covetousness, their hating of their
neighbors without cause, and their selling of the rightuous person. And
whereas they reply, That the people of Israel suffered so much affliction at
one season, as suffised to discharge their successors that lived afterward in
another season: surely besides that it is contrary both to the Justice and to
ye mercy of God; that gloss cannot be verified of any one line of the said
text: but it appears by experience, that the afflictions which the people of
Israel endured at the hands of the Chaldees, did not discharge them of
Antiochus; nor the afflictions laid upon them by Antiochus^ defend the Jewish
Church against the Romans; nor the extreme outrages of the Romans so
satisfy for the sins of that people, but that they be more scattered, and
more brought in bondage, as well of more sorts of masters as of more sorts of
slavery at this day, than ever they were before. Lo how one false and fond
proposition procures many fonder solutions.

But let us here further, how this text is expounded by other of the Prophets.
Seventy weeks (says Daniell Daniel. 9. verse. 14. and 16.
) are set down for the ending of disobedience, and for the Sealing up of
sin, and for the cleansing away of iniquity and the bringing of righteousness
for ever. As how? For unto the anointed Prince (says he) shall be seven weeks
and threescore and two weeks; after which time the Anointed shall be slain, and
nothing shall be left unto him, and the Prince of a People to come shall destroy
the City. etc. Here ye see how Christ must dye, and namely for sin,
according to this saying of Esaias, He has given his life for sin. And (as I
have showed already) Jesus was put to death even the very same time. As
touching the Circumstances of his death, Psalm. 22. verse. 17.
They perced my feet and my hands (says David) and parted my garments among
them, and cast lots for my coat. We read not that David was served so, but
rather Jesus who was crucified (howbeit that that king of punishment was not
used among the Jews, but among the Romans) and lottes were cast for his
Coat: and the Evangelists alleged this Text to the same purpose, as who
would say, it was so understood in their time. And whereas in stead of Caru,
that is to say, they pierced, the Jews will needs read Caari, that is to
say, As a Lion: their Mass^reths, (who have made a Register of all the Letters
of the Scriptures) do witness that in all good Copies it is written Caru they
pierced. Also the therescore and twelve Interpreters have translated into
Greek, (...), etc. they pierced my hands, etc. And the old Chaldee
translater, has joined both those readings in one, thus They have pierced and
thruft through my feet and my hands as a Lion. They that understand the
Traditions of the Indians and Etihopians, do witness the like: accordingly
also as the Jews themselves do know by their own readings, and are warned by
their Mazaroths, that that sense is imperfect. For as for the Chaldee
Paraphrase of R. Joseph the blind, because he was about a three hundred and
forty years after Jesus, we admit him not for a Judge: and besides that, he is
dubble blinded with a blind mood which he bewrays euerywhere against us.

Also the Prophet Zachary Zachary. 12.
says, I will power out the spirit of grace and mercy upon the house of David
and upon the Inhabiters of Jerusalem, and they shall look unto me whom they
perced. Bereschith Rabba upon. Genesis cap. 42. The book Succa: chapt. Hahechil.
He that powers out this spirit is God; He that is perced is man; and both
the one and the other together is Christ God and Man. And they themselves
expound this text in the same sense concerning the Messiah, that our
Evangelists allege it of Jesus that was stricken into the side with a Spear;
which surely had been a fondness in them, John. 19. verse. 37.
(considering how feawe texts they allege (if they had not been commonly
understood to concern the Messiah. The treat: Sanchedrin. Gap. Helec.
And it is all one with this which some of the Rabbines do say in ye Talmud,
namely That Christ should be distressed as a woman that labors of Child,
according as Jeremy Jeremy. 30.
says, that he had great anguishes to suffer, but that he should endure them
willingly too deliver men from sin. And Rabbi Hadarsan Rabbi Hadarsan upon
Ge. 1. Echa rabeth. Chap. 3. Midrasch Ruth Cap. 2. verse. 14.
says that Satan should be an aduerfarie to him and his Disciples; and
therefore he applies unto him a part of the third chapter of the lamentations
of Jeremy. Also in the book of Ruth, where it is written, Eat thy bread and
temper it with vinegar: This bread (says the Commentary) is the bread of the
Anointed King or Messiah, who shall be broken for men's sins, and endure great
torments as it is written in Esaias. And the Saint Rabbi says, that Christ
should deliver men's Souls from hell by his death. Howbeit yet further, whereas
it is said in Esaias, Esaias. 51.
we be healed by his death: the ancient Cabalistes Cabalistes.
understand it of Christ, and say that the Angels (who were the teachers of our
forefathers, as Raziel of Adam, Metatron of Moses and so forth) had taught
them that the cleansing away of sin should be done upon wood. And Rabbi
Simeon Ben Iohai R. Simeon ben Iohai Mirandulan in his Conclusions.
the first among them, writes thus; Woe worth the Murderers of Israel, for
they shall kill Christ. God will send his son clothed in man's flesh to wash
them, and they will kill him. Also Rabbi Judah R. Judah in his book of Hope.
says, That after a long breathing time, God will deliver his name of twelve
letters to Jeremy in writing after this manner, Jehovah ^lohim emeth, that is
to say, The everlasting God is truth; and that he will wype out the first
Letter of the last word, so as there shall remain Jehovah elohim meth, that
is to say, The everlasting God is dead. And peradventure it is thereupon, that
Rabbi Joshua the son of Leuy said, Midrach T^hilim.
That Israel was not heard in the world, for want of knowing this name; that
is to say, for want of praying unto God by ye Mediator Christ who died for us.
To be short, Philo the Jew, Philo the Jew in his book of the banished. Look
before in the 6. Chapt^^^
a very renowned Author, handling this question, namely when the banished
Israelites and Jews should return home; says it should be at the death of a
Highpriest. Howbeit finding himself graueled at this, that some live longer
than othersome; Surely I believe (says he) that this Highpriest shall not be a
Man, but the Word (the which he prayseth in infinite places) exempt from al
sin both willing and unwilling, who to his father has God; and to his
moother, the wisdom that is without beginning and without end. Whereby it
appears that he had heard of Christ a Highpreest, whom it behooved to be God
the Son of God, that he might sanctify, and likewise man that he might dye.

As touching the startinghole which the new Rabbines seek, in that (contrary
to the whole course, Objection.
both of their own ancient writers and of the Scripture) in sted of one
Christ God and Man, they make two Christ's, the one the Son of David, the
other the Son of Joseph, saying that this latter (to whom they apply all the
foresaid Texts) shall be slain in battle, and afterward raised again by the
Prayers of other: Surely let us tell them as R. Moses R. Moses upon the
Judges.
does, That none other than only the son of David, shall come with authority
of Christ; howbeit that there are two commings of Christ, the one in lowlynes
as Zachary Zachary. 9. ver. 4.
says. Poor, Lowely, and Sauiourlyke; and the other in majesty out of the
Clouds of the air, as is described in Daniel: the one to Redeem, the other
to judge, as they themselves say upon these words of Ecclesiastes, Daniel. 7.
Midrasch Coheleth Cap. 1. verse. 9.
What it is that has been? The same that shall be: whereupon they infer, The
last Redeemer is revealed, and he that is hidden shall come yet once again. To
be short, here ye see, how in the end the stumbling block is turned into
glory. For as Christ dyed innocently, Talmud, treatise Sanhedrin Cap. Helec.
so shall he also rise again and reygne for ever. Yea he shall rise again:
for it is written in the Psalm, Psalm. 16.
Thou will not suffer thy holy one to see corruption, which saying cannot be
meant of David; for he is dead and rotten in his grave, yea and he shall be raised
again within the third day, for it is written, Ose the. 6.
He will quicken us after two days, and in the third day will he raise us up
ageine. Also he shall go up into Heaven, to sit at the right hand of God;
Psalm. 110.
for it is written, The Lord has said to my Lord, sit thou on my right hand.
The book Mechiltha.
And all these Texts are so expounded by Rabbi Moses Hadarsan, R. Moses
Hadarsan, upon Genesis. Cap 22. and 40.
by R. Hacadoseh, by R. Jonathan the Son of Vziell and others: R Isaac upon
Genesis.
and they be all accomplished in Jesus. For their own writer Josephus Josephus
in his Antiquity Lib. 18. cap. 4.
says, In the time of Tyberius there was one Jesus, a wise man (at leastwise
if he was to be called a man) who was a worker of great miracles, and a teacher
of such as love the truth, and had a great train as well of Jews as of
Gentyles. The book of Collections.
Nevertheless, being accused unto Pilate by the chief of the Jews, he was
crucified. But yet for all that, those which had loved him from the beginning,
ceased not to continue still. For he showed himself alive unto the^ a three
days after his death, as the Prophets had foretold of him both this and
diverse other things. And even unto this day do those continue still which
after his name are called Christians. Certesse then let us conclude as this
Jew does in the selfsame place, and in his own words, This Jesus was in very
deed the Christ. For as for the goodly tale, That Christ's Disciples stole him
out of his Grave, and that for fear they did cast him down in a Gardyne where
he was found afterward: the fondness and fabulousenesse thereof appears in
this, that whereas because he had said in his lyfetyme. Destroy this Temple,
and in three days I will raise it up ageine; And also, There shall none other
sign be given unto you but the sign of the Prophet Jonas, and so forth;
thereupon the Jews caused Pylate to set a sure guard about the Sepulcher: Yet
notwithstanding, Pylate writing afterward to the Emperor Claudius, advertised
him of the resurrection of Jesus, so as the greater and surer the guard was that
Pylate did set, the mo and the stronger were the witnesses to prove the Jews
liars in that behalf. Also the high Priests being so enraged against Jesus as
they were, would not have sticked to have hanged up the said found Carkesse
openly in the Marketplace, whereby they might have abolished all the reputation
of Jesus out of hand. Ageine on the other side, the Apostles were men so afraid
of death, so weakeharted, so feeble in faith, and so utterly without credit;
that there is not any lykelihod that they durst take the matter in hand. Nay
(which more is) what benefit could they have had by his dead Carkesse? what
should it have booted them to have forgone their Children, their Wives, yea and
themselves too for such a one? Should they not rather have had cause to have
been offended at his cowsmage, and thereupon been the readier to have condemned
the remembrance of him them selves, and to have turned all men away from him?
Contrariwise, they preach nothing but his resurrection; for that are they
contented to dye; for that do they teach other men to dye; alonly by that do
they hope too live and dye most blessedly; and of all the whole number of them,
there was not so much as one that could be brought to say otherwise: nay rather
which could be made to conceal it, and not to speak of it, though they were
let alone, yea or for any promise or threatening that the greatest personages in
the world could make unto them. Surely therefore, if ever any deed were true,
we must needs say that this is it.

Finally Daniell Daniel. 9.
says; After that the Anointed is slain, The Prince of a people to come,
Math. 24. verse. 15.
(that is to say, the Emperor of Rome) shall destroy the City and the
Sanctuary, and his end shall be in destruction, and unto the end of the war be
desolations ordained. The destruction of Jerusalem.
But he shall stablish his covenant with many in one week, and in half a
week shall he cause the Sacrificing and Offering to cease. And to the same
effect Jesus himself says, Weep for your selves and for your Children, and
let them which are in Iewrie flee into the Mountains. Abomination shall abide
in the holy place, and of the Temple one stone shall not be left upon another.
And yet nevertheless, this Gospel (says he) shall be preached over all the
world for a witness to al Nations. Who can say that this was not accomplished
within a while after the death of Jesus? And who sees not yet still the
remnants of this desolation upon Jerusalem, and upon all that people? Yea and
moreover, that this their utter ruin and overthrow, is not to be fathered
upon any other thing, than upon their putting of Jesus to death? Jesus was
apprehended in Mount Oliuet; Josephus in his Antiq lib. 20. Cap. 6. 8.
and from Mount Oliuet was Jerusalem beseeged. He was crucified on the day of
the Passover; and on that day was the City entered into. He was whipped in
the Roman Emperors Pauilion by Pylat; In the Jewish Wars. lib. 5. Cap. 8.
and lib. 6. Cap. 25. 27. 28. 47.
and in the Emperors Pauilion were the Jews whipped by the Romans for their
pleasure. He was delivered by them into the hands of the Gentyles; and they
themselves were scattered abroad into the whole world, to be a skorning
stock to all Nations. Of these things and many other like do the Rabbines
complain in their Histories, and the more they speak of them, the more do
they confess Gods Judgment upon themselves. For what else are all these
things, but the execution of this their own sentence given upon themselves,
his blud be upon us and upon our Children? Philo against Flaccus.
Insomuch that (as Josephus reports) when Tytus saw the said extremities, he
lifted up his eyes to heaven and said, The Talmud concerning the destruction of
Jerusalem.
Lord thou know that my hands are clear from all this blud that is shed.
And afterward when upon the taking of the City, he had considered the force
and strength of the place and the people; he said, In very deed God has
fought on our side in the taking of this City, for otherwise what power could
ever have wo^ne it? Also the Temple was burnt down, though he did what he
could to have saved it, because (says Josephus) the vneschewable day of the
destruction thereof was come. Likewise the City was rased, cast up upon
heaps, and made level with the ground, Josephus, in the Wars of the Jews
lib. 7. cap 9. 12. 14. 16.
as if never man had dwelt there; and ten hundred thousand men were put to the
sword within it; which thing we read not to have been done to any other City
taken by the Romans. To be short, the signs that went before, and the voice
that gave warning from heaven, and the opening of the Temple of it own accord,
seemed to be forefeelings of Gods wrath that was to light upon them. Again, the
Fountain of Silo which was dried up before, swelled up to give water to the
Roman Host. Insomuch that their own Historywriter, beholding so many
records of Gods wrath, was in manner co^streyned to come somewhat nigh the cause
thereof, which he affirms to be, that the Highpriest Ananus had unjustly and
hastily caused James the brother of Jesus to be stoned to death, and certain
others with him, to the great grief of good men, and of such as loned the
Law. To the which purpose also may this saying of the notablest of their
Rabbines be applied, That the second Temple was destroyed for their selling of
the Rightuous, and for hating him without cause; John. 16.
according to this saying of Jesus concerning them, They have hated me without
cause.

And whereas some Jews at this day do say, that they be punished because
some of them received this Jesus for the Christ: there is no likelihood of
truth in it. For considering that Gods manner is, to save a whole City for
some ten good men's sakes, if they be found in it: he would much rather have
saved his own people for so many men's sakes, being the chief and representing
the state of the Realm of Iewrie, which did put their hands to the accusing of
Jesus; and for so great a multitudes sake, which cried out, Away with him, away
with him, crucify him. And if God confirmed the Priesthood unto Phinees, for
his zealousnesse in punishing a simple Israelite: what think you your selves
to have deserved, for crucifying (as you bear your selves on hand) an enemy
of God, one that named himself Christ the Lords Anointed, yea and which said
he was very God himself? Yet notwithstanding in the mids of all these
calamities, the City and Temple of this Jesus were builded up, first in Iewrie
it self, and afterward in the whole world; and according to Daniels Prophecy,
the Covenant of Salvation was stablished among all Nations by the preaching of
his Apostles; and the Sacrifices of the Jews were then put down, and never
anywhere reuyued again since that time. And within a while after, the very
ydolatries of the Gentyles, which had possessed the whole world, were likewise
dasshed also, as we shall see hereafter. Whereof Rabbi Hadarsan R. Hadarsan
upon Daniel.
writing upon Daniell seems to have given some incling, in that he says,
Half a week, that is to say, three years and a half, shall make an end of
Sacrificing. And so does R. Iohanan in that he says, Three years and a half
has the presence of the Lord cried out upon Mount Oliuet, saying, seek God
while he may be found, and call upon him while he is nere hand. And upon the
Psalms it is said, Midrasch Thehilim.
That by the space of three years and a half, GOD would teach his Church in
his own person. Now it is manifestly known, that Jesus preached between
three and four years about Jerusalem, and that his preaching was pursewed and
continued afterward by his Apostles.

Sothen, we have in the Prophets a Christ the son of God, which was to be
borne of a Uirgin, in the end of the threescore and and ten weeks mention in
Daniel, at Bethleem in Iewrie; whom being foregone by an Elias, it behooved to
preach the kingdom of God, to dye a reprocheful death to man's Salvation, and
to rise again with glory; shortly whereupon should follow the destruction of
Jerusalem and of the Temple. And at the very selfsame time, we have in our
Gospels and in the stories of the Jews themselves, one Jesus the son of God,
borne of the Uirgin Marie, at Bethleem in Iewrie, who being foregone by John
the Baptist, preached the kingdom of Heaven both in word and deed, was
crucified at Jerusalem, believed on by the Gentiles, and reue^ged by the
overthrow and destruction of the Temple. And all these circumstances and
marks are so peculiar unto him, that they can by no means agree to any other.
Wherefore let us conclude, that this Jesus is the very same Christ that was
promised from time to time in the Scriptures, and exhibited in his dew time
according to our Gospel. For that is the thing which we had to prove in these
last two Chapters.

The xxxj. Chapter.
An answer to the Objections which the Jews allege against Jesus, why they
should not receive him for the Christ or Messiah.
NOw let us examine the objections Objection, that he must have bin known.
of the Jews, and see what they can say against the Testimony of all the
Prophets, which agrees fitly to Jesus, and can agree to none but him. First,
If Jesus (say they) were the Christ; who should have known and received him,
rather than the great Sinagogue which was at that time? This objection is very
old; for in the Gospel the Pharisees say, John. 7. ver. 4^.
Do any of the Pharisees or chief Rulers believe in him, save only this
rascal people which know not the Law, who be accursed? Here I might allege
Simeon surnamed the rightuous, a Disciple of Hillels, who had served forty
years in the Sanctuary, Euke. ^^.
how he acknowledged Jesus for the Savior of Israel and the light of the
Gentiles; in the which Simeon the Jews themselves confess that Spirit of God
to have sailed, which was wont to inspire the great Sinagogue, and inspired
him still during all his life. Also I could allege John the Baptist, whom they
called the great Rabbi Iohanan, who acknowledging Jesus to be the son of God,
sent his Disciples unto him: And likewise Gamaliel, whom in the Acts Act. 5. 38.
of the Apostles we read to have said, If this Doctrine be of God, it will
continue; if not, it will perish; and in Clement, to have been a Disciple of
the Apostles; and in their own books, to have been the Disciple of the said
Simeon: Talmud. treatise Pirke^^ auoth.
And finally S. Paul him self, a disciple of the said Gamaliel, soothly a
very great man, and of great favor and authority among them, of whom they
cannot in any wise mistrust. To be short, Josephus reports that this Jesus
was followed among yt Jews, of all such as loved ye truth, and that as many
as loved the Law, did greatly blame Ananus the highpreest, for causing the
disciples of Jesus to be put to death. Also R. Nehumia R. Nchum^^.
the son of Hacana having recounted the miracles of (Jesus, within a little of
whose time he was) says expressly, I am one of those which have believed in
him, and have been baptized, and have walked in the right way. Likewise the S.
Rabbi seems to have hild of Jesus; and if he did not, then is it yet more
wonderful than if he had known him, There were two Rabbis of the name of
Hacadosch, both called Saints: the one living under Antiochus, and the other
under the Emperor Antonine.
considering yt he seems to describe this Jesus by the selfsame
circumstaunces yt the very Christ is described by him. But without any standing
upon that point, I say further to them, That whereas the Synagogue received not
Jesus for the Messiah, their so doing is a token that he was the very Messiah
in deed; and that their receiving of Barcozba for the Messiah, was a sure
proof that Barcozba was not the Messiah. For it is expressly said by the
Prophets, that when the Messiah came unto them, they should be so blind as
not too know him, and so unthankful as to despise him. The stone (says
David) which the builders refused, Psalm. 11. ver. 22.
is become the chief corner stone, and that is a marvelous thing in our eyes.
Esaias. 28. ver. 16
And this saying does Jesus interpret concerning the kingdom of Heaven, Math.
21. verse. 42.
which should be taken from the Jews for their refusing thereof. Also this
text is applied to the Messiah by R. Jonathan, yea and by R. Selomoh also (as
great an enemy to Christ as he is) who writing upon Micheas Micheas. ^. (...).
2.
says that Christ (by exprese name) should be borne in Bethleem; and which
way so ever they turn themselves, they can gather none other sense of that
place. Herevppon comes it that the young babes cry out in the Gospel,
Hosanna which comes in the name of the Lord; which is ye verse that follows
next after this place of Esaias, Esaias. 6. verse. 53.
Go tell this people, Hear and understand not, Look and see not. Harden the
heart of this people, stop their ears, and close their eyes, least they see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts,
and turn agein, and I heal them. How long? Even all their Cities be desolate
without inhabitants (says the Lord) and the houses without any man in them,
and the land be a wilderness. Yet shall a Tithe remain and turn agein, and
be made bare as a Turpentine tree and an Oak, whose sap nevertheless shall
continue in them. And if ye desire the interpretation hereof, behold, it is
ready at hand in the same Prophet. For going about to describe with what
humility and simplicity Christ should come to suffer for us, (whom these
great Rabbines looked for too have come in triumph to content their pride and
ambition) Who has believed our preaching (says he) or to who^ is the Lords
arm discovered? That is to say, of so great a number of Jews which look for
the Messiah, how feawe shall there be that will believe him, when they see him
come after such fashion as I am to describe him unto them? But surely (says
he) Those to whom he had never been declared shall see him, and those that
never heard of him shall consider him. This text (as I have declared often
heretofore) is expounded by the Jews themselves concerning the Messiah, Also
Zachary says, I will power out the spirit of grace and mercy upon the house
of David, and upon the inhabiters of Jerusalem, and they shall look unto me
whom they have pierced. This Jerusalem (say I) and this house of David
whereupon GOD will power out his grace and mercy, are the very same which shall
pearce his Anointed and cruciste him after the same manner that they martyred
Esaias, Jeremy, and Zachary, and tormented all the rest of the Prophets,
according whereunto our Lord Jesus said unto them, It is not meet that any
Prophet should dye elsewhere than at Jerusalem. Now they must needs grant,
that if they were to kill him, they were not to know him: for who durst be so
presumptuous as to lay his hand wittingly upon the Lords Anointed? And those
words also do they expound to concern the Messiah. Deuteronomy. 2^.
To be short, Moses says; The stranger yt is among thee shall be thy head, and
thou shall be his tail; he shall be advanced above thee, and thou shall be his
underling. And Esaias says, Because of the sin of Judah, I will seek out those
which have not sought for me, and I will be found of them which have not
enquired for me. I will give a better place in my Temple to the Geldedmen and
Strangers, than to the Sons and daughters of Israel. And it is an ordinary
matter among the Prophets, to use such speeches as this, Those which are my
people, Jeremy. 3. verse. 14.
shall no more be my people: and they which were not my people shall be my
people, and such other. And sildom do they speak any word of ye calling of ye
Gentiles, but they match it immediately with the casting off of ye Jews for their
refusing of Christ, like as ye cannot well make mention of the graffing of a
tree with a strange Impe or sien, but ye must also speak of the eu^ting off of
the boughs to make place for it. Talmud. Treatise Sanhedrin. Cap. Helec.
To this same effect do R. Samai and R. Selomoh say, It is said in Jeremy, I
will take one out of a City, and two out of a Trybe, and make them to enter
into Sion, because (add they) that as of sixehundred thousand Israelites,
only two (that is to wit, Joshua and Caleb) entered into Chanaan; so shall it
be also in the days of the Messiah. And the sons of Rabbi Hija affirm.
Talmud. Trea: Sanhedrin, Chapter Dines Mammoneth.
That the Messiah shall be a stone to stumble at unto the two houses of Israel,
and a Snare to the Inhabiters of Jerusalem, and they deliver it for a great
Secret. Also R. Iohanan and R. Jacob, R. Iohanan and P. Jacob. chap. Helec.
say that the Gentiles shall be put in place of the Jews that have refused the
Lord, as the Horse is put in the place of an Ox that halteth. And whereas I
have said that Gods spirit should be withdrawn from the Syn^gogue for their
Iniquities sake. Rabbi Judas says, that when the Son of David comes, there
shall be feawe wise men in Israel, and the wisdom of the Scribes shall stink,
and the Schools of Divinity shall be become Brothelhouses: which accords with
this saying of our Lord Jesus, Of a house of prayer ye have made my house a
den of thieves. And R. Nehoray says that men's countenances shall at that time
be past shame. And R. Nehemias writes, that wickedness shall be multiplied
without measure, Talmud. Sanhedrin. Helec.
and there shall be nothing but untowardness and Heresy; R. Moses Hadarsan
upon the 74 Psalm.
insomuch that (as says R. Natronai.) They shall say that the miracles which
the Mesias shall work, are done by Magic and by unclean Spirits. To be
short, Jeremy Jeremy. 10. ver. 11. and 30. ver. ^.
says, The Shepherds are become beasts, and have not sought the Lord. And in
another place, They have made my sheep to go astray, and turned them away to
the mountains. And the Rabbines to confirm the matter, say thus: If our
predecessors were the Children of men, we be the children of Asses; and surely
(says R. Menahem,) the she Ass of R. Pinehas is wyser then we. But to come
back ageine to the Prophecy of Esaias, The Ox (says he) knows his owner,
and the Ass knows his masters Crib, but my people know not me, they have
no understanding. And in very deed whosoever doubts yet still what spirit
governed the Teachers of the Jews from this time forth; let him read but
only their Talmud, which is such a book, that God (say they) studyeth in it
every first four hours of the day: And when Jerusalem was destroyed, he
left himself three cubits space whereon to sit and read in the Talmud, which
yet notwithstanding was not then made. Besides this, they make God (in that
book) to bewail the miseries of Israel, to be angry at the Comb of a Cook,
to lie, and to commit sin and so forth; so that if a man might have looked
into the consciences of those Rabbines, I believe he should have seen that
they made not so good account of GOD as of themselves. As for the Scriptures,
they expound not one text of them among a hundred to the purpose, no nor
scarsly without blasphemy, saving where they follow or allege the Rabbines
of old time. The residew are either toys, or oldwiues tales, or horrible
blasphemies, or things either too fond for Children or to wicked for men, and
such as even the Devil himself would be ashamed of. To be short, I can not
tell how they that wrate that book could be Jews; or how the reading of it
now should not make them all become Christians.

Yet they reply still and say: Esaias. 1.
What lykelyhod is there that this Jesus was the Messiah, An objection
concerning the bacenesse of Jesus.
coming so attyred as he did? Or were not we (at least wise) worthy to be
excused for not knowing him, coming disguysed after that manner? Nay, I
demand of you, after what other sort he could or should come, considering that
he came to humble himself, and to be crucified for us? You looked to have had
him princelyke, and he was forepromised poor: a Warryour, and it was told you
he should be beaten and wounded: with a great train, and he is descrybed
alone upon an Ass: with a company of wives, and there was no mo spoken of
but only one: with tryumphing and feasting, and ye were informed aforehand
that his bread should be steeped in vinegar, and his Cup be full of gall and
bitterness. You imagine under him, either the Peace of Solomon, or the
Conquests of great Alexander: peace to manure Iewrie at your ease, and War
to reap the riches of the Gentyles. But he came to appease Gods wrath, and to
vanquish the Devil; and thenceforth to make Jews and Gentyles equal. Of
these two commings, which is most meet, both for Gods glory, and for his
own? Admit he had the Empire of Cyrus and Alexander; admit he had all the
power and riches of all the Kingdoms that ever were in the world; what were
all this but a witness of his want, and an abate (...) of his glory? As for
example; Moses led Sixhundred thousand feyghting men out of Egypt, and with
the stroke of his rod he passed the red Sea and drouned the Egiptians therein.
Now in whether had Gods glory more appeared, and the calling of Moses bin
better warranted ^ by his winning of a battle against the Egiptians with so
great a number of men, or by overthrowing them with one stroke of a rod? In
reducing the King to reason by force of arms, or in making him to seek mercy
by an host of fleas and lyce? Let us come now to Christ. He was to subdewe the
world under his obedience. Whether was it more to his glory and more
correspondent to his Godhead, to have done it by inuesting himself in an
Empire, or by ridding himself of all worldly means, by force of arms, or by
his only word? By conquering men with show of pomp, or by winning them with
suffering reproach at their hand? By tryumphing over them, or by being
crucified by them? By being alive, or even by being dead? By killing his
enemies, or by yielding unto them? By overthrowing his foes; or by sending his
servants to suffer whatsoever they would do unto them? For who sees not, that
in the victories of Princes, their men be partakers with them of their glory?
And that in battles between men, the Horse and the spear have their part?
And that oftentimes the harness and the very shadow of the Crests of their
helmets (as ye would say) do step in for a share? Surely therefore, we may
well say, that Jesus could not have showed his Godhead better, than in coming
like an abject and miserable man; nor his strength better, than in coming in
feblenesse; nor his might, than in infirmity; nor his glory, than in
despisednes; nor his eternity, than in dying; nor his rising ageine, than in
being buried; nor his whole presence, than (...) his way hence; nor finally his
quickening life, than in conquering the world by the death of his Diciples. For
had he come otherwise, man had had the glory thereof: the stronglyer he had
come, the less had bin his victory; and the more pomp he had pretended
outwardly, the less had he always uttered his Godhead, and the more excusable
had both the Jews and Gentyles bin in not receiving him. To be short, will ye
see that he was the same son of God, which was present with God at the
creating of the world? God created the world without matter or stuff whereof,
and without help, by his only word: And Jesus being destitute of all help and
mean, has conquered the world with his only word, even by his (...) death,
which seems to have been a clear dispatch of him? What greater majesty or
greatness can we imagine than this?

Yea but (say they) where be the signs promised by the Prophets? An objection
that the signs promised by the Prophets are not come to pass.
and specially the everlasting peace which Christ was to bring unto the world,
which should turn Swords into Mattocks and Spears into Coulters? To this we
may answer, that Jesus was borne under the Emperor Augustus, at which time the
Histories tell us, that the Temple of Iauus at Rome was shut vp^ and all the
world was at peace throughout, as who would saythat by that mean God meant to
open a free way to the preaching of his Gospel. But let them first of all
mark here their own contrariety of speech, in that they require of us here a
general peace, and in other places speak of battelles against Gog and Magog,
and of the bathing of themselves in the blud of the Gentyles, insomuch as they
say that their second Messiah the Son of Joseph, shall be slain in battle.
Nay, as he is a spiritual King, so be his wars and peace spiritual also.
Esaias Esaias. ^.
calls him a man of war: but of his wars he says, They shall turn their
swords into Coulters. On the contrary part he calls him yt Prince of peace:
but of such peace whereof it is said; Esaias. 9. and. 35.
The chastiseme^t of our peace was laid upon him, and by his stripes are we
healed: that is to wit, he was wounded for our misdeedes and torn for our
iniquities. To be short, Micheas Micheas. 3. verse. 3.
says, He himself shall be the peace. Nevertheless, to the intent ye should
not think he means of your manuring of your grounds and of your dressing of
your ^ineyards; yet shall not the Assyrian (says he) cease to come into our
Land, and to march in our Palaces. And therefore does Jeremy well say, He
shall break the yoke from thy neck, and burst asunder thy bonds: howbeit (as
he expounds himself in another place, Jeremy. 30. and 35.
) in such sort as thou shall not serve strange Gods any more: that is to say,
he will both win us victory and be our victory himself against the Devil,
and also both purchase us peace and be our peace unto God, according to this
which he says another where: The Everlasting will be our righteousness.
Talmud in the treatise Sab. bath.
And in truth, in the book of Sabbath where these texts are examined, Rabbi
Eliezer says plainly, That wars shall not cease at the first coming of the
Messiah, but only at his second coming, that is to wit, when he comes in
glory to judge the world.

Of the same stamp are the objections that follow. Zachary. 14. verse. 4.
It is written (say they) that Mount Oliuet shall be split asunder in the
mids, and the one half fall toward the East and the other half toward the
West: which thing we see not yet come to pass. Well, they cannot deny but
that this text speaks plainly of the destruction of Jerusalem: and if they
will needs follow the letter, they shall see in their own Histories, that
when the Romans beseeged the City, they made their trenches on that side.
Again, it is said, R. Iohan^n in the treat: Baua Bath^a. Midrasch, Psalm. 86.
That the Lords hill shall be advanced above al hills; and therevppon they
dream that Jerusalem shall be hoyssed up three leagues into the air. But these
people which otherwhiles delight so much in Allegories, ought to understand
these, even by the text it self. For (says the Prophet) folk shall say let
us go up to Syon, and God will there teach us his ways: Zachary. 4. Esaias. 2.
and Michens. 4.
The Law shall come out of Syon, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. And
I pray you when came they better out, than when the Apostles of Jesus did
spread them abroad from Jerusalem through the whole world? And therefore
Rabbi Selomoh R. Selomoh and R. Abraham ben Ezra upon Esaias. 2. and Micheas. 4.
says upon those texts, that the Lord should at that time be magnified in
Jerusalem, by a greater signe^ than he was in Sinai, Carmel, and Thabor, And
Rabbi Abraham the son of Ezra says, that this Advanced hill is the Messiah,
who shall be highly advanced among the Gentyles. Also it is said in Esaias; Esaias.
11.
The Woolfe shall feed with the Lamb: and in Malachie, Malachy. 3.
The Angel of the Lord shall make the ways plain: Rabbi Moses Ben Maimon
upon Deuteronomy. in the Laws concerning Kings and War^es.
which things (say they) we see not yet performed, nor many other such like.
But yet does Rabbi Moses Ben Maimon their great teacher of Righteousness say;
Let it never come in thy head, that in the time of Christ the course of the
world shall any whit be changed: but when thou read in Esaias, that the
Woolfe shall dwell with the Lamb, call to mind how Jeremy leremy. 5.
says, A Woolfe of the wilderness has wasted them, and a Leopard watches at
their Cities, to snatch ^p them that come out. For the meaning thereof is, that
both Jews and Gentiles shall be converted to the true doctrine, and not hurt one
another, but feed both together at one Crib, according to this saying of Esaias
in the very same place, The Woolfe shall eat Hay with the Ox. And after that
manner (says he) must we expound all such manner of speeches, which belong to
the time of Christ: for they be parabolicall and figurative. of the same sort
also is the exposition of Rabbi David Kimhi, howbeit that ordinarily he
followed the letter, and the translation of Jonathan himself. And as touching
the Angel or Ambassador that should level the ways mentioned in the text of
Malachie: The meaning thereof ( says Ramban) is that a great Prince shall be
sent before the Messiah come, to prepare the hearts of the Israelites to the
battle. But Malachie expounds himself more fitly in these words: He shall
turn the hearts of the fathers to their Children: that is to say, he shall
exhort Israel to repentance.

The Objections An objection that Idolatry should cease.
that insewe hereafter have a little more weight in them. It is written, I will
destroy all the Idolles of the earth. Also, Esaias. 2.
I will hungerstarue all the Gods of the Gentyles. And again, Zach. 13.
They shall all serve me with one shoulder. Would God that the abuses which
are crept into the Christians Church against Christ's ordinance, So phony. 3^
were not so great a Stumbling block to the Jews. Nevertheless, let them
consider the great number of Gods woorshipped by the Assyrians, Persians,
Greeks and Romans, at what time every Country, every City, every
Household, and every person had his peculiar God and his Idols by himself: and
they shall find that within a little while after ye Apostles had preached the
doctrine of Jesus to the world, they were all gone, and not so much as any
rememberance of them had now remained, but that in publishing the glory of
God, we had also declared their overthrow. Let them read the Histories of
the Heathen and ask of them what is become of their Oracles, I mean the
Deuilles which hild them in with their Lies and Dreams, and would not be
pacified but with the Sacrificing of men, yea and even of their own Children:
and of all those wickednesses, which had taken root all the world throughout,
can they now show any print at all? Even in the time of Tyberius began men to
ask these questions, namely what was the cause that Oracles spoke not any
more; that Devils wrought not as they had done aforetymes; And that their
Priests wanted living? And the Heathen themselves were driven to answer, that
since the time that Jesus had dyed, and his Disciples had preached abroad,
Art Magic and the Devils had lost their power. So sodeine, so universal,
and so wonderful to our very enemies was the change in that time; and of so
great force was the only name of Jesus in the mouth of those poor men,
against Kings and Emperors, against their Kingdoms and Empyres, and against
the vpholders and worshippers both of the Deuilles and of their Idols.

For briefnesse sake I omit this Objection An Objection against the Alteration
of Religion made by Christ.
following and such other; as that all Nations have not followed Jesus. For the
Prophets have told us, that but a remnant shall be saved: and Jesus himself
says that Many be called, and few chosen. And it suffiseth that the voice of
the Gospel has been heard over all the world, and that the gate of the Church
is set open to all Nations. Again, to come to an issewe, they know^ that the
word Col [that is to say All] betokens not that all men without exception
shall follow him, but that all Nations without difference shall be his
people. Again, the seed of Christ (say they) should be everlasting: but we
see not the seed of Jesus to be so. They say very well, in that by the word
Seed, they mean Christ's Disciples; and in their own language they term them
Sons or Children: and thanks be to the Lord, there are Disciples of his
still, euerywhere through the whole world.

But the principal Objection remains yet behind, and that is this: If Jesus
be the Son of God, (say they) why changes he the Law of God his father
delivered by Moses, being (as has been said already) both holy and
inviolable, which who so does, how can) he be received for the Messiah?
Surely in this point where they charge Jesus with the changing and abolishing
of the Law; we be flat contrary to them; affirming that he did not change it
or abolish it, but more plainly expounded it and fulfilled it. Nay say they,
Circumcision was expressly commanded by God unto Abraham, and afterward to
Moses: and why th^^ has Jesus abolished it? In deed that is the thing which
does always deceive them; namely, that they take the sign for the thing
signified, and the shadow for the substance and truth of the promises. But
we say that Circumcision was a sign or seal of the Covenant, and not the
Covenant it self, and the best of the Jews deny it not themselves. Deuteronomy. 30.
and 10.
And yet Moses says: When the Lord shall have cast thee out to the uttermost
parts of the earth, yet will he bring thee home again into the land which thy
fathers possessed, and he will circumcise thy heart and the heart of thy
Children, that thou may love the Lord thy God; with all thy heart and with
all thy Soul, and that thou may live. And in another place he says:
Circumcise the foreskin of your hearts, and harden not your necks any more.
And when the Prophets rebuke us, they call us not simply uncircumcised, but
uncircumcised of heart or of lips. The which ought to advertise you that the
sign is fleshly, Jeremy. 4.
but the thing signified (that is to wit, the Covenant) is spiritual; The
Cabale by the report of Picus Earl of Mirandula.
and that it would behoue you to enter into the Maree of the Law, and not to
byte about the bark of it. To be short, the Cabale it self gives us to
understand, that Christ shall cure the venom of the Serpent, make a new
Covenant, and take away the necessity of Circumcision. As touching Sacrifices,
I have declared already heretofore that they were signs. It is said that they
shall cleanse away the sins of the Congregation. How may that be, if we go no
further than to the blud of a Lamb, or to the sprinckling of the ashes of a
Cow? And therefore. David says: Psalm. 49. and 50.
Thou desire not Sacrifice for sin, and therefore will I not give thee any.
And God himself says: I blame thee not for that thou have given me no
burntofferings. Also in Esaias: Esaias. 1. and 58. and 66.
Who required these things of you? As for these Sacrifices, these new Moons,
these Sabbats, and these solemn Feasts, they loathe me, they burden me, and I
cannot well away with them. Moreover Micheas says: If thou gave thousands of
thy Sheep, and Rivers of Oil, Micheas. 6.
yea and thine eldest son, even the son of thine own body begotten for thy
sin: all this is nothing before the Lord. Nay, (says Esaias) the offering of
an Ox is as the murdering of a man, and the offering up of a Sheep is as the
snetching of a Dog, and the burning of Incense is as the blessing of an Idol.
All which sayings do us to understand, that the Sacrifices were not the very
things themselves, but only signs of things, that is to wit, partly of the
lusts and affections which we feel in our hearts, and partly of the
Salvation which we look for by the Messiah; and that if we pass no further
than the bare Sacrifices, they be utterly unprofitable. But David says; The
Sacrifice of the Lord, is a broken and lowly heart. And Esaias says, Wash your
selves, scour away the naughtiness of your hearts, do right to the
fatherless and the widow. Also Micheas says, Deal uprightly, and show
mercy. These be the Sacrifices which God requires at every of our hands, and
which were betokened in the particular Sacrifices, by the Bowels, Kidneyes,
Liver, and such other parts, which were wont to be burned upon the Altar. And
as touching the general Sacrifices and such as were more solemn, they
betokened that universal Sacrifice for the sin of Mankind which God had
ordained everlastingly, that is to wit, the death of the Messiah. For that
those Sacrifices should have an end, namely, the sign by the presence of the
thing signified, the figure by the presence of the substance, and the shadow
by the presence of the body, we perceive by these words of Daniell; Daniel.
12. verse. 11.
From the time that the continual Sacrifice is taken away, there shall be a
thousand two hundred fowerscore and ten days. And that it should be done by
the death of Christ, it appears by this which he had said before, Daniel 9.
After threescore and two weeks Christ shall be killed, and in half a week he
shall cause the Sacrifice and Offering to cease; and for the outreaching of
abominations, there shall be desolation unto the end. And whereas Malachie
Malachy. ^
having reproved Sacrifices very sharply, says; From the Sunnerysing to the
Sunnegoingdowne, my name shall be great among the Gentyles, and Incense and pure
Oblations shall be offered euerywhere in my name: it cannot be understood of
the Sacrifices ordained by the Jewish Law, but rather of the abolishing of
them, and of all other signs, by the Messiah. For if the Gentyles must
Sacrifice unto him according to the law; then must they come to Jerusalem to
the Temple there. And if it be so: what Court will be large enough to hold the
Sacrifices? What shall al Jerusalem be but a very Slaughterhouse and
Butcherie? Nay moreover, the Prophet says that they shall offer euerywhere;
which thing bewrays an evident change: and a pure or clean Oblation, which
puts a difference between their Offerings, and the bloody Sacrifices of
the Law. And after that the Prophet has said, My name shall be great among
the Gentyles: He adds immediately; But ye have unhallowed it. Which is as
much to say, as that ye Gentyles shall be these Priests every man in his own
place, and they shall not need to co^^^ to you Jews for the matter. To be
short, as touching the Sacrifices, some of the Rabbines say, Midrasch. Nombers.
13. Mark. 2.
They shall all cease, saving the Sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. And as
touching the Sabbath; He that brings the Commandment from God, (say they)
may also break it: whereunto our Lord Jesus agreeing, says, The Son of Man
is Lord of the Sabbath. And as touching the difference between Beasts clean
and unclean, All Beasts (say they) which are counted unclean in this age,
shall be counted clean by the virtue of God in the age to come, that is to
wit under the Messiah, as they were to the Children of Noe. R Hadarsan upon
Genesis 42. and 49.
And thereof they ad this reason, That Gods inioyning thereof for a time, was
but to try who they were that would obey his word. The same does Rabbi
Hadarsan affirm, saying; There is not a more express Law, than that which
concerns the monthly disease of women; and yet shall that cease in the
reign of him: [that is to say, of the Messiah.] And it is not for them to
allege here, that concerning the Circumcision, the Sabbath, the feast of
Easter, and such others, it is said that thy shall be legnolam: Leuit. ^. and 15.
that is to say by their interpretation, for ever. For we have learned of
them, that the word legnolam, signifies not for ever, Deuteronomy. 15.
but a long time; and a time of long continuance without intermission or
breaking of, rather than a continuance of time without end. And in that sense
do we read it said of Samuel; He shall abide in the presence of the Lord
legnolam for ever: Midrasch.
Upon which place the Commentary says, It is an age of the Levites or a
Leuiticall age, that is to say, the continuance of fifty years. Likewise, of
the Servant whose ear his master boared through, it is said; He shall be thy
Servant legnolam for ever: in which place the Commentary says, R. David Kimhi
in his book of Roots. Proverb. 22.
Until the year of Iubil. And therefore their great Grammarian Rabbi Kimhi
says, that legnolam signifies a long time, according to this saying in the
Proverbs, The old bound or buttel that has continued of long time; where he
uses the word legnolam. The words whereby the Hebrews use commonly to betoken
a time without end, are these, gnad netsach, and selah, and legnolam vagned.

But that God meant by the sending of his son Christ to make a new Covenant
with his people, as far differing from the first Couenanat as the thing
figured differs from the figure, let us here Jeremy Ierem. 31. verse. 31. 22.
27.
in his one and thirtith Chapter. Behold, the day shall come (says the Lord)
that I will make a new Covenant with the House of Israel, and the House of
David; not according to the Covenant that I made with their fathers, when I
took them by the hand and led them out of the land of Egypt, which Covenant
they have disanulled though I was married unto them: but the Covenant that I
will make with them after those days (says the Lord) is this; I will plant my
Law within them and write it in their hearts, and I will be their GOD and they
shall be my people. Every man shalnot teach his neybour any more, nor every man
his brother, saying, Know the Lord; for they shall know me from the greatest
to the least. And I will forgive their vnryghtuousenes, and their Sin will I
remember no more. And that this was meant of the coming of the Messiah, it
appears plain. For he had said before, The Lord will create a new thing upon
the Earth; a woman shall compass a man about. Also that by the House of Israel
he meant all such as should be graffed into that house by the coming of
Christ, it appears in this, that having spoken of the peopling of Israel, he
said before, I will sow the house of Israel and the house of Judah with the
seed of Man; and after that manner do the Rabbines themselves allege it. And
therefore does Jonathan say upon Esaias, Mechilta upon Exodus 12. Esaias. 12.
Ye shall draw waters of gladness out of the welsprings of Salvation, that is
to say, you shall receive new doctrine of gladness by the chosen ones of the
Rightuouse, that is to wit, of Christ; of whom the Prophet had said in the
Chapter going last before, God is my safety, I will be bold and not be afraid.
Midrasch Coheleth Chap. 11. 1.
And the Comentarie upon the book of the Preacher says, The law that men
learn in this age, is nothing in respect of the law of the Messiah; nor the
miracles that are past, in comparison of his miracles. And in the book of
Blessings it is said, the things that were done in Egypt are but tappilath that
is to say, In the treatise Boracoth. Talmud of Jerusalem Chapter Meemathai
Korin.
an Accident or Bywoorke; but the things that shall be done in the time of the
Messiah, shall be gnikkar that is to say, the substance thereof. Yea and Rabbi
Iohanan in the Talmud says, Wherein soever a Prophet bids thee transgress
the Law, obey him, saving in Idolatry. Talmud, trea. tyse Sanhedrin.
For all the rest are things that may be changed by a Prophet according to
occasion and time.

Yet they reply and say, is God then chaungeable, to give a law that shall be
changed after that fasshion? A reply of the Jews.
No, say we. For what chaungeablenesse is it to promise and perform, to say
and to do, to represent and to bring to pass, to begin and to finish? Nay
contrariwise, what greater constancy can there be, than to bring to pass in
their times, and according to their circumstances, the things which he had
promised to his people? He had said, Circumcyse me all your male Children. This
was a sign. And he said also, He shall Circumcyse your hearts and the hearts of
your posterity; and that is the very true signification of the sign. Now
Jesus himself was circumcysed, and that was because he was borne under the
Law. But yet has he circumcysed our hearts by regenerating us, which is as
much to say as he performed the Law. And why should it be thought strange
that Circumcision is not retained now that the Gentyles are called. Verily
because there is not now any peculiar people, nor consequently any peculiar
mark to be coueted of any one People or Lineage, as a several mark of
covenant between God and them. Also God has said, Take a Cow for a Sin
offering, And ageine, Take every of you a Lamb. But he has said likewise, The
sacrifice that I require is a broken and sorrowful heart. The sacrifice that I
prepare for you is my Christ, who shall be led as a Lamb to be slain for you,
and upon him shall your sins be laid. Therefore the Moother of Jesus carried
her Sacrifice to the Temple, for her purification; but she carried her Son
with her also according to this scripture. Every manchild that first opens
the womb, shall be holy unto the Lord; because he was borne under the Law. But
he was crucified for our sins, wherein he accomplished the only Sacrifice
that had been betokened by so many Sacrifices in the Law, and therefore he
made an end of all sacryficing and offering of oblations, as one that came to
fulfill the Ceremonies of the Law, and to set us free and discharge us of them.

On the contrary part, how dealt he with the Laws which were no signs but
matters of substance in deed? It is written. Thou shall worship the Lord thy
God. And Jesus has said, Thou shall love God with all thy heart, and he has
given us an example thereof in himself. Thou shall not make to thy self any
graven Image says the Law: and Christ has overthrown all the Idols of the
Heathen. The Law says, Thou shall not take the name of the Lord in vain: yea
(says Jesus) and thou shall not swear by any manner of thing, no not even by
thine own head. The Law says, Thou shall keep holy ye Sabbath day: Howbeit
not to restreine thee from going above two miles that day, as the Pharisees
taught; but to apply thy self all that day throughout, to the mynding of the
Law of thy God, and to the serving of thy Neighbor in his need. And to the
Commandments of the second table he says, Thou shall honor thy Father and
thy Moother; howbeit from thy heart, and not for fashions sake, and thou shall
do the like to all thy Superiors. Thou shall uot kill: yea, and if thou hate,
not thy neighbor only, but also even thine enemy; thou art a manslear
already. Thou shall not steal: and if a man will have thy Cote from thee, thou
shall let him have thy Cloak too. Thou shall not bear false witness: not only
in word either false or hurtful, but also idle. Thou shall not commit
aduoutry: No, for if thou do but look upon a woman with a lust unto her, thou
have committed adultrie already. Moreover, so little leave have thou to covet
any man's goods, that to succor him thou must dispossess thy self, and sell
all that ever thou have. Finally, Thy God is only one God, and no mo: but thy
neighbor is every man whom thou meetest, of what Country, state, condition,
or calling soever he or thou be. To be short, worshippest thou God? do it
with the knees of thy heart. Do thou fast? When thou do it, anoint thy
face. Do thou alms? Let not thy left hand know it; give of thy need, and
not of thine abundance. I demand now whether the exhibiting of the substance
and body of the Law, in sted of the counterfeit or Portrayture thereof, and the
requiring of the mind in sted of the flesh; be an abolishing or defacing of the
Law? whether the stablishing thereof, be the disanulling thereof? The
clearing and inlightening thereof, be the quenching thereof? or the fulfilling
thereof in himself, and the spreading thereof over all Nations of the Earth, be
the breaking thereof? Nay moreover, the Law (say the Cabalistes) was given to
man for the sin of the Serpent; that is to say (according to our doctrine)
not for us to accomplish, for we cannot atteine thereto; but to show unto us
how far the infection of that venom has carried us away, from that duty
which God and nature it self require of us. Which end of the Law is greatly
enlightened unto us by the coming of our Lord Jesus, in that he teaches us
that the Law is not satisfied with an outward and pharisaicall obedience, that
is to wit, (to speak fitly) by hypocrisy; but by the vncorrupt obedience of
the Heart, yea even much more by an unfeigned acknowledgement of our
disobedience, than by the greatest profession of obedience that a man can show?

If they urge yet further, why then was not this lesson of yours given us at
the beginning? I answer, that even from the beginning foorthon, Moses and the
Prophets gave it you, in willing you to circumcise your hearts, to offer up
the sacrifice of praise and obedience, Deu. 30. and 10. Esap. 56. and 5 ^.
to abstain from vnhalowing the Saboth day with unrighteous, and such
otherthings. And in speaking to you of the land of Canaan, they have told you
loud enough by all their doings, that it behooved you to have a further reach
of mind, namely to the things which (as Esaias says) neitheir eye has seen,
nor ear heard, nor heart of man conceived. The service then which God required
of you is spiritual, and the reward which we ought to look for, is spiritual
also. But you, like Children as ye be, thought not but (as the most part of you
do still at this day) upon the body and the world; whereas GOD spoke to you
concerning your Souls and the welfare of them, which lies in him. Even so the
Schoolemaister promises his young Scholar a Marchpaine or some other banketing
stuff to make him to learn; not that virtue shall not like the Child much
bettter, and be a greater reward to him when he has atteyned unto it; but
because that if he should talk to him of virtue or of honor at that time, he
can no skill of any of them both; and he would be the negligenter to his
lesson, and the more unable to conceive a greater thing. And truly ye would
have said unto Moses; Let not God speak unto us, but to thee; and yet was he
feign to cover his face, because ye could not abide it. To the same purpose
does Esaias say, that ye were feign to have line after line, and precept after
precept, and lisping Prophets to dally with you like new weaned children,
that they might make you to understand. Also S. Paul says in the same sense,
that ye were trained up like babes under the discipline and tutorship of the
law. To be short, all Mankind (after the manner of one only man) has his
birth, his Childhood, and his youth, and his spiritual nourishment
proportionable to every age, as well as every of us has by himself. Nature
ought to be a Law unto us. And verily GOD meant to make us to feel how sore it
is corrupted in us; and because that in those first ages we did transgress it
and break it so many and so sundry ways, like young Scholars, which (to
speak rightly) cannot write one right letter without a sample: therefore God
gave us the Law written; and there remained at leastwise so much conscience in
us all, as that none of us could say but it was most just. Nevertheless, it
was Gods will that we should try our strength for a time in the doing
thereof; whereby we perceived in the end, that we could not atteyne thereto,
like as the Child that indeuereth to follow the Copy of a good Skriuener, and
cannot atteyne to the fashioning of one letter aright, furtherfoorth than his
master guides his hand. At length came Gods grace brought by Jesus Christ,
when our accusation (I mean the accusation of all Mankind and specially of the
Church) was made and concluded both by Nature and by the Law the Interpreter
of Nature, and that so apparently, as none of us can deny but that he
deserves very great punishment, nor any of us say that he deserves any reward
at the hand of the everlasting God, whose reward being proportionable (if I may
so term it) to the giver, cannot be but everlasting. So then, Nature has made
man ready to receive ye Law; the Law has made him ready to embrace grace:
and God (as seemed convenient to his wise providence) has in this last age of
the world, caused his grace to be brought and preached unto us by his Gospel,
even unto us which were as folk standing on the Scaffold ready to be
executed: to the intent that such as perish should acknowledge his Justice, and
such as are saved should acknowledge his only grace in Jesus God and Man, the
only Savior and Redeemer of Mankind.

Amen.
The xxxij. Chapter.
That Jesus Christ was and is GOD, the Son of GOD, against the Heathen.
NOw then, we have Jesus Christ such a one as he was promised unto us in the
Scriptures, namely God and Man, the Mediator of man's salvation, 2. Tim. 3.
(as says S. Paul) manifested in the flesh, crucified by the Jews, preached
to the Gentyles, believed on in the world, and taken up into glory. And
forasmuch as I have already proved the trewnesse and divineness of the
Scriptures, and that according to them the Mediator was to be such a one as
Jesus was: here I might make an end of this work: for the conclusion follows
of it self. The Scriptures are of God; In them we have found Jesus to be the
Messiah, the Mediator, and the Redeemer of Mankind; therefore it follows that
we ought to receive him for such a one, and to embrace his doctrine with all
our heart. Howbeit to take all cause of doubt from the Heathen, let us show
them yet further, that Jesus is God the son of God, without the testimony of
the Scriptures. For it may be, that although they will not believe Jesus to be
very God by means of our Scriptures, yet they will believe our Scriptures to
be of GOD in very deed, when they shall see that Jesus is God, whose coming
has been declared so plainly and so long aforehand in our Scriptures. But to
begin withal, let us call to mind this saying of Porphyrius, That Gods
providence has not left mankind without an universal cleansing, and that the
same cannot be done but by one of the beginnings, that is to wit, by one of the
three Persons or Inbeeings of Gods essence. And likewise these points which I
have proved already, namely, That man is created to live for ever: That by his
corruption he is fallen from Gods favor into his displeasure, and consequently
excluded from that blessedness: That to bring him in favor ageine, a Mediator
must step in, who must be man, that he may sustain the death which mankind
has deserved; and God, that he may triumph over death, and deck us with his
desert. And such a one do we say the same Jesus is which was crucified by the
Jews, and believed on among the Gentyles of old time: And God of his grace
grant in our time, to inlighten all those to whom he has not as yet given
grace to believe.

Surely as the Mediator came for the Gentyles Prophesies among the Gentyles.
Nomb. 22. and 23.
as well as for the Jews, that is to say for all men: so it should seem that
the Gentiles had some incling thereof revealed to them from GOD, that they
might prepare themselves to receive him. Origin in his 13. Homily upon Genesis.
In the Scripture we read of a Prophet named Balaam, who prophesied plainly
enough of Christ. And some ancient writers say that his Prophecy, Chrisostom
in his second Homily upon the viii. of Matthew.
and the prophecy of one other named Seth, were kept in the East parts of the
world. And Job who was an Edomite, says, I am sure that my Redeemer lives,
and shall stand up last upon the earth. Job. 19. 25.
Also the Sibils, and specially Sibill of Erithra who is so famous above the
rest, The Oracles of the Sibylls.
(at leastwise if the books which we have under their names be theirs) do
tell us that he should be the son of God, Lactantius. lib. 4. Cap. 6.
be borne of a Uirgin, be named Jesus, work miracles, be crucified by the
Jews, be raised ageine to glory, come in the end to judge both the quick and
the dead, and so forth; and that, (which is a greater matter) in such terms,
and with such particularities, as it seems to be ye very Gospel turned into
verse, as though God had meant to utter his mysteries more manifestly by them
to the Gentiles, than he had done to the Jews, because the Gentyles had not
been inured to ye heavenly doctrine any long time aforehand, and namely to the
hope of the Redeemer. And as for them which think those books to have been
counterfetted in those Sibils names, surely they may more easily say it than
prove it; but I pass not greatly for that. For (as Suetonius Suetonius in the
life of Augustus. cap. 31.
Tranquillus reports) the Emperor Augustus made them to be locked up in two
Cofers of gold, at the foot of the Image of Apollo on mount Palatine in Rome,
where it was hard for men to have falsified them. And in the time of Origin, of
Clement of Alexandria, and of Iustine the Martyr, which was not long after the
preaching of the Apostles; those books were abroad in the world, as appears
by the discourses of Celsus the Epicure, who says in deed that they were
counterfeit, but he proves it not. Also the Emperor Constantine in a certain
Oration of his, witnesses that he had seen and read them, and referred the
Gentiles of his time to them. Well it cannot be denied but that there was at
leastwise some such like thing. For Cicero in his books of Divination Cicero
in his first book of Divination.
writes these words, Let us observe the books of Sibyll. We must name us some
King, if we will live in safety. And yet all men know how hateful a thing
the name of King was, both to all the Romans and to Cicero him self. Also he
makes mention of Sibils Acrosticke, that is to say, of certain verses of hirs
whose first letters made the name of that King, of which sort we have some in
the eighth book of the Sibyls; whereupon he concludes, that they had a sound
and well settled mind. Moreover, the Emperor Constantine affirms, that Cicero
had translated the book Sibyll of Erithra, and that Antonie would have had it
abolished. In these books it was said, yt as soon as the Romans had set the
King of AEgipt again in his State, by and by should be borne the King of the
whole world. And therefore Cicero writing to Lentulus Cicero in his first
Epistle to Lentulus lib. 1. epist.
who sewed to have that charge; does mention that Oracle unto him: and the
Romans made a dout whether they might restore the King of AEgipt or no, by
reason of that matter, whereof the Sibyls do make some speech in their second
book. In the second book of their Oracles.
Nevertheless when the Romans had well canuased the case, Gabinus conveyed
home Ptolomie King of AEgipt into his Kingdom, and at the same time was Jesus
Christ borne. Virgill who by the favor of Augustus had access to those
books, made an Eglog Virgil. Eglog 4
(which is but a translation of certain of the Uerses of those Sibyls)
concerning the happy state which Sibyll behighted by Jesus Christ the son of
God; saving that Virgil not looking deeply into the matter, applied it wholly
to one Salonine, in favor of Augustus who^ he meant to flatter: After which
manner the Romans wrested this famous foresaying of Syria, to the Emperor
Vespasian, That out of Iewrie should come the Souereine of the whole world. But
we read that one Secundian a notable man in the time of the Emperor Decian,
Vincent. lib. 11. cap. 50.
and one Verian a Peinter, and one Marcelline an Orator, became Christians upon
the only reading and conferring of those Oracles. And therefore the first
writers among the Christians, as Iustine, Origin, Clement, Iustine in his
Apology. Origin against Celsus. Clement in strom:
and such others, do sommon the Heathen to the books of the Sibyls, because
they would not with their good wills have believed ours; and also to a former
prophecy of one Histaspes, which spoke plainly of the coming of the son of
God into the world, and of the conspiring of all kingdoms against him and his.
And therefore all those books were forbidden by the Heathen Emperors, upon
pain of death. But God of his wonderful providence had provided for the
Salvation of the Gentyles, by scattering the Jewish nations with their books
and prophesies, into all the four quarters of the World; howbeit that we read
not of any other Lineage or Nation to have been so scattered without losing
their tytles, their books, their name, and the very knowledge of their
original; which prerogative the Jews had, to the intent they should be
Preachers of the coming of the Mediator, and witnesses of the antiquity,
truth, and vncorruptnes of the Prophestes, against the effect whereof
nevertheless they set themselves with all their power. For what better
witnesses I pray you could the Gentyles have; than the Jews themselves? namely
in that they being the putters of Jesus and of his disciples to death, were
ready notwithstanding to dye for the truth and soundness of the books
wherein he was foreshewed, foretold, and forepromised unto them at all times?
Furthermore, that this King promised by the Prophets and the Sibyls, should
deliver the Law of good life to the whole world, Cicero seems to have had
some understanding (howsoever he came by it) or else I cannot tell whereto I
should apply this goodly sentence of his in his third book of his Commonweal.
Soothly the very Law in deed (says he) is right reason, shed into all men,
constant, everlasting, which calls all men to their duty by commanding,
and frayeth them from fraud by forbidding; which yet notwithstanding neither
bids nor forbids, in vain to the good, nor by bidding or forbidding
moves the bad. From this law may nothing be taken, to it may nothing be put,
neither may it be wholly abrogated. Neither Senate nor Pope can discharge us of
this Law, Cicero in l^^ third book of his Commonweal. in Lactantius lib. 6.
cap. 8.
neither needs there any interpreter or expounder thereof to make it plain.
There shall not be one Law at Rome, and another at Athens; one tooday, and
another toomorrowe: But one selfsame Law being both everlasting and
unchangeable, shall conteyne all Nations and at all times; and there shall be
but one common master and commander of all, even God. He is the deviser, the
discusser, and the giver of this Law; which who will not obey, shall flee from
himself as if he disdeined to be a man; which doing of his must needs be a
sore punishment unto him, though he were sure to escape all other punishments.
Who sees not here, that this Heathen man espied, that all Laws of man are but
vanity, and that he looked that God himself should come openly into the sight
of the world, to give a good law to Mankind? Now, Jesus has manifestly given
this Law, causing it to be published by his Apostles, and their voice sounded
to the uttermost bounds of the earth. And for proof hereof, what is more
convenient and meet for man in the judgment of conscience, than to love God
with all his heart and all his Soul; and his neighbor as himself? which yet
notwithstanding does more surmount our ability to perform, and more bewray
our corruption, and more condemn whatsoever is in us of our own, than does
the Law it self universally in all mankind. On the contrary part* what find
we in all the writings of the Heathen, but a Hireling virtue, and a teaching to
cloak vice, that is to say Hypocrisy? But as this Law is verily of God, so
let us see whether the bringer thereof be God. And I beseech all worldly wise
men, not to hearken unto me by halues, nor to look upon things at a glaunce,
(for I come not to daly with them:) but to yield me both their ears, and to
look wistly, and to bend all their wits advisedly: for the nearer they look
unto ye matter, and the more deliberatly they consider of it; the sooner will
they yield to our doctrine, as to the undoubted truth, yea and as to very
nature it self.

Jesus therefore is borne in the little Country of Iewrie subdewed by the
Romans, The proceeding of the Kingdom of Jesus beyond nature and against
Nature.
of poor parents, in a sorry Uillage, destitute of friends and of all worldly
helps, and yet was he to be Emperor of the whole world, to give the Law to
the whole world. Let us see the proceeding of this Emperor and of his Empire.
Amend (says he) and believe the Gospel: for the kingdom of Heaven is at
hand. If we consider the majesty of the Roman Empire, the eloquence and
learning of the great Clerks, and the pride of the Sophists and Orators of that
time; what greater fondness could there be to all seeming, than to talk after
that manner? Who would not have thought folly both in Christ and in his Apostles
for their preaching so? But what adds he? Whosoever will come into this
kingdom, let him forsake goods, father, moother, wife, children, yea and
himself too. And let him take up his Cross and follow me. Let him think
himself happy that he may suffer a thousand miseries for me, and that in the
end he may dye for my names sake. What manner of privileges are these I beseech
you, to draw people into that kingdom? What a hope is it for them that serve
him? What are these promises of his, but threatenings? and his perswasio^s, but
disswasions? What say we to a friend whom we turn from some other man, but
thus; eschew that man's company, for ye shall have nothing with him but
travel and trouble? And what worse could the veriest enemies of his doctrine
say, than he himself said? Also what a saying of his was this to S. Paul a
man of reputation among the Pharisees, and greatly employed before in following
ye world? I will show thee how great things thou have to endure for my names
sake? And yet notwithstanding, what a sodeyne change insewed, from
apprehending and imprisoning, to be apprehended and imprisoned? from being a
Judge, to be whipped and scourged? from stoning of others to death, to offer
himself from City to City to be stoned for the name of Jesus?

Let us hear on the contrary part the voice of a worldly Conqueror. Plutark
in the sayings of the Kings of old time.
Whosoever will follow me (says Cyrus to the Lacedaemonians) if he be a
footman, I will make him a Horseman: if he be a Horseman, I will give him a
Charyot: if he have a Manor, I will give him a Town: if he have a Town, I will
give him a City: if he have a City, I will give him a Country: and as for
Gold, he shall have it by weight, and not by tale. What ^ddes is there between
the speeches of these two Monarkes, and much more between their Conquests? And
therefore what comparison can there be betwixt the Conquerours themselves?
This Cyrus as great an Emperor as he was, could not have the Lacedaemonians to
serve him for all his great offers. But Jesus being poor, abject, and
unregarded, did by his rigorous threats, even after his own suffering of
reproachful death and his manacing of the like to his followers, draw all
people and Nations unto him, and not only Souldyers, but also Emperors; nor
only Cities, but also whole Empyres. Cyrus dyed in conquering; and Jesus
conquered by dying. The death of Cyrus decayed his own kingdom, as a body
without a soul: But the death of Jesus enlarged his kingdom even over the
Empyres. And how could that have been, but that the death of Jesus was the life
of all Empyres and all Kingdoms? Who sees not then, in the mightiness of the
one, a human weakness; and in the weakness of the other, a divine
mightiness? We wonder at the Conquests of Alexander. And why? Because that
being but a mean King of Macedonie, he passed into Asia, and conquered it
with forty thousand men and no more. Had he carried a hundred thousand with him,
we would have had the less estimation of his deeds. But how much greater
account would we have made of him, if he had done it with half his number? And
had he done it with the tenth man, O how we would have wondered! And if we
made a God of him for conquering so; what divine honor would we think
sufficient for him now? At leastwise who would not have thought him, if not a
God, yet (at the least) assisted with the power and might of GOD? But had these
Soldiers overcome their enemies by being beaten at their hands; had they
conquered by causing themselves to be killed; had they brought Kingdoms in
obedience by submitting themselves to their Gibbets: had it not been a crime to
have left them vnwoorshipped for Gods? For if between the able man and the
unable man, the skillful and the unskillful, the difference be that the
unskillful can do nothing unless he have very well and abundantly wherewith:
but the skillful can work much upon little, and by his cunning overcome the
awknesse of his stuff: What is the difference between the skilfullest man and
God, but that the man can of a little make somewhat, whereas God can of nothing
and without help of any thing make great things, yea and even one contrary of
another and by another? Which is as much to say, as that he is of infinite
power, able to fill up the infinite distance that is between contraries, and
specially between nothing and something. Now, let us see what Jesus has done;
and let us bring with us the same eyes and the same reason, which we did to
the judging and discerning of the History of Alexander. First, our Lord Jesus
was borne destitute of al worldly helps. From ten to tenthousand, and from
tenthousand to ten millions, men do atteyne: but who can atteyne from nothing,
to so huge a thing? He was accompanied by a few ignorant Fishermen of gross
wit. And yet is it no small matter yt he could cause them to give over their
Trade to follow him. But what Instruments were they to make Preachers to the
whole world, being rather clean contrary to such a purpose? And to encourage
them, he says unto them: Blessed are ye when ye endure all manner of
adversities for my names sake. This had been enough to have driven them away,
and yet they follow him. At length, he sends them of Embassage to al
Nations; And what was their message? He that takes not up his Cross and
follows me, is not worthy of me. What is he that would at this day take such
a charge upon him, no though he were well rewarded for his labor? They shall
whippe you in their Synagog says he. Who would undertake to deal in such a
case? Specially upon such a persuasion as this, He that will save his life
shall lose it? In the end, he dies. And how? Crucified between two Thieves.
Those few followers of his are at their wits end. He leaves neither Children
nor kinsfolk behind him to uphold his silly kingdom. The kingdom of
Heaven that he had talked of, seems to be buried in the earth. What worldly
kingdom had not perished in this plight? How long did the throne of Alexander
reign, notwithstanding that it was vphild with the hope of some Children, with
the policy of great Capteynes, with the force of victorious Armies, and with
the very terror of his name? In the mean while, those silly Sheep of Christ
came together, and went and preached to Jerusalem, and afterward to all the
world. And what preached they? That Jesus had been crucified, and that it
behooved them to believe in him. If he was a man; what was more vain? If he was
a God; what was more absurd? Yet notwithstanding, if they may have audience,
they teach men to suffer for him: if they be shut out, they will rather dye
than forbear to speak of him: and if they be accused for it, they preach
their crime before their Judges. Malefactors are tormented to make them tell
their fault, and these are tormented to make them to conceal it. Those hold
their peace, to save themselves from death; and these dye for speaking. Their
persecutors cry out, what a misery is this, that we cannot overcome an old
man, or a woman? what a shame is it for us, to be more weary of tormenting
them, than they be of the torments? Yet notwithstanding, in less than forty
years ye world is filled full of this doctrine, and the Countries are
conquered to Jesus Christ by those few Disciples preaching his bludshed and
sheading their own, from Jerusalem to Spain, yea and from Jerusalem to the
Indyes. And look by what means this kingdom is founded, by the same also is
it stablished, and from time to time increased and mainteyned. What man (if he
know how far man can extend) can attribute these things unto man? He is God
(says a wise man) which does that which no creature can do: And who ever did
such things either before Jesus or after him? Also Aristotle says, that of
nothing can nothing be made: that in deed is a rule in nature. But what else
are these doings of Christ, but a making not only of some thing, but also of yt
greatest things, of nothing? And who can vyolate or overcome the law of
nature, but only he that created nature? Now God spoke the word, and it was
done: this surpasses nature. But when Jesus says, He that does not take up
his Cross and follow me, is not worthy of me: to our fleshly understanding
it is as much as if he should say, Flee from me; and yet men follow him, and
seek him. The word (say I) which were enough to drive us away, draws us unto
him: by dissuading, he persuades us: in turning us away, he turns us to him:
in throwing us down, he sets us up: and in killing us, he makes us
everlasting. Who can draw one contrary out of another, as, the effects of
water out of fire, and the effects of fire out of water; but he that made both
fire and water? And who can draw persuasion out of dissuading; and converting
out of diuerting; but he that made both the heart of the man that hearkeneth,
and the speech of the party that speaks? And what is the conquering of the
living by the dying of himself and his; but as ye would say a working of an
effect by taking away the cause? What is this subduing of the world by
disarming, tying, and delivering of himself; but a taking of a way contrary
to his business, and a choosing of instruments most contrary to his working?
And he that does a thing by instruments contrary thereunto, nay rather by such
instruments as are directly hurtful to it and can no way further it; does he
not show that he could do it by his only word, without other help? But let us
see yet more. It is against nature to make something of nothing: Here the
Philosophers must stoop. It is against nature to make a thing by speaking the
contrary: Here the Orators are put to silence. What will thou say then, if
besides all this, there be an extreme resistance in the thing it self: if
thou be a Physician, in the Complexion: if thou be a Capteyne, in the
Conquest: if thou be an Orator, in the wills of men? Alexander did great
things with few men. I grant. But if men had made head against him as they
might have done, in what case had he bin. Let us see contrariwise what
resistance men made both generally and particulerly to shut Jesus out of ye
doors. If ye speak of force; he could scarsly preach without peril of death.
His Apostles could not open their lips, but they were by and by whipped,
stoned, racked, crucyfied or burned. The cruellest Emperors, as Caligula,
Nero, Domitian, and such others, wrought upon them the chief deeds of their
cruelties. If any of those Emperors chanced to be more mield, O what Justice
used he! Forsooth, If they be not sedicious, (say they) let them not be
sought. But come they once in Question, wherefore soever it be, let them not
escape. I would feign learn what sect of Philosophers in all Greece, would not
have ceased at the least commandment of a Magistrate. And of what truth do
we find any monuments of Conquests over all the world; but of the truth of
Jesus Christ? If ye have an eye to policy; those that followed him were
excluded from all promotions and offices: And what a hell is that to a man of
an ambicious nature? Their Children were prohibited to go to School: and what
was that but a cutting up of the tree by ye root, if it had not grown by
grace from Heaven? Also certain counterfeit Dialogs, forged concerning Pylate
and Christ, full of wicked lies and blasphemies, were enjoined to be read in
Schools, and to be conned of Children by heart, to steyne the name of Jesus,
and to make it odious and loathsome to all men for ever. And what more
pernicious policy could the Devil himself have devised?

The Jews worse than all others, (to whom notwithstanding he was promised)
were false Traitors to him; and whereas they should have preached him, they did
most eagerly accuse him; insomuche that there scarsly came any of his Disciples
into any town, but that they made Hew and cry upon him to murder him. Nay
(which more is) in every several person there was an inward encounter, and an
extreme resistance against this word. Yea? [sayd men within themselues] shall
I believe in Jesus? An abject man? A crucified God? Shall I believe his
Disciples, the ofscourings of the World, and the outcasts of the Jews? Shall I
believe in him for a two or three days, to leave behind me a wretched wife, a
reprochefull rememberance of myself, and the report of a fool too my
posterity? If the Emperors made so cruel war against this doctrine both by
sword and by their Laws; we may well conjecture what War every man
maynteyned against it in himself. And if we have known what persecution is,
let us here bethink us of the battles between the flesh and the spirit; and
of the lively and sharp arguments which a man in that case makes against
himself. Notwithstanding all this, in the end whole Nations yielded themselves
to the word of those men, and even Empyres worshipped Jesus Christ crucified.
If weakness wrought this; why did not force get the upper hand? If folly; why
did not wisdom triumph over them? If manhod; why did not multitude prevail?
No surely, it was Jesus the son of God, who repaired the world by his spirit
as God had created it at the first by his word. Cicero could not wonder enough
at Romulus, for that (says he) in a time which was not rude, he had compassed
so much as to be called a God. And certesse I marvel at Cicero, that he showed
himself so gross in that behalf. For if he were called a God, who ever
believed him to be so? And what was Rome at that time, and a long time after,
but a rout of ignorant and silly Shepherds? But thereby we may deem, what
judgment he would have given upon Jesus. Romulus was called a God; but the
Senate believed it not. The Senate did put the people in fear, and by that
means made them to say it. But all the whole Empire of Rome could not scare
one Disciple from professing of Jesus. What resemblance then is there between
them two? The same may be said of Alexander as great an Emperor as he was,
when he made men too woorship him as God. For even then did his army fall to
mutinies, he lost his estimation, he disteyned his victories, and his own
howseholdseruants were contented too be beaten rather than they would kneel
down to woorship him. And asfor Caligula, Domitian, Heliogabalus, and others,
they were Laughed to skorne as long as they lived; and they were not so soon
dead, but their Godheads were dragged in the mire like dogs, and men voutsafed
them not so much as a Tumb to be buried in. But what say ye to Jesus, who
being despised all his lyfetyme, was woorshipped as God after his death? Whose
Godhead (...) Disciples preach even upon the rack, and whom the very
Emperors Tiberius, and Antoninus, and Alexander honored in their hearts and
woorshipped as God in their priuichambers? And in what time? Surely in the
Learn eddest time that ever was, and in the full flourishing state of knowledge
in all arts, skills, and sciences: when Rhetoryk, Logic, and all Philosophy
were at their pride; and at such time as Magik and all manner of curious
seiences had their full scope and were at their highest pitch. If he be
woorshipped for his wisdom; what a number of grave Senators were there at that
time? If for Learning and Doctrine; what a number of learned men? If for Riches
and parentage; how would those great men have yielded to such an ofcast? If
for his giltlesse death, why not others also, of so many which preached him and
followed him? And why was not Gabinius woorshipped so to, being a Citisen of
Rome, a man of honor, and unjustly crucified, in whose behalf Cicero uttered
all the goodly eloquence that he had? Nay surely, they saw such a change in
the World, so sodeine, so great, and so universal; that they could not impute
it to any other thing, than to the power and operation of him that rules the
world, whose mighty power they perceived in Jesus.

That this so suddein turning of Nations to woorship a man; Records of the
wonderful proceeding of Christ's Kingdom.
of Emperors to reverence reproach, and of wise men to have folly (as says
S. Paul) in admiration, is very true: I will take none other witnesses than
themselves. We read in Suetonius and Tacitus, that the name of Christ was
known in Rome, and throughout all Italy: For they persecuted the Christians a
fresh contrary to the custom of the Romans; insomuch that Nero Sueton. in
Nero.
made them to be put to the slaughter, Tacitus lib. 5.
as if they had bin the authors of the burning of Rome, which he himself had
caused to be set on fire. And we read that in the same time, the Senate made
certain decrees, whereby many thousands of Christians, infected with the
Jewish superstition, (for so did they term them because they had their
original from the Jews) were banished into diverse Isles. Which thing the
Senate would not have done, (considering their ordinary manner of proceeding in
caces of Religion) if the hasty increase of that spiritual kingdom had not
put them in fear. And within a while after, we see how all the Emperors were
amazed at this flocking of people together unto the^, for counsel how to
extinguish that doctrine; and how fires were kindled against them on all sides;
and yet how Nations nevertheless were shaken at the voice of the Apostles, and
the very Courts of Princes with their Legions of Souldyers, were made to
inclyne unto Christ. Sufficient witnesses whereof be the Laws of that age;
wherein it was inacted that the Swoordgirdle of a Souldyer should not be worn
of any Christian: that they should not bear any office or have any charge in
the Court, and such other. And Vlpian the Lawyer did himself write four books
against the christians. And truly we read that a great many gave over their
charges, rather than they would forsake the Christen faith. Moreover in the
time of Marcus Aurelius, Xiphilus in the life of M: Aurelius.
there was a Legion that was called the Legion of Malta, which was altogether
of Christians; of which Legion he witnesses in a certain Epistle of his, The
Epistie of M. Aurelius in the Apology of Iustine.
that being upon a time brought to utter distress by the Marcomanes, this
Legion obtained by prayer beth Thunder from Heaven against the enemy, and
Rain wherewith to refresh the whole army, whereupon that Legion was afterward
called the Thunderer. And therefore says Tertullian Tertulian in his Apology.
in his Apology, If as many of us as be Christians should get us away into
some corner of the world; ye would wonder to see how feaw people ye should
have remaining to you, and ye should be feign to seek other Cities to
command; or rather you to flee away out of hand and too hyde yourselues; for
ye should have mo enemies than Citizens left ye. We have filled now whole
Cities, Islands and Castles; Counselles, Palaces, and Courts; Trybes, Legions,
and Armies. What war were we not able enough to undertake, if we listed? And
what is it that we might not bring to pass, dying so manfully and so willingly
as we do? Nay, the Law of our war teaches us to dye, and not to kill. Now
what kingdom ever had so great increase, in so short time? But (which is a
greater matter) what a thing is it to vanquish by yielding, to be furthered by
retyring, and to conquer by dying? We read of the Emperor Tiberius, that
upon a letter written to him from Pilate reporting the miracles of Jesus,
Egesippus in his Auacephaleosis.
his giltlesse death, and his rising agein from the dead; he preferred a bill
to the Senate with his assent unto it, to have had them proclayme Jesus to be
God; and that the Senate refused it, because they themselves were not the
authors thereof; but that Tyberius abode still in his opinion. And thereupon
Tertullian says, Go look upon your Registers and the Acts of your Senate:
Eusebius. Tertullian in his A^ologie.
Also Vespasian the scourge of the Jews, forbear the Christians: and Traiane
moderate the persecution, upon the report of their innocence made unto him by
Pliny. Pliny in his Epistles. Julius Capitolimus in Adrian and Alexander.
Marcus Aurelius having felt the help of their prayers did the like. Likewise
did Antonine, Antonine the Emperor in an Epistle of his to the cities of Asia.
but to another end: namely, because that (as he himself writes in an epistle
of his) persecution did stablish the Church of the Christians. To be short,
Alexander Dion in the life of the Emperor Alexander.
the son of Mammea, did in his Chapel worship Jesus surnamed Christ, of
whom also he took his The device was this, Do not to another that which thou
would not have done to thyself.
Poesy, and therefore the Antiochians called him the Archpriest of Syria. And
it is reported that for Christ's sake, the Emperor Adrian builded many Temples
without Images. Finally, the good Emperors of Rome, Vespasian, Adrian,
Traiane, Antonine the meek and such others, had Christ in estimation and
allowed of the Christians. But how far? Surely as to acknowledge in their
hearts that they were good and honest men, and that Jesus had more in him than
was of Man. But yet for all this, If they be accused, (say these good
Emperors) let them be punished; if not, let them not be sought. This is a
good proof and allowance of their innocence: but surely it is but a slender
relief for them. Contrariwise, the wicked Emperors Nero, Domitian, Valerian,
Commodus, Maximine, Decius, and such others, condemned them, and by their
condemning of them did justify them. For what did they ever allow, but evil?
But what manner of condemning is this? Kill all, burn all, yea whole Cities,
have no respect of sex, of age, or of quality. Scarcely had the Christians any
breathingtime, but a new counterbuffe came upon the^ again* they were no
sooner from the torture, but they must too it again. And yet God did so rule
all things by his providence, to the intent the whole glory in this mystery
should redound to himself, that the mield dealing of the good Emperors did in
deed justify ye truth, but yet durst they not advance or further it:
whereas on the contrary part, the malice of the other sort condemned it and
persecuted it to the uttermost, but yet could they not destroy it. To be
short, in few years there passed ten horrible persecutions upon that poor
Church; and yet in the end the Emperors themselves submitted themselves to the
Cross of Christ, and their Empyres sought their welfare there. Therefore we
may always come back to this point, That he, yea only he which first created
the world of nothing, when there was not yet any thing to withstand him; is
able to recover the world from Satan and to subdue it to himself, without the
help of any thing, even by instruments repugnant to him, and in despite of
the whole world bending itself against him.

But what will ye say if he subdue, not only men, The abolishing of the False
Gods and of their Oracles.
but also their Gods? not only the world, but also the Souereynes of the world;
I mean the Devils which at that time held the world under their tyranny? Let
us read the Histories of the Greeks and Romans that were before the coming
of Christ; and what shall we find in them, but the Miracles and Oracles of
Devils? What else have Varro, Cicero, Titus Liuius and such others among the
Romans; or Herodotus, Diodorus, Pausanias and the residewe among the Greeks?
On the contrary part we see, that even ever since Christ was borne and
preached (the world has changed his hew. Jesus was borne under the Emperor
Augustus, Suidas in the life of Augustus.
and see here what Apollo answers unto him. An Hebrew Child which daunteth
with his power
The blessed Gods, Ni. ephorus. lib. 1. Cap. 17.
does straightly me command
To get me hence to Hell this present hour;
Therefore of me no Counsel now demand.
Whereupon Augustus erected an Altar in the Capitol, with this inscription
upon it; The Altar of the first begotten Son of God.

And Cicero says that the Oracles whose answers he had so diligently registered
in his books, did cease in his time: And Iuuenall Iuuenal. Satyr. 3.
reports the same of the Oracle of Delphos by name, howbeit that he bears
us on hand, that Kings did put them to silence, who in deed were most
inquisitiue to hane them speak. Likewise Strabo says that the Priests of
Delphos were brought to beggerie by it. But Lucane gives this general report
of all the Gods of the Romans. The Gods by whom this Empire stood, abandon
euerychone
Their Temples, Shrynes, and Sacrifice, and leave us now alone.
Also Celsus the Epicure says, that the Oracles of Claros, Delphos, and Dodon
were stricken dumb. And Julian the Renegate writing against the Christians,
confesses and witnesses the same of the Oracles of AEgipt. Yea and Porphirius
himself (for I allege none here but the deadly enemies of Christ) rehearses
these verses of Apollo. Alas ye Treuets, moorne with me; Apollo now is gone,
Gone quite and clean; the heavenly light compelles me to be gone.
Jove was, Jove is, and Jove shall be; O Jove, now welaway;
The light of all mine Oracles does fail me now for ay.
And unto ye Priest yt asked him the last Oracle, he answered thus. Unhappy
Priest, inquire no more of me
The outtermost and last, concerning the
Divine Begetter, or the only decre
Beloved Son of that most mighty King.
Nor of his Spirit which vpholdeth all
Both Mountains, Earth, Brooks, Seas, Hell, Air, and Fire
Now woe is me: For sore against my will,
That spirit drives me from this house of mine;
So that this Chapel where I prophecy,
Shall out of hand be left quyte desolate.
Also being enforced by charms and Coniurations, he said again as it were for
a solemn Farewell; Eusebius in his book of Preparation to the Gospel.
The Pythonesse shall never now her voice henceforth recover.
Long tract of time has withered her: The souereine power above her
Has lokt her under silence fast, so as she can no more
Now utter any prophecy; which greeueth her full sore.
But you according to your wont, such sacrifices still
To Phoebus offer, as are meet for men to God to kill.
To be short, Plutarke Plutark.
has made a book of purpose, intytled why Oracles have ceased. But in the
end he comes to this point, That the spirits which had the managing of those
Oracles, are mortal, and that by their deaths their Oracles ceased, whereas
notwithstanding he commonly vpholdeth that all spirits are immortal; but in
deed he should have said that they were shut up as in a Iayle. Hereupon he
rehearses at length a notable story of one Epitherses, who sailing near the
Vrchinyles, heard (and al those that were in the Ship with him) a certain
voice coming from one of those Isles, which bade them declare that the great
Pan was dead, And he tells that after this voice followed an vnspeakle
sighing, and lamentations without number. Which story (says he) was reported
to Tiberius then Emperor; who being desirous to know the truth of the
matter, enquired very earnestly the opinions of all the Philosophers, What that
great Pan should be. Now let us mark that this was done in ye reign of
Tiberius, under whom Christ was crucified, and that this Pan was one of the
cheef Idols of the Heathen, as appears by this his Oracle in the books of
Borphiryus. The Goldenhorned Pan which serves the grizly Bacchus, stalks
Among the Mountains clad with woods, and keeps his wonted walks.
In deed Apollo andswered unto Diocletian, that The Rightuous made him dumb;
and the Priest told Diocletian, that by the Rightuous he meant the Christians.
Whereupon Diocletian fell to persecuting them. Also the same Apollo told Julian
(who would needs waken him up ageine by Coniurations) that he could say
nothing till he had first removed the bones of Babylas a Martyr of Christ's
away, which were an impediment to him; which is as much to say, as he could not
open his mouth, but to pronounce the sentence of condemnation against himself.
And therefore, It is no marvel (says Porphyrius Porphyrius against the
Christians.
) though our Cities be smitten with the plague, seeing that Esculapius and the
rest of the Gods are put so far from them. For since the time that Jesus has
been worshigped, we have taken no benefit by any of all our Gods. Then let
this great Philosopher tell me, whether Jesus be a Man, and they Gods or no?
What manner of Gods are those, which shrink away at the presence of a Man? and
what a man is he, that makes Gods to hide their heads? Nay further, what a
man is he whose Disciple commands their Masters, and whose servant
commands their Gods? Will ye see how it is the name of Jesus whereat they
tremble, and which they shun? Lo herr the tryail whereto the Christians submit
themselves before the Gentyles. Let a man (says Tertullian Tertullian in his
Apology.
) that is possessed in deed with a Devil, be brought before your
Iudgmentseate; and at the commandment of the meanest Christian, the Spirit
shall speak, and confess himself to be an unclean Spirit. Let one of those
folk be brought whom you think to be inspyred of a God; be it the same God
that promises you rain, or beeit Esculapius that plays the Physician among
you. If he dare lie before a Christian, or if he confess not himself to be
a Devil; take the Christian to be presumptuous, and let him dye for it out of
hand. Now, none will speak his own shame, but rather that which may sound to
his honor. Surely they will not tell ye that Jesus is a deceiuer, or of the
common stamp of men, or that he was stolen out of his grave, as has bin
reported unto you: but that he is the power, the wisdom, and the word of God;
that he sits in heaven, and that he shall come to judge us; and on the
contrary part, that themselves be Deuilles damned for their naughtiness, and
waiting for his dreadful doom; and that is because that being afraid of
Christ in God, and of God in Christ, they yield to God and Christ, and to the
servants of God and Christ. If Tertullians saying be true, what else is this,
but that Jesus commands them as slaves, yea even by his servants? Or if it be
false, how easy had it been for the Heathen to have given him the foil, by
putting the matter in proof? And why did they not put ye Christians to shame,
in the open face of the world? Nay (says Lactantius) when they offered
sacrifice to their Gods, the presence of a Christian would have dashed their
mysteries: and thereupon came up this speech which we read in Lucian: Lucian
in his Alexander.
If there be any Christian here, let him get him hence. And when they asked any
question of their Gods, their speech failed them: and it was as easy for a
Christian to drive Apollo out of his Priest or Pythonesse, as to drive a Devil
out of one that was possessed. And Julian himself (as Zosimus dares not
deny) found by proof in his Magical works, how weak his Gods were, and how
strong Christ is. Moreover, some curious Princes have by their Magicians caused
Jupiter, Neptune, Vulcane, Mercury, Apollo, and Saturn himself, that is to
say, the Deuilles that decked themselves with their names) to appear: which
thing they could never cause Christ to do, with all the Coniurations that they
had: and that is because all those Gods of theirs were Deuilles, over whom good
men have power by commanding them in the name of GOD, and evil men by
pleasing them. But as for Jesus Christ the very son of God, he stoopeth not
to any creature, but is served by Angels and good men as by his Servants, and
by Devils and wicked men as by his Slaves.

Also at the same time that Jesus came, there was scarsly any Country in the
world, where these Deuilles had not men offered ordinarily unto them in
Sacrifice, as we understand by Porphyrius himself, and as I have declared
heretofore. But in the reign of Tyberius, they were forbidden in Affricke, and
the Priests that Sacrificed them were hanged up in their hallowed Groves. And
under the Emperor Adrian all Sacrifices and all Idolles were abolished almost
euerywhere. And therefore says S. Austin to the people of Medaure; See how your
Temples are partly decayed for want of reparation, and partly shut up, and
partly altered to another use. S. Austin in an Epistle to the people of Medaure.
To worship your Idols, you have put the Christians to death; and the
Christians by their dying have cast your Idols down to the ground. And in
another place he cries out; where be your Gods, where be your Prophets, where
be your Oracles, your Bowelgazings and your Sacrifices? And we read not of any
that reproved him of untruth; notwithstanding that many (and among them one
Zosimus) bewayleth ye decay of them; and yet does not any of them step forth
for him, to show any remaynder of them. And whereas Julian says, As our
Oracles are ceased, so also be your Prophets: Let him first show upon what
cause his Oracles are ceased, which many have sought and none yet found. As
for ours, they had an eye to Christ, and amed at him as their mark: and now
that he is come, the office of the messenger ceasseth in the presence of the
master, and the representing of salvation by Sacrifices ceasseth, because the
Salvation it self is come.

Jesus therefore has overcome both the world and the Prince of the world,
Miracles which could not proceed but from God
by a force (in outward show) clean contrary to all victory, and by a way
contrary to the end that he intended; that is to wit by his word, which to the
sight of the world is folly and feebleness. Let us see now how in his works
he passes all the ability of al Creatures, according to this saying of his,
The works which I do, do bear witness of me. And soothly it is a miracle
that so many people have believed at the preaching of the Apostles: but a far
more wonder that so few folk in these our days should regard it, though
Jesus Christ and his Apostles had never wrought other miracle than that, as I
have often said before. But that they wrought very great miracles besides, I see
few of the Heathen that dare deny it; and against the Jews I have
sufficiently proved it already. We have a Letter of Pylats, wherein he
witnesses that Jesus gave sight to the blind, cleansed Leapers, healed them
that were diseased with the Palsy, delivered men from Deuilles, ouerruled the
waters, raised the dead, and rose again himself after he had been dead three
days. Also our Divines of old time say unto the Heathen, Read your own
Commentaries, and search your Registers, and you shall find there the miracles
of Jesus. And the Emperor Julian speaking of him in skorne, says thus; What
has this Jesus done worthy of memory or of any account in all his life;
saving that he cured a few blind and lame men, and delivered some from Devils
that possessed them, in the Villages of Bethsaida and Bethania? To be short, as
well the Turks as the Jews confess and commend his miracles; and the
Emperors would never have esteemed of him, if it had not bin for his miracles.
Apollo himself in his Oracles called him (...), that is to say, The wise in
wonderful works. But let us take Julian at his word, and his confession will
be enough. Put the case that he had done no more but cured the blind, and that
he had cured no more than one. Who is so blind, that in this healing of the
blind, sees not this singular power of God? Is not the eyesight one of the
excellentest substances in the world? And what is the restoring of sight, but
the restoring of a substance? and what is the restoring thereof, but a new
creating thereof, even of nothing? And what can make a substance (how small
soever it be) of nothing, but an infinite power? The which who can have, but
the only one God? or who can be the instrument or disposer thereof, but only he
that pleases God? To be brief, is he not without the bounds of nature, which
can create a substance? And whence has he then that power, but from the maker
of nature, at leastwise if he be not the maker himself? But our Lord Jesus
wrought infinite miracles, as the Jews that saw them have witnessed and do
witness still; and not only he, but also his Apostles; Austin concerning the
true Religion.
and not only his Apostles, but also their Disciples. And in deed they have
contrived certain books under the name of Jesus, as dedicated by him to Peter
and Paul, containing an Art of working Miracles; by likelihood because they
had seen them painted together, howbeit that Paul (as is well known) kept
not company with Christ while he lived in the flesh, but persecuted his
Disciples a good while after. And S. Paul says expressly, that he himself
came in signs and miracles: wherein if he lied, it was an easy matter to
disprove him. Again, Christ wrought some such miracles, as Julian being unable
to deny, falls to railing and reuyling him, calling him the greatest
Magician that ever was in the world. And of Saint Peter, they report that by
his Magic he made the Christian Religion durable for the space of threehundred
threescore and five years, and that he did it without the priuitie and consent
of Jesus. Whence rise these great slanders, but of the greatness of the
works of Christ and his Disciples? And if they had not done both great and
manifest miracles; had not the shortest way been to have denied them? But let
us consider of what spirit these contrarieties proceed. Jesus (say they) did
dedicate a book to Peter and Paul: and Paul was a persecuter at that time
and long time after. Likewise, Peter (say they) stablished Religion without the
priuitie and consent of Jesus: and how then had he learned it of him? To be
short, if there be any such books, why do they not show them? If they be
good, why should they hyde them? If they be evil, why esteem they him wise?
Or if they be effectual, why do they not put them in practice? As touching
this point, I have answered the Jews already. But let us come to the matter
again. Magic never flourished more in Princes Courts, than in the time of the
Apostles. Why did not some body step forth to vanquish them or to convict
them? Denis and Origin were great Philosophers; and Origin was the Disciple of
Ammonius, and fellowdisciple to Plotin, that is so greatly allowed and so
highly commended among them. Were these men such as would suffer themselves to
be led with illusions; or attribute that to Gods special working, which
depended upon nature? Specially Origin who had been trained up in Platoes
Philosophy, and at that time professed Magic, as well the natural by the
consent of dispositions in things, as the deuilish which they call Theurgie by
entering into fellowship and compact with Spirits? Julian also, (who to
confound the miracles of Jesus, did what he could to revive Magic by the help
of Iamblichus and Maximus) did he ever cure a blind man, or make a lame man
go? Nay, what got he by it, but ghastly fear, such as served not to heal men's
diseases, but to drive himself out of his wits? As for those which attribute
the Miracles wrought by the Christians, to a strong and forcible imagination so
vehemently fixed and fast set in the belief that Jesus is God, that it does
things wonderful to our mortal nature: therein they follow the opinion of
Auicen, who attributes unto fantasy or imagination, the operations that seem
to exceed nature. In his sixth book of the nature of things.
If it be so, I would feign have these good Philosophers tell me, if of so
many fantastical Arabians as have bent their whole force to imagination all
their lives long, they can name me one that has wrought any miracle? And of
them all, who should rather have done it, than the author of this imagination?
Also say they, whether of these has the greater force? an ability that is
bred in us, or a quality that does but come into us? fire as it is in it
self, or as it is in a thing that it has heated? Now, these Philosophers
work (as they think) by imagination applied to natural things, which
imagination is an ability bred in man by nature: But the Christians (say they)
work by an imagination or persuasion that they have concerning Christ, which
imagination is not natural, but comes from without. Why then did not these
Philosophers work miracles in natural things, yea and more evident than the
miracles of the Christians.

As touching Prophesying, The Prophesies of Jesus.
which holds a very high place among miracles; and is much less subject to
the wrangling of Sophisters; Phlegon the Emperor Adrians Freedman, confesses
in the thirteenth and fourteenth books of his Chronicles, (confounding
nevertheless S. Peter with Christ) that things to come were known to Jesus;
and he witnesses though with an ill will, that all the things which he had
foretold were come to pass accordingly in every point. And this kind of
miracles of his cannot be denied, specially at this day. For in our Gospells
we read his foretellings, and in the Histories of the Heathen we read the
fulfilling of them. What will rise then of all this? Uerily that Jesus has
converted the World by the bare Preaching of his Apostles, and by his own only
word; and that is, of nothing to make great things. This word considered in
itself, could not but turn men away from him: and that is a drawing of an
effect out of his contrary. The devils hid themselves away at the voice of
his Servants: and that is a power surmounting the power of man and Angel. He
not only made the Creatures obedient to his beck, but also created new
substances of many sorts and at many times: And this could not be but by a
power that was divine in deed.

But now omitting that such things depend upon God alone; Phlegon as he is
alleged by Eusebius, Lactantius, and Origin.
if the Lord Jesus had wrought by the Prince of the devils, [as he was
slanderously reported to have done,] would he have preached innocence and
holiness of life, reverence toward God, charity toward our neybour, yea and
that both in word and deed? For who could ever find fault in his conversation?
And seeing that the Gods of the heathen were devils (as I have proved before);
would he have overthrown their Idols, beaten down their Altars, abolished
their Sacrifises, shut up their Temples, and stopped the mouths of the devils
themselves? Or if they were Gods, as the heathen reported them to be; were they
not goodly Gods, that would flee away for the devil, and rank Traitors to the
souereine God, that would forsake their places, and cast away their armor and
weapon so cowardly? Or if (as the suttlest and cankeredest sort of them do say)
the devil thought himself more woorshipped in Jesus and more served by his
alone against the glory of God, than by all the services that had gone before;
(wherein notwithstanding I appeal to their own consciences whether they
speak as they think): would God (think you) have given his spirit, and
committed his power to the devil or to the devils instrument, too procure
obedience and service to the devil? Specially seeing that our Lord Jesus did
such things as surmounted the nature power and reach of all creatures, and
which could not be done but by or from the Creator himself? Nay, seeing that
God is altogether good; what a blasphemy were it? And seeing he is altogether
wise, what an absurdity were it? And seeing he is our father, what a
contrariety were it? And seeing he does all things to his own glory, how
should he further his enemy, specially an enemy that laboreth by all means he
can to bereue him of his glory? Surely therefore the woorking of Jesus was
from God and for Gods glory; insomuch that neither he nor any of his
Disciples, did ever speak unto us of any other thing; and therefore God
himself revenged his death, both upon Herod that had persecuted him, and upon
the Jews which had betrayed him (accordingly as he had foretold them) and
also upon Pilate which had condemned him: and likewise upon the Neroes,
domitians, Valerians, Maximies, Diocletians and such others as had persecuted
his Disciples; the end of all whom cries and proclaymeth with open and loud
voice, Take warning at us to deal justly and to fear God. Nay further, this
Jesus woorking manifestly by the power of God, tells us plainly that he was
the son of GOD, that the father was in him and he in the father, and that
both of them were one. Also he did oftentimes of his own authority command
nature as Lord thereof, and cause men too woorship him as God, even among the
Jews who abhorred nothing more than a strange God. On the other side the
Prophets of old time which Prophesied of him, wrought miracles also, howbeit by
calling upon the name of God; and likewise the Apostles that preached him,
howbeit in his name: and all they refused the honor that was offered them, and
rent their garmenes when men honored them, acknowledging themselves always to
be but his servants and instruments of his glory. And had he not bin the son
of God; surely in so saying he had not bin Gods servant, but his enemy, and a
rank rebel and Traitor and whatsoever worse is if any can be worse, and
consequently under the extreme wrath of the creator, as a person puffed up
with passing pride, which is the cause both of man's falling from his state, and
of the devils condemnation at Gods hand. Therefore let us say that Jesus is
the Son of God as he himself has told us, and that we ought to here him, to
yield unto him, to follow him, and to woorship him as God, I mean God and man,
the only Mediator of mankind, who dyed for our sins and rose ageine to make
us ryghtuouse; to whom be glory for ever and ever.

Amen.
The xxxiij. Chapter.
A Solution of the Objections of the Heathen against Jesus, the Son of God.
SUrely by those feawe things which the Heathen of old time either listed or
durst speak of Jesus, even at such time as it was an offense not only too
speak well, but also even not too speak evil of him; we see well that he did
put all the Philosophers to their Clergy; so as they wist not which way to turn
them. In his life they could find no ^lanie; The witness of the Infidels
of his doctrine they knew not what to say; and asfor his power, they could not
deny it for shame. All the shift they had, was but to say he was a great man,
full of godlynes and virtue, and wonderful to all men: but that his Disciples
did him wrong to call him God, seeing that neither he nor his Apostles had ever
affirmed him so to be. But let those that dout hereof, read S. John, and they
shall find in diverse places, that no man has told us more plainly that Jesus
was God, than Jesus himself; God (say I) the everlasting son of God, sent
down from Heaven, equal with the father, and all one with the father. Their
so saying was to avoid the force of this argument of ours when we say, he could
not do such things but from GOD; therefore he was not an enemy to God. S.
Austin in his Epistles. Porphyrius in books of the praises of Philosophi^.
But he had evidently bin so, if he had conveyed Gods glory to himself and
called himself God not being so in deeed; Therefore it follows that seeing he
himself said he was God, he is so in deed; and that our worshipping of him, is
a worshipping of the very true God. Hereupon it is that the Philosopher
Longinian in an epistle of his to S. Austin says, that he could not well tell
what to deem of Jesus. And asfor Plotine, he impugneth not so much the
Christians, as the Gnostiks and Manichies. And Porphyrius who fell away from
Christ because he had bin reproved by the Church, says thus; It is a great
matter that the Godds themselves should witness with Jesus, that he was a man
of singular godlgnes, and that for the same he is rewarded with blessed
immortality: But in this the Christians ouershoore themselves, that they call
him God. And Apollo being asked of one how he might with^rawe his wife from
Christiani^te, answered; Thou may sooner fly in the air or wait in water,
than draw her away from that. So strong was Christ in converting men too him,
to have nothing but adversity in this life; and so far to weak were the
Devils to turn them away from him, though they promised them all manner of
good. And here we may not forget a subtle trick of the Devil, worthy to
be noted in many of his Oracles alleged by Porphyrius. For commonly in the
wynding up of them, he ever commended the Jews, as worshippers of the only
GOD, and for that they continued deadly enemies to Jesus Christ, against whose
Godhead they made what resistance they could, howbeit altogether in vain.

As touching the Turks, Alcoran, Azo. ar, 1. 4. 11. 13.
Mahomet says, That Gods spirit was a help and a witness to Jesus the Son
of Marie: That the Soul of God was given unto him: That he is the messenger,
the Spirit, and the word of GOD: That his doctrine is perfect: That it
inlighteneth the old Testament: and that he came to confirm the same. But that
he should be God, and specially the son of God, that he denies: and yet it
is not possible that he should be either the Spirit or the Word of God, but he
must also be God, considering that in God there cannot be any thing imagined
to be which is not GOD himself: and that in the same doctrine which Mahomet
himself does so greatly allow, our Lord Jesus affirms himself to be God,
and the Son of God. But let us hear further of the Objections which the
Infidelles make, why they should not receive Christ for God.

What so great thing (says Julian Iulians objections.
) has your Jesus done, that he may be compared with Socrates, Lycurgus, or
Alexander? Nay surely may we say, and upon better ground, what have they all
three done and put them together, that is comparable to the doings of an
Apostle of Jesus? Socrates (says Julian) was an Innocent: but yet an ydolater.
Porphyrius alleging Aristoxenus.
A teacher and pattern of Moral virtue: but yet (as his own Porphyrie
reports) leacherous and a lover of women; and so choleric in his anger,
that he spared not to say any thing were it never so wrong. Yet dyed he for the
truth of the only God: but he had served false Gods al his life long, and
even at his death he made vows still unto them. And let not Julian boast here,
that his doctrine continued after his death. For the Athenians acquitted him
and honored him anon after: whereas open war was maintained against the
Apostles and their doctrine, by the space of three hundred years together. And
yet in as great reputation as Socrates was after his death, his Disciple Plato
durst scarce be so bold as to speak against the Gods. Such therefore were
their examples of good behavior, as these be. One Cymon was an honest man, but
yet given to Incest. Aristides was an vncorrupt man, but ^ robber of the common
treasure and ambicious. The Catoes were reformers of disorders in youths, but
yet adulterers and murderers themselves. But as for Jesus and his Apostles,
what enemy of theirs was ever so past shame, as to carpe their conversation?
And if the forerehearsed men were so far of from common honesty, even by the
record of them that had them in chief estimation: how much further of were
they from being Gods, yea or from resembling them?

In Lycurgus Lycurgus.
(to Iulians seeming) there was some singularity. The people were so rude and
headstrong that they put out one of his eyes as he was proclayming his Laws:
and yet notwithstanding those Laws bare sway in Lacedemon many hundred years
after. But Julian must remember also, that the Phrasians being next neighbors
to Lycurgus, and his confederates and companyons in arms, would not admit
them; and that the Lacedaemonians themselves corrected them while he was yet
alive: upon the report whereof he dyed out of hand for pride, greef, and
disdeyne. But what comparison is there between Sparta and the whole world?
between dying for disdeyne to see his Laws corrected, and dying willingly to
correct the Laws of all the world?

What will he tell us now of Alexander? Alexander. ^
He had a great Host and power of men: so much the more weaker was he of
himself. Jesus was despised and full of infirmity: so much the greater is his
mightiness and honor. Alexander vanquished the Persians in Battle: how much
more commendable had it been, if he had done it with a blast of his mouth? If
he had lived, he would have conquered the whole world: how much more honorable
had it been, if he had tryumphed over the world by dying? Alexander increased
his kingdom by oppressing; and Jesus by yielding. Alexander by killing, and
Jesus by dying. But Alexanders Empire decayed by his death; whereas the
kingdom of Jesus was both founded and stablished by the death of himself and
his. The difference therefore betwixt them is as great, as is betwixt him that
dies and him that quickens; or between him that of all makes a thing of
nothing, and him which of nothing makes all things. To be short, if ye look
for virtue; A man that excelled in virtue, was in old time a wonder. The
Philosophers themselves (says Cornelius Nepos) condemned themselves in their
own teachings. But after the time that Jesus was once preached, what a number
of men, women, and even children, in Town and Country, yea and in
Wildernesses, taught virtue to the world by their example? If ye require
righteousness; what were the first Christians but teachers of equity, of
vncorruptnesse, and of uprightness. Yea what enemy of theirs do we find,
that once opens his mouth to accuse them? If ye seek the despising of death;
in deed they make a great a do of one Zeno an Eleate, for spitting out his
Tongue at a Tyrant, least he might confess what the Tyrant demanded: and
likewise of one Leena a woman of Athens, that endured all manner of torments
without uttering one word. If this be so great a matter; what a thing is it,
that in one age, ye shall have whole millions of all fexes, of all ages, of all
states degrees and conditions, go willingly and joyfully to death: insomuch
that the Historiographer Arrianus, makes a general rule of it, That all
Christians made in effect no account of death? not to conceal any fault of
theirs, as those others did, who had lever to have suffered torments than to
have dyed: but for professing the thing openly before all people, which they
had learned of God, as folk that would have thought themselves unworthy to
live, if they had hild their peace. To be short, what Disciples, what
Subjects, what Souldyers had Socrates, Lycurgus, or Alexander in all their
life, that came any thing nigh this? these (I say) which were taught, ruled,
and trained up by Jesus even after he was departed hence, and by his Apostles
which were rude, ignorant, and weak as long as he was conversant with them,
yea and even at the very time of his death?

Besides this notable alteration, The objections of the Astrology.
I said also that at that time the serving of Idols ceased in all places at
once. Are they (think you) so void of wit as to say, that the ceassing thereof
in so many places, in so notable manner, and in so great geynstriuings; happened
by chance? And must it not be that those Gods were made in great haste, which
had perished by so sodeine chance? No say they: it came to pass by a
Constellation (that is to say, I wot not what a meeting together) of the
Stars in the Sky. Let us examin^ this Astrology a little. They suppose,
(and it is a common opinion) that according to the diversity of Images in the
Sky, there are also diverse Religions and diverse Gods in diverse Nations; and
therefore they divide the world into seven Clymates, and un to every Clymate
they allot a several Planet to have the rule of it. But how will they answer to
Bardesanes the Syrian, who (as they themselves cannot deny) was the wisest of
all the Chaldees? Bardesanes the Syrian. Eusebius. prepar. lib. 6. cap. 18.
Ye part the world (says he) into seven Clymates, every Clymate to be
governed by a Planet, and what a number of Nations are under every Clymate? In
every Nation, what a number of Shyres? In every Shyre what a sort of Towns?
All which do differ both in Laws, in Gods, and in Religions; and that, not
only according to the number of the twelve Signs, or of the six and thirty
faces only, but in infinite sorts. In India under one selfsame Clymat some
eat man's flesh, and some eat no flesh at all: some worship Idols, and
othersome admit none at all. Again, ths Magusians (carry them whether soever
ye will) are given to Incest after the custom of their Moothercou^try Persia
from whence they descend: And the Jews being dispersed over all the world,
alter not their Religion nor their manner of life wheresoever ye bestow them. To
be short, a Nation departing out of one Clymate, carries new Gods and new
Laws into another Clymate, and yet the Clymate neither troubles nor hinders
the doing thereof. What virtue have the Clymats or the Signs over Laws and
Religions: the differences whereof are made by Forrestes, Rivers and
Mountains, which are the bounds of Jurisdictions; rather tha^ by them? And
which they are brought into again even in despite of them, by men, by custom,
and by conquest? And in good sooth, whereof comes it that in the Countries
where Venus, Mercury, and Saturn were worshipped in old time; the Gods are
now abolished quite and clean, and yet the signs are still in the same places
where they were before? And whereof comes it that the Jewish Law being
banished and utterly rooted out of their own Country, continues under all
Clymates still? How happens it that the Religion of Mahomet is now, where the
Christian Religion was in time past? and the Christian is now, where sometime
were the bluddy Altars of Saturn and Mars, and in some places many and
contrary Religions together?

For the saluing of this absurdity, they run into another. Not the Clymates
in very deed (say they) do make the differences in Religion, but the great
Co^iunctions of the Planets: and yet even about this point they be at great
odds among themselves. For some say that the great Conjunctions of Jupiter and
Saturn and none other, Albumazar. Roger Bacon.
do dispose of Religion. Others say that properly Jupiter betokens Religion,
and that after as he is accompanied, so brings he forth the diversities of
them; as for example, accompanied with Saturn, the Jewish; with Mars, the
Chaldee; with the Sun, the AEgiptian; with Venus, the Mahometane; with
Mercury, the Christian; and with Luna, the Antichristian; and that there
cannot be above six of them. If I should ask both of them a reason, or an
experience of their saying, I doubt which of them would be most graueled. But
because I will show my self more indifferent, I require first that they agree
among themselves, to tell me which is a great Conjunction, which is a mean
one, and which is a small one: for as yet they vary upon that point. And
likewise whether the nineth house or the seventh house is the house of
Religion. Herewithall I would have them to set me down the beginnings of the
great Conjunctions, that they might iump with the original springings up of
Religious and with the chaunges of them: which thing they have not hitherto
done. Thirdly, if Religion depend upon the Conjunction of the Planets; let
them tell me whither upon the ceassing of those Conjunctions, the Religions
shall not cease also, or at leastwise anon after, as light fails by the
going away of the Sun: and whereupon it comes then that the Christian, the
Jewish, and the Heathen Religions have continued so many hundred years, seeing
there was never any Astrologer that once dreamed that a Conjunction should last
so long? Fourthly, what great Con^unction bred the doctrine of Jesus Christ,
seeing there was never any change in Religion, so great, so universal, so
speedy, nor so durable; and yet even by their own confession, there was not
at that time nor near about that time, any Conjunction either great or small
that could be perceived. To be short, if only Jupiter and Saturn be the
authors of such change; which of them makes the difference in Religions? If
Jupiter make the diversities of them according as he is accompanied, how
happens it that there be so many and so sundry sorts of Religions, seeing
it was said before that there can be no mo than six? Again, what great
Conjunction was there at the change of Religion made by Mahomet? Or at the
change that was made afterward by the Arabians or Saracens in Afric? And when
of two Countries, yea and even of two Cities yt have but a River betwixt them,
the one sticks stoutly and wilfully to the old Religion, and the other
imbraceth the new: what Conjunction may be the cause of such disjunction?

But too come too particulars, I ask of them concerning the change of
Religion that was brought up in the time of Jesus, whether they give their
judgment thereof by the first vprysing and original of Idolatry, which was to
fail at that time as a Clew of yarne that is wound out too the end; or by the
Orignall of the Christen Religion, which was to succeed and to smoulder the
other, by the force and operation of some great Conjunction then fresh and
lusty to thrust it forth? Ag^ine as touching the original beginning or first
vprysing, be it of that Religion which came up, or of that which went down;
whence do they take it? from the first publishing thereof, as they judge of a
City by the laying of the first stone, or from the birth of the founder or
inioyner thereof by law, as if a man should judge of the prosperity and
luckynesse of a City or house by the nativity or birth of the Maistermason,
or of the owner or founder that causes it to be builded? But if Idolatry was
to decay at that time, by reason that the force of the Conjunction that caused
it was then outworne; did all sorts of Idolatry being so many in number,
spring all of one selfsame Conjunction, and therefore must needs al fail not
once? Who can tell when the force of a Conjunction shall vanish away, but he
that knows the first instant of the beginning thereof? And where have they
ever marked or found out, either the very instant or any time near the instant
wherein Idolatry was first borne, which being so dyuersly shaped and of so
sundry sorts, must needs (by their own opinion) depend upon many great
Conjunctions? Or where have they cast the nativity of the first founder
thereof* who certainly (...) needs be mo than one? Or if they judge it by the
first vprysing of the Christian Religion; if it depend upon a great
Conjunction, let them show us one that time: or if it proceed from the
nativity of the setter up thereof by Law; let them tell us where they have
red it. For they wilnot denye^ but that the birthtyme of Jesus about the
casting whereof so many. Astrologers have bewrayed their own folly, is
uncertain and without ground. To be short, either the springing up of Religion
is as upon some great Conjunction. and at that time there was none such too be
marked; or else at the springing up thereof by the preaching of Jesus, some
great Conjunction matching there withal, did give force unto it; but none
such was seen about that time neither: or finally both the vprysing and the
force thereof depended upon the birthtyme of Jesus; and that is more
uncertain and less known unto us than both the other. But that the birth of
one man should ouerrule so many natures and so many Nations, what Astrology
will permit; seeing that some one or other of every Nation, might be borne in
the selfsame instant as well as he? And that such a nativity should ouerrule,
not only the Nations, but also the Gods or rather devils of the Nations, what
theology or what Astrology will grant; seeing that by the judgment of the
best Astrologers, the Stars enforce not the mind of man, and much less the
separated mynds (as they term them,) that is to say Spirits; and that even by
their own divinity, men ought to honor and obey the Gods? Finally, what order
is this, that the Stars should have dominion over a man, and by the same man
triumph over all the Gods? But the ^anitie of these contemplations or rather
gasings, is plainly bewrayed by the effect thereof. For by their supposed
Conjunctions they gave their judgment that the Christen Religion should not
continue above three hundred and threescore years or thereabouts: and then did
it manifest itself more and more to the overthrow of all manner of ungodliness
and superstition. Albumazar extended it afterward to the thousand fourehundred
and Sixtith year; and yet, GOD be thanked, it lifts itself up ageine and
shines forth still more and more, On the otherside, Abraham a Jew Prophesied
that in the year of our Lord a thousand fowerhundred threescore and four, the
Jewish Religion should get the upper hand; the which was never more oppressed
than at that time. This serves to show that their judicial Astrology is so
vain and fond that although ye granted them all their suppositions, (whereof
in very deed they can make no proof) yet they would confute themselves by the
course of the times, and also by their own consents. Nevertheless I would not
have any man think, that my speaking hereof is because I have not matter where
with to advantage myself in their Astrology: For I could allege here, how
they say that Jesus in his nativity, had for his ascendent, the sign of Virgo
in her first face, as they term it, in which place of the Heaven, Albumazar
the Arabian says that the Indians and Egiptians have marked a virgin bearing
two ears of Corn in her hand, and a Child sucking on her breast, whom a
certain Nation (says he) call Jesus; and that the Star which the Greeks
and Latins in their languages call an Ear of Corn, is called by the Arabians
The sign of the food that susteyneth, as if ye would say, The substantial
bread or food: And that upon the Star which the wise men saw in the East in
the time of the Emperor Augustus; the Astrologers deliver matter enough: But
in these earnest matters, I am loath to allege any thing which is not
substantial, or which I take not to be so.

After Astrology, Magik The Obiectio^s of the Magitians.
bids us battle. I said that Jesus in his miracles, surmounted the ability
of all Creatures. Hereuppon they set against us Simon the Sorcerer, Apollonius
of Thyanie, Apuleus of Medaure, and such others: And soothly all these do yield
us so much the greater record of the miracles of Jesus, in that for to diminish
the estimation of them, they have had recourse to false miracles, and given
credit to such as were woorkers of them. Simon Simon Magus
therefore reported himself to be a GOD, to have given the Law to Moses upon
Mount Sinay, to have appeared afterward in the person of Christ, and finally
too have shed out the gifts of toongues upon ye Apostles in the person of the
holy Ghost: wherein he confesses aforehand the myghtynesse of Christ's name,
and that he would have men believe that he was Christ, and beautify himself
with his woorks. To this end does he apply the grounds of Magic, whereby he
makes the people to wonder at him. Now, Jesus had bin crucified; but unto
this man the Romans did set up a standing Image upon the Bridge of Tybris,
Josephus in his 5. book of the Jewish wars. cap. 1.
with this title, To Simon the holy God. The Disciples of Jesus suffered, and
taught men to suffer, and were extremely persecuted of all Judges.
Contrariwise, he and his folowers were much made of among the greatest
personages. But he did yet more: for he taught his Disciples that Idolatry is
an indifferent thing, and that men should not need to suffer for his Doctrine;
and what could be more delyghtfull and more entycing than this geere? Yet
notwithstanding, in the end both he and his Lady Selene were quyte shaken of at
all men's hands, and all the cunning he had could not make him to take footing
ageine in the world, neither has the rememberance of him had any continewance
here, but to the glory of the Lord Jesus, and to his own shame. And what else
does this give us to understand, but that it is in vain for Princes to cherish
a wicked w^ede, when Heaven is bent against it, and that they labor in vain
to pluck up the good herb, which God intends to prosper?

They make great braggs of one Apollonius of Thyanie. Apollonius of Thyanie.
How feawe at leastwise among our learned men have not heard of him? This man
did call up the Ghost of Achilles, Philostratus in the life of Apollonius.
that is to say, a devil. What a number of Sorcerers can do as much as that?
He asks him whether he had not a Tomb? Whether Polixena were killed for his
sake or no? Whether the things which the Poets report of him be true? What good
hap should come unto the world; and what good fortune was to befall to the
Necromancer himself? He took a Lucksigne at the sight of a Lioness; and what
a Superstition was that? He wore Rings made by the constellations of Planets;
and what a vanity was that? When a Plague was begun, he gave warning of it:
and when it grew strong, he floonke away. He fetched a young wench to life
again; but yet his counterfeit Evangelist Philostratus durst not auowe that she
was stark dead. What is there in all these, that is either good or great? But
now come we to the point. Jesus dyed for the salvation of the world; Dion in
Aurelian.
and Apollonius to drive a certain disease out of a City, caused a stranger
to be stoned to death as he passed by in the open Marketsted. The Disciples of
Jesus were slain in all Cities: and Apollonius had Images set up unto him, and
was worshipped in many Temples for a God. The said Disciples did in the end
overthrow both the Temples, the Idols and his Images too: Contrariwise,
Apollonius lived till he saw himself bereft of all honor, and his Images
consumed into smoke; neither did the fame of him ouerliue him three days;
insomuch that even ye book which he had written of his consultations with the
Devils in the den of Trophonius, rotted and perished together with the
Ceremonies of the same Cave. What are the Miracles of this Apollonius, but
proofs of the Godhead of Jesus? For seeing that having atteyned to the
uttermost that man and nature could come unto, he vanished away so soon even
of himself; and Jesus even in despite of man, and of the world, and of nature,
went through and gate the upper hand of him and of all others; how could this
have come to pass, if the working of Jesus had not been by a higher power than
the power of the world, of man, and of nature?

Apuleius Apuleius.
of Madaure has showed sufficiently in his books, that he knew all the
tricks of Magic: but what was he the better for them? He was of an honorable
house; but did he ever atteine to the least degree of dignity? Some will say
perchance, that he made no reckoning of it: what shall we say then to his
pleading against the men of Choa (from whence nevertheless he had married his
wife) for that they would not receive an Image of him? But the Emperor
Vespasian Vespasian. Tacitus. lib. 20
(say thou) cured a blind man at Alexandria; and those (says Tacitus) do
bear witness of it, which had no gain by saying it. And why then deleeuelye
not the miracles of Jesus, witnessed by so many men which are content to forgo
all that ever they have, yea and their lives also, for saying it? And had
Vespasian done so; who knows not the vaingloriousnes of the Romans? O how
well would it have matched with this Oracle applied unto him by his flatterers:
namely, That the Monarke of the whole world should come out of Iewrie: and also
with this other, That to be saved, it behooved them to have a King? And as
small a miracle as it was, what a countenance would it have carried, being
vphild by so many Legions, soothed by so many learned flatterers, mainteyned by
the state of the Empire, and confirmed by so many hangers on? For as for
Antinous Antinous.
the Emperor Adrians Minion, whom the Emperor endowed with Temples and
Sacrifices: to what purpose served he, but to show that it was not in the
power of the great Emperor of the world, to make folk believe a man to be a
God, what pain or cost soever he put himself unto?

Yea (say they) but to believe the miracles of Jesus, Objection.
we would see miracles still. The time has been that they were seen, the time
has been that they were believed, and time has altered the course of them:
what a number of things do we believe which we see not? And what reason or
what benefit should lead us to the believing of any other rather than of
them? But we should be the more assured of them. As much might the former ages
have said, and as much may the ages say that are to come; and so should it
behoue miracles to be wrought to all men and at all times. And were it once
so, then should miracles be no miracles, for so much as in truth they have not
that name, but of the rare and seeldome sight of them. The Sun gives light
daily to the world: he makes the day, the year, and the seasons of the
year. Trees having borne flowers and fruit become bare, and afterward shoot
out their buddes and flourish again. The Uyne turns the moisture of the Earth
into Wine: the grain of Corn, turns it into ears of Corn: and the Pipen
or kernel of an Apple, into an Appletree. And infinite men receive shape and
birth every hour. Al these are very great miracles, and God and none other is
the doer of them; nature teaches it thee, and thou can not deny it. But
forasmuch as thou see them every day, thou regardest them not; and yet the
leasf of them would make thee to wonder, if it were rare. To succor thine
infirmity, the Sun forgoeth his light, a dry stick florisheth, water is
turned into wine, and the dead are raised to life: and all this is too show
unto thee, that the same power which wrought in creating things at the
beginning, woorketh now still whensoever it lists; and that if the effects
live, the cause of them is not dead. And if thou should see every day some
miracle in the Sun, in Plants, and in man; surely in less than a hundred
years miracles would be changed into nature with thee, and the helps of thine
infirmity would turn thee to unbelief; and to make the world believe agein,
God should be feign to create a new world for the world. An example whereof may
be the people of Israel, who having their meat, their drink, their trayning
up, and their government altogether of miracle, did in less than forty years
turn them al into nature; and like folk accustomed continewally to physic,
which turn their medicines into nourishment of their bodies; they abused the
stays of their faith, by turning them into occasions of distrust and unbelief.
Now, God created nature, and has given it a Law, which Law he will have it
to follow. Nevertheless, sometimes for our infirmities sake he interrupteth
it, to the intent to make us to know that he is Lord of nature. But if he
should do it at our appointment, then should we be the Lords both of nature and
of him; and if he should do it in all caces, we would make a rule of it; and we
would make books and calculations of it no less than of the Eclipses of the
Sun or of the Moon, or rather than of the motions of the eyghth Sphere; and
we would impute all those interruptions and chaunges, to the nature of nature
itself. Therefore it is both more convenient for his glory and more behooffull
to our salvation, that nature should still follow her nature, and that
miracles should continue miracles still; that is to say, that they should be
rare, as necessary helps to the infirmities of our nature, I mean not of one
man, or of one age, but of all mankind, or at leastwise of all the Church
together, which is but as one comonweale and one man.

Yet remains Mahomet, Mahomet.
and he seems to be a jolly fellow: for he made a great part of the world to
believe in him. He was an Arabian and took wages of the Emperor Heraclius, to
serve him in his wars anon after the declyning of the Empire; and in a
mutiny among the Arabian Souldyers, he was chosen by them to be their
commander, as we see diverse times in the bands of the Spaniards. Whether he
were a good man or no, let the people of Mecha (who woorshippe him at this day)
judge, which condemned him to death for his Robberies and murders. And he
himself in his Alcoran confesses himself to be a sinner, an Idolater, an
adulterer, given to Lechery, and subject to women; and that in such words as I
am ashamed to repeat. But he has enlarged his Empire by his successors, and
laid his Law upon many Nations. What marvel is that? For why? Auendge your
selves (says he) with all your hearts; take as many wives as ye be able to
keep; Spare not even nature itself. What is he (though he were the rankest
Uarlet in the world) that might not levy men of that price, considering the
corruption that is in mankind? He reigned as a Lord say they; but yet by
worldly mean^^, yea and utterly unbeseeming a man. If ye inquire of his
Doctrine, (say they) it is holy, conformable to the old and new Testament, and
admitted of God. But as good as ye make it, yet may ye not examine it nor
dispute of it upon pain of death. And what man of judgment would not have
some suspicion of the person (though he were very honest,) which should say,
Behold ye be paid, and in good monny; but ye may not look upon it by
daylyght? If ye look for his miracles; In deed God sent Moses and Christ
with miracles; but Mahomet comes with his naked sword to make men believe, and
asfor other miracle he woorks none. Alcoran, Azoar 2. 3. 6. etc
And therefore al his Alcoran is nothing else but kill the Infidells, reuendge
your selves, he that kills most shall have greatest share in paradise, and he
that feyghteth lasily shall be damned in hell. How far is this gear of from
suffering, and both from conquering and continewing by sufferance? What
wickedness might not be stablished by that way of his? Notwithstanding, to
allure the Jews he exalts Moses, and reteyneth Circumcision: and to the
intent he might not estraunge the Christians, he says that Christ is the
Spirit, Word and Power of God, and that Mahomet is Christ's servant, sent to
serve him, and Prophesied of by him before. Ageine to please the Heretics called
Nestorians, he affirms that yet for all this, Christ is not very God, nor the
Son of God, but that he has in deed the Soul of God. Thus do ignorance
and violence in him encounter one another, the one to choke the truth, and the
other to enforce the falsehod. What practyses, what wyles, what countersayings,
what inforcements, what armies, what cruelties uses he not too persuade men?
And yet what has he won by all this, but to be a Prophet without
Prophesying, a Lawemaker without miracles, and (even among his own Bisshops) a
man without God or Religion? What man of discretion would read his Alcoran
twice, except it were for some great gain, or by manifest compulsion,
considering the absurdities, toys, contrarieties, dreams, and frantik deuyces
that are in it, besides the wicked things, whereof I wilnot speak? Far of
therefore is he from furnishing forth of a Martyr, that will dye either for
the Preaching thereof, or for not reca^ting it. To be short, Mahomets miracle
is, to waste and spoil the world by war; Christ's is to bring the world in
order by his suffering for it. Mahomet was assisted by a sort of Cutthrotes like
himself; Christ was followed by infinite folk dying and suffering adversity
for his sake. The works of Mahomet were such as every man can do; and does
daily: the works of Christ are such as never any man did, nor durst undertake
to do but he himself. Surely therefore we may well conclude, without wearying
the reader any longer about these vanities; That Mahomet was a man, and wrought
but as man and by man, and therefore is to be examined as a man: and that Jesus
Christ wrought by GOD and was (as he has told us) the son of God, and
therefore let us here him and believe him as God.

At this word, An objection against Christ's Incarnation.
behold, they step up ageine and say; a man to be God? What an absurdity is
that? How is it possible? Nay rather seeing it is convenient and agreeable both
to Gods glory and to man's salvation, as I have proved before: why should it be
impossible? God created man by his wisdom, which wisdom is his son. Now, what
is more meet than he should repair man by him ageine? Also it was a man that
sinned, and in that man and by that man did al his offspring sin likewise. Now
what is more rightful, than to repair him by man? Man rebelled against his
father: who could appease this offense but God himself? And who could better
pacify the father, than his own well-beloved Son? Man (say I) rebelled
through extreme pride, upon desire to be equal with God. Now what thing is
there which ought too humble man so much, as to see his Creator submit
himself beneath man for the fault of man? Or which ought so much to make him to
consider his sin and to be sorry for it, as to consider the infinite
greatness of his Raunsum, the exceeding greatness of his sin, and of his
punishment due for the same? And if thou urge me still, with how is it
possible? I answer it is possible, because God lifts it, and even in man's
understanding it conteyneth no contrariety to say it. Also it is possible; for
we see it is so; and so many Profes cannot be wyped away by a bare question.
It seems possible enough to thee O Julian when thou listest: for thou say
that Esculapius the son of Jupiter took humane flesh to come down unto the
earth: and thine own Philosopher Amelius does under hand approve, that Gods
eternal word took flesh and clothed himself with the nature of man, alleging
the very words of S. John for the matter. To be short, thou haste a spirit
united to thy body; thou can not deny it, and yet thou see it not. And if
thou were less than man, thou would also deny it to be in man: and yet for all that, what fellowship is there between a body and a spirit? And what may
seem more against reason, than that a Spirit which occupyeth no place, should
not only be lodged, but also imprisoned in a place? But he which made both the
one and the other of nothing, can do what he thinks good with both of them.
And seeing that to glorify man, he voutsafed to take him up into heaven and to
join him unto him, ( Plotin says so, and therefore thou will willingly here
it and allow of it:) why should he be less able too come down if he list, and
too unite and join himself to man upon earth, if he list to humble himself?

But why did God send his dear Son into the world rather in that time than
in any other? Why Jesus came at the same time that he did.
Why sent he him not soouer or later? These are questions for masters to use
to their Servants, and not for silly Creatures to use unto God, who by his only
power made us to be borne, and by his only grace has begotten us new ageine.
But (as I have said before to the Jews,) man lived for a time without the Law,
too make him too learn that he was not a law to himself: and a certain time
under the law, to make him find by proof that he was not able to perform it,
and afterward grace was offered unto him, as upon a scaffold where he saw
nothing but death: and so the knowing of nature corrupted made man the more
able to receive the Law; and the Law made him the more ready to embrace Gods
grace. Moreover it is a wonderful confirmation to us, when we consider that
from the beginning of the World unto his coming, we have always had Prophets
from time to time, agreeing in one mind and one voice, as Heralds and
Trumpettors euerychone of them, to publish and proclayme the majesty of this
King, which was to come into ye world. For had he come anon after the Creation
of the World, this confirmation of ours had bin greatly (...), because they
that were the first had bin surprysed by his coming vnlookedfor, and those
that have come after should have bin in danger to forget it or to make the
less account of it, as though his coming had not belonged to them; whereas
now all of us are partakers both of joy and of Gods admonitions; both before
the Law, for he was promised to them; and under the Law, for they likewise
heard the Trumpetts, and also in the time that he came, for he himself spoke
to them; and finally in our time, for his return draws nygh. Nevertheless,
it was his will too come in the time when learning did most flourish, and when
the greatest Empire was in the cheifest pride, to the end that all worldly
wisdom should acknowledge it self to be foolishnes, and all strength and power
acknowledge itself to be weakness before him.

Now, therefore let us all conclude, as well Jews as Gentyles, that Jesus
Christ is the eternal son of God, the Redeemer, and the Mediator of mankind.
And let no question or objection withhold us from it. Jews; for he is such a
one as he was promised to them, borne in Bethelem of a virgin of the Trybe of
Judah, at such time as the kingdom was gone from the house of Judah, humbled
beneathe all, exalted above all, put to reproachefull death for our sins, and
raised ageine with glory to make us rightuouse. Gentyles; for he did woorks
which could not proccede but from God; he created things of nothing, drue one
contrary out of another, surmounted the nature of man, and overcame the nature
of Angels: his doing of which things (being not possible too be done but by
God,) declared him to be very God. And both together; for all of us desire
eternal life, al of us know the corruption of our nature, all of us perceive
what Gods Justice requires, all of us find that we have need of his mercy,
and all of us see that between his Justice and his mercy, none can (by reason)
step in to be the Mediator but GOD, and to be the Satisfier, but man, even
Jesus Christ, borne of the virgin, and the son of God. And seeing it has
pleased the father to give us his son, let us embrace him; and seeing he has
sent him too bring glad tidings too our Souls, let us here him. Finally let us
hearken to the rule and doctrine which he has left us, that we may indeuer to
live unto him in all godlynes, considering that he has voutsafed of his
unspeakable Love, to suffer here beneath, and to dye for us.

The xxxiiij. Chapter.
That the Gospel in very truth conteyneth the doctrine of Jesus the Son of
God.
NOw, as for our Lord Jesus Christ himself, (for I think I may now so call him
without offense to the Jews or scorn of the Gentyles) he has not left us any
of his own life or doctrine written by himself. For soothly had he writ it
him self, men would have conceived some suspicion thereof. Again, had he set
down those high things in a high style; the common sort would not have
understood them: and had he uttered them in a simple style, they would have
concluded (for so far as they had understood,) that it had been but the word
of a Man, and not the word of God himself; as we see it is a very common
fondness in the world, to esteem more of the books that are dark by reason
of their ouerhigh style, than of those which stoop as low as they can to the
capacity of the readers, to instruct them. But his life and his doctrine be
recorded by his Apostles and Disciples assisted by his spirit, The sincerity
of the writers of the New Testament.
from whom we have the Gospels, the Acts, and the Epistles, all which together
we call the new Covenant or the new Testament. And whether this Testament
ought to be of authority among us or no; I report me to the judgment of all
the world. For the writers thereof lived in the same time that ye things were
done, and saw the doing of them. And although that at the time of their
writing, they were far asunder; yet agree they both in the History and in
the Doctrine; and look what they wrate, the same did they preach and publish
openly euerywhere, even while those were alive which could witness thereof,
yea even while their enemies lived which would have bin very glad to have taken
them with an untruth: and in the end they signed it with their blud, and
sealed it with their death in all places of the earth: which thing we read not
to have been done for any other writing or Testament whatsoever, though it came
from never so great a State or Monarke, how authentical soever men labored to
make it. If we look upon the authors, their writing is not to flatter some
Prince, as some do. For had Jesus been but a Man, what could have bin gained
by flattering him when he was crucified? Again, they were none such as made
their gain of writing. And such would Cornelius Tacitus have men to believe.
Nay rather, they gave over the world, and gave their own lives for the things
which they wrate. If ye have an eye to the style, it is native, simple, plain;
preaching Christ's Godhead without concealing his infirmity, and confessing
his infirmity without granting away his Godhead. The weakness, the
curiousness, and the ambitiousnesse of the Apostles, that is to wit of the
writers themselves, are registered diligently there. Of bragging, of boasting,
of vanity, or of ye praise of Jesus himself, there is not one word. Peter
stepped aside, and denied his Master three times: and Mark his Disciple (who
wrate the Gospel under him) has set it down in writing. John and James the
Sons of Zebedie desired to sit, the one on the right hand and the other on
the left hand of Jesus in his Kingdom; and who urged them to tell such tales
out of School, which might seem to abate their own credit and authority?
Also Jesus himself was weary, and thirsty, and wept: these are infirmities
of man: yet do they preach him to be God and dye upon it. Might they not have
concealed these things without prejudice of ye truth? yes to our seeming, and
even with advancement thereof; at leastwise if they had not wirtten in the
behalf of the truth it self, and that they had not bin sure that his
mightiness uttered it self in infirmity. To be short, they set down the
particularities of time, place, and person, day, City, and house. The more
particularly that they declare things, the more easy was it to have discovered
their untruths, and to have convinced them. For they spoke not in Iewrie of
things done in the Indyes, but at the gates of Jerusalem, in Bethanie, in
Bethsaida, and in Jerusalem it self, in such a streate, at such a gate, by
such a poole and so forth. The witnesses were then alive, the blind saw, and
the dead walked up and down among them. Had the Apostles lied, how easy had
it been to have disproued them? What weapons gave they to their enemies to have
overcome them selves withal? And yet for all this, how happened it that of so
many Pharisees enraged against them, which took exception so precisely to the
healing of a man upon the Sabbath day, and to this saying of Christ's
misunderstoode, Destroy this Temple and in three days I will raise it up agein;
and of so many men which were ready both to do evil and to say evil; none of
them all stood up to geynsay them? Where was the zeal of Gods house become at
that time, than at the which there were never mo zelouse persons to be seen?
At leastwise how happens it that in that houge heap of nine or ten volumes
of the Talmud, they bring not forth their exceptions and geynsayings, ne set
us down some Countergospell? Seeing then that Hatred picketh out proofs and
testimonies where none are; and yet notwithstanding, the extreme hatred of the
Pharisees finds none, no not even in the time and place where the things were
done, and when their own authority was strongest and at the highest pitch:
what may we conclude thereon, but the infallible truth of the History of the
Gospel?

Nevertheless, let us yet satisfy unbelievers, by proving ye things unto them
which they esteem to be most incredible in the History of our Lord Jesus
Christ. When Jesus was borne in Bethelem, a Star The Star that led the Wise
men.
(says the Gospel) was marked by the wise men in the East, the which they
followed, and it gwyded them to the place where Jesus was. Some perhaps will
flatly deny this Star to have bin. (Let any man judge, how little credit to
himself and authority to Christ, the Evangelist could have purchaced by
beginning with a lie which all men could have disproued, specially seeing he
takes the Scrybes, and Pharisees themselves to witness thereof. Pliny lib. 2.
cap. 25.
But we read that the very same time, ( Augustus having then the chief charge
of the Games kept in the honor of his moother Venus) at Rome) there was seen a
Blasingstarre or Comet (that is the name which they give too all
extraordinary Stars) whereof the Preests of that College gave their
judgment, that for the singular marks which it had, it betokened not war,
plague, or famine, as other ordinary Comets do; but the salvation of mankind to
be at hand. And unto this Comet (because of the rareness thereof) there was an
Image set up in the City, And that only Comet (says Pliny) is woorshipped
over all the World. Whereunto relyeth this verse of Virgill in his fourth
Eglog, made to flatter Augustus by applying unto him the appering of that
Star; Behold how noble Caesar's Star steps forth with stately pace. After
which manner he wresteth unto Augustus, all the happiness with Sibyll promised
by the birth of the Redeemer. Also Cheremon a Stoik Philosopher, Orige^ against
Celsus.
judged the same Star to betoken welfare and happiness; and thereuppon
perceiving his Gods to be weakened, he traueled into Iewry with certain
Astrologers, to seek the true God. And Chatcidins the Platonist says
expressly, that the Chaldees had observed that it betokened the Honorable
coming of God down unto us, to bring grace to mortal men. Here the
Astrologers had matter whereupon to excercyse their Contemplations. For this
Star appeared in December, when the Sun was in Sagittarius, Marsilius
Ficinus in his treatise of the Star that led the Wise men.
in which sign (say they) both Jupiter, the Sun, and Venus were met
altogether; al which three (by their principles) betoken a most ryghtuouse, a
most myghtie, and a most merciful King, but yet poor, by reason of the Sun
which was come in betwixt them. How should he be mighty, if poor? Fruitful
also, because of Jupiter in the Angel of the ascendant; but yet baren and
Chyldlesse by reason of the Moon which was in ye first face of Virgo. Of these
their Contrarieties we might, according too their art, gather some profit. But
I will let these curiosities alone too such as delyght in them. But in very
deed, this Star appearing in December without rays, and being healthful,
was not an ordinary Comet, but a very Star in deed. The like whereof we
have seen ourselves in the same season of the year, in the year of our Lord a
thousand fiuehundred threescore and twelve, the signification whereof God will
reveal unto us when he sees time. How had the former Star bin one of the
ordinary Stars that are fixed in the firmament; what a miracle was it that
it should leave his place and charge, not to reign over Jesus, but to serve
him? And if it were newly then created; by whom could it be created, but by
the Creator; and for whom, but for himself? And whereas Julian the Renegate not
being able to deny the truth of the History, and the cunning of the Wise men
by the gwyding thereof, would bear men on hand that it was the Star named
Asaph, which the Egiptians have marked to be seen but once at every four
hundred years: besides that we read not of any like to have bin seen in all
the former ages; it has not bin seen any more in these full fifteen hundred
years which are passed since that time. Now by this inquiry of the wise men,
Herod was moved to kill all the Children about Bethelem, which were two years
old and under, meaning among them to have killed the Child whom the Star
betokened: in doing whereof because a Son of his own was killed with the
rest; we read in Macrobius, Macrobius in his Saturnals.
that the Emperor Augustus heering thereof gave him this taunt, I had lever be
Herod's Swyne than his Son.

Agein, that Christ should be borne of a Uirgin, they think it very strange.
Borne of a Virgin. Clement in his Recognitions. Petrus Comestor.
I have discussed this point already against the Jews. GOD had foretold it;
and what could then let him to bring it to pass? For who can dout of his
power, when he is sure of his will? But this was so true, that Simon Magus to
the intent he might not seem inferior to Christ in any thing, Preached to his
own Disciples, that he himself was the son of a Uirgin, which thing Jesus
Christ never Preached of himself. And we read that the same day that Christ
was borne, the Temple of Peace fell down at Rome; at the laying of the
foundation whereof, Apolo told the Romans it should stand till a Uirgin did
bear a Child; whereupon they thought it should have continewed for ever. And
as touching Simeon, who having Jesus in his arms acknowledged him to be the
Savior of the world, I have declared what the Jews say of him. Josephus lib.
18. cap. 7.
And as for John the Baptist our Lords foregoer, the History of his godly life
and doctrine and of his death also, is set down after the same manner in
Josephus, that it is in our Evangelists. If we consider Christ's works, all the
whole course of his life was nothing but miracles, the which I have proved true
long ago. And this only point, namely that they be described and set forth with
so many circumstances, whereunto never any man has yet presumed to take
exceptions, does sufficiently give credit to the matter; and therefore let us
pass unto his death.

From the sixth hour (says our Evangelist) unto the nineth hour there was
darkness over all the Land: The Eclips. Mark. 27. verse 45. Mark. 15. verse 33.
that is to say, at high noone and even in the chief of the day. If they doubt
hereof, Phlegon Trallia the Emperor Adrians Freedman, the diligentest of all
Chronaclers, Phlegon Trallian in the 13. book of his Chronicles. Orige^
against Celsus. Suidas.
notes that in the fourth year of the two hundred and tenth Olympiade, there
was the greatest Eclips of the Sun that ever was seen, and therewithal a
very strange Earthquake. And that was the very 18. year of Tyberius, in the
which year Christ suffered his passion. And Eusebius says he had read the like
in the Commentaries of the Gentyles. Also Lucian a Priest of Antioche cried out
to such as tormented him: Search your own Chronicles, and you shall find that
in the time of Pylate the light failed in the chief of the day, and the Sun
was put to flight as long as Christ was a suffering. And Tertullian Tertullian
in his Apology.
in his Apology does summon them to the same books. Now, that it was no
natural Eclips, it appears plain: For ye Sun was then so far of from
Conjunction with the Moon, that it was even full against it, according to the
Law of the Passover, which was to be kept the 14. day of the Moon. And if
they take exceptions to the Epistles of Dennis of Areopagus, wherein he
describes the spectacle of this wonder at length; Esculus the Astrologian a
man of small Religion says, that at that time the Sun was in the first
degree of Aries, and the Moon was newly entered into Libra. Others say, that
the Moon was in Virgo and the Sun in Pisces, which comes al to one in
effect: and therefore that there could be no natural Eclips by reason of this
opposition. To be short, some say it was universal over all the world; and
then was it a special work of God, for the order of Nature can do no such
thing in the world. Othersome say it was peculiar to ye only Land of Iewrie;
and then is Gods special working yet more manifest: for it is (as ye would
say) a poynting at the cause of the Eclips with his finger; namely, the
suffering of the Savior of the world. And as little also could that Eclips be
by the order of Nature, as the other. For who but only God could dim the sight
and light of the Sun in such sort without a Conjunction thereof with the
Moon, that it should give light to all places saving only Iewrie, as who
would say, he sholed out Iewrie from all the rest of the world? And as touching
the Earthquake The Earthquake.
that accompanied it, the foresaid Phlegon speaks thereof, joining it to the
Eclips as our Evangelists do. And these cases are so rare and unseen, not in
some one age, but in the whole course of the world, that seeing they be
reported to have been in one selfsame year, and both together; they cannot be
understood of any other than those which our Evangelists and Authors speak of.
To be short, the Ueyle or Curteine of the Temple did rend asunder. For the
believing or discrediting of this point, there needed no more but to go to the
place and see whether it were so or no. And Josephus speaking of the foretokens
of the destruction of the Jews, reports the like thing.

Behold, Jesus is now dead: but the third day he ryseth again, The Rising
again of Jesus from the dead.
as he himself had told aforehand. If he had said as Mahomet said, about an
eight hundred years hence I will come see you again; he had taken a good
term for trial of his lie. But when he said I will come again within these
three days; his deceyt (if he had meant any) would soon have bin discovered.
Here they cry out and cannot admit the story to be true. And yet
notwithstanding when they read that one Erus an Armenian, that one Aristeus,
or that one Thespesius rose again to life; they think no evil of Plato,
Herodotus, or Plutarke for reporting it. How vnindifferent are these people,
which will needs both believe and be believed of all men without witness and
unrequested; and yet no witness can suffice to make them believe their own
salvation? Women saw Christ, men touched him, the unbelievers felt him with
their fingars; he did eat and drink and was conversant among them, diverse
times and many days: and yet all this they stoutly deny. But Pylate witnessed
it; and the Apostles being erst astonished at it, did afterward preach it,
publish it, and sign it with their blud. He whom the Chambermayd had made
amazed, and who had denied him three times in one hour when he was alive; does
preach and publish him even in Jerusalem, before the Magistrates, and before
the Priests; and no threats can make him hold his peace. If Christ rotted in
his grave: what hope of benefit was to be had of his dead carkesse? Nay if he
lived not in Peter; who urged Peter to preach him? And if he spoke not in him;
who would have believed him? Who (say I) would have believed it, at leastwise
so far as to preach and publish it, and to sign and seal it with their
blud, upon his report, and also after that he was gone? Uerely, the very
slaunderers themselves give light unto this truth. For thereupon it is that the
Jews have feyned, that his body was stolen away: for they found it not there:
but Pylate proves them liars expressly. And therevppon also did some of the
Gentyles surmise, that they had crucified a Ghost or Sporne in stead of him:
which thing the Jews uphold to be very false, who took offense at his death,
as which they knew to be a matter of truth, in respect whereof they call him
still the Crucified. But he lived then, and lives still for ever and ever.
And therefore as he had promised his Disciples before his death, The coming
down of the holy Ghost.
Saint Luke says that he sent them the holy Ghost in fiery Tongues within a
few days after his rising again: whereby they received the gift of Tongues or
Languages, yea and that in such wise, that the same gift came down upon many
others by their laying of their hands upon them. This is one of the things
which they will not believe, as who would say it were not as east for God to
give one man the understanding of many Tongues, as it was to divide one
language into so many when he was displeased. But if it be a brag, as they
surmise: to what end was it? and what might have bin more easily disproued? The
Magistrate had them in his hand: why did he not examine them before the people?
Jerusalem was as the Musteringplace of all the East: and where then might they
have been disproued and made to recant it? Nay, the effect that followed upon
it confirmed it. For the Apostles, being but Fisshers, and Publicanes, and at
the beginning ignorant persons, men which ordinarily knew no more than their
own moother tongue, and that but grossly; did afterward write books, and
travel over the whole world, preaching in all places. Consider what lyking
either the Jews or the Gentyles would have had of such folk, to have made
them their spokesmen to the people. And yet the Disciples did it so
effectually, that in less than forty years, the whole world that was
inhabited, was replenished with the name and doctrine of Jesus. How could that
have bin done, if they had not had an extraordinary skill of the Languages?
Soothly the History thereof was so true and so commonly known, that Simon
Magus to countenance himself withal, reported himself to be the same that
came down upon the Apostles in fiery tungs, under pretense that by the help
of the Devil, he counterfetted after a sort the gift of tongues.

And as for some searchers and sisters of words, it is not for them to carpe at
the Hebrewe phrases which they find in our Evangelists; seeing that in Horace
or in Virgill they count Greek phrases for an elegancie. For to the intent
they may perceive that it is done to express Christ's matters the more
pithily, and to represent them the more nearly: let them read S. Paul. and
there they shall find so fair a Greek tongue, so full of pithie words, so
full of excellent and chosen phrases, and so peculiar to the Greek tongue it
self, that the best learned do confess he had the very ground of it, and
allege him for an example of eloquence. Let us come to the history of him.
This S. Paul a Disciple of Gamalielles, was sent with Commission to persecute
the Christians. In his way (says Luke) a light shone about him, Acts. 9. and
22.
and being smitten to the ground, he heard this voice, Saul, Saul, why
persecutest thou me. To be short, of a Jew he became a Christian: and of a
Persecuter, a Martyr. 1. Cor. 15. 8. 2. Cor. 12. 2. The Conversion of S. Paul,
And if thou beleeuest not S. Luke; S. Paul himself touches his own
history in diverse places. What has unbelief to bring against this, save
only peradventure a bare denial, according to common custom? If Peter saw
it: he is but a Fissherman say they. If Paul heard it: he is an Orator. So
then belike, if God offer thee his grace in an earthen vessel, thou mislykest
of it: and if he offet it thee in a vessel of some valewe, thou suspectest it:
either the one is beguyled, or the other beguyleth thee, say thou. What will thou have God to do to make thee to believe him? Examine this case well. Paul
in the way to grow great, he is in good reputation with the Magistrate and the
Priests, and sodeinly he changes his Copy out of one extremity into an
other, to be skorned, scourged, cudg^led, stoned, and put to death. Put the
case that neither S. Luke nor S. Paul did tell thee the cause thereof. What
may thou imagine, but that it was a very great and forcible cause, that was
able to change a man's heart so suddenly and so straungely? Is it not daily
s^ene (will thou say) that men are soon changed and upon light causes? Yes,
fools are. But he debateth the matter, he urges his arguments, and he drives
his conclustons to an end. The best learned of his enemies find fault with
his misapplying (as they term it) of his skill, and yet commend his writings.
Yea, and he knows that unto thee his preaching will seem folly, and yet that
(as much folly as it is) it is the very wisdom of God; and that by following
it he shall have nothing but adversity, and yet for all that, he does not give
it over. How shall he be wise, that counts himself a fool? or rather which
of the wiser sort is not ravished at his sayings and doings? But if he be wise,
learned, and weladuised as thou see he is; what follows but that his
change proceeds of some cause? And seeing the change was great, the cause
must needs be great also: and seeing it was extreme and against (...); surely
it must needs proceed of a supernatural and souereine cause. Uerely the
reason that leads thee to this general conclusion, ought to lead thee to
the special also: that is to wit, that it was a very great and supernatural
cause that moved him: namely, the same which Saint Luke rehearses, and which
he himself confirms in many places, for the which he esteems himself
right happy to ^ndure the misery which he caused and procured unto others,
and in the end after a thousand hurts and a thousand deaths, he willingly spent
his life.

Also the death of Herod stricken by the Angel for not giving glory unto God,
The death of Herodes Agrippa.
is reported unto us much more amply by Josephus, than by S. Luke. Acts. 12.
Herod (says he) made shows in Caesarea, and the second day of the
solemnity, Josephus in his antiquit^ lib. 19. cap ^.
he came into the Theater being full, clad in robe or cloth of Silver, which
by the stryking of the Sunnebeames upon it, made it the more stately. Then
began certain Clawbacks to call him God, and to pray him to be gracious unto
them. But forasmuch as he did not refuse that flattery, he saw an Owl
sitting upon his head, and by and by he was taken with so strange torments,
that within feawe days after he dyed, acknowledging Gods judgment upon him,
and preaching thereof to his flatterers. This History is set out more at large
by Josephus, which in effect is all one with that which is written by S. Luke,
who says that the people cried out, It is the voice of God, and not of a man:
and that thereupon an Angel of God struck him, and he was eaten with worms,
and so dyed. These be the things which they find scarce credible in the
history of our Evangelists: which yet notwithstanding are confirmed by the
histories of the Jews and Gentyles, who report the things with words full of
admiration, which our Evangelists set down simply after their own manner. And
seeing that in these things, which exceed nature, they be found true; what
likelyhoode is there that they should not also deliver us Christ's doctrine
truly; specially being (as I have showed before) miraculously assisted with the
power of his spirit according to his promises, and moreover having witnessed
the sincerity of their writings, by suffering so many torments, and in the end
death? Seeing then that the new Testament conteyneth the truth of the doctrine
of Jesus, and proceeded from the spirit of Jesus, whom I have showed to be the
Son of God; what remains for us, but to embrace the Scriptures as the word
of life and Soulehealth, and as the will of the Father declared unto us by his
Son, and to live thereafter, and to dye for the same; considering that by the
same we shall be raised one day to glory, and reign with him for ever?

But forasmuch as we make mention of rising ageine from the dead; An objection
against the rising again of the Dead.
that is yet one scruple more that remains. What lykelyhod is there of that
(say they,) seeing that our bodies rotte, Woormes devour us, yea our bodies do
turn into woormes, and a number of other chaunges ^o pass over them? This is
a continewall stumbling always at one stone, namely to stand gasing at Gods
power who can do all things, when ye should rather rest upon his will. He will
do it: for he has knit the body and Soul together, to be parttakers of good
and evil together, and he has given one Law on them both together, so as
they must suffer together and joy together, yea and suffer one for another and
one by another in this life: and what Justice then were it to separate them in
another life? He will do it: for he made the whole man; who if he were but
Soul alone, were no man atall. He will do it: for to the intent to^ save man,
his Son has taken the flesh of man unto him. Now to save the Soul, it had
bin enough for him too have taken but a Soul: but he that made the whole man,
will also save the whole man. To be short; he will do it; for he has said it:
and he will do it; for he has done it already. He has said it by his Son,
and he has also done it in his Son, and his son adorneth us with his
victory; and he will surely adorn us with his glory. Look upon the grain
that is cast into the ground; if it rotte not, it springs not up; if it
spring not up, it yeldeth no foyson. Agein, of one grain, come many Ears of
Corn; of a kernel, a goodly Tree; of a thing of nothing (as ye would say) a
perfect living Creature. Which of all these things resembles the thing that
comes thereof, either in substance, or in shape, or in quantity, or in
quality? To be short, what strangeness is there in this? Of a handful of
Earth God made thee, and all the Earth of nothing, and of a handful will he
make thee new ageine? This body of thine which in time past was not, is of his
making; this body which one day shall cease to be, he will one day make new
agein. Uerily this doctrine was common to all true Jews, and among all the
Teachers of the Law, who had gathered it out of the old Testament, (as we
read in Josephus and in the Acts of the Apostles) for they agree fully with S.
Paul in that behalf. And in the Talmud Talmud. cap. Helec. treatise. Sanhedrin.
there are infinite places thereof. Also the Alcorane (which is borrowed of
their Rabbines) is full of this Doctrine. And as concerning the Heathen of old
time, Zoroastres said, that one day there shall be a general rising ageine of
all the dead. Theopompus a Disciple of Aristotle's does the like; and noman in
old time (says AEnaeas of Gaza AEnaeas Gaza concerning Immortality. Seneca
in his 75. Epistle, and in his books of Questions. lib. 3. cap. 26. 27. 28.
etc. Ovid in his Metamorphosis lib. 1.
) did once geynsay them. The Stoiks hild opinion, that after a certain time
there should be an universal burning of the World, (which we call
Doomesday,) and that immediately after, all things should be set in their
perfect state ageine, as they were at the first: and it was the opinion of
Crysippus in his book of Providence translated by Lucane the Stoik, which new
state Varro calls Palingenesian, that is to say, a Regeneration, Rebegetting,
or New birth Platosaith expressly that men's Souls shall return into their
bodies. The Astrologers following Albumazar, Lucane the Neuew of Seneca. lib.
1. Lucretius. li. 5. Lacta^tius out of Chrysippus lib. 7. cap. 22.
uphold that when ye Stars come home ageine every one into his first place,
all things shall be set ageine in their first original state, both men,
Beasts, Trees and all other Creatures; which opinion even Arethmetick alone
shows to be absurd in Astrology, and the best learned men reject it.
Nevertheless it bewrays our beastlynes, Austin of the City of God. lib. 22.
cap. 27. Haly upon the first Apotetesme of Prolomie.
which do attribute such power to the Stars, to defeat the maker of them
thereof.

As touching the judgment which the Son of God shall give after the said
Resurection; although the same were not foretold by the Prophets of old time,
and by so many verses of the Sibills, and finally by the mouth of Jesus and his
Apostles: surely Gods giving of his Law, not to the outward man but to the
inward, Nicolaus Oresmus concerning Proportions. The Acrostiks of Sibill.
Lactantius. lib. 7.
nor to our deeds only but also to our thoughts, shows sufficiently without
other proof, that there is another Judge than the Magistrates of this world to
judge us, and another Judgment than their judgment to be lookedfor, as whose
judgment here proceeds but to the outward deed, and by proofs of witnesses,
and therefore cannot in any wise pearce into the heart, to discern what is
within. Neither would our own consciences sumon us so often as they do, if we
were not to appear before other than men. For since it is the Soul that
cheefely receives the Commandment and cheefely breaks it: it is the Soul
that must come to examination and trial; which cannot be done in this world,
wherein there is but a shadow of Justice, and whose Laws and Judges extend no
further than the outter side. Midrasch. Psalm. 118. Esaias. 45. Psalm. 149. etc.
And therefore we see that the ancient Rabines speak very often of this
General Judgment, and (which more is) do attribute it to the Messiah, saying;
Fear not God for your Judge; For your Judge is your own fellow citizen, your
own kinsman, and your own brother. All the ancient Gentyles have spoken so
of this Judgment, which they say shall be given in another life, in the feeld
of truth, whereupon shall follow either endless life or endless death as I
have showed before. Yea and it seems that by the lending of their ancient
Oracles (which were a kind of Cabale) they passed yet further. For they called
their great and souereine God by the name of Jupiter, and gave the judging of
men's Souls to his Son Minos, the King and Lawegiuer, and not unto Apollo,
Mercury or any other: as who should say, they meant that the Judge of the World
should be the Son of God, and yet there withal a ryghtuouse man, that is to
say, the Mediator, God and man.

I hope I have now showed the trueness and substantialnesse of the Christian
Religion, The Conclusion of the whole Book.
and the vanity and wickedness of all other Religions. Of the which Christian
Religion, the Primitive, Church, for a Badge and comfort to the Christians,
has made a Su^me which we call the Creed of ye Apostles. For we believe in
God the Father Almighty maker of Heaven and Earth, etc. To believe in him, is
to trust in him; to trust in him, is to hope for all good things at his hand;
but vain were our hope, if it reached no further than to this present world.
Now I have declared heretofore that there is but only one God: that the same
God created the world for man, Chapt. 1. 2. 3. 4 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13.
and man for his own glory, and both of them of nothing: That he guydeth them
by his Providence, the one according to nature, which is a steady and
suresettled Law prescribed by him to the World; and the other according to wit
and will, which he has given him, so that which way so ever man take, he
frames him always to his holy will, to such end as he has appointed: That
man is immortal and created to lead an endless life: Chapt. 14. and 15.
that in that life is the souereine welfare or good, which alonly can content
man's will, and satisfy, his wit; Chapt. 18. 19.
and therefore that he must tend and indeuer thither with all his heart and
bend all the powers of his wit to that end: And to be short, that the mean for
man to atteine thereunto, Chapt. 20.
is to serve the true God with all his heart, with all his Soul, and with all
his strength; that is to say, to vow all his thoughts words and deeds to the
glory of God. But I said also that man is fallen from his Original, Chapt. 16
17. 20.
through the pride and disobedience of the first man, whereupon has followed
frowardnes in his will, and ignorance in his wit: Ignorance making him unable
to discern his own welfare, and frowardnes turning him away from it, yea even
when it is showed him, and making him unworthy to atteyne to it, and finally
causing him to abuse his abilities and powers to all evil, and so consequently
plunging him in the gulf of al misery, both according to his own desert, and
according to the Justice of God; Whereupon it insueth that man is forlorn in
himself, unless God recover him by his mercy; blind, except God inlyghten him
ageine; utterly Lame to the doing of any good, and to the atteynement of any
good, until Gods grace do relieve him. Chapt. 20.
And therefore I said, That he has left us a Religion for a guide, A Religion
that turns us from all Creatures, as which are but vanity; and conuerteth us
to him the only Creator of Heaven and Earth; and that the same is the Religion
of the Israelytes; Chapt. (...) 23.
and that in all other places there was nothing but the service of Devils, and
Idolatry. That the Religion of Israel had the keeping and custody of his
word, his revelations, and his promises, giving us his Law for a Rule to live
by, whereby it conuicteth us of our naughtynesse, and inuyteth us to call to
God for grace. Chapt. 24. 25. 26.
That the old Testament is the Law of Moses and the Prophets, which I have
proved to have proceeded from God, and to have bin inspyred by him: that in the
end having condemned us he offers us his grace, and having given judgment
upon us, he sends us pardon, and steadeth us of a Surety that is able to pay
our depts: Chapt. 27. 28.
that this Surety is the Messiah promised to the Jews for the salvation of the
whole world, the Mediator of mankind, God and man, exhibited to the world in
his due time, to be the Savior of the Jews and the light of the Gentyles,
even Jesus Christ the Son of God, Chapt. 29. 30. 31. 32. 33.
in whom we believe according to this percell of the Creed, And in Jesus
Christ his Son our Lord, conceived by the Holy Ghost, borne of the Virgin
Mary, crucified, Dead, and rizen agein, and so forth. Al which points we have
proved against both Jews and Gentyles; against the Jews, by the Scriptures;
and against the Gentyles by reason, which they themselves say they take for
their guide; and by their own Records. Our Creed adds, I believe in the
Holy Ghost. And I also have showed how there be three Inbeings in one Essence
or Being, Chap^
acknowledged by the Jews and (...) by the Gentyles namely the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, which are termed by them, the One, the word, and
the Love, in the name of whom we be Baptized. And finally we believe, that God
by the dese^ of his son in the power of his holy Spirit, Chapt. 34.
maynteyneth his Church spread over the whole world, knitteth us in one
Communion of fellowship together, pardons our sins, and will one day raise
us up ageine, to make us enjoy everlasting life. To that end has the Father
created us, the Son redeemed us, and the holy Ghost inspired us. And
therefore let us look up with sighs, and with sighs travel up toward the
Kingdom whose King is the Trinity, whose Law is Charity, and whose measure
is eternity. And unto him, who has granted me both to begin and to end this
work (whom I beseech with all my heart to bless it to his glory, and to
the salvation and welfare of those that are his) be honor, glory and praise
for ever and ever.

Amen.
FINIS.
Imprinted at London by George Robinson for Thomas Cadman, dwelling at the
great Northdoore of S. Paul's Church at the sign of the Bible. 1587.


