THE MYSTERY OF INIQVITIE: That is to say, The History of the Papacy.

Declaring by what degrees it is now mounted to this height, and what
Oppositions the better sort from time to time have made against it.

Where is also defended the right of Emperors, Kings, and Christian Princes,
against the assertions of the Cardinals, Bellarmine and Baronius.

By PHILIP MORNEY, Knight, Lord du Plessis, etc.

Englished by SAMSON LENNARD.

Falleris aeternam qui suspicis ebrius Arcem,
Subruta succensis mox corruet ima tigillis.


LONDON Printed by Adam Jslip, Anno Dom. 1612.

TO THE MOST HIGH AND MIGHTY PRINCE, HENRY, Prince of Wales, Son and Heir
apparent to our Sovereign Lord the King.
IF the Lord du Plessis (most high and mighty Prince) having finished this his
work, out of that reverend and honorable conceit he had of your Fathers
greatness, that unfeigned love which true religion wrought in his heart, and
that hope he had of his future endeavors to beat down Antichrist, thought it a
sin, though a stranger, to think of any other Patron but himself, to whom
he might dedicate these his labors; much more I, his natural subject, linked
unto your Highness, his natural son, with the same bond, rapt with the same
admiration, fed with the same hope, must say, having finished these my labors,
Cui dicare debeam ambigere nefas: For the same reasons that moved him, must
likewise encorage me; your greatness must encourage, because the same, being a
Princely branch sprung from that Royal stock; your religion must encourage,
because the same which your worthy father, and all the Fathers of the
Primitive Church, have made profession of; your hopeful endeavors must
encourage, because the same, for what he conceiues of your Princely father,
the whole world expects should be performed, if not by his, by your hand. His
pen has made way for your sword, and his peace, if God give long life, may
farther your wars: Glorious be his peace and your wars, and Gods glory the
end of both. His Highness can best judge what is fitting; we can but wish, and
if he have begged at Gods hands with Hezekiah, That there may be peace in his
days, we all say Amen, and with one voice we all cry out, Let there be peace
upon Israel: only we wish he may never have reason to say as David did, I
seek peace, and when I speak thereof they are bent to war, they intend
mischief. And therefore renowned Prince (leaving your royal father to Gods
peace and his own hearts desire) give me leave, though altogether unworthy in
a matter of such moment to advise, yet to wish with du Plessis, that I may live
to march over the Alps, and to trayle a pike before the walls of Rome, under
your Highness Standard. It was my first profession, oh that it might be my
last. The cause is Gods, the enterprise glorious, O that God would be pleased,
as he has given you a heart, so to give power to put it in execution. Jn the
mean time (whilst our hopes are in the bud) let me humbly beseech your
Highness, till my sword may do you service, to accept of the poor endeavors
of my unskillful pen; and as it has pleased your Highness, not long since,
graciously to protect my sorry labors bestowed upon Charron his three books
of Wisdom, so now to pardon my boldness, in undertaking a work so far
unbefitting my strength, and to protect my infirmities. The God of heaven ever
bless your Highness, and ever defend you from Antichrist and his bloody
designements, that you may live, and live long even in perniciem, to the ruin
of him and all his Antichristian rabble, Amen, Amen.

To your Highness most humbly devoted, SAMSON LENNARD.

TO THE RIGHT REVErend Fathers in God, GEORGE Archbishop of Canturburie, and
Metropolitan of England: and JOHN Bishop of London.
RIght Reverend and my very good Lords, I am bold, out of that duty I owe to
two so great Prelates and pillars of this our Church of England, to present unto
your learned and judicious censures, my unlearned and simple labors, bestowed
upon a work worthy the reading in it self, howsoever by my unskillful pen it
may be disfigured. I confess I was unfitting, amongst a thousand, to undertake
a work of such consequence, and yet better I (as I thought) than none, being a
Mystery fit to be laid open to as many as can read it in their mother tongue.
My good Lords, pardon such faults as either by too much speed, or too little
skill, or otherwise, have slipped my pen: There is nothing past that may not be
amended in a second edition, if your Grace shall be pleased to give the
encouragement. The God of heaven, as he has multiplied his gifts and graces
upon you, fit for so high a calling, even in the highest measure, so ever
assist you with his holy spirit, in that great work you have undertaken, to
his glory, and the good of his Church.

Your Graces and Lordships in all duty to be commanded, SAMSON LENNARD.

TO THE READER.
GEntle Reader, I have once again adventured my self upon your gentle
censures, with this only request, That, though perhaps a curious eye may find
faults ynow, yea sometimes where there are none, you would be pleased to do
me this favor, that if at any time you shall find me to disagree sometimes
from the Latin copy, sometime from the French, not to condemn me without the
examination of both; because in this translation I have followed both the one
and the other, as occasion was offered, and as I found them agreeing in one and
the same sense. This is all I request, and so much the rather, because I know
the most unskillful is more ready to judge, than he that can judge iudiciously.

S. L.

TO THE FRIENDS AND FOLlowers of the Church of Rome.
2. Tim. 4. v. 2.
Be instant in season and out of season; yea with that wholesome and opportune
importunity, wherewith we pluck those that are nearest and dearest unto us,
even by the hairs of the head, out of the furious rage of fire and water:
wherewith we pinch and prick those even till they bleed, that are dying of a
Lethargy. What shall I then say unto you? To some that are floating, or rather
fleeting betwixt many opinions, and to others that have already stepped over the
threshold, gotten one foot out of Babylon, Paul, they double upon us even till
they be hoarse; What new doctrine is this? Mark. 1. v. 27. Act. 17. v. 19.
Math. 19. v. 8. Joh. 9. v. 29. Joh. 5. v. 46.47.
We know that God has spoken to Moses, but this man we know not whence he is.
To whom preposterously boasting of their antiquity, we may easily answer with
the words of Christ himself, From the beginning it was not so, Had ye believed
Moses, or his writings, ye had likewise believed Had ye believed the sacred
word of God, the holy Scriptures inspired from above, the true antiquity, the
only treasury of the Charters of the Christian Church, ye had likewise
believed me. But truly if ye be not over hard of belief, I doubt not but in
this work I shall satisfy you touching both these scruples. Let them not make
you believe the Popes have bin always such as you now adore. Behold here their
beginning, their progression, their increase, their secret, subtle, cruel,
outrageous enterprises, violences, assaults. A Mystery (not without mystery
so called) under pretense of the ministry, ending in this prodigious estate
that we see in this two-headed monster; whilst the ministers of the Gospel,
the Prelates, Bishops, Archbishops, Patriarchs, partly under Heathen Princes,
Phocas in his murder, they were made Universal Bishops, and secular Princes in
Italy, excluding Emperors; and not content to withdraw themselves from their
obedience, they likewise absolved both the nobles and people, of that oath of
allegiance wherewith they were bound. At the last, threatening with both
swords, they mingled profane things with holy, confounding and devouring the
holy in the profane. They set kings together by the ears, A Mystery, great
Babylon? In so strange a novelty, so diverse changes, is it possible that any
man should object the antiquity of the Popedom; where Satan reigns so
visibly under the only Peter?

Let them not abuse you with the name of the Church, the Catholic they call
it, thereby inferring the Roman Church: For the Church of Rome is not, nor ever
was, the Universal, the Catholic Church; a part thereof it was, so long as it
continued pure and unpolluted: but yet but a part with others, not above
others. And therefore by her fall, her ruin, the flock of Christ cannot
perish, though that perish utterly; by her defection the flock of Christ
cannot fail, though that fail utterly. True it is, that the Church of Rome
was once pure and chaste, and no small part of the Spouse of Christ, so long as
she hearkened to his voice, and stopped her ears against the voice of
strangers, having always before her eyes her vow Augia, the cave of Cacus,
miserably oppressing all the godly, yea piety it self. From thence forward
the suppressed gronings of the godly brake forth, and the mournful plaints
of that woman that flew from the dragon, of our dove, the purer Church, were
every where heard. Her footsteps sometimes, though flying from the face of the
persecuters, you might discern,

Do thou ask therefore where our Church was so many ages past? Where it
fed her flocks, where it lay at noone? Cant. 1. v. 7.
Hear I pray thee what S. John the Evangelist says, The woman, that is the
Church, persecuted by the Dragon, Apoc. 12. v. 6. and 16.
did fly into the wilderness, where she has a place prepared of God, that
they should feed her there, that is, prophetical days, a time certain, and
that not short. She is not therefore to be sought in the Popedom, in the
light of the world, in the midst of pride and excess. It is likewise said
that the dragon which deceived the whole world having great wrath, persecuted
the woman, and cast out of his mouth water after the woman, like a flood, that
she might be carried away of the flood; But there were then given to the woman
two wings of a great Eagle, that she might fly into the wilderness. And of a
flight in the air there remains no trace; In such sort that we are not bound
to search after it, much less to show it, accounting it sufficient that we
believe the Scriptues: That God knows who are his: That the Church is known
unto God, as in the time of Eliah, though unknown to the Prophet, whereof,
after so many ages past, there is no reason why any account should be demanded
of us.

But I will not deal so rigorously with you, will you know where, and what
manner of Church ours was in all your time? Our Church was that Primitive
Apostolic Church inspired with the holy Ghost, grounded upon the word of God,
which has left unto us the Canon of the holy Scriptures the rule of our faith
and life, the Symboll of the Apostles the badge of our Christian warfare. To us
therefore that embrace all these, and to hold and defend them, reject all
humane inventions, stop our ears against the voice of a stranger, the
society of this Church, spread far and wide through the world, and, as our
Savior says, If we or any angel from heaven preach unto you otherwise, let
him be accursed. Our Church is that which has continued with this, Gal. 1. v.
7.8.9.
yea has been ever joined unto it, shining with so many and so great
miracles, made red with so many and glorious martyrs; For these are the
miracles that witness the truth of this Gospel, Martyrdomes that gave
testimony to Christ the only begotten son of God, the only redeemer of
mankind, Mediator, Savior, the only true Priest of the new Covenant, which we
only urge, refusing all other, and are ready to seal it with our blood: Ours
therefore are these miracles, and these confuted and confounded Arius,
Macedonius, Nestorius, Eutiches, Pyrrhus, yea Honorius himself, who called
into question the divinity of the only begotten son of God, and of the
holy ghost, and the two natures and two wills in one Christ. Ours are those
general Counsels of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, Chalcedon, and others; In
which they with theirs were condemned and overthrown. Forasmuch therefore as
we approve and embrace all these, and consequently the Catholic Church
represented in them, as we never wandered in any thing from their doctrine, so
are we not to be separated from their bodies. Tell me again whether you dare
to say as much; And if for shame you will seem to dare, See ye not that your
Pope is to be brought into order, that he is presently to fall to the ground?
Find you any where in any of those approved and Vbinam Gentium? for to say the
truth, there she was, there she fed; Not upon the hill of Sion, but the
little hills and groves of Garisim, the mountains of Seyre, the pastures of
Paganism: From whence ye have gathered, whatsoever,

From thence-forward the authority of one man by the contempt of the word of
God, gathering strength in the Church of Rome, the Princes likewise, according
as it was foretold, striving to give their assistance, he made and unmade laws
at his own pleasure, preferring humane inventions before the divine oracles,
his decrees before the Canons of Counsels, Novelties before antiquities,
things profane, before holy, borrowed from elsewhere before his own,
adulterat before lawful, superstition before religion, and all this furniture
of Paganism, before Christian simplicity, by which means the Church by
degrees fell into this 1. Corinthians. 3.
so long as she stood upon her only true foundation Christ Jesus, so long as
the salvation of man depended upon him only, his merit, the blood of his
cross; Not upon our own or other men's works, not upon Popish absolutions and
indulgences, and other blasphemous toys of that nature. And as it falls out,
that the wind changing, the wether alters, so for a time the matter hung in
an equal balance, until impiety ouer-weighing the mind of man, by a kind of
Eliah: I have reserved unto my self (...) seven thousand men who have not bowed
their knees to Baal. Romans 11. v. 2.
To my self says he: They stand to their Lord and master, insomuch that thou
need not doubt of them. Much less it is to be doubted, that there are seven
times seventy thousand, yea innumerable numbers in the whole world; since
tyranny and corruption grew more slowly in some places than in other, and
Eliah alone in Israel withstood the false worship of God. That there were so
many in so many

And these things fell out in the seventh, eight, and ninth ages, in which the
East Church was directly opposite against the West, the West at variance with
it self, their Counsels wavering, and in one and the same Council voices
divided, different opinions: we call these times the twilight of the Church,
growing by little and little into an obscure and dark night; A moonelesse
night, wherein there are few stars, and those that twinckle most, for the
most part wandering, not Woman, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 11.
the true Church being put to flight by the Dragon, and borne upon the wings of
that great Eagle, was enforced to retire her self to the wilderness: Of that
Eagle, the eternal omnipotent Iehoua, who when there is need, knows how to
carry and keep his Church, as the Eagle does her young. This likewise was
that time, Apoc. 12.15.
cast out of his mouth water after the woman like a flood, that she might be
carried away of the flood. But she whom thou seek and persecutest to the
death, being got out of thy sight, cutteth the air with her wings, seeks the
steepie tops of the mountains, where she rests and hides her self under
the wings of the Almighty: And she, whom thou like a wretch think to be
perished, in the beginning of the twelfth age, took her flight toward the
plain, God moving and leading her the way, into Dauphin, Province, Languedock,
Guyenne, the plains of Italy, filling all from the Pirenei hills to the Alps,
from the Alps to the Appenine, with the preaching of the Gospel. At the last
her enemies the Popes, exercising their fury against her, after many bloody
slaughters and massacres, there others by multitudes are consumed with fire.
For fear least thou should

But thou contemnest this poor and ragged Church, though not so full of
wrinkles, and proudly disdainest her natural color, though it be white, loving
rather (delicious and delicat as thou art) a Church proud and glorious, in her
vestments of scarlet, painted with colors more glittering, though borrowed,
wantonly lusting after novelties. It is therefore no marvel if thou have
embraced that Babylonian Whore, beautified with false and counterfeit colors.
The chosen vinyard of the Lord, like a negligent husbandman, thou suffer to
grow unto

Remember Jonas, a figure of the body of Christ in the Sepulcher, and
therefore of his Church: Thou see him swallowed by the Whale, and thou
think him devoured, Jonas c. 2. and 3.
and thou have reason to believe too; for he says, The waters compassed me
about unto the soul, the depth closed me roundabout, and the weeds were wrapped
about my head, in as much that I said, I am cast away out of thy sight; out of
the sight of God himself, if we may so say, not of men, not of his
adversaries: But I (says he) will yet look again toward thy holy Temple:
Out of the belly of hell it self, the bowels of that beast, I cried, and thou
heardest my voice. At the very beck of the omnipotent God this monster cast
out Jonas upon the dry land, to be sent as an Herald to preach repentance
unto the Ninevites, a people separated from the Church.

But now give me leave to ask thee again, In all this long space of time
where was thy Church? and of all loves answer me: In those six hundred years
next after Christ, in the whole world, was there any that was thy Church? and
that worshipped, burnt incense, adorned, adored, and inuocated Images?
Doubtless Simon Magus, not Simon Peter. In a whole thousand years was there
any Church that called the Host Lord, thought it a god, adored it? In a whole
thousand two hundred years, that shut it up in a box, carried it about,
appointed unto it a proper feastiuall day, set it out with pomp to be gazed
upon by the people, as in a public Theater? Again, in a whole thousand years
after Christ, was there any Church, howsoever otherwise corrupted, that placed
Christ the son of God between the hands of a Priest, yea created him, that
sold his sacrifice for money, to be offered at all times, yea every moment of
time, and in all places; That abolished the ancient institution of Christ, and
Communion of the faithful, bringing into the Bellarmine and Baronius spend
their labors, and he that abates but a hair of that they affirm, let him be
accounted as a Heathen or Publican. That man on the other side that believes
all this, especially all those points that concern the Pope, though he be
otherwise an heretic, a profane person, an Atheist, yet he is a good
Catholic, and in the right way. It is now then your part to prove this your
Church out of the Fathers, Councels, Histories, yea even your own, for I
refuse not any.

But perhaps thou will ask, though against the rules of disputation, By what
apparent reason it appears that your Church has erred, and how it should be
Jacob amongst so many visions of God, Israel in the desert, in the midst of
so many miracles, have erred; the Church, the Spouse of God, under the Judges,
the Kings in the presence of the Arc, in that holy land, though reproved by
the Prophets, very often, in the time of the first Temple, and as often under
the second, and that which is more, puffed up with the doctrine of the Law,
even to the forsaking of Christ himself, the crucifying of him with her own
hands, and consequently in her own salvation, that man of sin, the son of
perdition, and the adoring of him, since both the one and the other proceed
from the same spirit of presumption, not to err; both the one and the other
foretold by the same mouth, by the spirit of God in his word; and therefore of
like certainty? Doubtless the Church then has erred, erred by neglecting the
word of God, and shall err as often as she shall forsake the sea-mans
compass, without which all things are to it uncertain, the heavens, the sea,
the earth: In so much that being left to her own discourse, her own
cogitations, it is no marvel if she have erred, if she do err: yea rather it
were a wonder, and more than a wonder, if without that compass Hypocrates,
that at the first is most hardly known, most easily cured, afterward by tract
of time the symptoms, or accidents belonging thereunto increasing, it is
easily known, hardly cured.

But yet I will not refuse to satisfy thee herein, if I can. Thou would
know Palladium, le Guard corpse of the Church should first be stolen, before he
could be received, before that fatal horse could be admitted; The word of God,
the Candlestick of the holy Scriptures must first be hid under a bushel,
before the thief durst creep in, or make any assault upon the Church; which
still continuing in force, in vain could that sink of superstitions besiege
it, but we kept it far off from our Troy, our rampires, our territories, much
more from the porch, the Temple, the Sanctuary of the Lord. That old Dragon,
under the color of a not written word, cunningly and closely brought in
Traditions to betray the Church; which the wisdom of the flesh, their near
alliance, Simon, rather under the name than shape of Simon, began to appear,
by diverse cunning devices covering his treachery, persuading us to receive
that dangerous engine, that Trojan horse, that Epitome as it were of all the
Painims impieties, Capis then and diverse others who were of a sounder
judgment, fearing their subtilties, and finding them, cried out to have it
burnt. The most famous Fathers of the Church throughout the world, foretold,
threatened the evil to come, resisted, banded themselves against it. But you
unadvised, or rather ill advised, ita ferentibus fatis, being necessary that
the Prophesies should be fulfilled in their due time, Diuiditis muros, and
moenia panditis vrbis,
Et licet -- Vtero sonitum quater arma dedere.

Though four times the armor in his belly did sound.


Nothing regarding either the aduertisements of the Apostles, the counsel of
the Fathers of the Church, or the suspicions that it gave of it self: But,
Instantes operi immemores caecique furore,
Hoc monstram infoelix sacrata sistitis Arce.
Blind with fury, the more is the pity,



From thence forward he put all to fire and sword in the city, ransacked the
Church, polluted the holy things, left nothing untouched with the infectious
hands of his Harpies, powered out of that fatal horse all manner of
superstitious services in the Church, calling this horse (although a mark of
the Greeks) the Trojan horse. These superstitions, Catholic, Orthodoxall,
because consecrated and hallowed (these are their own words) by the Popes,
though from their bginning they were Heathenish and Idolatrous. Now in the
midst of this fire, this universal confusion, thy neighbors house being on
fire, nay thine own, nay thy Antenor, devout Aeneas, did not so, but breaking
through the Grecian troops, got themselves out of the city with their
fellows, gathered together what they could, and to sea they go, and putting
themselves into the first ships they met with, hoyse up sails to seek a new
country, and find it, and there they settle: being still Trojans whither soever
they went, in what place soever they rested; carrying with them their household
gods, and the ensigns of their country: Being still Christians, professors of
the Catholic faith, carrying with them the word of God, untouched by the fire
of the Greeks, where Troy was, Antichrist where Christ was, furious in the
midst of the Temple, as once Antiochus was, sacrilegious even between the
Altars, the sacrifices.

Do you yet doubt (my brethren) hear what S. John says, Apocal. 13. v. 5. 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 4.
And there was given unto him a mouth that spoke great things, and blasphemies:
S. Paul likewise, He does sit as God in the Temple of God, showing himself
that he is God. Hearken now and behold Paul 5 your Pope at this day. Lib.
Benedicti de Benedictis Bononiae excusus Anno 16^8. Jtem These. Caraffae Neapoli
excusae 1609.
He is placed in the beginning of the books The invincible Monarch of the
Christian Commonwealth, and the most valiant Protector of the Pontifical
power. And in the same style we read at Tolentine: To Paul 3 The most great and
excellent God on earth. The scepters and diademes of Princes, Kings and
Emperors are his Trophes, who stand about him beholding him with astonishment
bowing downward, strooken with his lightning, adoring him with this
inscription over his head, His countenance presageth an Empire. The word of God
sounds on every side, but God knows strangely wrested and applied; The
nation and kingdom which will not serve him, I will visit says the Lord with
the sword, 27. That which was once foretold of Nabuchadnezzar the destroyer of
the Church, he like another Caiphas applies to himself, and will have it
fulfilled in him the Alastor and usurper of the Christian Church. Again, He
gave him dominion and honor and a Kingdom, and all the people shall serve him,
his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall never be taken away, and
his Kingdom shall never be destroyed. Dan. 7 With their faces toward the
earth, they shall lick the dust of thy feet. Esaias 49.23. That which was spoken
of Christ only, the eternal son of God, governing his Church, and to be
applied to no man else, is without blasphemy communicated to others. These
things were done by the command of the Superiors, and printed at Bononia, Loco
Maiorum, in the presence of Paul himself, in a famous assembly of Cardinals,
and a great concourse of people disputed and determined. Here Reader thou
beginnest to bend thy brows, but they are not secrets that I utter: Rome
knows these things, and these monsters are set out to the view of every man;
And thou art a great stranger in thine own Church, if thou know them not; a
traitor to thy self, if knowing them thou dissemblest it. These Iuglers in the
mean time, are nor ashamed to tell us, in books printed to that purpose, That
Antichrist is borne at Babylon with the teeth of a Cat, with rolling

Let me therefore speak unto you, O ye people, why do ye still make delays?
Being so often deluded, why do ye not obey the voice of God thundering from
heaven? Apoc. 18. v. 4. and 9.
Go out of her my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye
receive And O ye kings so long made drunken, why stand ye at a gaze, not
executing the counsel of the Almighty, which cannot be made frustrat, nay
which in a manner is already fulfilled? why do ye not rather make that beast
desolat and naked, Apoc. 17. v. 16.
and eating her flesh, burn her with fire? In danger otherwise to lament
before her, to be partakers of her punishment, her ruin, since you have so
long enjoyed her pleasures, and committed fornication with her. But thou O my
Savior, in the midst of this cunctation, or rather careless security,
awaken and rise up, and come down and behold the sins of this spiritual
Sodom Tread the wine press alone, though none of the people, none of the
kings, join with thee. Esaias 63.3.
Gird thy sword unto thee, even thy two edged sword, wherewith that man of
sin shall be slain, the spirit of thy mouth, thy holy word. And let the
wicked at the last cry out, standing a far off for fear of her tormonts,
Alas, alas, the great city Babylon, Apoc. 18. v. 10.
the mighty city, for in one hour is thy judgment come: Let the godly sing
together, and let them repeat it again and again, Halleluiah, Salvation, and
glory, and honor, Apoc. 19. v. 2.
and power, be to the Lord our God, for true and righteous are his judgments,
for he has condemned the great Whore, which did corrupt the earth with her
fornication, and has avenged the blood of his servants, shed by her hand. And
let me, O Lord, sing with old Symion, Luke 2. v. 29.30.
Now let thou thy servant depart in peace, according to thy word, for mine
eyes have seen thy salvation: The salvation and deliverance of thy Church from
the hands of her enemies, the Lamb victorious and triumphant, shortly
celebrating the marriage of thine elect with the immaculat Lamb Christ Jesus,
to whom with the Father and the holy Ghost, be all honor and glory for ever
and ever, Amen.

To the Reader.
POpe Paul the fifth caused himself to be pourtrayed in the first page of
diverse Books dedicated unto him, printed at Rome and at Bolognia; as has
been said in the Preface: The first words of the Latin inscription are, PAVLO
V. VICEDEO; take the numerall letters and you shall find the number of the
Beast, Apocal. c. 13. v. 18.

PAV 5.L 50.O V 5.. V 5.I 1.C 100.ED 500.EO.

5. 50. 5. 5. 1. 100. 500. 666.

THE MYSTERY OF INIQVITIE: That is to say, The History of the Papacy.
Declaring by what degrees it is now mounted to this height; and what
oppositions the better sort from time to time have made against it.
THE PREFACE. Of the person of Antichrist, of the time when, and of the place
where he was to be revealed.
Paul in his second Epistle to the Thessalonians, and the second chapter; and
more particularly by circumstances and signs described by S. John, in the
thirteenth, fourteenth, seventeenth, and eighteenth chapters of his Revelation:
which Mystery, time it self from age to 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2.
S. Paul therefore tells us, That that day of Christ, meaning that glorious
day of his last coming, shall not come, unless there first come that
Apostasy and notable revolt, that is, unless some great part of the Church
first fall away from the pure and undefiled service of Christ; and unless that
man of sin be first revealed; that son of perdition, which shall be
ringleader and chief director in this desperate revolt; lost in himself, and
cause of perdition unto others, and is John (...), that is to say, a Destroyer.
Apocal. 9. verse. 11.
And to the end that none should take offense when these things should come to
pass, he forewarneth us of the greatness of this revolt, by representing it
to our understanding under the name of Babylon, and of an Horrible confusion;
comparing him who was to have the chief direction and command in this work,
Apocal. 17. verse. 3.
to a woman sitting eminent, and in every respect glorious, and consequently
admired of all those who should behold her, Ibid. verse. 8.
save only those whose names are written in the book of life: insomuch, that
even Kings, those I mean whom she shall make drunk with the wine of her
abominations, shall give her their authority and power, to help war upon
the Saints, and that Peoples and Nations shall serve her for a seat to sit
upon: Ibid. verse. 13.
The waters (says he) on which she sits are Peoples, and Multitudes, and
Nations, and Tongues. So that, that Apostasy and that man of sin make both
together a kind of Estate or Kingdom; whereof the Apostasy is the Body, even
the Papacy, which has long since degenerated from the true doctrine of
Christ, drenching the world with Idolatry Apocal. ca. 13. verse. 12.
And for this cause makes S. Paul mention of an Apostasy, and of a man of
sin; and S. John of a second Beast, and of a Whore: By which second Beast,
which exercises the authority of the first, what can be meant but the Roman
Hierarchy, which has derived upon her self all the authority of that
ancient Commonwealth, making the earth to adore the first Beast in the second;
that is, the old Rome in the new? And that Whore there spoken of, what is she
but the Pope, in whom all that abomination is comprised, and as it were
incorporated, who holds the cup in his hand, presenting it to Kings, and unto
Peoples, Paul describes that Man of sin, 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2. verse. 4. Apocal.
17. verse. 3.
by saying, that it is he which opposes and lifts himself up above all that
is called God; so that Whore in S. John is described sitting upon a scarlet
colored Beast, full of names of blasphemies, and her cup full of
abominations, filthiness, and whoredom. Now what greater blasphemy than to
call himself God, and to make himself above his Word? or what greater
whoredom than Idolatry, styled by this very name in the holy Scriptures?
All which yet must pass under a color of piety and religion, and covered
with a mask of the worship of the living God: And so far forth must this
hypocrisy prevail, that as S. Paul says, This man of sin shall sit as God
in the Temple of God, 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2.
and shall have, as S. John two horns like a Lamb, thereby to make at least
some show and appearance of the doctrine of Christ, Apocal. 13. verse. 11.
yet speaking (says he) like a Dragon, and teaching the doctrine of the
devil; as do the Pope and Papacy at this day.

Thus then you see what the person of Antichrist is. As touching the place
where he shall have his Seat (for that is the term which they properly use)
the case is clear. 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2. verse. 4.
S. Paul tells us, That he shall sit in the Temple of God, that is, in the
most eminent place of this visible Church: and S. John more plainly, Upon
seven Hills, Apocal. 17. verse. 9. verse. 1. verse. 15.
i. at Rome, aunciently surnamed (...), i. a City built upon seven hills, by
virtue of which Seat he shall bear rule over many nations; for the great
whore (says he) sits upon many Waters: and the Angel expounds these The
Waters which thou have seen, on which the Whore sits, are Peoples and
Multitudes, and Nations and Tongues.

As for the Time, which is the maine doubt of all, S. Paul tells us; And now
(says he) you know (...), that which withholdeth him, to the end he may be
revealed in his due time, to wit, the Roman Empire; whose place Antichrist was
to possess, which also was of necessity first to be dissolved, before that
other could openly appear: wherefore also it is said in the verse next
following, 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2. verse. 6.
(...), Only until he which now withholdeth, be taken or abolished, because
that the one must build and raise it self upon the ruins of the other: in
which place, by (...), that which withholdeth or hinders, is meant the Roman
State; and by (...), he which withholdeth or hinders, their form of
government, which was Monarchical: as before by the Apostasy was signified
the Roman Church, by that man of sin the head and governor thereof was
prefigured. And S. John speaks yet more plainly, as one that saw Antichrist
at a lesser distance, and says, Apocal. 13. verse. 3. and 12. and 15.
That this second Beast exercises the power of the first Beast, in his
presence; that is, that he arrogateth this power to himself in the face of the
Empire, and setleth it in himself, in such sort, that the deadly wound of the
first Beast seemed to be healed: to whom he gives life and speech, making the
old estate of Rome to quicken again, and to revive in the new. All which could
not possibly be done by one man, not yet in the life of one man (certain ages
sometimes passing between the first decline, and the final ruin of great
Empires) but in long continuance of time, and succession of many years, as the
manner of one State is, in long time, to raise it self out of the corruption
and ashes of another. And so much appears by that which follows in S.
Paul: for (says he) that mystery of iniquity now works, this thread of
Satan is already set into the loome, not by open force, but as it is there
added, According to the effectual working of Satan in all power, 2 Thessalonians.
ca. 2. 7 verse. 9. and 10. Apocal. 13.14. and cap. 14. verse. 8.
in signs and miracles of lies, and in all deceitfulness of iniquity: and as
S. John says, seducing and making all nations to drink of the wine of her
fornications, and ensorceling them with idolatrous superstitions. And indeed
this pestilent Estate and Empire, enemy to God and to his Christ, is not now
(as in some measure we see already come to pass) begun to be destroyed by
force of arms, but as S. Paul says, By the spirit of the Lords mouth, 2 Thessalonians. cap. 2. verse. 8.
and by the brightness of his coming, by the preaching of his Word and clear
light of his doctrine, which is to shine in these later days; which are
opposed to the darkness and mists of Satan, as the coming of Christ in
brightness, i. in truth, is opposed to the coming of that man of sin in all
power of lying: the Lord proclaiming If any one adore the Beast and his Image,
Apocal. 14. verse. 9. and 10.
and take his mark upon his forehead and upon his hand, he also shall drink
of the pure wine poured out of the cup of his wrath, and shall be tormented
with fire and brimstone before the holy Angels and before the Lamb. But says
S. John, Here is the patience of the Saints: as also S. Paul says in the
very beginning of that second chapter to the Thessalonians, Be not ye
troubled, neither by spirit, neither yet by word, neither by Epistle, as if
that day were near at hand: his meaning is, that this mystery already set on
foot; must run on and hold his course, and that in the mean time the Saints of
God have much to suffer, even between that day wherein that Whore glorying in
her I sit a Queen, and cannot be a widow, and that day, Apocal. 18. verse. 7.
and 8. and cap. 2. verse. 10.
even that instant of time, when her wounds shall come upon her, that she shall
be burned in the fire, that the Angel shall cry out, saying, She is fallen,
She is fallen. Wherefore again I say, that this cannot be meant of one man, or
of one age, but of many; of the waxing and waining of some temporal
Monarchy, of the infancy, youth, perfect age, decline, and final destruction
of some spiritual tyranny: neither let any man think, that this is a chicke
of my ^a^ching, but the interpretation of the most ancient Fathers, which in
all likelihood received it by hand from the Apostles: for, to have named the
destruction of the Roman Empire, had in those days been a capital offense:
and therefore S. Paul to the Cap. 2.
Remember ye not (says he) how that when I was with you I told you of these
things: he told those things to the disciples in plain words, which he would
write but in cipher: and S. John says, A mystery, that great Babylon, etc.
and, Here is understanding, who has wisdom, etc. And they which came after,
recounting the events as they fell out, could more plainly decipher this
secret Caball, and (drawing wide the curtain) see more clearly into this
prophecy than they which went before them.

But before we go any farther, let us here take a view, and see what was the
opinion of the ancient Fathers and Doctors concerning the person of Antichrist,
the time of his appearing, and the place of his residing. As touching the
first, Tertul. de Resurrectione, cap. 25.
Tertullian calls him Ciuitatem prostitutam, a People prostituted unto
whoredom; meaning no doubt that spiritual whoredom, which is Idolatry: And
S. Ambros. in Apocal. cap. 17.
Ambrose terms it the City of the devil, and Rome the harlot: Hieron. ad
Marcel. vidua^.
S. Jerome styles it by the name of Babylon, and of Rome, and the very Church
it self of Rome: Augustine. Hom. 10. in Apocal. idem, Homil. 11.
S. Augustine brandeth it with the title and appellation of the wicked City,
and corporation of wicked ones, fighting against the Lamb: Idem, lib. 13. de
Ciuitat. Dei, cap. 2. and lib. 20. cap. 19.
A people contrary to the people of God, which together with their Head is
called Antichrist: an heretical Church, in name Christian, but indeed
Infidel, meaning Rome, that second Babylon. Gregor. in Moral. lib. 33. cap. 26.
S. Gregory calls it a multitude or company, of the Preachers of
Antichrist. Add we unto these our modern Tho. in Apocal. cap. 13.
Thomas Aquinas says, That Antichrist is a Body or Corporation, and not a
Man: Gloss. ordinar. ib.
the ordinary Gloss, The whole Antichrist consists of a Body and a Head:
and lastly, Hugo Cardin. ib.
Hugo Cardinalis says, That it is an University, that is, a Communaltie or
People; and in like sort speak many others.

Concerning the second point, which is the time of his revealing; they say,
that it shall fall upon the decline of the Roman Empire, whose ruins he shall
appropriate to himself: First Tertul. de Resur. carnis, c. 24.
Tertullian, Antichrist (says he) shall not come, Donec e medio fiat, until
he be taken out of the way: who (says he) but even the Roman Empire? which
once coming to be distracted into ten kingdoms, shall draw Antichrist after
it at the heels: And thence it was that those old Christians, to put Idem in
Apologet. cap. 32. and ad Scapul. ca. 1.
Pro mora finis, that it would please God to defer the fall of this Empire.
And after him Hieron. ad Algasiana.
S. Jerome says, That Antichrist shall not come, until the Roman Empire be
first rased to the ground, and that the Nations be first wholly revolted from
it: which S. Paul durst not speak openly, because they took it to be an
eternal Empire, fearing to draw on a persecution upon the tender blossom of
the Church, to wit, under pretense of treason against the State: and Ambros. in
2. ad Thessalon. cap. 2.
S. Ambrose uses almost the same words upon that place to the Thessalonians:
so does Augustine. de Ciuitat. Dei, lib. 20. cap. 19.
S. Augustine, interpreting the same words of the Apostle in his 20 book de
Ciuitate Dei: And Chrysostom. in 2. ad Thessal. cap. 2.
Chrysostom gives a reason of his not coming sooner: For (says he) so long
as that is, the temporal power in consequence of the spiritual.

As for his Seat, we say, he shall have it in the most eminent and conspicuous
place of the visible Church. Orig. in Matt. tract. 27.
Origin says, That he sits upon the chair of the Scriptures, whence he
takes the proofs of his false doctrines. He sits upon the buildings of the
Scriptures, and vaunteth himself as if he were God. And whence I pray Hieron.
ad Algasiam.
Saint Jerome expounding that place: He shall sit in the temple of God, that
is, says he, either at Jerusalem, as some think, (but we know, that according
to the prediction of our Savior, there is now not one stone of that city left
upon another) or, as we think more properly, in the Church. And Chrysostom. in
2 Thessalonians. c. 2. Hom. 3
Chrysostom more resolutely, Not, says he, at Jerusalem, but in the temple of
the churches: and the Scholiast speaks after the same manner. And again, Idem
in opere impers. Hom. 49.
That wicked Heresy, That army of Antichrist shall sit in the holy places of
the Church, and shall possess them; and then he that will know where the true
Church of Christ is, where should he find it but in the Scriptures? And Hilar.
contra Auxentium.
Saint Hilarie, Doubt says he, that Antichrist shall sit upon the buildings of
the Church? The wild forests, prisons, and dungeons, and hollow dens of the
earth, where sometimes the Prophets prophesied, are, to my seeming, less to be
feared than the churches. And Theodor. in epitome divine. decret. lib. 2. and in
2. ad These. c. 2
Theodoret, though so far off, yet saw most clearly into this point: The
Apostle, says he, calls the Church the Temple of God, wherein Antichrist
shall take unto himself the Prime seat, seeking to make himself to be reputed
and taken as a God. And Oecumen.
Oecumenius also speaks after the same manner. And et Theophil. ib.
Theophilact, Not properly says he, in the Temple which is at Jerusalem, but
in the churches, and in every holy temple. And Thomas ib.
Aquinas, In the temple, says he, that is in the churches, rather than at
Jerusalem. And S. Augustine goes farther, Shall Antichrist, says he, August.
de ciuit. Dei li. 20. c. 19. Baron. Annal. to. 1. an. 45. art. 17. and 18.
sit upon the ruins of the Temple says he, some imagine that this Antichrist
(note well these words) is a Prince, with the whole body of those which belong
unto him; and think it more proper to express it in Latin as it is in
Greek, (...), in templum, non in templo: meaning that he shall sit as if
himself were The Temple of God, and his very Church it self: Ireneus l. 5.
c. 25 Tertullian cauersus Iudaeos, and contra Marcio. lib. 3. Hieron. in Ca^a.
and in Isai. c. 47. Eusebius. li. 2. c. 25. Ambros. in 2 Thessalonians. ^. c. 2. August.
lib. ^8. de ciuit. Dei c. ^. And^. Casa^ in Apocal. c. ^. In Beda, Oecumen.
Lyran. Thomas, Caiet. in 1. Pet. c. vlt. Bellarmin. de Romano Pontis. lib. 2.
c. 2. Tertul. aduersus Iudaeos and lib. 3. contra Marci^. Hieron. ad Algasiam
quest. 17. Aret, and Andre. in Apocal. (...). Glossa Ordin. ibid. Hieron. ad
Marcellam viduam. Idem contra Iouinian. lib. 1.
Which jumps with that maxim of the Popes adherents, That in his person the
whole Church resideth and consists. Wherefore it is now manifest, that
Antichrist shall have his seat in the Church Christian: Now let us see whether
in the Latin Church, or no.

Ireneus surely searching after the number of 666, which is the name of the It
is very likely; for such is the name of the Empire, which now swayeth in the
world. They call themselves Latins. So likewise do Tert^llian, Jerome,
Ambrose, Augustine, Andrew B. of Caesarea, Beda, Oecumenius, Lyranue, Aquinas,
Caietan, and others, when by Babylon they understand Rome, as well in the first
Epistle, and last chapter of Saint Peter, as in the Revelations. And Bellarmin
himself is clear in this opinion; and Baronius affirms, that by Babylon, in
the places before rehearsed, cannot be meant but Rome: much more, when by the
whore clothed in scarlet, which makes drunk all the kings of the earth, they
understand Tertullian, Jerome, Aretas, Andrew of Caesare^, the Ordinary
Gloss, Bellarmin also, and Baronius, and others do. Nay, we say f^^^ her,
that the Ancients understand it of the Roman Church, whose corruption they saw
even in those days to increase so fast: for to her applies Saint Jerome those
words of the Apocalypse, Go out of her my people, says the Lord, and be not
partaker of her sins, nor of her plagues; fly out of Babylon, and let every
one save his own soul: for she is fallen, she is fallen, and is made a
receptacle for devils, an habitation of all unclean spirits: For surely, says
he, there is the holy Church, there are the trophies and monuments of the
Apostles and Martyrs, and there is the confession of Christ: But withal, says
he, there is ambition, and oppression, luxury of the belly and of the throat,
which go to And therefore he summoneth all well disposed people to depart out
of her, though built upon Christ the true rock, by the preaching of Saint
Peter, and though her Prophets which deceived her, cried out, Peace, peace, the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, to lull them asleep in their own
security. And he seems farther to strike at her very Hierarchy, when as in
his preface to the books of Didymus of the holy Ghost, Idem in Prefati. in
lib. Did. de Spir. sancto.
we find these words, When I lived, says he, in Babylon an inhabitant of that
purple whore after the laws of the Quirites or citizens of Rome, I would have
written something of the holy Ghost, and have dedicated the treatise to the
Bishop of that city: and behold, that seething pot which was seen in the
Prophet Jeremy, looking out of the North, begins already to boil, and
Romulus, and those Lupercall sports, come to visit again the hosterie of the
Virgin Marie, and the sepulcher of our Savior, etc. Had this holy Father
lived in the days of our fathers, and seen what passed in these later ages,
what would he have said? And truly, to understand those passages of the
Apocalips of Rome Painim, as some would have it, and not of the Church of Rome;
were to make it, of a mysterious prophecy, as all acknowledge it to be, a
mere story, cold and frivolous: or was it fitting, that the Prophet, with so
maiesticall a preface, speaking in the name of Ribera Apocalip. c. 14. number. 42.
and 57. Viega in 17. Apoc. com. 1. sect. 3.
This must, says Ribera, be understood of Rome, not only such as she was
under the Emperors, but also such as she shall be in the later days. And
Viega says, That the name of Babylon must be referred to her, and not only to
that Rome which served Idols, before it received the faith of Christ, but also
to that Rome which shall be in the days of Antichrist: By which words, what

Ca. Proposait. extra de prabe^d. and Gloss. ib. Lib. ^. cerem. Pontis. c. 1.
But some man will say, When was it seen that a Pope called himself God? And I
answer, That neither are the Popes themselves over sparing in calling
themselves Gods on earth, and the Canonists are over prodigal of such titles,
and of far greater also, if greater may be, whilst they make them to
participate of the Deity, and with power to command both in heaven and hell,
as the sequel of this discourse will but too apparently declare; and it were
but needless to repeat here, what I have long since sufficiently proved in my
treatise of the Church, cap. 9. But this is the point, and this is that which
God so often forewarned us of, That Antichrist should enter into the Temple and
Church of God, with false In all deceitfulness of iniquity, says Saint Paul,
and borrowing, as Saint John speaks, the horns of a Lamb, that is, as a
servant of God, and under color of his service: for otherwise every man would
have shut gates against him. And this is that which all the Fathers aimed at:
Origin. in Matt. tract. 27.
Origin says, Antichrist has nothing of Christ but the very ^ame; he neither
does his deeds, neither teaches his doctrine: Christ is truth it self, Idem
in Matt. tract. 24.
and Antichrist a counterfeit. And to the end, says he, that he may have some
color to exalt himself above God, he takes the testimonies of his false
doctrines out of the Scriptures, to deceive those who will not otherwise be
satisfied: He takes possession Which when and so often as I read, me think I
hear him come in with his Tibi dabo, with his Pasce oues meas, with Oram pro
te Petre, and the like. Saint Ciprian also, He shall teach, says he,
infidelity under a show of faith, Cypr. epist. 7.
the night for the day, destruction for salvation, and Antichrist under the
name of Christ. August. in Apocal. Hom. 11.
And we read, says Saint Augustine, in the Apocalips, that the Beast has two
horns like a Lamb, that is, two Testaments like the Church, thereby the more
easily to shed out the poison of Antichrist, under the name of Christ. And
Saint Jerome, yet more particularly, Hieron. in Dan. c. 13.
according to the interpretation of Symmachus, says, That Antichrist shall
speak as God: He shall attribute to himself as well the words as the power of
his Majesty: He And in another place, He shall change, says he, Idem in 2.
ad Thessal. c. 2.
and seek to increase the Sacraments of the Church. Now therefore seeing that
the Pope makes himself to be called, The most holy Father, seeing he
deposes kings, new moulds at his pleasure all Religion, all Commandments,
all Sacraments instituted by God; may we not say that Saint Jerome prophesied?
And thus you see how these predictions of Saint Paul, and of Saint John, were
understood by the ancient holy Fathers of the Church.

This Mystery therefore of iniquity, which our age now beholds in her
height and exaltation, began to work and to set it self forward, even in S.
Paul's I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, I am of Cephas, and I am of Christ. And
what, 1 Cor. c. 1. v. 12. and 13.
says Paul, Is Christ divided? or was Paul crucified for you? The like would
he have said of Cephas, and Cephas of himself: But Paul to reserve all
entirely unto Christ, speaks clearly, and says, He that planteth is nothing,
and he which waters is nothing, Ib. c. 3. v. 7. and 8.
but God which gives the increase: as for those others they were all one, and
servants in the same degree. And farther to cut off all pretense of
inequality, Gal. 2. v. 6.
I was nothing different, says he, from those which seemed to be some body:
They which seemed to be great, added nothing to me, above that which I had
before: and who were they? but James and Cephas, and John, which were accounted
pillars of the Church: Who also acknowledged, says he, that the Gospel of the
uncircumcision was committed unto me, as the Gospel of the circumcision was
unto Peter; and therefore gave unto me and unto Barnabas the right hand of
fellowship: in all which, no one jot of superiority is to be found. And
farther in another place he says, From Jerusalem to Illiricum, Romans c. 15. v.
19. and 20.
I have made to abound the Gospel of Christ, and not there where he had been
already preached; that I might not seem to have built upon another man's
foundation: much less therefore did he preach by another man's commission. And
Cephas himself, that is, Saint Peter, puts off from himself and others
this claim of superiority, where he says, I beseech the Elders which are
among you, 1. Pet. 5. v 1.2.3 (...).
I that am a fellow And again, Feed, says he, the flock committed to your
charge, etc. not domineering over the heritage of the Lord: But that ye may
be ensamples to the flock, decked (as he speaks afterward) with humility,
because God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble: Math. cap. 20.
verse. 25. and 26. (...). Baron. Annal. to. 1. an. 34. art. 275. idem an. 57.
to. 1. art. 39.
As well remembering the lesson of his Lord, whose term he uses; You know,
says Christ, that the Princes of the earth lord it over them: but, says he,
it shall not be so with you; you shall not do so over my Church, over mine
inheritance. Far and wide is this from that claim which Baronius makes in the
Popes behalf, where he says, That Christ after his resurrection translated
upon the Popes both Priesthood and Kingdom; and that this was signified by
that shadow of Saint Peter, whereby the sick were healed; namely, Peter had,
though never so far different from him in life and conversation; because they
should ever retain the shadow. And what is it now that they would conclude out
of this shadow? no power to heal the sick, but to destroy kings and
kingdoms: for what other miracles have they wrought these thousand years? But
shortly after the death of the Apostles, this ambition began to sway more
violently in the Church: And true in this point, as also in many others, is
that saying of Hegesippus, Eusebius. lib. 3. c. 26. and lib. 4. c. 21.
as Eusebius reports him, That to the times of Traian, or thereabouts, the
Church continued clean and undefiled, as a virgin; but since that sacred
company was taken out of the world, the conspiracy of iniquity began to
work with open face: And

1. PROGRESSION.
Of the difference which fell between the Churches of the East and of the
West, con^erning the observation of Easter day.

ABout the year 195, touching the Feast of Easter, whether it should be held
John the Apostle in Ephesus, and so continued unto their days. This was a
difference about a thing in it self indifferent, and therefore not worthy to
disturb that happy quietness, and to dissolve the union of the Church.
Polycrates B. of Ephesus in Asia, defended his cause by a certain Epistle,
registered in Eusebius, and grounded, as he says, upon holy Scriptures, upon
the example of S. John, Victor, as it should seem, to have answered the reasons
of this Epistle: what does he therefore? Victor, says Eusebius, Eusebius. Hist.
Ecclesiast. lib. 5. edit. Latin. c. 22.23.24. (...).
who was then President of the Church of Rome, went at one blow to cut off from
that common union; the Parishes of all Asia, with the neighboring Churches, as
men of a different opinion in religion: setting them, by his Epistles, as it
were upon a scaffold, to the view of all the world, and proclaiming
excommunicated all the brethren which there inhabited.

OPPOSITION.
But this, says Eusebius, this attempt of Victor, pleased not all the Bishops:
as if he nay rather they exhorted him (Ruffinus translateth it inhibebant, they
commanded) him to seek the peace, love, and unity of his brethren. The
sayings of sundry Bishops, uttered upon this occasion, says Eusebius, are yet
rife in men's remembrance, whereby they sharply reproved Victor. Among the rest
that of Ireneus, writing to him in the name of the Churches which he governed
in France, to this effect: That true it was, the mystery of our Lords
resurrection ought not to be celebrated but on the Sunday: and so are they at a
point with for the observance of a tradition, or ancient custom, Victor in
duty ought not to cut off whole Churches: condemning thereby the abuse of his
authority. And note here, that the interpreter of Eusebius, makes Ireneus to
say, That Victor should not cut off whole Churches from the body of Christ's
universal Church: as if Ireneus had held the Church of Rome for such: Whereas
in Eusebius it is only thus: (...), i. whole Churches of God. And his drift
herein is clear, by the whole tenor of that Epistle: The Priests, says he
unto Victor, which before Soter presided in that Church which you now govern,
namely, Anicetus, Pius, Higinus, Telesphorus, and Xystus, neither observed that
day themselves, nor suffered others to observe it: yet maintained (...).
But the Priests which were before you, sent unto them the Eucharist, and
communicated with them in Sacrament: So fared it between Polycarpus and
Anicetus Priest, (i. Bishop of Rome) whom though Anicetus could not persuade to
depart from that which he had ever before observed, as being a disciple of S.
John, yet parted they in peace, and all the Church continued in good accord, as
well they which did observe the foureteenth day, as they which observed it not.
And in this manner wrote Ireneus, not only to Victor, but also to sundry
Bishops of other Churches. Yet Bellarmine tells us, Bellarm. lib. 2. cap. 19.
de Romans Pontif.
that Victor did well and wisely in so doing, to prevent Iudaisme: but Ireneus,
by his Victor in the matter, yet condemned the manner of his proceedings; so
shall Eusebius, who having no part in the brawle, yet affirms that Ireneus
justly reproved Victor. And Wicelius in our time says boldly, See Wicelius.
That in the Bishops before Victor the spirit abounded, but in those which came
after him the flesh began to have the upper hand: and Ireneus himself seems
to touch upon this string, where he speaks of those, Qui Principalis
consessionis tumore elati sunt, Lib. 4. cap. 4.
i. who swell with the pride of the Principal, or Prime See: from whom we
ought to separate our selves.

But here Baronius makes himself ridiculous in his History, whiles he would
Baronius tom. 2. An. 198. art. 2, 3, 4, 5, 9.
that Theophilus bishop of Caesarea assembled the Council in Palestina (which
was held upon this occasion) by commission from Victor Bishop of Rome;
alleging for his author, Beda in his book of the Vernall Equinox, written
seven hundred years after. Judge the reader what credit this ought to have in
prejudice of Ireneus, Polycarpus, and Eusebius himself, Eusebius. li. 5. c. 25.
Histor. Eccles.
who says plainly in this manner, speaking of that Synod, At this day there
is extant a certain writing of the Bishops then called together in Palestina,
among whom Theophilus presided; (...).
as also another writing of those of Rome, mentioning Victor their Bishop:
where we find no trace of any prerogative at all. Neither sticks he to tell
us as much of the Synod of Asia; as if Polycrates had held it in quality of
Pope Victors Legate; because that he had called together those Bishops, Eusebius.
lib. 5. ca. 21. and 22. (...). Baron. to. 2. an. 198. art. 2, 3, 4.
which he entreated him to assemble; as if Popes prayers and requests were to
be construed and interpreted for commands absolute, and proceeding from a
sovereign authority. All which is founded upon an idle supposall, that the
bishop of Rome was, even in those days, reputed and generally taken as
universal Bishop and Pontifex Maximus, i. High Priest or Pontife.

Let us therefore now see the grounds of this supposall, and the proofs of
this assertion. First then, Baronius alleges a certain Epistle of Sixtus the
first, wherein he calls himself the universal Bishop of the Apostolic
Church. But who knows not that the most learned even among themselves, have
ever discarded Adrianus and Verus, who reigned long after, in the year 137:
which might well make this grand Annalist to blush for shame. We could as well
cry quittance with him, and for our purpose allege an Epistle decretall of
Pope Eleutherius to the Bishops of France, Onuphrius in Fastis Pontif.
where he tells them, That the universal Church of Christ is committed to
their charge; this being an Epistle of as good pistol proof as the other, and
both alike. And what credit ought in reason to be given to Sixtus in a cause so
nearly concerning himself, especially when in the next precedent Epistle,
Tertullian in his book of Chastity, Lib. de Pudicit. c. 1.
where he taxes a certain Edict of Victor, by which he receives adulterers
unto penance; and whereof he baffleth the inscription: I hear talk, says
Tertullian, of an Edict, and that a peremptory one to: Pontifex Maximus, i.
The high Pontife, the Bishop of Bishops says, I remit sins to adulterers and
whoremasters which come to penance. True it is, that after that attempt of his
upon all Asia, any thing may seem credible of that man's insolency and pride:
But who sees not, that Tertullian frumpeth only and jeasteth at him? as also
he does at that other decree of Pope Zepherin: For where, says he, shall this
liberality of his be proposed? if in the Church, how so? seeing she is a But a
little after, in the same book, he drives this nail a little closer: If,
says he, because our Lord said to Saint Peter, Upon this stone I will build my
Church: and, To thee will I give the keys of the kingdom of heaven: thou
do therefore presume that the power of binding and loossing is derived upon
thee: what art thou that crossest the purpose and intention of our Savior, who
collated it only upon Saint Peter's person? And consequently not upon you
Victor, nor upon you Zepherin, farther than you represent Peter; not in shadow
only, as Baronius would have it, but in truth and verity. But grant we, that
he did call himself Universal Bishop, might not every Bishop have done the
same in regard of his charge? yes verily, and many of them upon better reason,
considering the worth and dignity of their persons: Clement, whom commonly
they thrust upon us, as next successor unto Saint Peter, had not, be like, well
perused and understood his evidences, Clement. Constitut. lib. 6. c. 14.
when in his Constitutions he spoke in this manner: We have written to you
this Catholic and universal doctrine, to confirm you; you, I say, to whom
the Universal Bishopric is committed. Jgnatius in Epistola ad Philadelph.
And Ignatius speaking of a Bishop of Philadelphia, of his time, says, That he
was called of God to undertake (...), that is, the ministry of the common
Church; as Baronius himself renders it. Nazianz. in laudem Cypriani.
And Nazianzene says of Saint Cyprian, That he presided not only over the
Church of Carthage and Afric, but also over all the East, all the West, over
all the Idem in laudem Athanas.
and all the South: And of Athanasius, That he presided over the Church of
Alexandria, nay over the whole world. But he expounds himself in both: of
the first he adds, wheresoever the admiration of his name came; and of the
other, That he governed the Church of Alexandria in such sort, that the
Universal Church was benefited by him. And would God the Bishops of Rome had
done the like, we never would have envied them the like honorable title.
Eusebius. in vita Constantin. lib. 5. c. 57.
Also the Emperor Constantine himself writing to Eusebius, upon the refusal
which he made of the Bishopric of Antiochia, when it was offered unto him:
You are, says he, a most happy taking this word in that sense, which Saint
Cyprian does, when he says, That there is but one Bishopric, of which every
Bishop holds his part in solid. Cyprian. de vnitat. Eccles. Baron. to. 2. an.
216. artic. 9. and 10.


As for the title of High Priest, or Pontife, Baronius alleges no other
proof but only the imitation of the old Jewish law, where there was a High
Priest; and of Paganism, which had Pontificem Maximum, i. a High Pontife; and
groundeth himself especially upon this later: He, says he, which was most
eminent in judicial authority above all the rest, was only Pontifex Maximus,
Sovereign Pontife among the Pagans: Whence Festus says, that it was he who
was reputed Judge in all matters divine and humane. And to this purpose
alleges this Cardinal all that Rex Sacrificulus? who according to his own
author Festus, seems to be the greatest among the Priests: after him Dialis
the Priest of Jupiter, then Martialis, of Mars, afterward Quirinalis, the
Priest of Romulus, and last of all Pontifex Maximus, the High Pontife; all
which you shall find in Festus in the word Ordo, whence we learn by the way,
that this word, Orders, was anciently taken from the Heathen.

2. PROGRESSION.
Pope Stephen attempteth to restore two Bishops of Spain, deposed by their
Metropolitan.

ABout the year 250, Stephen Bishop of Rome made the like attempt against the
Bishops of Spain and Afric. In Spain Basilides Bishop of Asturia, and
Martialis Bishop of Merida, in time of persecution sacrificed unto Idols, and
were therefore deposed from their charges: Whereupon they had secret recourse
unto the said Stephen, hoping to be restored by his authority; which he
attempted to effect, and thereupon wrote to the Bishops which were in Spain.

OPPOSITION.
But this matter rested not there; for the Churches of Spain gave notice of
this attempt unto those of Afric, and presently assembled themselves in
Synod. The Synodall Epistle is yet whole to be read in Cyprian; the sum and
effect whereof is, In editio Turneb. Epist. 35. and Pamelij 68.
That the law of God suffers them not to readmit such persons to their charge
in holy Church: That where the ordinances of God are in question, there ought
to be no acceptance of persons, no relaxation in favor of any man: That their
running to Rome, or to Stephen, might not cause the ordination of Sabinus to be
reuersed, he being there placed by due course of law, and the other remaining
incapable of restitution: That Basilides might deceive Stephen by wrong
information, but God he could not: That they ought to hold themselves to that,
which themselves, and all Bishops throughout the world, and Cornelius himself
their Colleague, had formerly decreed; namely, That such persons might well be
received unto penance, but never to Priestly dignity in the Church. In the
whole course of which Epistle they ever call Cornelius and Stephen, Bishops of
Rome, their Colleagues. Not unlike unto this, was that attempt of Cornelius, not
long before, upon the Bishops of Afrike, in the case of certain false Bishops
which fled unto him, against the censures of the Churches: Editio Parisien,
Epist. 18. Pa. mel. 55.
but Cyprian complained thereof unto Cornelius as of a wrong, and in bar of
such proceedings, pleaded the laws and constitutions of holy Church: These
fellows (says after all this, presume to pass the sea, etc. For seeing
(says he) that by us all it has been already ordained, according to rules
of equity and justice, That every ones cause should be heard in the place of
the fact committed, and that to every Pastor should be allotted his proper
portion of the flock, which he was to ouersee, and for which he should stand
answerable unto God; it is not fit that those over whom we are set, should run
from place to place, to make the Bishops, who are at unity among themselves,
to square and fall foul one of another: (for example, Cornelius and Cyprian)
but that every one answer for himself in the place, where the defendant may
have both accusers and witnesses face to face; unless perhaps these few
desperate companions think the authority of the Bishops of Africa, who have
condemned them, to be less: meaning less than that of Cornelius, Cyprians
thought to acknowledge any right of appeal to the Sea of Rome.

Bellarm. de Pontif. Romans lib. 2. cap. 33.
Wherefore when Bellarmine says, that the constitution alleged by S. Cyprian,
That every cause should be heard in the place of the fact committed, is to be
understood only of the first instance; the words themselves, and those which
follow are too too clear against him: The cause (says Cyprian) has been
heard, sentence is passed, it is not fit that a censure of Priests or Bishops
should be retracted, as rash and unadvised. And as frivolous is that which he
says, that the word less is not spoken in comparison of the Pope, but of the
cause: for those words, unless they think the authority of the Bishops of
Afrike to be Less, must necessarily be understood in Cornelius. And all this
suiteth with the vein of Cyprian, as also does that in his Treatise of the
unity of the Church: The other Apostles (says he) were the same that S. Peter
was, of like honor, of equal authority and power, but the beginning
proceeds from unity, to show that the Church is one; where yet, to bolster
out this pretended Primacie, one or other has corrupted the text in sundry
places, contrary to the truth of manuscripts, acknowledged in the Paris
edition by the learned Turnebus.

For between these words, Pasce oues meas, and Et quamuis, either Pamelius, or
some other before him, has inserted these, Super vnum illum aedificat
ecclesiam suam, that is, He has built his Church upon him alone, (i. S. Peter)
and him has he commanded to feed his sheep. And whereas Turnebus reads,
Tamen vt vnitatem manifestaret, vnitatis eiusdem originem, ab vno incipientem,
sua authoritate disposuit: i. yet that he (meaning Christ) might declare this
unity, he has declared by his authority, that this unity should take her
beginning from one alone. Pamelius with like honesty as before, between these
words manifestaret and vnius has thrust in these, Vnam Cathedram constituit,
i. he has established one Chair. Likewise after those words before mentioned,
The Apostles were all the same that Peter was, etc. after the word proficiscite
he adds, Primatus Petro datur, The Primacie is given unto Peter. And again,
unto these words, vt vna Christi he adds and Cathedra vna, i. and one Chair.
And to conclude, where S. Cyprian says, Qui ecclesiae renititur and resistit,
in ecclesia se esse confidit? i. He which resists the Church, can he hope
that he is in the Church? Pamelius between these words, resistit and in
ecclesia, foisteth in these, Qui Cathedram Petri super quam ecclesia fundata
est deserit, i. he which forsakes the Chair of Peter, upon which the Church
is builded. And the like does he in many other places of this Treatise; which
additions, how incompatible are they with the sense and scope of the text it
self? where it is said, The Lord has given, after his resurrection, and
again, They were all the same that Peter was: as also with that Nullitie
pronounced elsewhere against appeals made over the sea, Cyprian. in Council.
Carthagin. sieve de sentent. Episcop. 73. editio Parisiens. Cyprian. de Al^ator.
and diverse other places of the same Author. None of us (says he) has made
himself a Bishop of Bishops, through fear and tyranny to force his Colleagues
to his obedience: The heavenly goodness has bestowed upon us the ordering of
the Apostleship, and has by his heavenly favor dignified the Vicars seat of
the Lord: Christ said to all the Apostles, and in them to all Bishops which
should succeed them in their Vicariall ordination, He which hears you,
hears me: Idem ad Puppien. Epist. 66. editio Parisien.
so that (says he) one of us may not judge another, but we attend (he
excepteth none) the judgment of our Lord Jesus, who alone has power, Vnus and
solus, to ordain us to the government of his Church, and to judge Thus far
Cyprian: immediately upon whose death the Church of Afrike, to cut off all
claim of this pretended jurisdiction, decreed, That the Bishop of the first
See should not be called Prince of Priests, or chief Bishop, Idem in Council.
Carthag. sieve de sentent. Episcop. epist. 73. Council. Afric. art. 6. Capitu.
Carol. Magn. li 7. c. 17. Bochell. Decret. Ecclesiae Gallic. li. 5. tit. 5.
cap. 1.
or by any other like name: Which decree our French Church heretofore
understood expressly of the Sea of Rome. And now let the indifferent Reader
judge, which edition, that of Pamelius, or this of Turnebus, sorteth and
suiteth better with these sayings of Cyprian, and consequently, whether these
are not Harpyes claws which thus defile the pure foord of the Fathers writings
to our hands: and what they have done in this Epistle, who can warrant us, that
they have not done in the other writings of the same Father, and of all other
Fathers?

Baronius, Baron. to. 1. an. 33. art. 21 and an. 34. art. 203. and passim.
who would make us believe, that the meaning of S. Cyprian was clean
contrary: for first he says, That S. Cyprian acknowledged S. Peter's Chair as
supreme Judge over all Churches in the world, grounding himself upon the
Epistle before rehearsed, and so notoriously corrupted, which yet he is not
ashamed so often to repeat, as if it were as true as Gospel; and who cannot
make his own cause seem good, if he may be suffered to do thus? Secondly he
says, That in that decree against Judgments given beyond the seas, the Church
of Rome was still excepted; whereas indeed it was enacted directly against that
Church, and against no other: but for proof, he alleges a certain decretall
Epistle of Fabianus, In 1. vol. Council. Epist. Decret. Fabian. ad Hilar. 3.
Bishop of Hilarious, with these words, Salua in omnibus Apostolica authoritate,
i. saving always the authority of the Sea Apostolic: as if he had said,
saving the case for which the Canon was principally made; than which, what can
be more ridiculously absurd? Now as touching all those Epistles which are
inserted into the Councels, until the time of Syricius, it is agreed of on all
hands, that they are of no credit, and though they were, yet were it reason
that Fabianus should be credited in his own cause? But besides the
sottishness of the style of this Epistle, the very date which it bears,
Baron. an. 55. art. 21.
Africano and Decio Coss. bewrays the stamp; for they can show us no such
date, either in their Fasti, or in Onuphrius himself: And it is noted in the
margent of the first volume of the Councels upon Sixtus the third, which was
but as yesterday to speak of: a professed Annalist should not so do. Thirdly,
that notwithstanding all this, yet Cyprian did aduow the authority of the
Church of Rome: For (says he) in that Epistle which he wrote to the Clergy of
Rome, upon the death of Fabianus, he terms him Colleague in regard of his
function, but Praepositum in respect of his place and dignity: a mere trick,
not fitting any simple scholar, much less a learned Divine and Cardinal:
for what? must Praepositus needs signify a Pope? Does he not in the same
Epistle call him a Bishop, and does he not term him Praepositus, in regard of
those to whom he wrote, and not of himself? Or does he not give the Rogatian
his Deacon in the Church of Carthage, Cyprian. epist. 7. ad Rogatian. editio.
Pamel.
congratulating him for the firm and steadfast confession of his Clergy, he
uses these words, The glory of the Church is the glory Praepositi, i. of him
that is set over it; meaning himself as Bishop, as appears by the next
precedent clause, In this common joy, the portion of the Bishop is the
greatest: Idem epist. 11. ad Marty. and confesso. editio. Pamel.
And in the eleventh Epistle we read, Praepositorum est, i. It is the part of
them which are set over the Church, to instruct the hasty and ignorant, that
of Pastors they become not butchers of the flock, to wit, in suffering them
which had fainted in the confession of Christ to come over hastily to the
Communion; where he expounds this word Praepositos, by Pastors: so likewise
in the 13, 15, Pamelius himself cannot deny: But as you see, a little stuff
will serve this Cardinal to make the Pope a coat. Fourthly, he says, That all
questions of heresy were referred to the judgment of the Bishops of Rome,
exclusiuely to all other, at least that others came but only to stand as
ciphers, alleging the example of Origin; who when he was accused of heresy,
sent (says he) his confession first of all to Fabian Bishop of Rome, as to the
Bishop of all the Catholic Church; and to this purpose cites Eusebius: but
Eusebius joyneth Fabian with others: He wrote (says he) to Fabian, and to
many other Governors of the Church concerning his true profession; and so
runs the Latin translation: and who doubts but that among them all, such a man
as Fabian, Bishop of the imperial City, Fabian being dead, the Clergy of
Rome (he should have said the College of Cardinals) took upon them the care
of all the Churches; Baron. an. 245. ex Eusebius. lib. 6. c. 8. Grae. ad.
his proofs in this point are like the rest: for (says he) The Clergy of
Rome advertised S. Cyprian of the death of Fabian, as appears by his third
Epistle: and knowing that S. Cyprian had withdrawn himself from Carthage,
wrote unto his Clergy, exhorting them to take heed that none went astray:
Cyprian. epist. 3. edit. Pamel.
And this they did (says he) Vice Pastoris, i. doing as Fabian should have
done if he had lived; sending unto all Churches copies of the order taken at
Rome in Lapsorum negotio, i. touching their case which had fallen in
persecution. And what? must these mutual offices of care and love, this
interchangeable Cyprian, written whether to the Pope, or whether to the Clergy
of Rome, upon so many points of great importance, wherein he instructs,
exhorts, and sometimes sharply reproues them, shall they serve for so many
presidents to his successors in the Church of Carthage, of superiority and
usurpation over other Churches, and over the Church of Rome it self? See here
Reader the course of their impostures, and withal remember (which Baronius
wittingly suppresseth) In notis ad epist. 3.
is not to be found either in the edition of Manutius, or in any manuscript,
as Pamelius himself acknowledges.

3. PROGRESSION.
Of the variance which arose between S. Cyprian and Stephen Bishop of Rome,
touching those which had been baptized by heretics.

An. 258.
ANother question arose not long after, Whether those which had bin baptized
Stephen held, that no; Cyprian, that they should. Stephens cause no doubt was
the better, had he carried the matter with discretion and sobriety: and had he
stood as much upon ground of argument and reason, as he did upon his
authority; for unto a letter which was sent unto him from a Council
consisting of 71 Bishops, his answer for all was this, Whatsoever the heresy
be, let the party come to us; let nothing be innouated or changed, only as it
has been delivered to us from hand to hand, let them receive imposition of
hands in penance. Seeking by authority to make the rest of the Churches dance
after him; and because they would not, he excommunicated first the Churches of
Afric, and then all the Churches of the

OPPOSITION.
But neither Cyprian, nor yet the Churches, suffered themselves to be so
muzled by these excommunications; for first Cyprian in his Epistle to Pompeius,
Cypria. in Epist. ad Pomp. 74.
Among other things, says he, which our brother Stephen has written unto us,
either insolently, or vnfittingly, or contrary to himself, he has also
added this; If any man come to us, for what heresy soever (making no
difference between heresy and heresy, which yet the Council of Nice
afterward thought fit to make) let him receive imposition of hands in penance:
nay farther, says he, his obduratnesse of heart and obstinacy Marcion,
Valentin, and Appelles, children may be borne unto God. Thus he spoke, and this
he maintained in heat of contention, contrary to what the Church afterward
defined, because these retained not the form of baptism: But, says he, a
Bishop should not only teach, but also learn; and he is the best teacher of
others, who is himself every day a learner: As if he had said, That Stephen
should do well to learn religion, by conferring with his Colleagues: not to
lay his authority upon them, under a pretense of custom, which not grounded
upon truth, says he, Cyprian. Epist. 71
is naught else but an aged error. Saint Peter, says he, the first chosen of
our Lord, upon whom also he built his Church, when Saint Paul disputed with
him upon the point of circumcision, carried not And upon these and the like
terms he ever holds him. But Stephen stayed not here: for he had already
written to the Eastern Bishops, Eusebius. l. 7. c. 4.
who held opinion with Cyprian, declaring unto them, That he could no longer
hold communion with them, if they persisted in that opinion: as appears by
that Epistle which Dionysius Alexandrinus wrote unto Xystus, who succeeded unto
Stephen: and yet more plainly, by that which he wrote to Firmilianus, Helenus,
and others; to whom also Cyprian had already dispatched Rogatian his Deacon.
And the Eastern Bishops, upon the intimation given them from Cyprian, grew
much offended with the insolency and pride of Stephen, and therefore in their
answer unto Cyprian, We, say they, have cause indeed to thank him, for that
his inhumanitie has given us large testimony of your faith and wisdom; yet
deserves not Stephen any thanks for the good he has done unto us, no more
than did Judas, for that by his treason he became an instrument of salvation
unto all the world. But let this fact of Stephen pass, least the remembrance
of his pride and insolency put us farther in mind of his greater impiety.
Although, say they, in diverse Provinces many things are diversely observed, yet
no man by occasion thereof ever departed from the unity of the Catholic
Church; which yet Stephen now presumes to do, breaking that league of peace
with us, which his predecessors so inuiolably observed: He marks not what a
flaw he makes in this precious gemme of Christian verity, when he betrayeth
and forsakes unity: And yet, say they, Stephen all this while vaunteth
himself to have Saint Peter's chair by succession. And this no doubt was that
which animated him to presume so far upon the Churches: But made they any
whit the more reckoning of his excommunications therefore? or did they not
rather tell him, That thereby he had excommunicated himself? Surely, say they,
a man full Stephen, set on foot throughout the Churches? and how much sin
have thou heaped up unto thy self, in cutting thy self off from so many
flocks? For so have thou done: seeing he is a right scismatike which departs
voluntarily from the unity of the Church. Cyprian. Ep. 4.
And thou, whilst thou wentest about to seperat others from thee, have
separated thy self from all other Churches, etc. Walk, says the Apostle, in
your vocation, in all humility of mind, in meekness and patience, supporting
one another in love, endeavoring to keep the unity of the spirit in the band
of peace, etc. And has not Stephen well observed this precept, think you,
when he breaks off now with all the Churches of the East, and anon with
those of the South? Or has not he with great patience And see whither this
grew in the end: He is not, say they, ashamed to call Cyprian false Christ, and
false Apostle, and a deceitful workman: For, finding his own conscience
surcharged with all these imputations, he wisely began to object that to
another, which others might far more justly have laid upon himself. Thus
then wrote the Churches of the East unto Saint Cyprian, as much offended with
the insolency which Stephen had used upon this occasion; so that Pamelius had
reason, I confess, Manutius had done before him, but that Morelius, i.
Turnebus himself had printed it in his edition. How far is all this short of
that mild and temperat humor of Saint Cyprian? Cyprian. Epist. ad Inbaianum
Edit. Paris. 70. in Edit. Pamelij 73.
We, says he, will not fall at variance with our Colleagues and fellow Bishops,
for the Heretics sakes: We maintain in patience and meekness the love of
heart, the honor of our society, the band of faith and Priestlie unity: And
for this cause at this present, by the inspiration of God, have we written a
treatise of the Benefits of Patience. And at the same time, for a lenitife of
this sharp humor, he wrote another book of Zeal and Envy. Such were the
essays of the Bishops of Rome, even in the heat of persecution: and such were
the wiles of Satan to serve his own Constantine coming shortly after to
restore peace unto the Churches, and as it were to shed forth the sweet
influence of his liberality and favor upon them; these sparks of ambition,
fostered by his bounty, and no ways restrained by persecution, began to flame
out more violently than before.

Baronius in the mean time hunteth on upon the old sent, and not able to
contradict the verity of these proceedings, will yet persuade us that the
Bishops of Rome commanded absolutely in all the Churches: and so did they, I
confess, First therefore, says he, when as Dionysius Bishop of Alexandria,
Baron. vol. 2. an. 263. art. 30. and sequent.
in oppugning the heresy of Sabellius, was accused by those of Pentapolis unto
Dionysius Bishop of Rome, as having spoken some things not so properly
concerning the son of God, he purged himself to the Bishop of Rome by
letters. And what, I pray you, could this good Bishop do less in a slander
of such importance, especially to those to whom he had been defamed? But what,
of this forwardness of his must we needs erect a Consistory in the Church?
or does Athanasius report it as a suit at law? These fellows, says he,
without ever asking him how he would be understood, (...).
went to Rome, and misreported of him. He says not, That they accused him in
form of law, but brandeth only their pretended zeal, with a mark of leuitie
and rashness. And as touching Dionysius Bishop of Rome, he says, Athanas. de
Sententijs Dionysij.
That he sent him word what they had said of him, and that thereupon the other
wrote him back presently his apology. And what, I pray you, is all this, more
than a brotherly communication, and intercourse of kindness between two good
Bishops? Secondly, says Baronius, in the case of Samosatenus, when he hatched
his heresy in Antioch, Baron. an. 265. art. 10. and sequent. and an. 272. art.
1. and 2. Athanas. lib. de Synod. Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 29 30. Graec. c. 23. and
24. Lat.
they presently ran to the Bishop of Rome: whereas yet Athanasius joyneth
another with him in part of this praise and commendation. Two Dionysius, says
he, the one of Rome, the other of Alexandria, overthrew Samosatenus. What
difference here between Eusebius, In a Synod, says he, of very many Bishops
assembled in Antioch, he was condemned of heresy, and cut off from all the
Catholic Churches under heaven. He says not, that these Bishops sent to Rome
for a commission, but well he says, That (...) (for this was the proper word)
i. assembled together with one accord, they wrote a letter, directed to
Dionysius Bishop of Rome, (...).
and to Maximus of Alexandria (who lately had succeeded the other Dionysius in
that See) in particular, and to the Bishops of all other Provinces in general;
to let them understand what care they had taken in the quenching of this
heresy: And so goes the very inscription of this letter, To Dionysius, and
to Maximus, (...).
and to all other Bishops our fellow servants throughout the world, and to all
the Universal Church which is under heaven. And what Baron. to. 2. an. 272.
art. 18.
when as the heretic would not relinquish the Bishops house to Domnus, elected
in his room by the Synod of the place, he ran to Aurelian the Emperor, not
yet engaged in his persecutions against the Church: And he, says Baronius, as
Eusebius reports, Eusebius. li. 7 c. 24. Lat. c. 30, Graec.
very religiously ordained, that liuerie of the house should be made, and
seisin given, to whom the Bishops of this doctrine which were in Italy and in
the city of Rome, should assign it. These are the words of Eusebius: and
thence concludes he, that Aurelian, Pagan as he was, yet acknowledged the
power of the Bishop of Rome, over all the world. How so? when as it appears
that the other Bishops were joined with him, and consequently in this respect
are made his equals, this matter Eusebius has it thus: To whom the Christians
of Italy, and the Bishops of Rome, should assign it: Which Baronius, to serve
his purpose with this place, has voluntarily followed, though knowing it to be
corrupted: because the original in Greek make the other Bishops of Italy to
enter into concurrencie with him, and in order of nomination, to stand before
them. Fourthly, what will you say, if Baronius tells us, That even in those
days it was the fashion to kiss the Popes feet: for he durst not say the
pantof^e. Baro. an. 294. art. 8. and seque^t.
For proof he tells us a tale out of a certain old Legend, Praepedigna,
wife unto one Claudius, who was converted to Christianity by one Susanna his
niece, near of kin to the Emperor Dioclesian: and that Praepedigna for joy
hereof, because she her self was long since in heart a Christian, ran to Caius
Bishop of Rome, cast her self at his feet, and according as the custom was,
says the Legend, kissed them. And has Baronius no better authors than these,
which himself, with others of like stuff, has in so many places utterly
condemned? Where can he show us that this Caius Bishop of Rome was nephew to
the Emperor Dioclesian, or that Susanna was his grand child? a name not used
among the Heathen. But grant we all this to be true, does not he himself tell
us in that very article, That this same Claudius also kissed the feet of
Gabinius the Priest? If

4. PROGRESSION.
1 That peace and plenty bred corruption in the Churches.

2 Constantine his bounty and liberality to the Churches.

3 Sundry reasons summarily rehearsed, to overthrow that pretended donation of
Constantine unto the Church of Rome.

1 IT cannot be denied, but that the Church whilst she had rest from
persecution, began ever to decline unto corruption. Cyprian observed as much
after the persecution of Decius, Cyprian. lib. de Lapsis.
and yields the reason; namely, Because every man stepped in the covetous
desires of his own heart: adding farther, That it was high time for God to
awake them with his rod, speaking principally of the Pastors of the Church, Non
in Sacerdotibus deuota religio; There was, says he, no longer any devotion
left in the Priests, no sincere faith in Ministers, no mercy in their works,
no government in their manners, etc. The Bishops themselves, who should have
served for a spur, and pattern of well doing unto others, abandoning their
holy functions, dealt in matters of An. 253.
says he, deserve for these ill doings? This was after the year 253. And, as
bad weeds grow apace in the Church, if God from time to time crop them not, so
Eusebius imputes that succeeding persecution of Dioclesian, to the same causes
as before: An. 302. Eusebius. lib. 8. c. 1. and 2. (...).
There was, says he, among us naught else but cursed speakings, and
continualliarres, of Prelates falling out with Prelates, and congregations with
congregations: They also which seemed to be Pastors, casting off the law and
rule of piety, kindled And therefore less wonder is it, if afterward taking
their ease under Constantine the Great, many of them became fit instruments,
some more, some less, to advance the Mystery whereof we speak.

An. 310.
2 Constantine therefore affecting the Christian religion, about the year 310
set himself to bestow huge largesses upon the Christian Churches, especially
upon that of Rome, as chief city of the Empire, and the place where his
person Syluester, Lib. 4. de Episc. and Cler. in Co. Theod. Damasus and
Anastas. in Syluestro.
written by Damasus Bishop of Rome, and by Anastasius, surnamed
Bibliothecarius: and his greatest princes, becoming conuerts after his
example, did the like, both by deeds of gift and legacies, which Constantine
ratified, and authorized by law express. And the more to win credit, and to
inure his people to Christianity, about the year 330, as he pulled down
Idolatry, so he applied the revenues of their temples to the maintenance of
the Christian Churches: so that in short time the Roman Church grew exceeding
rich. All which, and every particular thereof appears in the said life of
Syluester, and by Cedrenus in his history, where he says, Cedrenus page 243.
That in the 26 and 27 years of his Empire, Constantine labored to pull down
the Idols with their Temples, and to convey their rents and revenues to the
Churches of God. And herewithall went forward still, and increased that
pretense of the Bishops of Rome unto the Primacie, whereof we find too many
marks in their Epistles, even in those of Syluester himself: but I make a
conscience to allege them, because the more learned sort, and Cardinal
Casanus himself, hold them all, or the most part, for counterfeit, until the
time of Pope Syricius, which was the year 400, as we have elsewhere declared.

3 Neither do we here speak of that pretended donation of Constantine, made
unto the Church of Rome in the person of Syluester, as well of the city of
Rome, Constantine the son and Gallicanus, which yet is the date of that
donation: Because Damasus Bishop of Rome, in the life of Syluester, so
particularly by him described, makes no such mention; and Anastasius as
little: Because all Italy, and Rome it self, came afterward in partage among
the sons of Constantine, as Eusebius, Victor, Zozimus; Eusebius. lib. 4. c. 51
Idem de vita Constant. lib. 4. c. 49. 50. 51. Zozimus lib. 2. Victor in
Constantin. Zonaras to 3. Aga^^n. Epist. ad ^^^stant. Pog^^^t. in Actis 6.
Synod.
and Zonaras, report: Because Isidore, Burchard, and Iuo, judging it
Apocryphal, have omitted it in their several Collections of decrees: Because
Pope Agatho himself writing many years after to Constantine Pogonatus,
calls Rome Vrbem Imperatoris seruilem, i. The servile town or city of the
Emperor: Because the Anton. Archiep. part. 1. tit. 8. c. 2. sic inquit
Antonine Archbishop of Florence, Volaterra. in vita Constantin.
Raphael Volaterranus, Hieron. Catalan. in practica. Cancella. Apostol.
Hieronimus Catalanus, Chamberlain to Pope Alexander the sixth, Otho.
Frisingens. in Annal.
Otho Frisingensis, Cardin. Cusanus in concord. Cathol. lib. 3.
Cardinal Casanus, Laurent. Valla de ficta donatione.
Laurentius Valla, Senator of Rome, Franciscus Guicciard. in locis duobus de
Papa.
Francis Guicciardine, and others, every one of them famous in their several
generations: Aeneas Syluius himself, afterward Pope Pius the second, in a
particular treatise, cited by the foresaid Catalanus: Because Platina the Popes
Historian is ashamed to mention it: to be short, Because that in the pretended
original it self, kept in the Vatican, and written in letters of gold, the
scribe which wrote it has added at the foot thereof, in false Latin, Quam
fabulam longi temporis mendacia finxit, i. Which fable, a lie of long
Constantine the fourth day after his baptism, gave this privilege also to the
Bishop of Rome, That all the Priests throughout the Empire should acknowledge
him for their head, as Judges acknowledge their King. Surely it should seem,
that this good Emperor was not well instructed by Syluester, in the rights and
privileges of the Bishops of Rome, since it appears that he knew not that
they came from heaven: nor Syluester himself well learned in this point, since
he chose to hold them, as from the Emperor, rather than from Saint Peter. And
again it is there said, That Constantine gave to Syluester and to his
successors, the Primacy over the Sees of Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem,
Constantinople, and Syluester had never gone to school with the Jesuits,
where he might have learned, That it belonged properly to him to have given the
Empire unto Constantine: as for himself, that this Primacie and pre-eminence
over all other Churches, was given him in the Gospel. And farther it is there
said, That of purpose to make room for the Pope, the Emperor built
Constantinople; It being unfit, as it is there said, that where the Empire of
Priests should be, there the earthly Emperor should intermeddle, or have any
thing to do: Yet is it evident, that afterward Constantine allotted Rome to
one of his sons, and that many Emperors after him made that their ordinary
dwelling. And to conclude, this privilege was to endure to the end of the
world, with Constantine damned to the pit of hell, without hope of remission,
that should offer to impeach or oppose against it. And who now can have any
good opinion of the decrees of Gratian, reformed in our days, since Gregory
the thirteenth, which undertook to reform them, was not ashamed to let stand
for good, I will not say this Palea, or chafe, but this unsavory and filthy
ordure. And we have just cause to wonder at the impudency of Baronius, who
trippeth over this matter, as one would do over fire, lightly for fear of
burning, leaving it as a judged case, no longer to be questioned: Baron. to. 3.
an. 324. art. 117.
We, says he, say nothing hereof, because we can say nothing but what has
been often said already; and it were bootlesse and troublesome to repeat it:
Whereas, Baron. an. 44. to. 1. art. 86. and sequent. Idem passim.
and this is that which Baronius means, where he says, That men at that time
hallowed Heathenish rites and ceremonies, by bringing them into the Christian
Churches.

OPPOSITION.
This great abundance and plenty of wealth falling by heaps upon the Church,
caused many devout and well disposed persons to forecast cruel things. The
Legend of Syluester says, Legenda B. Syluest.
That there was at that time a voice heard from heaven, saying, Hodie effusum
est venenum in Ecclesia^, i. This day is there a poison powered forth upon the
Church. But what ever the wealth of the Roman Church was, this one thing is
clear, as touching their authority, That when there was question about
Donatus, who stood an heretic condemned by the Churches of Afrike, Constantine
left him not to be judged by Miltiades Bishop of Rome, but appointed Delegats
Maternus, Rheticus, and Marinus, Bishops of Collen, Optat. cont. Parmen. li. 1.
August. Epist. 162. and 166.
Authun, and Arles, as Optatus and Augustine report: with whom he joined
afterward in commission for the same cause, the said Miltiades. And when
Donatus refused to stand unto their judgment, he assigned him the Council of
Arles (which himself had formerly assembled) to judge of his appeal; and at
last gave sentence upon him, himself in person at Milan: so that the Bishops
of Rome, of Authun, and the rest, were all equal in this commission, without
any color of prioritie. Neither needed Constantine any great entreaty, upon
the difference and Arrius, himself to call the Nicene Council, Theodor. lib.
1. Histor. Eccles. cap. 7.
and there to preside in person, witness Eusebius, Socrates, Theodoret,
Sozomene, Gelasius, and the whole company of Fathers, assembled in that
Council by their Synodall Epistles: which Fathers took upon them to order the
Bishop of Rome, and did order him by special Canon; which Canon, because it is
cauilled, and contradicted by some, deserves more narrowly to be scanned, and
more particularly to be considered.

The sixth Canon therefore of the first Nicene Council, about the year 325,
An. 325.
concerning the ranking and ordering of Bishops every one in his place,
Canones Graec. Council. Nicen. 1. can. 6. 7. (...).
is read in these words, Let the ancient customs be observed, which are in
Egypt, Lybia, and where the Greek word is (...), that is, a thing used by
custom; by which appears, that it was a matter only of custom, not of law,
much less an ordinance or decree of God: Likewise in Antioch and in other
Provinces, let every Church retain her due honor. And in the seventh Canon
is like provision made for the Church of Jerusalem, and the same reason added:
Because such has been the custom, and the ancient tradition, to honor the
Church of Aelia (for so was Jerusalem called, after that Adrian had rebuilt it
in another place) let her also have her honor next after the other, with
reservation always of due honor to the Metropolitan Church. And so is this
Canon Gelasius Cyzicenus in the Acts of this Council taken out of the Vatican:
Gelas. Cyzicen. in Act. Syno. Nice. 1. page 61.
where we may observe, that this Council foundeth them all alike upon custom,
which it calls (...), a manner, wont, or custom, placing the Bishop of Rome
between those of Alexandria and of Antioch, unto whom it assigns their
proper portions, in every respect equal to him of Rome. Of this custom we
read in Epiphanius in express terms: The custom (says he) is such,
Epiphan. her. 68. in princi.
that the Bishop of Alexandria has ecclesiastical cure and charge over all
Egypt, Thebaida, Mareotis, Lybia, Ammonia, Mareotida, and Pentapolis. And
Ruffinus, Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 6.
who lived in the same time with S. Jerome, about 60. years after this
Council, cites the Canons thereof, and among the rest this sixth Canon, to the
effect of the Canon In Alexandria (says he) and in the City of Rome, let the
ancient custom be observed: to wit, that the one should take care of the
Churches of Egypt, and the other suburbicariarum, that is, of the Churches
near unto the City, meaning Rome. And the truth is, that at this time, do he
what he could, he could not extend the limits of his jurisdiction, so far as
unto Milan or Rauenna; whereof there is a type and figure remaining at this day
at Rome, which witnesses as much: wherein the Church of Lateran is expressed
to be a Patriarchall Church, unto which there are seven Bishops assigned to
celebrate before the Pope upon high days, or to assist the Pope, if he pleased
to celebrate himself, Onuphri. de Episcop. titulis and Diacon. Cardinal.
to wit, the Bishops, as says Onuphrius, of the adjoining Cities, namely,
Ostia, Porto, which Ruffin here seems to call Suburbicarias, which yet
perhaps comprised somewhat more, as the countries of Marca and Tuscanie, as we
may collect out of the Theodosian Code. True it is, that Balsamon expounding
the Greek Canon, extends the authority of the Bishop of Rome over all the
West, because that in his time, which was about the year 800, he had stretched
his wings a little farther; Balsamon in Ca. Nice. Synod. cap. 6. and 7.
and Balsamon thought it enough to exempt the East from his authority, not
caring in the mean time what became of our Churches of the West. But this one
thing is evident, that Gratian long since entered this Canon in his collection
of decrees, in the same sense which we allege it, and in more forcible terms
than we do cite them, Distinct. 65. Can. 6. Nichola. in Ep. ad Michael.
Imperator.
Let the old custom continue in Egypt, Lybia, and Pentapolis, since the Bishop
of Rome has the like custom: For to interpret this Canon after Nicholas the
first, who lived five hundred years since that Council, as Gregory the
thirteenth and Bellarmine do, saying, That the Council of Nice knew well
enough, that our Lord had given all to the Church of Rome, and therefore could
have no meaning to order her, but others by her example, were first to make him
judge in his own cause, and secondly to presuppose the thing in question,
which is an apparent fallax. But Bellarmine has yet one crochet farther of his
own brain, he tells us, That in the vulgar copies there are wanting in the
beginning of this Canon, these words, The Church of Rome has ever had the
Primacie, yet let the old custom stand etc. But I Ruffin, Balsamon Patriarch
of Antioch, out of Gratians decrees, canonized by themselves, or out of
Cyzicenus, who took them out of their own Library, and lastly, if not out of
the old Roman Code it self, Codex canonem vetus ecclesiae Roman. edit. Paris.
An. 1609.
where this Canon begins with these words, Antiquae consuetudines seruentur
etc. Let old customs be kept; having this summarie over head, Of privileges
belonging to certain Cities, joining Rome as you see with other cities. What
copy can Bellarmine produce unto us more authentical than these? Council.
Chalced. Can. 16.
Peradventure he will say, the Council of Chalcedon, where it is so read as he
alleges, Action 16. But what if we reply, that the Balsamon never heard
thereof? What will he rejoyne, especially seeing that this Council was held in
the Greek Church? And put case it were not, must we seek the Canons of the
Nicene Council among those of Chalcedon, rather than in the Nicene Council it
self? Moreover, seeing that Bellarmine sticks not to tell us, that it was
Paschasin, Legate of Pope Leo, which proposed it in this manner in the Council
of Chalcedon, what security will he give us, that this Paschasin dealt more
honestly now, than did he, which afterward falsified this very Canon in the
open face of the Council of Carthage? But this is not all: for Bellarmine
himself corrupts Paschasin: for whereas he proposes those words, Quod
ecclesia Romana etc. as Bellarmine alleges them as part of the text and
decision it self, saying, Ecclesia Romana semper habuit Principatum, inuerting
quite the sense and meaning of the Fathers. Moreover, true it is, that
Paschasin alleged those words in manner as we have said; but Bellarmine
concealeth, that when Aetius Archdeacon of Constantinople had delivered the
book of Canons to Constantine, Secretary to the Synod, Constantine read the
said sixth Canon as we now do, beginning with those words, Antiquae
consuetudines seruentur, Can. 3.
and not with those other, Quod ecclesia Romana etc. And the decree of the
Council thereupon followed, Can. 28.
That the Bishop of Constantinople should hold the first place or primacie
after the Bishop of Rome, because she was new Rome. Neither is it the Propter
principalitatem vrbis, (...), not by ordinance from Christ, not by any
authority derived from S. Peter, neither yet by any grant from Constantine,
or act of the Nicene Council, but that it was here so ordered, Propter
primatum vrbis, i. because Rome was the chief city; and so as, that
Constantinople, which had none of these fond claims to make, ijsdem primatibus
honoris, and ijsdem priuilegijs vtatur, should enjoy the same primacie of
honor, and equal privileges, for no other reason but because she was Nona
Roma, new Peter, how could these be made equal with them? And if these be
equal, then is it evident that those other came not from the Gospel, or
prerogative of S. Peter: and why then should these men so abuse the name of the
Gospel? Truth it is, that the morrow after Lucentius the Popes Legate
protested against this decree, requiring it to be retracted, and an Act to be
made of such his Protestation: But his Protestation was rejected by the
Emperors Delegates themselves, who pronounced in this manner, as is there
expressed: The honorable Judges said, what we have pronounced, all the Synod
has approved, namely, touching the Canon against which they protested. So
far was it from Bellarmine would have, Bellarm. de Roman. Pontif. lib. 2.
cap. 13.
That the Fathers of that Council held themselves satisfied with the
remonstrations of Paschasin: and this is the truth and sincerity which they
ever use in alleging Councels. As for his final answer, to which he holds
himself, it is more than ridiculous: The true exposition and meaning of that
Canon (says he) is, that the Bishop of Alexandria should govern those
Provinces, because the Bishop of Rome was so wont to do, that is, was wont
before any definition of the Councels, to suffer the Bishop of Alexandria to
govern them. But let him tell me in conscience, can these words, (...), i.
Quia Romanus Episcopus ita consueuit, alias, Quia Romano Episcopo pardis mos
est, that is, Because this is the manner or custom of the Bishop of Rome; can,
I say, these Ruffinus? Or can Bellarmine but blush at the remembrance of this,
even in his secret chamber? Add we hereunto, that in that celebrious and
renowned Council of Nice, the deputies of the Bishop of Rome presided not, but
contented themselves with the fourth room. So that Cardinal Cusanus having
expounded this sixth Canon as we now do, had reason to say as he does: De
concordant. Cathol. lib. 2. cap. 12.
Hence we may see (says he) how much the Bishop of Rome has at this time
gotten, only by use and custom of subiectionall obedience, beyond that which
the old customs of the Church afforded him.

This then is the naked truth, according to that which we find in Histories,
Baronius would feign disguise, either believing it himself, or willing to put
the gull upon other men, to make them believe, that from the very cradle and
infancy of Christianity there has ever been a Pope, wrapped in such clouts as
now we see him in: and that Constantine, because among others he gave largely
also to the Church of Rome, therefore deuested himself of his imperial robe
and dignity, to clad him withal. And observe by what degrees he comes to
it: First (says he) To the end that the sovereign Bishop of Christian
religion should no longer dwell in a private house, Baron. to. 3. an. 312. art.
80, 81, 82, 83, 84, 85.
he gave unto Miltiades for him and his successors after him one of his
palaces, to wit, that of Lateran in Rome. And whence had Baronius this report?
He is ashamed to allege that Epistle of Isidore the Collector; but We have it
(says he) from an approved Author, Can. 12. q. 1. c. 15. denique.
namely, from Optatus Mileuitanus, who tells us, that Miltiades Bishop of
Rome held the Council of Rome in the house of Fausta in the Lateran: he should
have added, Optat. Mileuit. aduers. Parm. lib. 1.
That he kept the Jubilee there also. But what can he argue or prove out of
these words? That that was the Bishops house? or if it were, that it was given
him by Constantine? We read, that not long after Syluester held another
Council, Intra Thermas Domitianas: was that house therefore his also? or if
that stately palace of Lateran was his before, what needed he now to borrow
another man's? Yet this were a small matter if he stayed there: but taking this
as granted, he wisely groundeth thereupon, and infers, That seeing the
Emperor bestowed his Palace on him, which conjecture of his vanishes like
smoke, so soon as it is denied. Secondly, he tells us, Baron. to. 3. an.
324. art. 78. and sequ.
that Constantine in the 24 year of his reign ordained, That the Bishops of
the Christian law should from that time forward have the same privileges which
the idolatrous Priests had and enjoyed in times past: not seeing, at least not
considering, what prejudice he does to his own cause, whilst he makes it to
appear unto us, that what ever they have of this sort, they have it all from
thence. But yet, what author has he? Baron. an. 311. and an. 315. art. 10.
None, but the Acts of Pope Syluester in Latin, which himself in so many
places vilifieth, as being full of enormous falsities. And yet from this sink
raketh he all those privileges of idol Priests and Pontifes, to settle They
had (says he) as chief among them, Rex Sacrificulus, who in their solemn
feast was wont to watch, and have an eye over all the rest: They had also their
sovereign Pontife, An. 324. art. 79.
Pontifex Maximus, arbitrator of all questions arising about matters divine or
humane among them: And who can think, that Constantine would long endure, that
these should exceed the Christians in pomp and glory? the Christians, I say,
to whom himself was contented to bow his neck? Such are the proofs of this
absolute authority and power of the Bishop of Rome: yet may we learn from him
those proud and pompous obseruances used by the Popes, wherein if he err
somewhat in the times, yet he makes amends for it in the matter. The Idol
Priests (says he) as Tacitus reports, Tacit. lib. 12.
had this privilege, to enter the Capitol in Plutarch. q. 9. and 10. Cic. ad
Attic. lib. 2. ep. 24. Prudent. Him. 10.
so may you see the Pope always carried through the City. Whomsoever they met
(says Plutarch) they never uncovered unto him; no more does the Pope at this
day. They were clad (says Tullie) with scarlet of the deepest dye: so are the
Pope and his Cardinals. To conclude, the High Priest, as Prudentius reports,
at the time of his consecration, had his labels, and his crown of gold. O how
much are we beholding to Baronius, who presents unto us their Pope, attyred
from top to toe, in habit of a Pagan? But to say the truth, the Popes were no
such jollie fellows in those days, neither can any proof be made thereof.
As for the name of High Priest, Pontifex Maximus, it had been no less than
flat treason to have usurped it, seeing that, Histor. lib. 4.
as Zosimus reports, as well Constantine himself, as other Emperors
Gratian, both retained the name, and used the pontifical robes and ornaments,
presented unto them by the Priests at the time of their coronation: Which
Baronius himself elsewhere not only affirms, Baron. to. 3. an. 312. art.
94. and sequ.
but also proves by sundry old inscriptions which he produces, and gives
the reason thereof himself, namely, that therefore the High Priesthood was
joined with the imperial dignity, that the Senate and people of Rome, those
which were yet of the Heathenish faction, might not so easily be drawn to
conspire against the Christian Emperors, as being of a foreine and different
religion. And who can then imagine, that any other durst usurp that name in
Rome, and in their presence? Thirdly, Baronius maintains, That if the Pope
had not perhaps Constantine himself took knowledge of the cause of the
Donatists, received their Appeal, appointed Delegates, and in the end
sentenced and decided the cause himself in person; whereof to doubt, were to
call all History into question. The truth of the History is this: The
Donatists being moved by Anulinus the Proconsull, by order from the Emperor, to
reconcile themselves to Caecilian Bishop of Carthage, had thereupon Optatus
says, That the Emperor hereupon grew very wroth, and said, You crave
judgment of me in my secular Courts, Optat. Mileui. cont. Parm. lib. 1.
which am my self to attend my doom from the hands of Christ: as being justly
incensed with the brawles and wranglings of these Bishops, who in Christian
duty should have fallen to an accord, without an vmpire. And yet as Optatus
says, at their suit Judges were appointed, namely, Maternus Bishop of Cullen,
Rheticus of Authun, and Marinus of Arles. Here Baronius tells us, Baron. to.
3. an. 313.
That Constantine was as yet a ^^^ce in the Faith, not skilled in the courses
and proceedings of the Church; but that afterward (says he) the Emperor
testifies by that Epistle which he wrote unto him thereupon: by which letter,
at the solicitation of Anulinus, he joined him in commission with those other
three, for the hearing and determining of that cause in the Synod. Seeing
therefore that he groundeth the reformation of the Emperors judgment upon
this Epistle, it shall not be amiss to examine the contents thereof; First the
title of it is this: (...). Eusebius. lib. 10. cap. 5.
A copy of the Emperor Constantine his letter, by which he commands to
call a Synod at Rome, for the unity and concord of the Churches; The
superscription, this: (...), i. To Miltiades Bishop of Rome, and to Marcus.
Where Baronius, impatient to see a companion (...).
But grant we that it is so, what does I pray you (...) signify in all
ancient Writers, and even in Dionysius himself, whom they falsely surname the
Areopagite, but only a Bishop, that is, a man having charge and oversight of
divine Service? But to the purpose: it is far more likely, if we will stand
upon conjectures, that that word Marcus was written short, to stand for
Maternus or Marinus, with an abbreuiation in the end, in this manner, Materno
or Marino etc. a thing usual in those Patents, which they called Formatas or
Sacras, when they were directed to many at once; of whom, in the
exemplifications, they named only some few of the i. and to the rest: And such
might that copy of Eusebius be. But what says the Patent it self? (...) (a
word usual in their solemn decrees) that is, It has seemed good unto me,
that Caecilian, with ten other Bishops, should repair to Rome, there to have
hearing before you, and before Rheticus, Maternus and Marinus your Colleagues,
whom I have commanded to hasten thither for this purpose (according to that of
S. Augustine, where he says, August. in breu. Collat.
That then and th^^e were read the letters of the Emperor before them, by
which he enjoined them to hear the cause of Caecilian:) Also, I have caused to
be delivered into their hands the copies sent unto me by Anulinus the
Proconsall, (...).
to the end that your Gravity (a great inciuilitie of the Emperor, not to say
your Holiness) may the better advise of some And now let the reader judge,
where the authority then rested, and what omnipotency the Pope then had. But
so eagre are they in this matter, that of a simple voice and suffrage of the
Pope they will needs make a definitive sentence: By the sentence of Miltiades
(says Baronius) this cause was ended and controversy decided: Baron. an. eod.
art. 26.
having no color for his assertion, but only this that Miltiades spoke last;
whereas the Author speaks only in this manner: Caecilian was pronounced
innocent by all the above named Bishops, and by the sentence of Miltiades
himself, with which the judgment was concluded; and reason good: for he
presided, as was fit he should, being Bishop of Rome, in a Synod held at Rome:
Yet would not the Donatists here Optat. cont. Parmen. lib. 1.
and Optatus thereupon says, That Donatus thought fit to appeal from the
Bishops (he says not from Miltiades, or from the Bishop of Rome) and that
Constantine grew highly offended with this course, and cried out, O the
boldness of these mad fellows! they have entered their appeal as the Gentiles
use to do in their suites at law: so distasteful and unpleasing to him was
this bangling of the Clergy. Yet for all this (though Baronius should burst
for anger) the Emperor in the end admitted of their appeal, and gave order
that a Council should be called at Arles, for the oyer and terminer of this
cause, writing to sundry Bishops and Metropolitanes, to be present at it: And
we find in Eusebius a copy of his Letters Patents, directed to Chrestus Bishop
of Syracuse; the title whereof is, as of that other to Miltiades: by which he
commands a Council to be called etc. and the tenor as follows; Eusebius.
lib. 10. cap. 5. edit. Lat.
Having declared the first judgment which was given in this cause, by express
order from himself, by certain Bishops of France and Afrike, the Bishop of
Rome also being there present (he says not President) in the end, We (says
he) have commanded certain Bishops to assemble in Synod upon such a day at
Arles; giving him likewise straightly in charge to be there in person, to the end
(says he) that (...), i. by thy Gravity (which quality and no other he used
before unto Miltiades) and by the wisdom of the rest this controversy may be
composed. Episto. Constant. ad Abla. ab ipso Baron. citat. ex Biblioth. Pet.
Pyth. August. ep. 68. August. cont. Parmen. lib. 1. cap. 5.
To which purpose also he wrote unto Ablauius, Grand Master of the household,
willing him to follow this business, and ever with these terms, Preceperam
and the like. So that S. Augustine speaks very properly when he says,
Alterum Episcopale iudicium dedit habendum etc. that is, He appointed another
hearing of this cause, to be had by the Bishops at Arles, leaving it a clear
case, to whom it appertained of right to call a Council. And this Emperor
caused at length (as S. Augustine reports) two hundred Bishops out of France,
Italy, and Spain to assemble at Arles; himself also was there present,
Baron. an. 314. art. 53.
he presided, and in the end gave sentence himself in favor of the
Catholics: whereupon Baronius cites that unto us which we find in Eusebius
his first book; Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 1. cap. 37, 38.
namely, that Constantine taking a particular care of the Churches of God, by
reason of sundry dissentions which he saw daily to arise between (...), i.
assembled Synods of the Ministers; and consequently, did that which the Pope
now claims as properly belonging to himself. Well (says Baronius) yet at
least this appears, That the Fathers of this Council wrote their Synodall
Epistle to the Bishop of Rome, entreating him thereby to ratify and confirm
their Acts: and thence infers, that the custom and manner of the Church at
that time was, whenever any decrees of Councels were agreed upon and
enacted, to send them first to the Bishop of Rome, as not to be published
without his approbation first had and obtained thereunto: Let us therefore
briefly examine this Epistle also, whether according as we find it in the
Councels, Baron. an. 314. art. 67, 68, 69.
Pytheus. The title it self in the first is worth the noting, Domino and
fanctissimo fratri Syluestro Episcopo, i. To our most holy brother Syluester
Bishop: The exordium follows in this manner: The things which we have with
one consent decreed, we here make known charitati tuae, to your charity, to
the end that all may know what they ought to do hereafter. Now, this word
Decree imports no suspension of authority in them, nor yet implies, that
they were to learn of him, but rather that the Pope, as well as all others,
should learn of them; neither does that other copy much differ in sense:
Communi copula say they, knit together in one, and united, by that common bond
of love and charity, and met together in this city of Arles, by the good
pleasure of the most godly Emperor, greet thee most religious Father with all
due reverence. Religiosissime Papa.
Would God, beloved brother, you had been present with us at the hearing of
this cause; so should a more severe decree have passed against the Donatists,
and we all, finding your judgment to concur with ours, should have had the
greater joy. And coming a little after to signify unto him what had passed in
the Council: It seemed good unto us, say they, the holy Ghost and the Angels
being present with us, etc. I would know whether this be to crave confirmation,
or to fetch the holy Ghost from Rome in a budget? or is it not rather to
determine of the cause absolutely without the Pope? And Placuit, etc. It seemed
good to us, say they, because you hold the greater Diocese, (therefore not
all, as if all the world were but one Diocese, and that subject to his
jurisdiction) to make known unto all men what we have done, and principally by
you. And who sees not, that to make known is one thing, and to crave
confirmation is another? To conclude, the Donatists finding themselves to have
the worse, appeal to Constantine in person, who, though all weary of their
contentions and debates, yet assigned the parties a day to appear before him
at Milan, and there confirmed he by his decree all the former sentences given
against them; witness Saint Augustine in many places: The Emperor, says he,
being constrained to judge this cause after the Bishops, caused the parties to
appear before him, and with all care, August. Epist. 168.
diligence, Cecilian innocent, and his adversaries a company of ungodly
persons. And again, Post Episcopalia Iudicia, says he, i. After the
judgments of the Bishops, etc. (meaning as well that at Rome, as that at
Arles) what King or Emperor in these our days, attempting to do the like,
should not be excommunicated, and cut off from the Church? yet Syluester at
that time never grudged or repined at it. And thus they still abuse the world.

Fourthly he alleges the case of Arrius: let us see therefore whether his
success be like to prove better in this than in the former. Arrius therefore
having disgorged his poison in Alexandria, and afterward by his ballad-like
letters (...). Ep^phan. Haer. 69.
Alexander Bishop of Alexandria opposed himself against him, and sent likewise
his Epistles general into all parts, to the number of seventy, as Epiphanius
reports. Here Baronius, without any authority or reason, grows very
peremptory: It is apparent, says he, that Alexander, before all others, wrote
first concerning this matter to Syluester Bishop of the first See. But why
should we take his bare word for proof? Proof enough, Baron. an. 318. art.
59. Epist. Liber. to. 9 Biblioth. Socrat. lib. 1. c. 3.
says Baronius; for have we not a certain Epistle of Liberius, wherein it is
thus written, We have even at this day the letters of Alexander unto Syluester?
And what of that? for have not we likewise even at this day another of his
Epistles general in Socrates, with this inscription: To our most honored
fellow Ministers throughout the Church And have not we another of the same in
Theodoret, written in particular to the B. of Constantinople? Were we disposed
to take such advantage, what might not we conclude out of this? But we say
farther, That Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, without attending any advise from
Rome, Ibidem.
excommunicated Arrius, and cut him off from the Church; as appears by his
own letters: and moreover, published an orthodoxall confession, for an
antidote against the poison of his doctrine, and raised both East and West
against him: in all which we hear no news of Syluester. Here again Baronius
runs to his likelihoods: Baron. an. 318. art. 88.89.
All other Bishops of the East, says he, rising as it were in arms to join
with Alexander, Haud par est credere, we may not think that Syluester Bishop
of Rome stood all the while idle: And has Baronius indeed no better proofs
than these? Eusebius. de vita constantin. l. 2. c. 63. Socrat. l. 1. c. 4. Sozom.
l. 1. c. 15.
Yes, says he, for Syluester sent Hosius Bishop of Corduba, his Legate, into
Egypt. This, I confess, is somewhat to the purpose, if it were true: True it
is, that the Emperor, to quench that fire, dispatched his letters both to
Alexander and Arrius, by Hosius, a man of note, and one whom the Emperor
honored very highly. Eusebius. de vita Constant. l. 2. c. 63.
And Eusebius speaking of the same man, says, That he was one much honored
among good men, for his virtue, and whom the Emperor had near about him. And
the title of that chapter in Eusebius, is, Legatum de Pace componenda mittit:
i. He sends a Legate or Ambassador to Theodor. l. 1. c. 7.
Theodoret has the like, and withal a copy of that letter, wherein the
Emperor admonishes them to handle such questions with discretion, reverence,
and good agreement. As for Syluester, or what he did herein, there is not in
all these either word or syllable to be found. And must Baronius his conjecture
go for current, That sure it was so, but that Eusebius would not report it?
But to proceed: This fire beginning now to flame out, it was thought fit to
assemble that first general Council in the city of Nice: But who then called
it? or by whose authority and command was it assembled? All histories agree
in one: Eusebius. de vita Constant. Edit. Lat. c. 6. l. 3.
Eusebius says, The Emperor Constantine assembled the general Council of
Nice, calling thither the Bishops out of all parts: and he calls this
dispatch a precept, or command: and in the title it is said, Theodoret. l. 1.
c. 7. Sozom. l. 1. c. 16.
That he enjoined. And Theodoret, The Emperor, says he, not able to compose
matters in Alexandria, (...), assembled that great Council. And Sozomen uses
the word (...), i. he called them together. Also the Synod it self writing to
the Churches, Acta Council. Nicaen. vol. 1.
We, say they, here assembled, by the grace of God, and favor of Constantine
our Prince, beloved of God, etc. And likewise writing to the Churches of
Egypt, they use these words, By the grace of God, and commandment of the
Emperor. Socrat. l. 1. c. 5. Gelaz. Cyzicen. l. 1.
Likewise Socrates and Cyzicenus use the word (...), i. he gathered, or
assembled them together; as Eusebius had done before them: Neither is there any
Father or Historian of the Church, which speaks in Baron. an. 324. art. 131.
to. 3. Council. Romans 2. c. 1.
And all this done by Constantine, after the time that Baronius acknowledges
him to have been a good and a perfect Christian, and withal most forward to
advance the Church, to wit, after his baptism, and a whole year after that
supposed donation of his. What now will he say to this, seeing the whole Church
has ever held this for a most holy and lawful Council? back again to his
old ward, and to his conjectures: The Council of Rome, says he, was held one
year before, under Syluester, ad Traiani Thermas: (and why not at Lateran, if
that had been his own palace, as he said before) Constantine and Helena his
mother were there present. (But will this Cardinal stand to this Council,
where the Priests of Rome, now called Cardinals, stood behind the place where
the Bishops Baron. an. 324.
) But to the matter: Who dares to doubt, says he, but that Syluester and
Constantine, at this Council concluded, to call that other afterward at Nice?
And we ask again, Who dares to affirm it, seeing there is no such thing
mentioned in the Council, nor the Arrians there so much as named? A silly
guess as ever was. But if Baronius will needs stand to ghesses, why may not
we do the like, and say, Who doubts but that it was there accorded, that
Constantine himself should call it, seeing that indeed he did call it, as all
histories record, and that without contradiction of any, for aught that yet
appears to the contrary? Yet is Baronius ashamed to build hereupon, as upon
an undoubted verity: Baron. an. 325. art. 13. and sequent.
And if all fail, at least, says he, this is sure, that Hosius presided there
as Legate of the Bishop of Rome. Let us therefore see if he prove his embassage
here any better than he did that other at Alexandria before mentioned. Eusebius.
de vita Constant. lib. 3. Edi^. Lat. c. 7. Ib. c. 11.
Eusebius in the life of Constantine speaks in this manner: He which presided
over the Imperial city (meaning the Bishop of Rome) was not in this
assembly, by reason of his age; but his Priests there present supplied his
room: Now Victor and Vincentius are named for such, in the acts of the
Council; but of Hosius, who should least of all have been forgotten, there is
no mention made to any such effect. Why then, says he, Athanas. Apoleget. 1.
did Hosius first subscribe before all the rest? I answer, Because he was
principally employed by the Emperor Victor and Vincentius wrote in this manner,
We have subscribed for the reverend Syluester our Pope and Bishop; Acta Council.
Nicaen.
why did not Hosius the like, if he were also his Legate? Why subscribed he in
his own name, I Hosius Bishop of Corduba, of the Province of Spain, do so
believe: for so we find it even in the old Roman Code it self. Baronius
replieth out of the title of a certain Epistle, written, as he says, from the
Council unto Syluester by his Legates; Baron. an. 325. art. 2.
which is nothing else, but to presuppose the thing in question: the title
therefore is this, To Syluester the most blessed Pope of old Rome, Hosius
Bishop of Corduba, a Province in Spain, and Macarius Bishop of Constantinople,
and Victor and Vincentius Priests of Rome, appointed or ordained by your
direction. Not to say that this Epistle with that which follows, are both
noted in the very acts of this Council to be of little credit, I ask only,
Whether he will have Macarius also to be one of the Popes Legates? and whether
that word Direction ought not to be restrained to Victor and Vincentius, as
Eusebius would have it? But the truth is, Baron. an. 325. art. 54.
that Baronius when he alleges this title, leaves out Macarius, to blind his
reader, and to save himself from this absurdity. Last of all, if Hosius had
been his Legate, should not he also have opened the Council? which yet he did
not: The Bishop, Theodor. l. 1. c. 7.
says Eusebius, which sat uppermost upon the right hand, standing up, made a
short speech to the Emperor, and rehearsed a certain hymn, to give thanks
to Almighty God: and Eustathius Bishop of Antioch, because the Bishop of
Alexandria stood now as a party against Arrius.

Fifthly, Baronius grows very choleric, to see the Bishop of Rome ordered
by the sixth Canon of this Council, as the other Bishops of Alexandria,
Antioch, and Jerusalem were; he says, That these Canons are mangled, and must
be corrected by those of Chalcedon: And if they were so, yet might Baronius put
all that he should gain thereby in his eye, and do himself no harm, as we
have already showed against Bellarmine. Ruffinus, of all the rest, sticks
most in his stomach, for bounding the Popes jurisdiction, with these words,
Ruffin. l. 1. c. 6.
Suburbicariarum Ecclesiarum curam gerat: i. That he should take care of the
Churches near about Baronius tells us, that Regiones Suburbicariae, and
Vrbicariae, Baron. an. 324. art. 54.
in the Imperial laws of those times, were all one: And that Regiones
Vrbicariae comprised, besides Italy, the isle of Sicilie, Afrike, Egypt, and
many other countries: Forgetting in his choler, that the very Canon it self
now in question, assigns Egypt to the Bishop of Alexandria, and consequently
not to him of Rome. Author for this assertion he has none, nor reason, more
than this, Lib. 14. Cod. Theodos. l. 6. tit. de Canon. frumentar. vrbis Roma.
that these Provinces were called Vrbicariae, which we deny not: and the
reason may be, because they yielded a yearly reuenew of corn, Vrbi, to the
city of Rome, according to the rate set down in the Code of Theodosius. But
grant we, that Regiones Suburbicariae, and Vrbicariae, were all one, what
gets he? for Constantine in the third law de Annona and Tributo, shows
plainly, that by Regiones Suburbicariae, were meant only those which lay
within Italy, and were near adjoining unto Rome; where he speaks in this
manner: Anatolius, late Consul, certified us, that he has taken away the
frauds of the Tabulariorum Lib. 8. de Annon. and Tribut. l. 3. and 11. in Cod.
Theodos.
Collectors per suburbicarias Regiones. Which course, says he, we command
also to be held throughout all the other Regions of Italy: so that the more
remote regions of Italy it self, are not comprised under this name of
Suburbicariae Regiones, but command given, that these should be ordered after
their example. So likewise would Baronius feign comprise Sicilie and Afrike
under the appellation of Vrbicariae Regiones. Lib. 11. de Extraord. and sord.
muner.
But the words of Constantine and Constantius, in the same Code, give him the
lie; where it is said, That lands of inheritance and The reason follows: For
not only in Italy, but also, in vrbicarijs Regionibus, and in Sicilie, lands
of inheritance, and lands held in fee farm, must be rated according to their
abilities. Whereby it appears, that Italy was to be eased after the example
of Afrike, and both Italy and Afrike, and Sicilie it self, distinguished from
those which were properly called Vrbicariae Regiones. So likewise in that law
of Gratian, Valentinian, and Theodosius, it is said by the Emperors unto
Probus Grand Master of the household, in this manner; Let thy sincerity and
uprightness observe an equality throughout Italy, Tit. Si per obreptione^ l.
vnic. Cod. Theodos.
as likewise in the Regions of Afrike, and those which are called Vrbicariae,
and throughout all Illyria: Suburb cities were; that law of Gratian and
Theodosius teaches us: L. 1. de Indulgent. debit. in Cod. Theodos.
We command, say they, that Picenum and Thuscia, now called La Marca d'Ancona,
and Tuscanie (and yet not all Tuscanie neither) being the suburb Regions,
shall bear the seventh part of the tribute: not comprising therein so much as
Campania (now a parcel of the kingdom of Naples) nor other Regions of like
distance. And now let Baronius cast up his reckonings, and see what he has
gotten by quarelling that place of Ruffinus. But be this what he will, can he
deny that the Bishop of Rome was here ordered and confined as well as the
rest? As for that Canon which he would put upon us, Art. 57. and sequent.
That from all Churches a man might besides that there is no history that
reports it, no not Gelasius Cyzicenus himself, I would ask, Whether this
sixth Canon be not utterly repugnant thereunto? And farther let him say, when
men were long after this time sent of purpose to search the Archiues of the
Churches of Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antioch, to decide the controversy
between the Churches of Carthage and of Rome, whether there were any such
Canon there found? or can he produce any one appeal made to Rome in all that
time? As for that goodly Canon of the Council of Rome, which he would thrust
upon us, in these words; The first See let no man judge, Baron. to 3. an. 324.
art. 130.
because all other Sees seek for equity at her hands, as of the chief:
neither may the Judge be judged by any Clergy, Emperor, or King, or people
who is so ill advised as to believe them in their own cause? or who sees not
that this is a mere trick and g^llerie put upon the reader? For what kings
could they mean? if Pagans, what can be more ridiculous? if Christians, where
were any in those days? and consequently, what more vain? moreover, do we
not see the contrary practiced in the Nicene Council, immediately ensuing? And
why is he not then ashamed to cosen the world with a false coin, so
apparently discovered, and bored thorough by all Historians and writers? It is
said in the acts of that Synod, That there were 139 Bishops, ex vrbe Roma, aut
non out of the city of Rome, or not far from thence: What, were there more
Bishops than one at Rome? and where, I pray you, should a man find so many
Bishops so near to Rome? It is also there said, That Helena the mother of
Constantine was there, and subscribed to the acts. And what, had they so soon
forgotten the saying of the Apostle, That it is not permitted to a woman to
speak in the Church? Constantine also is there called Domnus, which is merely
Gothish, and joined in Consulship with Priscus, which was never heard of. He
should not for shame have alleged this Synod, seeing that the very
barbarousnesse of the style is enough to convince it of open forgerie. Last of
all he says, That the Fathers of the Nicene Council wrote to Syluester, to
crave his confirmation of their Syluester, and not remembering how often himself
in other places has condemned them as false and counterfeit. The truth is
this, that upon any question arising about religion, the Fathers assembled in
Council were wont to send their Synodal Epistle throughout all parts of
Christendom, Ruffin. l. 1. c. 13.
and some particulars among them to write their private letters to some chief
and principal Bishops of other countries, to acquaint them with the tenor of
their acts, and to request them, (...), i. to give their suffrage and
approbation thereunto: (...).
So also were they wont to address another Epistle to the Emperor, to entreat
him to confirm and ratify their acts, and to cause them to be received: of
both which sorts we have examples in this very Constantine, who was present at
this Council; which Epistle we have in Eusebius, Socrates, Gelasius,
Theodoret, Eusebius. de vita Constant. lib. 13. Socrat. lib. 1.
and others: whereby he ordained, That Easter day should be kept upon the day
which they appointed; and that the books of Arrius should be burnt in all
places. Which decree was published only to authorize, and to put in execution
the Canons agreed upon and enacted in the Council. And those patents of the
Emperor were directed sometimes to the Bishops and people, and sometimes to
the Syluesters hands, there is no mention at all made therein. And farther,
that Epistle which we have in the first tome of the Councels, besides that it
is most foolishly written, is not Synodical, but written, as it is expressed in
the title, by Hosius Bishop of Corduba, Macarius of Constantinople, Vitus and
Vincentius Priests of Rome: whereas the Synodals carried always the title Of
the Sacred Council, and withal, the names of some of the most famous Bishops;
and to what purpose the name of Macarius Bishop of Constantinople, which was at
that time scarce built? Neither does it mend the matter, that Baronius in stead
of Constantinople reads Jerusalem: Baron. an. 325. art. 171.
for why then should Hosias subscribe before him, contrary to the order
established in the Council? Victor and Vincentius, Lieutenants at that time
for the Bishop of Rome? and lastly, why was not Eustathius Bishop of Antioch
first named? As for the confirmation it self of Syluester, Baronius
acknowledges that whole Epistle to be forged, and proves the falsitie thereof
by the date. Neither is there any greater reckoning to be made of the
testimony of Pope Felix, as being a witness in his own cause, and living one
hundred and sixty years after this Council; and either abused himself or
abusing others with that said counterfeit Epistle. Eusebius. lib. 4. de vita
Constant. c. 41.
Now there were sundry national Synods held shortly after under the same
Constantine, for the confirmation of that first Nicene Council; as that of
Tire in the year 334, at Jerusalem An. 335, at Constantinople An. 336:
Baronius quarrels us concerning the issues of them, and of their confirmation.
But what can he say for the calling and assembling of them? or can he show that
either Syluester or Marcus complained, that the Emperor had done them wrong as
encroaching upon their liberties, and meddling with that which appertained not
unto him.

5. PROGRESSION.
1 That Marcus Bishop of Rome called himself the Universal Bishop.

2 That Julius Bishop of Rome offered to restore certain Bishops deposed by
their Metropolitans.

3 Of the Canon of the Council of Sardica, by which Bishops wrongfully deposed
might fly to Julius Bishop of Rome.

An. 337.
1 ABout the year 337, we have in the first book of the Councels an Epistle of
Marcus Bishop of Rome, successor unto Syluester, written to Athanasius, and to
the other Bishops of Egypt; wherein, notwithstanding what has been already
said, he takes upon him the name and title of Universal Bishop. Surely we may
well imagine, that this Epistle is of the same stamp with the rest. There he
furnishes his cause with all the arguments which he can devise: The Peter,
ever so to endure. And again, The Lord in the Gospel spoke unto the Prince of
his Apostles, saying, I have prayed for thee that thy faith should not fail.

Socrat. l. 2. c. 11. Edit. Lat. Sozom. l. 3. c. 7.
2 After which time, we find in Socrates and Sozomene, that Julius, successor
unto Marcus, took upon him by absolute authority to restore sundry Bishops
of the Eastern Churches, deposed for diverse causes by their Synods; Because,
says he, the care of all the Churches belonged to him, by reason of his See,
therefore he wrote to the Bishops of the East, telling them that they had done
very ill to determine and conclude any thing against those Bishops without his
priuitie: Where it is to be noted, without his priuitie, are added in the
Latin translation, there being none such to be found in the original it
self. And farther says he, Julius commanded them to send some of their
companions to appear before him upon a day appointed, Epist. Marci in 1. tomo
Council.
to give a reason, and to justify their proceedings against them. And if this
Epistle be all one with that which we find in the first to me of the Councels,
with this title, In the behalf of Athanasius, and concerning certain excesses
against the Church of Rome; then would he farther persuade them therein, that
the Fathers of the Nicene Council decreed, That no Bishop might be judged but
by his See, no Synod called but by his authority: and thence proceeds to
sharp reproves, and reproachful speeches, concluding at last, That whosoever
shall attempt irreuocably damned, and for ever deposed from his charge: And
farther, That whosoever shall be deposed without his authority, he will
maintain him in his place: and adds this reason; For that ever since the
times of the Apostles, and lately by the decree of the Nicene Council (as much
the one as the other) all greater causes have ever been reserved to the
hearing and final determining of his See.

An. 347.
3 So likewise in the year 347, in the Council of Sardica, at the motion of
Hosius, there was a decree which passed to this purpose, That Bishops deposed
by Julius Bishop of Rome: (...).
which his successors since that time, from a particular case, have extended to
all sorts of causes, and from the person of Julius to all succeeding Popes: and
we now come to examine what Oppositions were made against these attempts.

OPPOSITION.
First therefore as touching the Epistle of Marc, Athanas. in Orat. Vnum esse
Christum, col. 104.
Athanasius himself might well have answered him, as he sometime spoke in a
treatise of his: Thou art Peter, and upon this stone will I build my Church:
This is a faithful saying, and varieth not: The And if perhaps Marc would have
gone to restrain this answer to himself and to his See, Athanasius might
have replied, that though indeed he defended him, yet his successor Liberius
did openly condemn him, namely, when he wrote unto the Bishops of the East in
this manner: Epist. Liberij ad Oriental. apud Hilar. in fragment.
I cast off Athanasius from our Communion, not daining so much as to receive
his letters: I maintain peace with you, embracing the confession of the
Syrmian Council: which is all one in effect, as if he had in express words
renounced the Council of Nice. Wherefore S. Hilarie, who lived at that time,
cried out, Ibid.
This is an Arrian treachery: Anathema to thee O Liberius, and to all thy
companions; Athanas. in epist. ad solitar. vitam agentes, col. 470. Hiero. in
Catal. in Fortunatian. Bellar. de Romans Pontif. li. 4. c. 9.
Anathema again and again unto thee, thou false hearted double dealing
Liberius. And this is that accursed Athanasius also and Jerome give of him. And
Bellarmine himself acknowledges as much, by reason of certain letters which
he wrote to Constantius the Emperor, and others; all which were found in the
Popes Library.

Now therefore let us see what answer the Bishops of the East made to those
letters of Pope Julius: They took (says Socrates) his reproves in scorn,
Socrat. lib. 2. c. 11. edit. lat. Greca, cap. 13.
and calling a Synod at Antioch, by common advise and consent they returned his
imputations back upon himself with all bitterness, telling him, That he was
no more to control them, if they thought fit to deprive any man in their
Churches, than they intermedled, at what time Nouatus was cast out of the
Church at Rome. Sozomene adds, Sozom. edit. lat. l. 3. c. 7. Graec. c. 8.
That their answer (says he) they attributed indeed very much to the Church
of Rome, as the mother City, and schole of piety and of religion (though so
it were, that their first instructors in Christian religion came unto them out
of the East) yet for all this disdained they to be reckoned their inferiors, as
they who made it not their glory to excel in pomp and riches, but in virtue,
piety, Socrat. l. 2. edit. lat. c. 13. Graec. c. 17.
and Christian resolution etc. offering peace and communion unto Julius, but
still upon condition, that he should put out of his protection those Bishops of
theirs which were fled unto him. This answer (says Socrates) much offended
Julius: and it seems that it wrought upon him; for in his next letter he
complains only, That they called him not to their Synod; whereas before he
pretended, that they might not call a Council (...).
That the Canon of the Church forbad to impose any Law upon the Churches
without the advice of the Bishop of Rome; whereas before he pretended a right,
absolutely to dispose of all: which was the thing which moved them to reply,
that they would not be ordered nor concluded by him. (...).
By which it appears, that that answer of Julius to the Eastern Bishops,
which we find in the Councels, is merely counterfeit, seeing he is there made
to speak worse than in the former, even to allege, That in the Council of
Nice there is a Canon, which forbids to call a Council, or to condemn any
man, without the advice of the Bishop of Rome, though there be there no such
word to be found; witness the Gloss upon that very Epistle, where he
confesses, that there is no such thing aperte, sed reducibiliter, i. not in
plain terms, but only by collection. And thus we see, how under color of
protecting Athanasius, the Pope made way to his own ambition.

Neither is Baronius his cause any jot furthered and advanced all this while:
He brought in Syluester, who, good man as he was, never dreamt of any such gay
clothes, attyred like an Emperor, as we saw before; and now he tells us,
that his successor Marcus began first to give the Pall to other Bishops:
Pallium.
We read (says he) in the life of Marcus, Baron. an. 336. art. 62. to. 3.
that he ordained, that the Bishop of Ostia, whose office it was to consecrate
the Bishop of Rome, should at the time of consecration use a Pall: whereupon
(says he) non inficias imus, we deny not that he gave him the Pall. Had
Baronius Isidore Pelusiota, Baron. an. 216. vol. 2. art. 15. and 16. Isidor.
Pelusio. l. 1. ep. 136.
a scholar of Chrysostomes, it makes clean against him: for it is there said,
that (...), which Baronius Pallium, was worn by every Bishop in time of
celebration, and consequently no privilege of Metropolitanes, or prerogative
of certain Bishops; much less a present to be received, or a commodity to be
bought for ready money at the Bishop of Rome his warehouse: (...).
his words are these, The garment which the Bishop wears upon his shoulders,
made of wool and not of linen, signifies unto us the skin of the lost
sheep, which the Lord sought, and having found him, laid him upon his
shoulders: For the Bishop, bearing a type and figure of Christ, must also
perform his office: So far is he from deriuing it from the High Priests of
the Jews, to appropriat it to the Pope, and to such as he for a favor is
pleased to impart it.

We have already showed what maine opposition was made against the attempts of
Pope Julius, yet does Baronius upon that attempt only, without effect, ground
an absolute and sovereign power of the Bishops of Rome in general: He called
(says he) a Council at Rome, Baron. an. 340. art. 1. and sequ.
requested thereunto by the Arrians themselves, who being cast out of the East,
hoped to find relief and succor in the West: For answer we say, that this was
no General, but a National Council, such as every Metropolitan might, and
the Bishops of Alexandria, Antioch, Jerusalem, and Constantinople often did
call in their several dioces; such as did Athanasius himself in this very
cause of Arrius: Athanas. Apologes. 2.
But this we affirm, that no one of the general Councels was ever called by
other than the Emperor himself, though at the request Constantine, we never
read of any General Council, and but of few National; Julian could any
Council be assembled, how great soever the necessity of the Church at that
time was; and yet the Bishops of Rome were at that time grown to some jolitie,
and began to look somewhat big upon the matter, and to affect a soueraignetie
over the Church of God: But be it Julius assembled a Synod at Rome, at the
request as well of Athanasius as of the Eusebians, his Antagonists: what then?
Was it to judge of the difference between them by way of Appeal, or was it
rather to compose matters between them as an indifferent friend? The very
words of Athanasius are these: The Eusebians (says he) write unto Julius, and
thinking to affray us, request where the Latin Interpreter renders it
Arbitrator, and Baronius uses the same word. Now I would know whether men use
to speak in this manner, of a sovereign Judge: And indeed the Eusebians
seeing Athanasius come to Rome, drew back, and made Athanasius wait there a
whole year and a half, until in the end, upon their non appearance, Julius
examined the cause of Athanasius, and finding him innocent, received him to the
Communion of the Church. Neither did Julius himself in the carriage of this
business use any of this absolute, or as they term it, of this coactiue
power; neither did his proceedings any whit at all savor either of the
pretended authority of a Pope, or of the lawful power of a general Council;
his words Though (says he) I have written alone, yet is not this my opinion
only, but of all the Italians, and Bishops hereabout. Whereby it appears,
that this was no general Council, but only a Synod within Italy; and
therefore has Baronius no color to conclude from hence, a Power in the Pope
to call general Councels. Moreover, in his letters to the Eastern Churches he
pretends nothing but love unto them: He that wrote unto you out of love
(says he) should have been answered again in love. But a little after, when
he attempted to restore the Bishops, whom they had deposed, they presently
assembled in Synod at Antioch; where, being there present a far greater
number of Orthodox Fathers, than of Arrians, as Baronius himself confesses,
by common voice and consent they reproved Baronius, as his manner is, begins
to juggle with us, Baron. to. 3. an. 341. art. 56.
and to dazzle our eyes, by telling us, that this Epistle was written by the
Eusebians; when as yet it appears to have been written and sent by the
general consent of all; this being no point of faith and doctrine to distract
them, but only of Church government. Socrates speaking of this Epistle,
Socrat. l. 2. c. 11.
They wrote (says he) all by common consent. Now of ninety Bishops there
assembled, there were not in all above thirty six Eusebians or Arrians, and
they not willing to acknowledge that name neither. So likewise speaks Sozomen
of this Epistle; Sozom. l. 3. c. 7.
the points whereof what they are, already has been declared. But what says
Julius to all this? does Peter, or of the Nicene Council, they ought to
appeal to Rome? no such matter; his words are only these, The Fathers of Nice
ordained, and that not without the counsel of God, that the Acts of one
Council should be examined in another: whereby there appears no greater
power given to the Bishop of Rome over Alexandria, than to the Bishop of
Alexandria over Rome. As for the grieuance whereof he complains, it is only
this, that contrary to the custom, they had not written first of all unto
him, concerning the difference fallen out in Alexandria, to have his advice for
the composing thereof, as being Bishop of the first See: as also, that many
Synods had been held in the East, concerning points of faith and doctrine,
without giving (...).
contrary to the Rule and Canon of the Church; wherein is contained, that none
might impose any law upon the Churches, without the advice of the Bishop of
Rome: which was but reason, considering the place he held. But it follows not
therefore, either that he alone might make Canons, or that they, his advice
once heard, might not otherwise determine, if they saw cause. As for those
Epistles of Julius, which we find inserted in the body of the Councels, they
speak in a higher strain: nothing there, but of Appeals to the Sea of Rome,
and of reseruations of all greater causes; all founded upon Scriptures,
Traditions, and the Council of Nice; in all which no one word is to be found,
tending to that purpose: But the very date of Felicianus and Maximianus
Consuls, gives Onuphrius himself; and, which is the greater wonder, Baronius
himself, our grand Annalist, is ashamed of them.

Now come we to examine that famous Council of Sardica; which as Baronius and
his fellows think (and not without some color and show of reason) much
aduanceth the cause of the Bishop of Rome: Baron. to. 3. an. 346. art. 5.
To begin therefore, first I ask, who called it? That Julius Bishop of Rome
(says Baronius) was the first Author thereof, appears partly by that which
has been already spoken, and partly by Sozomene, who seems plainly to
insinuate as much. But what is this to the purpose? The question is, Who called
it; and he for answer tells us, That the Bishop of Sozomene seem to
insinuate as much? Sozom. l. 3. c. 10.
his words are these: It seemed good in the minds of the Emperors, that the
Bishops of either part should at a day appointed meet at Sardica, a City in
Illyria, now called Triadizza. These are the words of solemnity, and absolute
authority of the Emperors. And Socrates speaking of the same Council says,
Socrat. l. 2. c. 16. and Graec. edit. c. 20.
That the one Emperor requested it by his letters, and the other readily
accorded thereunto. Also the Synodall Epistle of the Fathers there assembled,
reported by Theodoret, speaks in this manner: The Emperors, beloved of God,
have Theodoret. l. 2. c. 8.
and have given us leave to hold this holy Synod in this City of Sardica. And
Athanasius, a man of all others most interessed in this Council, Athanas.
Apolog. 2. Balsamon in praefat. Synod. Sardicens.
By the command (says he) of the most religious Emperors, Constans and
Constantius etc. And Balsamon in his preface to this Council, By the
commandment (says he) of these two brothers, were assembled 341 Bishops at
Sardica. And now tell me what are become of Baronius his ghesses? Likewise
Liberius himself, successor unto Julius, sent Lucifer a Bishop, Hilarie a
Priest, and Pancrace a Deacon, Epist. Liberij ad Constantium.
to the Emperor Constans; who as we hope (says he) shall easily obtain of
thy clemency, that a Council may be called for the peace of the Churches
Catholic: meaning whether there should happily be occasion to assemble the
Bishops Athanasius speaking, says, That there were there present from Julius,
Athanas. Apolog. 2.
Archidamus and Philoxenus Priests: whom Baronius would feign put into scarlet,
only to make Legates of them. And a marvel is it, that because Hosius is there
a chief speaker, he makes him not chief Legate also: Baron. to. 3. an. 347.
art. 10.
But having no author for that, After the Legates of Julius (says he) Hosius
Bishop of Corduba, and Protogenes Bishop of Sardica, took the chief place in
this Synod, as Sozomene reports. How many lies is poor Baronius feign to
coin, Athanasius, who was there present, and had good cause to know, recites
their names which subscribed, in order following: Hosius of Spain, Julius of
Rome, by Archidamus and Philoxenus Priests, Protogenes of Sardica, etc. Neither
is it probable, that he would not have named Hosius for a Legate, if he had
been such; but it is clear, that this prerogative was given him for the
worthiness of his person. As for Sozomene, whom he alleges, he speaks
plain in this manner: Hosius and Protogenes, who were the chief and
principal of those which met at Sardica, out of the West, etc. And therefore,
that reservation of our Annalist, Post Legatos, i. after the Legates, where is
it to be found? And farther, if those Priests had been received in this
pretended quality, should Hosius Hosius did this, in what quality did he it,
if not in his own private quality, and in regard of that great sufficiency
which the world took notice to be in him? Which made Athanasius, and after him
Theodoret to say, Where is that Synod, Theodor. l. 2. c. 15. ex Athanas.
wherein Hosius has not presided? and where is that Church which has not the
memorials of his presidencie? Whence it is also that Theodoret himself calls
him, The great and venerable Sire, justly called Hosius, which is by
interpretation Holy, (...).
and excellent above all other men. Well (says Baronius) yet this is evident,
Baron. an. 341. art. 18.
That if any found himself wrongfully condemned by the Bishops of his own
Province, the party grieved might appeal to Rome. The words verily of the
Canon are these: Hosius the Bishop said, Council. Sardic. c. 3. and 4.
If any Bishop And Balsamon upon this place affirms, That the like privilege
was granted to the Bishop of Constantinople. But come we to the point: And
first, it was Hosius which proposed it; and he proposed it as a new and
extraordinary antidot against a poison, considering that the Bishops of the
East were for the greatest part at that present infected with Arrianisme: and
his purpose was, that if any found himself oppressed and aggrieued by the
Arrians, he might by virtue of this Canon have recourse Julius, and would no
doubt have done otherwise in the person of Liberius, successor unto Julius, and
a professed Arrian, notwithstanding that pretended chair of S. Peter. And
secondly note these words, If it please you, let us honor the memory of S.
Peter: For had this been an ancient right, should he not rather have said,
Let us observe the commandment of the Lord, or the ancient order of the
Church, or the Canon of the Nicene Council, whereby it is ordained, That men
might appeal to Rome? In stead whereof he speaks as of a new proposal,
extraordinary and arbitrarie, at their pleasures. Thirdly, is it reason, that
a Canon of a National Baronius reckon this for a General Council, without
overthrowing all Histories, and inuerting the whole order of the Councels, as
they are already placed? For if we number this for one, where then shall those
of Constantinople, of Ephesus, and of Chalcedon stand? Or because Athanasius
calls it a Great Council, is it therefore a General one? Is not the first
Council of Arles called a Great one, because there met in it the Bishops of
sundry Provinces, which yet was never numbered among the General Councels? And
does not the Decrete it self, D. 16. can. 10. and 11.
authorized by the Popes, rank it with the Nationals? And to conclude, seeing
that his reasons whereon he groundeth his assertion, namely, because it was
called by the Bishop Can. 3. and in that of Chalcedon, Can. 28. both of them
being Councels General, as Baronius himself acknowledges, and both of them
granting Appeal: (...).
which word yet is used only in the narratiue part of Hosius, not in the
decision of the Fathers, in favor of Julius, (...).
which only permits him to take knowledge of the cause anew: which in the
fifth Canon is qualified with this Particle, as: if (say they) the Bishop
deposed, As appealing, (...).
shall fly for refuge to the Bishop of Rome: and as the third Canon, so this
in the decision concludes only for a reuiew of the former sentence: so little
was this matter of formal Appeals meant or understood in this Council. And
this fellow, which stands so much upon his knowledge of Antiquity, and has
written so many volumes of it, should in all reason have produced some Canon
of the Apostles, some Constitution of Clement, or of some precedent Council,
or some example out of the History of the Church, and not have grounded
himself de facto by Martian, Valentinian, Fortunatus, or some such like
heretic, and make that his only title to claim by; especially considering
that the Council of Nice sets down another order in express terms,
(...). Council. Nicen. can. 4. Council. Antioch. can. 4. and sequ.
namely this, that the power of ratifying (for so does the word (...), there
used, signify in good Greek) should belong to the Metropolitan in every
Province: where there is no superior appointed over the Metropolitan, no not
the Patriarch himself at that time; and yet was the question at that time
properly concerning the ordination of Bishops. And the Council of Antioch,
which was held but a little before that of Sardica, gives to a Bishop deposed
by his own Synod, no other remedy, but only a reuiew in another Synod. And
farther, all Antiquity Formatae, from his own Metropolitan or Bishop: which
absolute and general Law were to little purpose if this Law of Appeals did
stand in force. And hence came the use of those Formata, which were of so great
weight and moment, and were never granted forth, but upon mature advise and
long deliberation. Fifthly, here may we see how Baronius abuses a certain
place of Theodoret, Theodor. l. 5. c. 9.
where he says, That Julius having received letters from Eusebius the Arrian
of Nicomedia, who made him Judge, following (...).
and cited Athanasius to appear there also: that is (says Baronius) a Canon
of the Nicene Council, now lost, whereby it was enacted, that men might from
all parts appeal to Rome: so small a piece of ground will serve their turn to
found the tyranny of the Pope upon; for what likelihood thereof do they find
in any History? Wherefore it is more probable to say, that seeing this was
before that Canon of the Council of Sardica, it was meant rather of the common
practice of the Church in those days, when one Bishop oppressed, was wont to
fly for relief to some other of greater dignity, to clear himself before
him; who thereupon used to call his adversary, and to hear the cause between
them, according to that universal Bishopric, whereof, as says S. Cyprian,
every one did administer his portion by himself, yet so, as that no man
neglected the whole Body, or any particular member thereof, the Church being a
Body (...), Sozom. l. 8. c. 13.
i. which lived but by one and the selfsame breath. As appears in the
example of Ammonius and Isidore, who finding themselves wronged by Theophilus
Bishop of Alexandria, fled to Chrysostom, who received them, and examined
their cause; and finding them to have a right and Orthodox opinion concerning
the Deity, wrote to Theophilus, to receive them to Communion; if not, and that
he would yet draw the cause to a farther hearing, that then he should send some
one or other to make himself a party in it. The like was in Athanasius,
flying to Pope Julius. And yet did not Chrysostom Theophilus in person, or
over the dioces of Alexandria. The like was also in Liberius, whom, the
Churches of the East assembled in the Syrmian Council, recommended to Pope
Felix, and to the Clergy of Rome, requiring them to admit him as Colleague in
that See: which also they obtained. And thus you see what that pretended
Appeal was, Baron. an. 349. art. 6.
unless yet perhaps some man may think that foolerie of Baronius worth the
answering, where he says, that Athanasius calls the Church of Rome, The
Church, Athanas. Apolog. 2. idem ad solitarios.
by excellency, without addition: The words of Athanasius are these, The
Emperor (says he) sent me letters; having received them, I went up to Rome,
with purpose to visit the Bishop and Church there. Who sees not that this word
Rome was omitted in this the Metropolis of all Italy, what rejoinder would he
make? Nay, we may say farther, that this Council had been ill advised to draw
all to one man's authority, seeing that Hosius, the proposer of this Canon, a
while after fell away from the true and Orthodox doctrine, and that Liberius,
next successor to Julius, fell unto Arrianisme, excommunicating Athanasius, and
being therefore himself, without regard to his pretended supremacy,
excommunicated by our S. Hilarie. Baron. an. 347. art. 25. and an. 352. art.
14. to. 3.
Baronius seeing the consequence which this History draws with it, would
feign make it trauersable, and sometimes flatly denies it to be true; and
which is more, enrolleth Hildebrand, called Gregory the seventh. But leave we
him to debate this question with Athanasius and Hilarie, with Liberius himself
(whose Epistles Nicholas Faber his trusty friend lately published, with the
fragments of Hilarie) with Bellarmine, who, as has been already showed, so
clearly condemns him; and lastly with himself, for as much as he uses
these fragments of Hilarie so far forth as they serve his own turn: for from
thence takes he a Synodicall Epistle, Baron. an. 357. art. 26.
written to Julius from the Council of Sardica, and therefore ought in reason
to admit also of that Epistle of Liberius, found in the same volume: but we
need no argument in a thing which himself affirms so plainly as he does:
Baron. vol. 4. an. 365. art. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and sequent.
By all these things, says he, taken partly says he, there were no other
proof, his own letters are sufficient to put it out of question: But shall
we therefore call him heretic? minime gentium. And why not, good sir, since
many a man has been so called upon far less occasion? unless a Pope
holding opinion with Arrius, by virtue of his Popedom, be neither Arrian nor
heretic.

An. 362.
Now Athanasius, in the year 362, held a very famous Council in Alexandria,
whither he invited the Bishops out of all parts, to help reestablish the true
doctrine of the Church. Our Annalist would needs persuade us that he did it
Liberius; and that Liberius confirmed the acts of this Council: Which, Baron.
to. 4. an. 362. art. 208.
says he, he plainly expresses in his Epistle to Ruffinian. But let who will
read this Epistle, and then say, whether there be in it any one word tending to
that purpose: Nazianz. in Athanas.
At least Gregory Nazianzene understood it otherwise, when as alluding to this
Synod assembled by Athanasius, he speaks in this manner: He prescribed laws
to all the world, and drew every man's eyes upon himself. And upon that
question, Whether and how far forth such as had fallen were to be restored,
he says, That the same courses were taken in all the Synods which had been
assembled: In the presence, says he, of the Bishops of all foreign Provinces,
as also of Greece, and of Spain: but of Italy or Rome no one word spoken.
Likewise in Sozom. lib. 5. c. 7. (...).
there was another Synod held in Lampsacus, where the Orthodoxe of Bythinia and
Hellespont, says Sozomene, sent Hypatianus Bishop of Heraclea, to Valentinian
the Emperor, to entreat leave to assemble themselves in council. The Emperor
wearied with so many Councels called in the time of his predecessor Constans,
(...).
to so little good purpose, made answer, That it was not lawful for him, being
a lay man, to meddle with the matters of the Church. Whence Baronius
concludes, That he thereby resigned all authority he had or could pretend in
Church causes. But the Emperor adds farther, Let the Churchmen assemble
themselves where they will: (...).
Which words they took for leave, and thereupon assembled themselves. And in
the end that fell out which the Emperor foresaw, which was, that Baronius
takes advantage, because they sent three Legates to Liberius Bishop of Rome,
with a Synodall Epistle. True, but these Legates coming to him, salute him
only by the name of Colleague and brother; and to begin withal, tell him, That
they had brought letters to his Benignity, and to all the other Bishops of
Italy, and of all the regions of the West: Who consequently were associated
with him in the same letter. And what, I pray you, has Baronius now gotten?
Last of all, and for an vpshot, let us not forget a good saying of Baronius,
who, Optat. lib. 3. contra Parmen.
to show the pride of Donatus, alleges a saying of Optatus: Seeing, says he,
that there is none above the Emperor but God which made him, he therein
passed the Which was only for that he refused to accept the alms and
offerings of the Emperor, with whom he held not communion. Let Baronius lay
his hand upon his heart, and tell me truly what Optatus would have said of our
Pope of Rome now adays, seeing that he so much lifts himself up above the
Emperor, both in his decrees and in his actions, but only this, That of a
truth he is that man of sin foretold unto us, which lifts himself up
above God, and causes himself to be adored in the Temple of God.

6. PROGRESSION.
What ambition was used in aspiring to the Popedom, and what was the cause
thereof.

IN the year 366, in the election of Damasus, successor to Liberius, An. 366.
appeared plainly with what ambition and violence men aspired to the Sea of
Rome. The book of the Popes says, That Damasus got it, by having the stronger
faction. And Ruffin (who lived at that time) says, That about the choice arose
so great a tumult, Liber Pontificalis quia fortior and plurima multitudo erat.
Ruffin. l. 1. c. 10. Marcellin. l. 27
or But Ammianus Marcellinus tells us both the history it self, and also
the cause thereof: Damasus, says he, and Vrsicin enraged with a desire of that
Episcopal See, drew the people into factions, who thereupon grew first to
blows, and afterward to murders: So that Viuentius finding himself too weak
either to repress, or to appease them, withdrew himself out of the city: in
which conflict Damasus had the upper hand; and it is certain, that in the
Church of Sicininus, where the Christians used to meet at service, there were
left in one day 137 dead bodies; and a hard matter it was, for a long time
after, to assuage this enraged populace. And thence it was that Ruffin called
it an open war. And Marcellinus adding For my own part, says he, I do not
wonder, considering the bravery of that city, if men ambitious of that place
set up their rest for the purchasing thereof: for having once aspired
thereunto, they are sure to be enriched with the offerings of gentlewomen and
ladies, and to be carried in their coaches sumptuously attired, and so
magnificent in their feasts, as passes any kings table: Whereas they might
indeed be truly happy, if not regarding the greatness of the city, they
would order their lives after the manner of other meaner Bishops, who approve
themselves to the immortal God, and to his true worshippers, by purity of
life, by modesty of behavior, by temperance in meat and drink, poor
apparel, and lowly eyes. Whence the reader may perceive and judge, wherein
consisted the difference between the Pope and other Bishops in those Baronius
glories in this pomp and pride of the Popes, and takes great pleasure in
these feasts, as one delighting to hold his nose over the pot. Baron. to. 4.
an. 367. art. 8. and 9. Rex Sacrificulus.
Marcellinus, says he, was a Heathen, and therefore envied to see our
Sovereign Pontife to surpass their High Priest, in pomp and glory. But he
should have remembered, That this is a question, not yet decided among the
learned, Whether he were a Pagan or a Christian; and by his words it should
seem that he was a Christian, Hieron. Epist. 61
The modester sort of Bishops, says he, approve themselves to the immortal
God, and his true worshippers, etc. What now says Baronius to all this?
Hierosme, says he, in a certain Epistle of his, tells us of one
Protextatus, then Consul designed, who was wont to say unto Damasus, Make thou
me Bishop of Rome, and I will quickly make my self a And that in Tertullians
time also the Pagans were wont causlesly to blame the prodigality of the
Christians. You accuse, says Tertullian, Tertul. Apoleget. 39.
our poor suppers, of prodigality, as if that saying of Diogenes might well
fit us, The Megarenses feast to day as if they should dye to morrow. And what
of all this? for were those Caenulae, those little banquets which Tertullian
speaks of, and these profuse feasts mentioned in Marcellinus, all one? And
for whom were those suppers which Tertullian speaks of provided? for even
poor and indigent people, not for Consuls and Governors, as Baronius
reports. And is not this falsely to allege Authors? But let us see what
Hierosme himself says concerning these times.

OPPOSITION.
Hieron. ad Marcell. viduam.
Hierosme makes Paula and Eustochium to write unto Marcella in these words:
Read, say they, the Apocalypse of Saint John, and mark what is there said of
the woman clothed in scarlet, of blasphemies written in her forhead, of the
seven mountains, etc. There no doubt is the holy Church, there are the
trophies of the Apostles and Martyrs, there is the confession of Jesus Christ:
But there is also, says he, ambition and tyranny, which keep men back from
doing good. And in another place, Luxury of the belly and of the throat,
seek to overthrow the power of the Cross. And to the end that no man may say
that he spoke this of the City, not of the Church of Rome, in his Preface to
that book of Dydimus, of the Holy Ghost, he expounds himself: When I
lived, says he, in Babylon an inhabitant of that purple Whore, living after
the laws and customs of the citizens of Rome, I had a determination to write
somewhat of the Holy Ghost, and to dedicate the treatise to the Bishop of that
Diocese: And behold, that seething pot which Jeremy saw looking out of the
North after the rod of the Almond tree, began to boil, and the Senate of the
Pharisees to cry out together; neither was there so mean ascribe of that
whole faction of ignorance, who did not eagrely conspire against me. As soon
therefore as I was returned to Jerusalem as out of banishment, and after that
cottage of Romulus and those Lupercall sports, saw again that Inn of Marie,
and the cave of our Lord and Savior, etc. In these words therefore what does
he call Babel, but the Clergy it self of Rome? That Senate grown already
Pharasaicall, Marcellinus does? As for the pre-eminence of Bishops, according
to the greatness of the cities: If there be question, says he to Euagrius,
Orbis mayor est vrbe. Hieron. in Epist. ad Euagr.
of authority, the world is greater than the city (so called they Rome) why
do thou then enthrall the whole Church to a few men? And whence comes this
presumption? For wheresoever there is a Bishop, whether at Rome, or at
Eugubium, whether at Constantinople, or at Rhegium (mark how he confounds
the greater cities with the lesser) he is of the same dignity and Priesthood.
Riches and poverty make not one less or greater than another: for they are
all successors of the Apostles. And so are these words inserted into the
decree. And speaking in another place Hieron. in Epist. ad Heliodo. to. 1
It is no easy matter, says he, to stand in the place of Paul, and to
maintain the dignity of Peter; that is, to be a Bishop: reckoning all Bishops
to be successors of Paul and Peter: Basil. Epist. 55.
speaking in the same sense in which Saint Basil spoke, when he said, That
Ambrose was called to the Apostolical government, when he was made Bishop of
Milan.

And do you think that this holy Father Basil can pass over with silence
the pride of Rome? or if he happily let fly some words, shall we therefore
condemn him as a Pagan? So it was, that in those lamentable combustions of the
East, he thought to have found some comfort in the West; but he quickly found
himself in an error: For if the anger of God, says he, continue still upon
us, what comfort will (meaning Damasus) not concerning any Church affairs,
Coryphaeo. Basil. Epist. 10.
but only to let him understand, That they neither rightly understood the
state of our cause, nor took the course to be duly informed of it. In
brief, That they ought not to bruise a broken reed, nor oppress those who
were already humbled by affliction: nor yet reckon their pomp for honor,
seeing that, that very sin And this he wrote to that great personage Eusebius
Samosatenus, who carried on with an incredible zeal, ran from country to
country, seeking to repair the decays and ruins of the Church; whilst
Athanasius and Basil traveled in the East, opposing themselves against the
Arrians, and praying in aid from the Churches of the West, and from Damasus
himself, who, hand in bosom, lightly regarded them, conceiting out of
harebrained humor which proceeded from his pride, that Basil himself was an
heretic, and therefore would not, forsooth, vouchsafe him an answer. Whereupon
Basil and his fellows sent letters to the Bishops of the West, by name, to
those of Italy and France: It being impossible, say they, Basil. Epist. 70.
that they should be ignorant and yet they received no comfort from them. And
farther they requested them (not Damasus) to join with them, for the procuring
of a lawful and free Synod. After this they redoubled their letters, Idem
Epist. 78.
coniuring them to inform the Emperor of these troubles in the East: from
whom, and not from Damasus, they hoped for redress. And by a third dispatch
sent by Dorotheus a Priest, Basil reproacheth them for their want of charity,
in not daining to visit and to comfort them in their afflictions; offering, if
any imputation lay upon him, to clear himself, when and wheresoever they
should appoint him. At last in a fourth letter he breaks forth into these
terms: We have, says he, venerable brethren, set our eyes upon you, Basil.
Epist. in Addition. Ep. 1.
but our hope has proved So dead a sleep was Damasus laid in, being drowned
in that wealth and luxury whereof we speak. Yet Baronius would persuade us,
That these Epistles were all written jointly to Damasus and the other Bishops;
but the inscriptions are too clear against him: To the Italian and French, to
the Western men, and to the Bishops beyond the sea: and the style it self
shows the contrary. And Marcelline tells us, That the Bishop of Rome was
rich with the oblations and offerings of Gentlewomen and Ladies. And Hierosme
taxes the Clergy of Rome in worse terms than he: The Clerks, Hierom. ad
Eustoch. Epist. 22. Ad Nepotian. 2.
says he, who in duty should serve for an ensample, and he an awe unto them,
kiss the Ladies heads, and reaching out their hands as if they would bless,
receive the reward of their salutation. And the women finding that the Priests
expect maintenance from them, wax proud thereupon: and having once tried what
it is to be subject to a husband, choose rather to continue in free widowhood:
and others there are who spend their whole lives in learning the names, the
houses, and qualities of these Ladies: and thereupon names some of them, as
Anthimus and Sophronius, and some others; and describes the tricks which they
used to draw oblations and offerings from the Ladies which came unto them. And
in another place he reproves them in this manner: Ierem. 12.
In this says he, seek not the riches of the world, neither crave to
possess more now than when thou first came into the Clergy; that it may not
be said unto thee, Cleri eorum non proderuntijs: For there are Monks richer
now than they were when they lived in the world, and Clerks which possess more
under poor Christ, than erst they did under the rich devil: so that the
Church now sigheth to see them rich whom the world before saw poor and
beggarly. And it plainly appears to what a loossenesse and lewdness about
women their wealth had carried them, by those reproves which he gives them in
this Epistle, Hieron. ad Nepotian. 2.
as also in that other which he wrote unto Nepotian, wherein he shows by what
infamous services they lay at catch for legacies, and inheritances, from
oldfolkes, both men and women; which I Hierosme, Idem ad Helio. Epist. 2.
Baron. vol. 4. an. 385. art. 8. Paulin. Ep. 2.
because I am ashamed to repeat them. And Baronius denies not, that for his
free speaking and writing, the Clergy of Rome took him for their enemy:
insomuch that he was thereby forced to return unto Jerusalem; and Paulinus
Bishop of Nola was for the same cause served with the same sauce; as appears
by his first Epistle, where he shows, That he could by no other means be
safe and free from the contagions of that city, but by getting himself away
far off from it. Neither does he spare the Bishop of Rome himself: Thou
know, says he, what loss we suffer of the grace of God, by the proud
discretion and wisdom of the Bishop of that city, meaning Syricius,
successor unto Damasus.

And this contagion spread it self so far, that the Christian Emperors,
Valentinian, Valens, and Gratian, were feign to take order by express law
against it: which law was directed and sent to Damasus; L. 20. de Episc. and
Cler. in Cod. Theodos.
and therein were all Clergy men, and such as made profession of chastity and
continency, prohibited, once to set foot within widows doors, or orphans,
or to receive any gift by testament or other devise whatsoever, of any woman,
with whom, under pretense and color of religion, they had acquaintance or
familiarity; confiscating whatsoever had been so given, or should from thence
forward be so devised, granted, and made over to them. This ordinance, says
the text, published and read in the Church of Rome. And this is that which
Saint Hierosme says in one of his Epistles before alleged: I am ashamed,
says he, to speak it: But the Priests And much after this manner speaks
also Saint Ambrose in his thirteenth Baron. vol. 4. an. 370. art. 123.
But Baronius would here persuade us, That the Emperors made this law at the
motion of Damasus himself: as also, that Constantine long before that time
passed another Edict at the instance of Pope Syluester, and of the Bishops; by
which he inhibited the gentry of the Empire to make themselves of the Clergy;
because that by reason of the large privileges and immunities belonging to
that Order, the richer sort put themselves into the ministry, and so left the
Commonwealth unserved: And this he says to no other end, but that Princes and
States in these days should not offer, by their examples, out of their own
regal authority, to order and reform the Churches. But the truth is, that
those Emperors ordered and limited the jurisdiction of the Clergy (which even
in L. 23. de Episc. and Cler. in Cod. Theodos.
If there happen, say they, any small contentions or offenses to arise,
touching questions of religion, let them be heard in the place where they
arise, and by the Synods of the Diccesse. Where note, that they say, small
offenses, and, about religion: excepting always all sorts of crimes which
belong to the audience of the Judges, ordinary or extraordinary, or
governors of the place. Add we hereunto, That about the year 390, under
Syricius Bishop of Rome, this disorder of the Clergy still continued; and that
the Emperors, Valentinian, Theodosius, Arcadius, renewed this law in more
strict terms than before; ordaining, That no widow might give to any Church
or Churchman, Lib. 27. de Episc. and Cler. in Cod. Theodos.
under what title or color soever, either mouables or immouables, in prejudice
of children, or of other lawful heirs, no not to make so much as either
Church or Churchman, or the poor, his heir and successor, by last Will and
Testament: Which Law Ambrose caused shortly after to be somewhat mitigated.
Such a do they had even in those days to entrench and fortify themselves
against their greedy avarice.

7. PROGRESSION.


DAmasus, if we will stand to the Epistles which go under his name, though a
man commended for some good parts and qualities which were in him, yet treading
the path of his predecessors, sought to establish a Primacie in his own
person, especially in that Epistle which he wrote to Stephanus Archbishop of
Mauritania: wherein he pretends, that all the greater sort of causes ought to
be referred unto his hearing, and that they could not be decided but by his
authority; as also, that the provision of Bishops belonged to him. And
Isidorus Mercator would yet farther persuade us, that Aurelius Bishop of
Carthage sent to entreat Baron. vol. 4. an. 314. art. 10.
But Baronius himself blusheth at this, for that in all the time of Damasus
this Aurelius was only a simple Deacon.

OPPOSITION.
But the practice of the Church was clear against the usurpation of Damasus,
seeing that all the greater offices and dignities of the Church have in all
times and places been bestowed by those which were of the same place, without
asking the Popes advise or leave therein. And seeing that the Fathers assembled
at Constantinople, openly declared unto him, Theodor. l. 5. c. 9
That there was an ancient law and decision of That by virtue of this decision
Nectarius was ordained at Constantinople, Flauianus at Antioch, and Cyril at
Jerusalem, which they there term the mother of all other Churches: Requesting
him to rejoice for company, as for a thing rightly and canonically done: And
that he would not suffer any humane affection to carry him beyond the bounds
of reason. Neither do they address their letters to him alone, but also to
Ambrose, to Britto, to Valerian, to Acholius, and others, assembled in the
Synod of Rome. And seeing also that Ambrose himself was elected Bishop of
Milan by the suffrages of the people, and that the Emperor Valentinian,
immediately upon the news received, Ruffin. l. 2. c. 11.
for his installation without sending to Rome.

And which is more, about the year 381, Damasus then sitting Pope, An. 381.
Socrat. lib. 4. c. 24. and 25.
this second general Council of Constantinople was held, and two years after
was received and acknowledged by the Synod of Rome: which Council Theodosius
the elder called, and Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople ordered, Onuphr. in
Fast.
without any Legate from the Bishop of Rome: and there also these Fathers trod
the path of the Nicene Council, dividing the Provinces, for the auoidance of
confusion, in such sort, That the Bishops of one Diocese should not offer to
go, unrequested, into the Diocese of another, there to give orders unto any:
which yet, says Socrates, was in former times tolerated in the Church because
of persecutions: Council. Constant. can. 5. and 7. can. Graec. 3.
And that if in any Province As for the Bishop of Constantinople, it was
ordained, that he should have his prerogative of Precedencie next to the Bishop
of Rome: all which to stand for good, if the Emperor were so pleased, without
any reference at all unto the Pope. And both Socrates and Sozomen give the
reason of this equallising of them, Socrat. Histor. Eccles. l. 5. c. 8. Sozom.
l. 7. c. 9.
because that Constantinople had not only the name of Rome, with like Senate,
and other magistrates, but bare also the same Arms, and held all other Rights
and Honors which belonged to old Rome: which reason is apparently grounded upon
a civil respect and policy, not upon any precept of the Gospel. Bellarm. in
Recognit. p. 46.
Yet must Bellarmine needs tell us, that these Fathers writing to Damasus,
acknowledged that they were assembled by his appointment, intimated to and he
cites to this purpose Theodoret, lib. 5. cap. 9. where the words themselves
make clean against him, showing, That they had bin formerly invited to come to
Rome by the Emperor, and were after that called to Constantinople by letters
which the Synod of Rome, after that of Aquileia, sent to Theodosius; not that
Damasus gave forth any summons for their assembling. And Bellarmine himself
in his Recognitions acknowledges, That this Epistle was never written by the
Fathers of Constantinople; and so it makes not to the question now in hand.
But yet he adds farther, Bellarm. de Roman. Pontif. l. 2. c. 13.
That they acknowledged the Pope for their Head, and themselves as members of
that Head. Here again is a bundle of manifest untruths: for first the letter
was not directed to Damasus, neither yet to the Church of Rome, but to the You
have invited us thither, as members of your Body, showing thereby your
brotherly affection: whereby they acknowledge not any Head, but only
declare, that all Christian Congregations are each others members; and
therefore having signified unto them, That according to the ancient Canons,
especially that of the Nicene Council, they had provided their own Churches,
they conclude in manner following: Wherefore we thus agreeing, and being
established in one faith, and mutual love, will now no longer use that saying,
condemned by the Apostle; I am of Paul, I am of Apollo, and I am of Peter: but
knowing that we are all of Christ, who is not divided in us, will by the grace
of God keep that Body of the Church vnrent, not to say, that it is found
written in some copies at the foot of this Epistle, Reverend sons, we pray
God to preserve you. In these days who durst speak so unto the Pope? In the
mean time Pope Leo the Great, Leo. ep. 55. Theodor. l. 5. c. 10.
a strong maintainer of this Primacie, quarrelleth the authority of this
Council, making the world to believe, that he would hold himself wholly to
the Council of Nice; which, as we have already proved, makes as little for
his purpose as the other. But he cannot deny, that his predecessor Damasus
rested satisfied therewith, and wrote back unto the Fathers in that Council
his kind and loving letters, without ever calling the authority thereof into
question; though yet to retain a respect and reverence to his own person, or
happily to His much honored sons: and tells them in the very beginning of
his letters, that indeed they had yielded all due reverence to the Sea
Apostolic. Onuphr. in Fast. an. 382.
And lastly Onuphrius observes, That two years after he approved it in open
Synod at Rome, as an Oicumenicall or General Council, though neither the Pope
in person, nor any for or from him, assisted at it; whereas that other at
Rome, where Damasus himself presided, is scarcely accounted in the number of
provincial Synods. And now let the reader judge where this pretended Primacie
of the Popes was in those days.

Baronius: First he says, That this Council of Constantinople was called
jointly by Theodosius and Damasus Bishops of Rome; and who (says he) can doubt
hereof? May it please him, Baron. vol. 4. an. 381. art. 20.
it should seem that Socrates and Sozomene doubted of it, when they tell us,
Socrat. l. 5. c. 10. Sozom. l. 7. c. 7.
That the Emperor without delay labored as much as in him was to assemble a
Council of all sorts. So also, as it seems, did the Fathers themselves of
that Council, who in their Synodall Epistle say in this manner: We, here
assembled by his commandment, Epist. Synod. in to. 1. Council.
etc. meaning the Emperor. And in that other Epistle of theirs, which they
wrote the Summer following to Damasus, Britto, Ambrose, and other Bishops of
the West, where they show, that they of the East were not called to the Synod
of Rome it self (which Damasus, Theodor. l. 5. c. 8. and 9. Socrat. l. 5. c.
10. Sozom l. 7. c. 12.
but from the Emperor. So likewise do all the Church Histories, which tell
us, that the Emperor having heard the resolution of the Orthodox Fathers in
the Synod of Rome, much desired to assemble another of all sects, hoping by
that means to make them fall to some agreement; not borrowing any authority
from Rome. And to conclude, the practice of all ancient times seems to doubt
hereof, seeing that in that very year a Council was called at Aquileia by
the Emperor Gratian, Council. Aquil. in ep. ad Gratian. Valent. and Theodos. in
1. Vol. Council. Theodor. l. 5. c. 9. Sozom. l. 7. c. 9.
where Ambrose himself was present, and the deputies of the Churches of France
and Afrike, as he affirms; and seeing also that Damasus himself became an
humble suitor to the Emperors Theodosius and Gratian, to grant a warrant for
the calling of Flauianus had succeeded Paulinus in the Church of Antioch: for
how could he grant leave to others, who asked for himself? And of this very
Council it is, that S. Hierosme speaks in his Epistle to Eustochium, When
the imperial letters (says he) had assembled at Rome the Bishops of the East
and West, Hieron. ad Eustoch. ep. 27.
she then saw very admirable personages, Bishops of Christ, Paulinus Bishop of
Antioch, and Epiphanius Bishop of Salamis. And now let Baronius tell me whether
a man may not have reason to doubt thereof. Well, says Baronius, yet the best
is, To. 1. Council.
that Damasus did at least confirm this Council. And we must see whether he
did or no, and how he confirmed it, whether to authorize it, or else to submit
himself unto it. For the first, we have a Synodall Theodosius, with the Acts
of that Synod annexed thereunto; wherein as called together by his command,
they jointly yielded him an account of what they had there enacted, requesting
him by his seal and sentence to confirm and ratify their decrees. Baronius
tells us, Baron. to. 4. an. 381. art. 38.
that this they did only in policy, to engage Theodosius in the maintenance
of their profession: And what need, seeing the world takes notice, that he was
as zealous for religion, as was the best of them? And for Damasus, that he
approved indeed this Council, but that he did it likewise for a purpose, which
was to make the Greek Church sure against the heresy of Macedonius: and I
would feign know where it is that he finds it. All a matter, says Baronius,
but so it is, that he did confirm it: for Photius Photius are these: And a
little after (says he) they understood, that Damasus also, Bishop of Rome had
confirmed them, as being of the same opinion with them, meaning with the
Fathers of Constantinople. And does this prove that they required his
authority to confirm their Acts? or rather that he confirmed them only by
yielding assent, and submitting himself unto them? And yet such is his
madness as to say, that he confirmed it fraudulently and for a purpose only
not to auow the Canon, there made, for the place and dignity of the Bishop and
Church of Constantinople, making his dreams and idle fancies to stand in
balance against the soliditie Paulinus borne out by Damasus was restored to
his See, and Flauian, who was there placed by the Council of Constantinople,
dispossessed, and all this without either argument or Author, other than his
own fantastical assertion. Thirdly, Baronius very stiffely maintains,
Baron. to. 4. an. 382. art. 18.
that notwithstanding this Canon of the Council of Constantinople, yet still
causes of weight and importance were reserved to the Sea of Rome, such as were
Heresy and Schism, deposing of Bishops, and the like, and that these causes
were brought to him by way of Appeal. And surely for heresy and schism we
cannot deny, that scarcely ever was there any heretic or schismatike
condemned Bellarmine yet deriueth it from very far, and from the time of
Marcion the heretic, who being excommunicated in Pontus, came to Rome. But
this I ask, whether Ireneus or Tertullian does affirm, that he came by way of
Appeal? or does not Epiphanius say, that they sent him back again with these
terms, Epiph. cont. Marcion. here. 42.
We may not receive thee without the permission of thy venerable Father,
meaning the Bishop: There is but one faith and consent of all; we may not
oppose against thy Father, our Colleague and fellow Minister. Bellarmine yet
instanceth again in the case of Felix and Fortunatus, a couple of schismatikes
of Afrike, who would have had their cause new hammered before Cornelius Bishop
of Rome: But we have already declared what was the opinion of S. Cyprian
thereupon, Cyprian. edit. Pamel. epist. 55. and 68.
protesting, that if such courses taken may be allowed, all discipline would
come to naught. And Stephen, who succeeded Cornelius, when he attempted to
undertake the patronage of Basilides and Martialis, Basil. in Epist. ad
Occident.
whom the Churches of Spain had deposed from their Chaires, prevailed as
little as his predecessor had done before him. As for Liberius, his bad hap was
to take upon him the protection of that hypocrit Eustathius, Bishop of Sebasta,
Nazian. in ep. ad Caledon.
and Damasus of Vitalis, a Bishop of the East, whom afterward upon better
advise he excommunicated: neither does Baronius deny, but that Syricius
himself, Baron. to. 5. an. 397. art. 17. and sequ. an. 399.
had he not been forewarned by Marcella, had been, as almost he was,
overtaken by the Origenists; so easy a matter was it by fair words and low
crouchings to come over these men, blinded with ambition and with desire of
sovereign authority.

But to come to this age and matter now in hand, we read, that Theophilus
Bishop of Alexandria assembled a Synod, and therein absolutely condemned the
Origenists, wherein he never expected either authority or advice from Rome:
nay Rome her self was content to follow his example, namely Anastasius the
year following, Hieron. ep. 78. ad Pammach. and Marcell.
witness S. Hierosme, who writing of this subject says, Him whom Demetrius
chased out of Alexandria, Theophilus vanquished over all the world etc. He
boldly proclaimed Origin for an heretic: Let the Chair of S. Peter by her
preaching confirm what the Chair of Marc the Evangelist has taught: adding
afterward, Anastasius had now condemned in the West what formerly had been
condemned in the East: not that Theophilus had need of confirmation from him,
for his sentence was absolute, and carried execution with it: But as Hierosme
says, They both did it with the same zeal, as led by the same spirit, because
they had both drunk out of the same fountain of the Scriptures.

But there arose at this time a certain difference between Chrysostom Bishop
of Constantinople, and this Theophilus of Alexandria, whereof they would suck
no small advantage; the case was this: Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople being
dead, question arose about the choice of a successor: The Bishops of the
province assembled in Synod, by common consent of Clergy and People, elected
Chrysostom, Socrat. l. 6. c. 2. Sozom. l. 8. c. 2. (...).
and Baronius groundeth his argument: for (says he) it is evident, that
Theophilus opposed himself against his election, and would have brought in one
Isidorus, a Priest of his dioces: if therefore (says he) that Canon of the
Council of Constantinople had bin of force, Baron. to. 5. an. 397. art. 63.
which equalleth Constantinople with Rome, how could Theophilus have meddled in
this election; and thence concludes, that it is a forged Canon, in despite of
all Histories whatsoever. But let this Annalist read the History once more: To
give the greater credit and luster to this election (says Socrates) there were
also many other Bishops there assembled by order from the Emperor, and among
the rest Theophilus of Alexandria, who did what he could to stain the credit
and reputation of Chrysostom. Arcadius; and therefore his argument concludes
not. And here began the quarrel between these two: Theophilus a man of an
implacable spirit, took the other to task; the reason was, for that
Theophilus had not long before excommunicated certain Origenists, who
presently fled to Chrysostom, whom yet Chrysostom would not receive to his
Communion, until he might hear the reasons of Theophilus, either by himself,
or by some others from him, concerning their excommunication: Theophilus also
had this advantage over him, that through his liberty of speech in pulpit, he
had drawn the hatred of the great ones of the Court, and of the Emperor
himself, but above all, of the Empress Theophilus was sent for, to sit upon
him; who coming to Constantinople, assembled a Synod, but for fear of the
people held it without the city; the Synod consisting for the most part of
those Bishops whom Chrysostom for their demerits had formerly deposed. Pallad.
in vita Chrysostom. an. 403
Thither he cited Chrysostom to appear before him and them, who had to the
open view of all men combined themselves against him. Chrysostom on the
contrary held another Synod within the walls, whither he also cited Theophilus
to appear before him: and farther, by three Bishops and two Priests admonished
him and his adherents, not to pervert or trouble the orders of the Church,
especially not to violate the Canon of Nice, by meddling in other men's
jurisdictions; Pallad. in vita Chrysostom. Socrat. l. 2. c. 4. Sozom. l. 8. c.
17. (...).
that he in his Synod had the greater number that then he appealed to a
General Council. These are the words of Palladius in the life of Chrysostom:
likewise of Socrates and Sozomene in their Histories. And why then did he not
appeal to Rome? or can they show any such authority as this, for the
maintenance of Appeals to the Sea of Rome? Which notwithstanding, they
proceeded to his deposition, and cast him into exile, having no other cause
against him, but that he refused to appear before them. But why then (says
Baronius) had not be rather relieved himself upon that third Canon of
Constantinople, if any such had been in force? Theophilus, who was set over
the Churches of Egypt, had nothing to do with the Churches of Thracia. But
hereupon the people began to repine and mutiny, till in the end Chrysostom
was restored to his Chair. Shortly after he drew more anger upon him by like
Pulpit liberty as before, and his adversaries taking hold of this occasion,
condemned him a second time, alleging, that he had returned to his Chair,
without restitution first had and obtained from them. And thereupon, the
displeasure of the Empress, joined with the implacable hatred of Theophilus,
they cast him into banishment, Baronius is bold, Baron. to. 5. an. 404. art.
20. and seq.
and says, That he had recourse by way of Appeal to the Church of Rome as
unto her, which was only able to correct all other Churches, and that he
appealed to Innocent Bishop of Rome in person. Which he reports with that
confidence, as a man would think himself almost bound in conscience to
believe him: adding farther, That all this fell out by the wonderful providence
of God, to show men how they ought upon like occasions to fly to the Pope of
Rome. But let us see what proofs: for our part we are content to stand to his
own allegations, and namely Chrysostom unto Innocent: which Epistle, by his
leave, is not directed to Innocent alone, but jointly to all the Bishops of the
West, as appears, in that the whole Epistle runs in terms of the plural
number; neither in six whole pages, which that Epistle takes up, is the word
of Appeal so much as once named: but we find there many other things which
make against them; as first, that he declares unto them the cause of his exile
to have been only, that he would have appealed to a Council, meaning a
General Council, as we said before; and consequently not to the Bishop of
Rome. Secondly, that he prays their charity to awake, and to help to put
some end to these his miseries, and therefore not their pretended omnipotency.
Thirdly, I humbly beseech you (says he) my most reverend Lords, to prevent
this ruin; and therefore not Innocent, or his See alone: and what ruin was
it? For if (says he) this custom take place, and it may be lawful for one to
enterprise upon another Province, all is lost. His meaning was, that they
should help to order this matter by a Council, in execution of that Canon of
Nice, and therefore he entreats them to retract and to disannull all that
which had been practiced or attempted against him: so far was he from
requesting Innocent, who dwelt farther off than the other, to interpose his
authority in the cause. Fourthly, in that he tells them, That he had written
the same things to Venerius Bishop of Milan, and to Chromatius Bishop of
Aquileia: and so indeed had he also written to Aurelius Bishop of Carthage. By
which appears, that he wrote Innocentius; whom he could not omit, in regard
that he was Bishop of the first See: but he appealed not to one more than to
another. The like also may appear by the resolution which Innocentius took in
this business: for having received the letters, and heard the embassages of
both parties, in good discretion he admitted them both to his Communion,
thereby declaring, that the sentence which was given against Chrysostom was
unjust: Theodor. Roman. apud Pallad. in Dialog.
adding farther, That it was fit in this case to call a sincere Synod, as well
of the Eastern as of the Western Bishops, which was nothing else in effect,
but only to give way to the Appeal, which Chrysostom had from the beginning
put in, to a General Council: which he requested Innocentius and others,
according to the practice of the Church in those times, to procure from the
Emperors Arcadius and Honorius; especially from Arcadius, who being offended
with Chrysostom, would never have granted it, but at their entreaty. Which
plainly appears in Sozomene by the letters of Innocent sent to the Clergy
of Constantinople. Sozom. l. 8. c. 28.
It is needful (says he) that a Synod have the hearing of this matter, for it
only is able to repress these troubles, and in the mean time it is meet to
refer the cure of this malady to And a little after, We are very careful
(says he) to find the means to assemble a General Council: which he needed
not to have been, had things been in his own disposition. Now that which
ensued hereupon was, that the year following, which was the year 405, An. 405.
there was assembled a Synod of the Western Bishops at Rome, where they
entreated the Emperor Honorius to write to his brother Arcadius, requesting
him, that he would cause a Synod to be assembled at Thessalonica, to the end
that the Bishops both of the East and also of the West might there meet, as in
a more convenient place, for the final hearing and sentencing of this cause.
Whereupon Honorius sent unto him, and the more to show him the good opinion
which the Bishops of the West had of Chrysostom, of many letters Innocentius
Bishop of Rome, the other of Chromatius Bishop of Aquileia: And the author
himself notes, that the ambassadors sent unto Arcadius from his brother
Honorius, delivered him letters from the Emperor his brother, from Innocentius
of Rome, from Chromatius of Aquileia, from Venerius of Milan, and from sundry
others; all which joined in this embassage: the end whereof was, to reestablish
Chrysostom in his place for the present, until a General Council might be
assembled. In the mean time Chrysostom died in banishment, and the rest of
this History concerns not this matter. What reason therefore has Baronius
so confidently to report, that Chrysostom did appeal to Rome? For when a
Prince oppressed by one Baronius, and so an end of this discourse. This grand
Annalist tells us, Baron. to. 5. an. 407. art. 20. and an. 408. art. 33.
Theodor. l. 5. c. 33. and 34.
that Innocent would never communicate with the Eastern Churches, no not after
the death of Chrysostom, till his name was restored to the catalogue of the
Bishops of that See, and thereupon voucheth Theodoret, lib. 5. cap. 33.
Whosoever will take the pain to read that place, shall find no mention there
made of Innocentius. It is said there I confess, that the Doctor of this
Universe being dead, the Bishops of the West would not communicate with the
Bishops of the East, of Why then should he appropriat that to one, which the
Author himself attributes unto all? The like care (says he) did Alexander
the Bishop take in Antioch, being the first which caused his name to be
registered in the writings of the Church; which is true: But Baronius adds,
that he did it at the instance and request of Innocentius, having no other
argument for this assertion but this, that Innocent wrote a letter to him; for
as touching any such matter Theodoret speaks not a word.

8. PROGRESSION.
Of the attempts of Innocentius and Syricius upon the Churches of Spain and
Afrike.

THe Bishops of Rome finding no passage open to their intended Supremacy,
through the constancy of the Eastern Church, bent their course back upon the
West, especially upon Afric, where they thought to meet with less
opposition. To. 1. Council.
Damasus had already broken the ice unto them, as appears by that Epistle of
his written to Stephanus Bishop of Mauritania; wherein he qualifieth Firmament
of all Bishops, and Top of all other Churches: emboldened, no doubt, thereunto
by letters sent before that time unto him from the said Stephanus; who
complained that certain Bishops had bin deposed in Afric: adding, that this
was so done, notwithstanding they all knew well enough, Ibid.
That censures of Bishops, and all other Church causes of moment, ought to be
reserved to the audience of the Bishop of Rome, whom he there terms The
Father of Fathers: being of the very brood and offspring of those rebel Bishop
of Afric, of whom Saint Cyprian complained in his days; who being reproved
and censured for their faults, would presently cross the seas, and run to Rome
for Sanctuary. All which to be understood with this condition, If those
decretall Syricius, who now enters upon the stage: And indeed the old Roman
Code leaves them all out, until the time of this Syricius. This Syricius,
about the year 386, An. 386.
in his first Epistle to Himerius Bishop of Arragon, is very quick, and
says, That it is not lawful for any Priest of the Lord to be ignorant of the
decrees and statutes of the Sea Apostolic: and therefore requesteth him to
make known such ordinances and decrees as he shall send unto him, not only to
those of his own Diocese, but also to those of Carthagena, Andalusia,
Portugal, Galeace, and others: that is in effect, to all the Provinces of
Spain; Which could not, says he, but he glorious unto him Pro antiquitate
sacerdotij sui.
purposing to use the ambitious humor of this Prelat, only to make himself
and the authority of his See great in Spain. And in his fourth Epistle to the
Bishops of Afric, he goes a step farther, and tells them, That without the
priuitie of the Sea Apostolic, that is to say, of the Primat, none might
presume to ordain a Bishop: And this word Primat, some interpret for the
Bishop of Rome, in regard of the claim which was made unto the Primacie not
long before by Damasus, and these late presumptions of Syricius himself, in
his first Epistle; the rather, because it is improbable, that he would impart
this title of The Sea Apostolic to any, save only to the Sea of Rome.

OPPOSITION.
Council. Carth. 2. ca. 12.
The Africanes therefore assembled upon this occasion a second Council at
Carthage, in the time of this Syricius, where they decreed in this manner: It
seemed good unto all, that without the leave of the Primat of every Province,
no man hereafter presume, in what place soever, to ordain any Bishop: without
any reference at all to the Bishop of Rome. But, say they, if necessity so
require, any three Bishops, by order from the Primat, may consecrate a Bishop.
And it is to be noted, That in this very Canon they call the chair of the
Metropolitan, the First Chair, or Chief See: and that Gratian inserting this
Canon in his book of Decrees, Distinct. 64. C. extra. conscientiam 5.
followed the intent of this Council of Carthage, and not of Syricius;
referring it to the Metropolitan Bishop, not to the Apostolic See, though he
falsely report it under the name of Innocent. And in the year 397, An. 397.
the third Council of Carthage went a little farther, Syricius at that time
also sitting Pope, and decreed, That the Bishop of the first See should not be
called the Prince, or Chief of Priests, Council. Carthag. 3. ca. 26.
or High Priest, or by any other such name, but only, The Bishop of the first
See. As for the name of Universal Bishop, that the Bishop of Rome it self
should not be called by that name. Which last words are also in Gratian,
though now, Distinct. 99. ca. primae sedis 3.
through the good order which of later times has been taken in these matters,
they are no longer to be found Syricius should be the man who should first
establish the forbiddance of Priests marriages, though by general consent
rejected in the Council of Nice, and not received for six hundred years after
in the West, do what his successors could do: Bringing in also the the
commemoration of Saints into the Liturgy and daily service of the Church, in
imitation perhaps, of that Carmen Saliare, used heretofore among the Romans,
wherein the names of all their gods werewith much solemnity rehearsed: For
that was the disease of that age, to fashion themselves in all points after the
rites and ceremonies of the Heathen.

9. PROGRESSION.
Of the decree of Pope Innocent concerning Appeals to Rome.

IN the year 401 came Innocent, who would not be so put back; he, An. 401.
Innocent. Epist. 2. ad Victric. Rothomagens. c. 3.
in his second Epistle to Victricius Bishop of Roan, published this general
decree, That the greater causes, after that they had been censured by the
Bishop, should be referred to the Sea of Rome; as the Synod, says he, has
ordained, and the laudable use and custom of the Church requires. Yet have we
hitherto seen the contrary both in the one Epist. 7. ad Episc. Maced.
upon the Macedonians, and persuading them that he did the like in all other
places. Let us therefore now see whether he found any better success in this
his attempt than his predecessors had before him.

OPPOSITION.
The question then is, as you see, about great causes. An. 402.
In the year 402 was held the Mileuitan Council, and after that in the year
413 another at Carthage, An. 413.
where no petie causes were in handling, but the maine doctrine of the Church,
the schism of Donatus, and the heresy of Pelagius: where both were condemned,
Pelagius (concerning whose doctrine Pope Innocent thought fit to suspend his
judgment) was excommunicated. And all this done without consulting the Bishop
of Rome, only sentence being already passed, he was entreated to join his
authority and voice with theirs; for so go the words of those Fathers in a
letter which they sent unto him, reported by S. Augustine: We have, say they,
Council. Carth. ad Innocent. to. 1. pa. 469. August. Epist. 90
by common consent pronounced Pelagius and Caelestius to be excommunicated,
etc. for the amendment, if not of them, yet of those whom they have seduced:
Which done, we have thought good, dear brother, to signify so much unto thee,
to the end that unto this ordinance of our mediocritie thou should join the
authority of the Sea Apostolic. So that here we see a sentence plainly and
absolutely given; and yet under these terms Council. Mileuit. in Epist. ad
Innocent. to 1. Council. and apud August. Epist. 92. Council. Mileuit. c. 3.
Seeing, say they, that the Lord of his special grace has placed thee in that
Apostolic See, being such a one, as that our negligence would be condemned, if
we should conceal anything from thee which makes for the good of the Church,
rather than our fear excused, as if we doubted of thy good acceptance; we
therefore entreat thee to use thy Pastoral care and diligence in these so
great perils and dangers of the members of Christ, etc. Their meaning was, that
he should do in these cases of heresy within the limits of his jurisdiction
in the West, as they had already done in the East. But when they saw that upon
their round dealing with them in the East, he was the rather inclined to
absolve them in the West, they Whosoever shall say, that the grace of God, in
which we are justified by Jesus Christ, is auailable only for the remission of
sins past, and that it is no help to us against sin hereafter, let him be
Anathema. And thereupon add they farther: This error and impiety, which has
every where so many followers and abettors, ought also to be Anathematised and
condemned by the Sea Apostolic. As if they should have said, It is high time,
Innocent, that now you show your self, and do your duty. All which
Innocent, as one not willing to break with them, passed over, and seemed not
to understand; but as if they had fled to him as to their superior, frames
them an answer only to futher his own ambition: Apud August. Epist. 90. and
to. 1 Council. apud August. Epist. 91
You have, says he, well observed the ordinances of the ancient Fathers, And
again, You have, Apud August. Epist. 92.
says he, had due regard of the Apostolic honor, I say, of him which has
the charge and care of all other Churches, in asking advise of him in these
perplexities, and intricate causes: Following herein the ancient Canon, which
you, as well as my self, know to have been observed in all the world. And
where, I pray you good Innocent? and when was it so observed? for saw you not
the contrary in Afrike it self, and in these two last Councels, practiced?

But let us see whether they use him any better in his matter of Appeals. The
Council. Mileuit. Can. 22.
It has been, say they, thought fit in the case of Priests, Deacons, and
other inferior Clergy men, if in their causes they complain of the wrongful
judgment of the Bishop, that then the next adjoining Bishops shall hear and
end their cause, by the consent of their own Bishop: And if they think fit to
appeal from them also, yet that they appeal not but only to the Councels of
Afrike, or to the Primate of the Province: But if any shall presume to appeal
beyond the seas, that no man presume to receive that man to his communion. And
it is very probable, that the like decrees were made in other Churches of the
West, howsoever Gratian, 2. q. 6. c. 35.
to save the Popes jurisdiction, adds these words, Unless, says he, they
appeal to the Sea of Rome: whereas it was properly against that See that they
Bellarmine yet goes more finely to work, and says, That this Canon
concerns only the inferior Orders. But the Canon next precedent, which
properly provides for the cases of Bishops, is linked with this as well in
reason as in order, and the conclusion is general, Whosoever shall offer to
appeal beyond the sea, etc. without any distinction between Priest and
Bishop: Council. Carthag. apud Balsam. Can. 31. ex Council. African.
and in the margent there is noted this diverse lection; Alias, That they
appeal not beyond the sea, but to the Primates of their Provinces, as it has
often been ordained in case of Bishops: and so are all sorts of Clergy men
comprised. (...).
And to conclude this point, we may not forget that Saint Augustine himself
was present at this Council.

All these things standing as they do, let us now see what arguments Baronius
hence draws, to the prejudice of the Churches of Spain and Afrike, in favor
of the Pope. And first, says he, in the third Council of Carthage, Baron. to.
5. an. 497. art. 55.
can. 48. it is decreed, That concerning the baptism of the Donatists,
Syricius Bishop of Rome, and Simplicianus of Milan, should be consulted: The
one, says he, as head of the Church, the other for the worthiness of his
person: whereas the Fathers themselves make no such difference; but, say they,
we have thought good to consult our brethren and no marvel, seeing that
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage wanting fit ministers to furnish his Churches, wrote
jointly to Anastasius Bishop of Rome and to Venerius Bishop of Milan, to
supply his want; calling them Holy Brethren. Secondly, Council. Carthag. 3.
ca. 26. Distinct. 99. ca. primae sedis.
he takes on because we allege the Canon, Primae sedis, That the Bishop of
the first See should not be called Prince, or the Chief of Priests, or High
Priest, or by any such like name. And I would know, whether these are not the
very words of the Canon it self? or are they not so reported by Gratian in
the Decrees? Yea, but he will not that we should extend them to Rome, especially
those last words, viz. Baron. an. 397. to. 5. art. 48.
That the Bishop of Rome himself shall not be called the Universal Bishop:
For what likelihood, says he, that Afrike would presume adding farther, That
out of doubt they are Gratians own words, and that they are not found in the
Canon it self which he alleges. Nay rather, say we, seeing that they are in
Gratian, Council. Carthag. prouincial. 4 in Praesat. Council. African.
who will warrant us their honesty, and that they themselves are not the men
which have torn it out of the Councels? And why is it unlikely that those
poor Africans should use those words more than these, which they cannot deny,
That no man should appeal beyond the sea: that is, to Rome. For though it be
true, Council. Carthag. can. 33.
that these Africans could not, as Baronius says, dispose of what was done at
Rome, yet might they well take order against his usurpation, and encroaching
upon their Church and liberties at home; and cause that no man there should
attribute to him those titles of insolency Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, Baron.
to. 5. an. 401. art. 9.
at the opening of the Council of Carthage, caused a certain letter of
Anastasius to be there openly read, wherein he forewarned them to beware of the
cunning sleights of the Donatists; he therefore concludes, That this Council
was assembled and held by order from Anastasius; and that Aurelius
acknowledges him for no less than a Father, and consequently for a Head. But
why did he not rather observe, that he calls him also, Brother, and fellow
Priest? must his advise given, be induced to prove his mastership? The Synod of
Afrike, in the year 407, seeing a fell contention risen between Innocentius
of Rome and Theophilus Bishop of Alexandria, made a decree in manner following:
It seems good to us, Council. Afric. 68.
that as touching the dissension Shall now this brotherly admonition of theirs
be interpreted to proceed from a right of jurisdiction, or of sovereign
command? Fourthly, in the cause of the Priscillianists of Spain: Such as were
fallen, says the Council of Toledo, if they come to penance, shall not be
received unless the Sea Apostolic write in their behalf. And thereby, says
he, you may plainly perceive, Acta Council. 1. Tolet. Baron. an. 405. art. 52.
vol. 5.
that no man might communicate with one which had fallen, unless the Sea of
Rome had first approved of his reduction, and communicated with him. But why
should he put us to read the acts of this Council, seeing that he himself in
other cases refuses Ambrose, and that they governed themselves by his
directions: which he denies not; but says that Ambrose himself meddled not,
but by express order from Syricius: for, says he, the words are, We had great
patience, hoping that according to the letters of Saint Ambrose, of blessed
memory, if we condemned that which they had done amiss, and observed the
condition specified in his letters, they would return to peace. (Added
hereunto, what Syricius of blessed memory had advised us to do.) And must
then this accessarie carry with it the principal? or this Parenthesis, be
interpreted for a Commission directed to S. Ambrose? Let them rather take the
pains and read a little farther, where they Council. Taurin. can. 5.
We expect, say they, what the Pope and Simplician Bishop of Milan, and other
Bishops of the Churches, will write in answer to our letters: much after the
manner of the Council of Turin in the same cause: Aut Romanae Ecclesiae
Sacerdotis.
According, say they, to the letters of the venerable Bishop Ambrose, or of the
Priest of the Church of Rome. What would, or rather, what would not Baronius
say, if he had the like advantage?

10. PROGRESSION.
Pope Zozimus seeks to draw all causes to Rome, by virtue of a Canon of

But Zozimus, successor unto Innocent, would not be so answered: wherefore at
the sixth Council of Carthage, An. 417.
which was held the year 417, and where were assembled 227 Bishops of Afrike
(whereupon also Saint Augustine calls it a full and a grand Council) Zozimus
sent thither Faustus Bishop of Potentia, Plenarium Concilium. August. Ep. 47.
Ep. Council. African. ad Bonifac. in to. 1. Council. pa. 519. a. Faustin. in
Commonit. ad Can. 1. Synod. Carchag. apud Balsam. ex editio Herueti. page 305.
and Philippus and Asellus Priests of Rome, qualified as Legates from him, to
require in precise terms, That the Bishops of Afrike should appeal to the
Bishop of Rome: which matter they proposed to the Council in these words:
Those who in the Nicene Synod gave their sentence concerning the Appeals of
Bishops said in this

OPPOSITION.
Ibid.
This matter so proposed by the Legates, Alyppius Bishop of Theagast protesting
openly, That he intended to hold himself in all points to the Nicene Council,
began to make question of this pretended Canon: We have, says he, already
promised to maintain the Canons of the Nicene Council: but this is that which
troubles me, that when we come to consult the Greek copies, I know not how it
should come to pass, but we find no such Canon there. In Can. 135. sub fin.
And again, We have seen diverse copies, and yet could never find this Canon
in any of them, no not in the Roman copies, neither yet in the Greek Whereupon
Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and President of that Council, notwithstanding
that the Popes Legates were there present, pronounced, That they would forthwith
dispatch messengers and letters to the Bishops of Constantinople, Alexandria,
and Antioch; with request, That they would be pleased to transmit unto them the
acts of the Nicene Council, fast closed and sealed up, thereby to take away
all cause of doubt; Because, said he, In Commonit. ad Can. 1. pa. 306.
we cannot find that Canon which is alleged by Faustus in the behalf of
Boniface Bishop of Rome: which Boniface, during this Council, had succeeded
Zozimus. And farther, they required Boniface himself to do the like, to the
end that these things passing in his presence, might be void of suspicion, and
Cyril Bishop of Alexandria, and from Atticus of Constantinople, together with
their letters, which we find recited in the Council, followed that decree
which we there read; and withal a Synodal letter from them to Caelestin Bishop
of Rome, who during this pursuit had succeeded Boniface, and this Epistle
closes up that Council. Neither is it unworthy our observation, that the
copy which Cyril sent, taken out of the Archiues of Alexandria, came from
Rome, being long before sent from Marcus Bishop of Rome to Athanasius, and to
the other Bishops of Egypt, upon complaint which they had made unto him, That
the Arrians had burned all the copies of the Nicene Council which In to. 1.
Council. pa. 299. and pa. 300. Epist. Egypt. ad Marcum, and Marci ad Aegyptios.
and we have the letters of Marcus to testify as much. The decree therefore of
that Council, made in confirmation of the Canon of the Mileuitan Council,
passed there by general consent, in manner and form following: That Priests,
Deacons, and other inferior Clerks, appeal not beyond the sea, but to the
Primats of their Province, as it has often been decided, and commanded in
case of Bishops. As for those which shall appeal beyond the sea (that is, as
Balsamon expounds it, to Rome) that no man in Afric receive them to
communion. Which clause is set down in as general terms as could be
devised: and the letter sent to Caelestin makes their meaning yet more plain;
which letter we find registered in the Council of Afric, according to the old
Roman copy it We earnestly entreat you, say they, Council. African. Can. 105.
Codex Canonum Vetus Ecclesiae Romanae in Council. African. 105.
that hereafter you give no care to those which fly unto you from hence, and
that you admit not to your communion such as we have excommunicated: for your
Venerablenesse knows well, that it is so ordered by the Council of Nice;
which though it seem to dispose only in case of inferior Clerks, and lay
persons, yet in reason their mind was, that it should be so observed much more
in case of Bishops; that those which had been justly censured, and put from
the communion of their own Church, should not over hastily be restored by your
Holiness. And farther we request your Holiness, that you would repel those
Priests, and other Clerks, which make you their refuge; both because there is
no constitution of the Fathers, which has at any time so much derogated from
the authority of our Churches, as also because the Council (which word
compriseth also Bishops) by the help thereof, will be able at all times wisely
and discreetly to enter into the full knowledge and understanding of causes,
and according to right and equity to judge of them; especially considering
that every man which finds himself aggrieued with the sentence of his
Diocesan, may, if he will, forthwith appeal to the Synods of his own
Province, or if him list, to a General Council, unless peradventure any
think, Vni cuilibet.
and that he will deny the same to an infinite number of Bishops and Priests
assembled in a Council: Innumerabilibus sacerdotibus.
and how can a judgment given beyond the seas be good, where witnesses
necessarily required in such cases, cannot be present, either in regard of
their sex, or of their age, or by reason of some other impediment. As for your
sending of a Legate a Latere, A tuae sanctitatis latere.
we find no such ordinance in any Council, neither yet in the writings of the
Fathers. And as touching that which you sent us by Faustinus our fellow Bishop,
as a Canon of the Nicene Council, we let you to understand, that there is no
such Canon to be found in the true and vncorrupt copies of that Council, which
have been sent unto us, taken out of the Originals by Cyrill our fellow Bishop
of Alexandria, and by the reverend

Now in the whole narration of this Epistle there are many things worthy our
observation: as first the inscription, To our loving and venerable brother
Caelestin. Secondly, that the Popes Legate brought back again and presented
before them Apiarias a Priest (whom Urban Bishop of Sicea had condemned) to
purge himself before the Council, notwithstanding he had fled to Rome.
Thirdly, that it is said, (...).
your Holiness believed that he had appealed unto you, that is, your Holiness
was made to believe, that he had right to appeal unto you, which yet you were
not able as one which was convicted by his own confession, notwithstanding the
sleights and practices of the Legate. Fourthly, that Celestin here is fairly
entreated no more to protect or receive their Priests or Bishops, as you (say
they) shall find ordained in the Council of Nice, whereas that which you
pretend is not there to be found: so that the lie was put upon those three
Popes as plainly, and as mannerly withal, as possibly could be devised.
Fifthly, that whereas they talk so much of that fountain of Gods spirit,
flowing so plentifully at Rome, in the person of their Bishop; by far greater
reason it is to be presumed, that it will not wax dry and fail among so many
holy persons assembled in their own Province. Sixthly, that they will not
hear a Latere, that they know not what they mean, nor found they any such
officer mentioned in the Canons of the Church, as also that they never heard of
any such clerks, as lately came by strong hand to put his decrees in
execution: by which attempts of theirs it appears how much ground their
ambitious violence had already gotten, through the breach which was made in
their liberties by those rebel Bishops which fled unto them for protection.
And this is that which the Fathers call Typhum seculi in Ecclesiam Christi
inducere, Typho isto.
to bring in worldly pride and arrogancy into the Church of Christ: which
they doubted not to speak unto Boniface himself, saying, We believe, that
seeing thou sit in the Roman Church, we shall no longer be oppressed with
this vain pride, calling him always Domine frater. For whereas they triumph
in this word Sanctitati vestrae, i. your Holiness, they must understand, that
the Popes themselves used the same style, and gave the same title to them, and
to all other Bishops; as Zozimus writing to these very Africans, We are
persuaded (says he) that your Holiness has been informed touching the
proof and trial which we have made of Caelestius his absolute and sound
faith: and so likewise to others.

Against this maine wall of truth and verity, Baronius opposes the brittle
glass of his own fancy, seeking to darken this clear light with the smoke
of But (says he) it may be that the text was corrupted, Baron. vol. 5. an.
419. art. 70. and sequ.
and this word Nicene put for Sardican, and I am forced to believe, that these
acts are not reported truly and as they ought to be. Tell me reader, whosoever
thou art, will such a shift serve in a matter of this importance? Idem ib. art.
87.
Secondly (says he) what advantage was there to be gotten, in alleging the
one for the other? for was not the Sardican Innocent ever plead for himself
other than the Canon of Nice, under color of this glorious name to dazzle the
eyes of men, and to abuse the world. Thirdly (says he) what likelihood that
the Africans would withstand these Appeals, seeing they had been used from
all antiquity? the only thing which they misliked was the form. What need of
answer to this argument, more than the bare recital of the argument it self?
and who doubts of their presumption and arrogancy? Or who knows not, that
evil manners give commonly occasion of good laws, that usurpations cause
orderings, and that if injustice Celestius, a companion and an abettor of the
heretic Pelagius, was condemned in Afrike; August. contra duas Pelagij, ep. l.
2. c. 3. Epistola Zosim. ad Aurel. Carthag. episcop.
that he appealed from this sentence to Zozimus Bishop of Rome; that he
admitted of the appeal, and that this was but the year before: true; and
Baronius, you may perceive that this proceeded of that Papal humor, to admit
of all plaintifes, suffering themselves with flattery and fair words to be
abused often times by the most dangerous heretics. But say, I pray you, what
follows? Is it not, that the Africanes complained of these wrongs? that
Zozimus carried it not far? that he was regulated and ordered the next year
following? Augustine. epist. 261. edit. Plantin.
Yea, but (says he) Do you not see so and so many examples of these Appeals
mentioned and thereupon alleges his 261 Epistle all at large. Annalist would
be, as he is: Does he not see, that all these examples were before the law was
made, and that they were the proper occasion and cause of this Decree? and do
men in Commonwealths matters ground themselves upon abuses, or rather upon
Laws? upon that which, de facto, is done, or rather upon that which of right
ought to be done? The truth of the cause is this: Anthony Bishop of Foussall
in Afrike being deposed by the Bishops of his own Province, got letters of
commendation from the Primat of Nicomedia to Zozimus Bishop of Rome, by means
whereof he found access to Zozimus, and after him to his successor Celestin;
who, bad man as he was, went about to restore him by force of arms. Augustine,
who was present at his condemnation, wrote to Celestin in this manner: We are
threatened (says he) with a Posse comitatus, and force of arms, to put the
sentence of the Apostolic See in execution, and so shall we, poor Christians,
stand in greater fear of a Catholic Bishop, than the heretics themselves do
of a Catholic Emperor: Let not these things so be, I do conjure thee by the
blood of Christ, and by the memory of the Apostle S. Peter, who warns those
which are set over the Christian assemblies, not to dominiere with violence
over their brethren. What could this holy Bishop do more, to stay the course
of his rage and madness? but in that great Synod of Carthage, he with a
multitude of other worthy persons laid the axe to the very root of his
pretended soueraignetie, by their Baronius in this cause of Antonie Bishop of
Foussall cries out, O admirabilem Dei prouidentiam, etc. O the wonderful
providence of God, Ib. art. 76.
in matters concerning the Catholic Church! at that very time when
controversy was between the Fathers of Afrike concerning the Canon of Nice,
God would have it, that a cause should fall out, by occasion whereof Saint
Augustine himself, who was present at that Council, was even compelled to
record unto posterity so many examples of those who had recourse and did
appeal to the Church of Rome. Tell me, I say, whether we have not far
greater cause to praise his goodness, in that out of these enormities and
abuses he was pleased to direct this Council, to set down a rule, and a
certain order, by which the Churches Baron. vol. 5. an. 419. art. 92.
Fourthly, will you see (says he) how much they attribute and yield to the
Church of Rome? When they went about to set down a certain Canon of the
Bible, they consulted Boniface thereupon, requesting him to confirm it: and
what likelihood, that they would not use the like submission in the rest of
their Canons? But the very reading of that Canon is a refuting of this
assertion: Council. Carthag. Can. 47.
It seems good unto us (say the Fathers in that Canon) that nothing be read
in the Churches but only the holy Scriptures; which are these, Genesis,
Exodus, Leuiticus, etc. Wherefore their resolution and decree was absolute
without any reservation, both that the Scriptures only should be read, and
also which books they are which ought to be accounted for We will also that
this be signified to our companion in Priesthood Bonifacius, and others, to the
end that they may confirm it; for so have we received from the Fathers, that
these only ought to be read in Churches. Now if the Popes authority alone had
been necessary to the validity of this Canon, what needed they to signify
it unto others? This therefore was naught else but a testimony of their
mutual love and charity. Baronius here stormeth because we say, That by
occasion of that forenamed Canon the whole Church of Afrike was cut off from
the Communion of the Church of Rome; because it thence follows, that S.
Augustine, and such a multitude of other holy Fathers died out of the
Communion of the Church of Bonifacius the second, which testifies, that they
were not reunited till a full hundred years after. I confess, that whereas it
is there said, Under the reign of Justin; the mistake was easier of Justin for
Justinian, than that of Nicene for Sardican, and the inconvenience thence
arising is very great: for what then shall become of so many Martyrs, put to
death during those hundred years, under the persecution and tyranny of the
Vandales? But they themselves must look to that: Sure I am, that this is none
of their greatest cares, witness the poor Grecians in these days, who have
now lain groaning under the yoke of the Turks so many years. And if this
Epistle was not written by Bonifacius,

Bellarm. de Bontif. Romans l. 2. c. 24.
Let the reader now judge what reason Bellarmine had to say, that those Fathers
never intended to forbid their Bishops to appeal to Rome; seeing they name
Bishops in express terms, and ordain that all causes should be determined
within the same Province: Or what conscience, when he says, that S. Augustine
understood that Council otherwise in his 262 Epistle, August. ep. 262.
because he there says, that Caecilian needed not to care for the conspiracy
of his adversaries, seeing himself For what can he gather from thence but
only this, that it was no hard matter for him to purge himself unto those
Churches, in case he had been traduced: for if he thence conclude, That
therefore he might appeal to Rome; as much may be said and concluded of all
other places: But he was wise not to quote the place, for there is nothing (and
he knew it well enough) which makes for his purpose. And farther here observe,
that S. Augustine was present at this Council, as appears by his 207 Epistle.

An. 431.
that about the year 431 the General Council of Ephesus was assembled
against Nestorius, where we find not this pretended Primacie in any sort
acknowledged. For as touching the calling thereof, Socrat. l. 7. c. 3.
the Bishops (says Socrates) assembled themselves together out of all quarters
unto Ephesus, by order from the Emperor. And Euagrius and Nicephorus say,
Euagr. l. 1. c. 3. Nicephor. l. 14. c. 34.
that they were assembled by the letters of the Emperor directed to the
Bishops of all places. And the Synod it self in more than twenty several
places uses these words, By the will of the most religious Kings; meaning
Theodosius and Valentinian. Acta Council. Ephesin. in 1. to. Council. (...), c.
1. to. 2. and cap. 17, 18, 19. and passim. Ib. pa. 99. 177. 201, 202. Bellarm.
l. 1. de Council. c. 19. Acta Council. Ephesians. c. 17.
And the Acts all along speak in this and the like manner, Whom your Majesty's
commanded to come to Ephesus etc. and, Their letters commanded us so etc. and,
By virtue of the Edict of the most religious And so likewise wrote Theodosius
unto Cyrill, that he had appointed the Bishops to assemble at Ephesus out of
all parts, at Easter. And Caelestin Bishop of Rome writing to Theodosius: We
yield (says he) our presence in the Synod which you have commanded, by those
whom we have sent. As for the Presidencie in that Synod, it is a matter
questionless, and not denied by our adversaries, That Cyrill Bishop of
Alexandria presided; only they say, that he was Vicegerent to Pope Caelestin:
having no other color for their assertion but this, That the Pope requested
him to execute his sentence given in the Synod at Rome against Nestorius. But
the Synodall Epistle to the Emperor evidently shows, that that was done long
before this Counsel at Ephesus was called. And the truth is, that the Cyrill:
but at a pinch a forgerie must help. A certain modern Writer, in his
abridgement of the Councels says, That in this Council presided the blessed
Cyrill, Bishop of Alexandria. Isidor. Decret. Paris. impres. an. 1524. pa. 79.
To. 1. Council. in Council. Ephesians. Colon. an. 1551.
Which sentence he took out of Isidore; but he adds of his own head these
words, In the place of Pope Calestin; which are not to be found in Isidore: and
Bellarmine himself is more than half ashamed of it.

Now let us see what advantages Baronius here takes; and first, Nestor. epist.
ad Caelestin. ex Co. Anto. August. apud Baron. to. 5. an. 430. art. 3. (...).
Epist. Cyrilli. ad Calest. in Act. Graec. pa. 141. Baron. vol. 5. an. 430. art.
11.
When Nestorius Bishop of Constantinople had broached his heresy, against the
union of two natures in Christ: Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria took him to task;
and then they Nestorius was the first; Fraternas nobis inuicem debemus
colloquutiones etc. We owe (says he) each to other brotherly communications:
and Cyrill much after the same manner, The ancient customs of the Church
advise and counsel us to take instruction one of another etc. And hence it is
that Baronius concludes, That no matter of Faith could be questioned without
the Bishop of Rome; yet how many heretics have we already seen condemned,
sometimes without him, and sometimes in despite of him? Secondly, Caelestin
upon this alarm given him by Cyrill, called a Synod at Rome, and from thence
wrote a long Epistle to Nestorius, the faith of the Church of Rome, of
Alexandria, of Constantinople, and of the whole Catholic Church; not as now
the fashion is, of the Roman Catholic Church; Epist. Caelest. ad Cyrill. in
4. to. Cyrill. and in ep. Pontif. numer. 3. extat Graec. (...) Page 85.
if not, he declares him excommunicate: and withal he sent a letter, in
nature of a Proxy unto Cyrill, whereby he requested him to denounce and put in
execution this sentence of his: a thing done every day between friends and
equals. And whether tended all this, but only to join his authority with
that of Cyrils, to kill this cockatrice in the egg? The words themselves are
plain and clear: The authority of our See (says he) being joined unto
thine, that is to say, using thine own authority together with ours; and
using the power of our succession, that is, using our power, as if we ourselves
were there present, thou (...).
and if he abjure not his perverse opinions within ten days, your Holiness
shall presently put another in his room. This they did, and all was little
enough to depose a Patriarch: and yet the question remains still, Ib. art. 26.
whether Cyrill did ever accept of that Proxy or no, though he might well have
done it, without any prejudice at all to his authority? As for the Phrygium
and Mitre, and the name of Pope, and Judge of all the world, which Caelestin is
said to have sent to Cyrill, he should have done well first to have proved,
that Caelestin ever used such names and weeds himself; and every man knows,
that the name of Pope was aunciently given to Priests and Bishops without his
leave: neither is it probable, Balsamon. in Nomocan. Phocij, tit. 8. c. 1.
Nicephor. l. 14. c. 34.
that he which was so forward to challenge to himself the Balsamon and
Nicephorus, who lived the one five, the other six hundred years after; and
even they report it, not as a matter certain, only they say Fama est, the
report is, etc. as of a thing that has no ground of truth.

Thirdly, this Proxy of Caelestin unto Cyrill, which was only for the
execution of this sentence, Baron. an. 431.
Baronius would feign extend to a faculty of Legatship, by virtue whereof
Cyrill should preside over the Ephesin Council, as representing the person of
the Pope. But we would know where this title of Legate is so much as once given
him: for seeing that we have the Acts of this Synod more at large Caelestin
having no purpose to be there himself, and Nestorius by reason of his heresy
being made incapable, the Pope could be content that the world should think,
that Cyrill was there to supply his room, as doubting that his own Legates
would not be able to prevail for the presidencie, no more than they had done
in former Councels; and Cyrill himself perhaps might be glad to Caelestin, for
the easier suppressing of so great and so potent an adversary as Nestorius
was. And indeed Euagrius speaks of Cyrill as of one (...), (...), page 197.
i. which exercised the room of Caelestin: And the Council it self uses
these words, Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria, who exercised also the place of
Caelestin, Cyrill. in Apolog. ad Theodos. to. 4. (...).
speaking of him as of one which executed the sentence of Caelestin, as
appears more plainly in his letter unto Theodosius. But let Baronius tell
me, whether in all that Council he be once styled by the name of Lieutenant or
Legate of Caelestin? or do not all the proceedings euict the contrary?
Caelestin Arcadius and Patroclus Bishops, and Philippicus a Priest, Ex collect.
Creseo. ib. art. 9.
(...), i. his Legates: and Baronius himself produces their letters of
Credence, which they had unto the Fathers of the Council. Now I would know,
what need of any Legate at all, at least of so many, if Cyrill had been his
Lieutenant? Or is it likely that he would have made no mention of Cyrill in
them, not so much as to say, We have sent these to supply our room together
with Cyrill? Now these Legates came thither a day after the fair, when all was
done, and when sentence was already solemnly pronounced against Nestorius:
and yet Baronius tells us, that they were sent to put the sentence given
against him at Rome, in execution: and whence then was it, that the Fathers, as
Cyrill testifies, the Synod placed the venerable Gospel in the holy Throne,
as crying in the ears of the Fathers, Judge rightly you that are Judges,
between the holy Gospels and the words of Nestorius. Was the Gospel, trow
you, placed there only to execute the sentence given by the Pope? or do you
call this the holy Ghost, coming from Rome in a budget? And why also does the
Council in the preamble to that their sentence use these words, (...)
We have thought it necessary for us to proceed to the examination of his
impieties? as taking no notice of what had passed in the Roman Synod, unless
you will say, that because when sentence was now ready to be given, there is
mention made of Caelestin, and of his letter, (so dangerous a thing is it to
our Liberty to Baronius has here omitted, and is as follows: (...), Page
130.
Cyrill Bishop of Alexandria has subscribed, pronouncing with the Council:
Iuuenal Bishop of Jerusalem has subscribed, and so the rest each one according
to the order of the Patriarchs; and Cyrill assumeth no other quality or title
but his own: in which quality, and in no other, Epist. Synod. ad Theodos.
apud Cyrill. to. 4.
the Synodall Epistle written to the Emperor styles him, by the name of the
Head of the Congregation of Bishops: and when the Popes Legates came afterward
in the fourth Session (before which time sentence was already given and
signified to Nestorius) they took their place, and sat with Caelestins letters
were read, the Synod cried out, To Caelestin a second Paul: I confess; and
did they not the like of Cyrill, crying out, To Cyrill a second Paul: there is
but one Caelestin, but one Cyrill. And what other demand, I pray you, did
those Legates make, but only that they might have the Acts, to subscribe unto
them? a thing not to have been denied to any ordinary Bishop, which had come
late as they did. And yet Baronius would feign have it, Iterata damnatio.
that this subscription of theirs was a second sentence, confirmatorie of that
which had been given by the Council; whereas they themselves writing to the
Emperors, signify only this, that they are of the same belief and opinion
with the Synod. (...).
Now if Cyrill Cyrill was not Legate for the Pope, but was only requested to
pass his word unto the Council for the Orthodox belief of Caelestin.
Fourthly, Philippicus a Priest of Rome, and one of the Legates, in his speech
said, that he rejoiced to see that the members did so well agree with their
holy Head. (...), Page 195.
And hereupon Baronius makes a flourish, and because these Fathers had the
patience to hear him, Do thou see Reader (says he) how all these Fathers
were content to hear him without repining? For my own part I know not what he
would have had them to do in this case, unless it be that they should have
made an uproar in the Synod, and have fallen by the ears about it. He should
rather have considered, how at the Cyril the Head of the Congregation of
Bishops: but of every such insolent pranke which the Popes or their Legates
play, Baronius is ever ready to make a Title. But will you now know who was
Sovereign in this Council? The Synod by their letters to the Emperors, in all
humility ask leave to depart every man to his own home, seeing that all
controversies were now decided: And the Emperor upon relation of what they had
done, gave his confirmation in this manner: (...) pa. 273. (...).
The Emperor (...).
duly informed, has pronounced, That the holy Oecumenicall Council has
done all things according to the Canons, and therefore has displaced and and
thereupon the Fathers ordained Maximinus. And farther the Emperor commanded
them to return every man to his own home.

Consider we also, that the Fathers of those times speak of this Primacie by
virtue of Saint Peter's chair, in far other terms than now men use to do.
Saint Ambrose expounding those words of Saint Paul to the Galathians, Ambros.
ad Gala. ca. 2.
where he compares himself to Peter: He names, says he, only Peter, and
compares himself to him, because he had received the Primacie, to lay the
foundation of the Church among the Gentiles. Now I would know whether Rome were
not of the Gentiles? if Peter? But he adds yet farther: Yet we see full and
absolute authority given to Saint Peter, for the preaching to the Jews; and
so likewise full and absolute authority was given to Paul, to preach unto the
Gentiles: For which cause also he terms himself the Teacher of the
Gentiles in truth and verity; and yet was he never Bishop of Rome. For, says
he, every man according to his ability took unto him, as by lot, the
dispensation: And a harder matter it was to draw those unto the faith which
were a far off, than those which were near at hand: as if he meant to
prefer Paul before Peter, as one which undertook the harder task. August.
in Johan. Tract. 124. and in Epist. Johan. Tract. 10.
And Saint Augustine, The Church, says he, is founded upon the rock; from
which rock Saint Peter took his name: upon this stone, says our Savior: of
Peter: but those who would not build upon Peter, but upon that stone, said, I
am of Christ. Saint Basil doubtless never dreamed of this Primacie: he saw
indeed, and grieved to see the pride and hautinesse of the Bishop of Rome: for
with what indignation speaks he of him in his tenth Epistle? Yea, but, say
they, in his 52 Epistle to Athanasius, speaking of the combustions in the East,
he says, That he purposed to write to the Bishop of Rome. I confess, but to
what purpose would he write? only for this, Basil. Epist. 10.50.52.
To request him to give them his advise, and that he would admonish such as
were perverse. How much more gloriously does he speak of Athanasius underwent
the care of all the Churches; and calling him the shelter and refuge of them
all. And speaking of the Church of Antioch, Miletius, says he, presideth
there, as over the body of the Catholic Church, Chrysostom. in Math. c. 16. and
in sermon. de Pentecost. Eusebius. Emiss. in sermon. de Natiui. Chrysostom. Homil. 43.
in Math.
and of which all other Churches are but as parcels. And Chrysostom, Upon this
stone: he says not upon Peter, for he has not built his Church upon a man,
but upon that faith, and confession, and words of piety. And in like manner
speaks Eusebius Emissenus. And Chrysostom having laid this doctrine for a
ground, goes on, and speaks plainly: Whosoever, says he, among the Bishops
(he excepteth none) shall desire this Primacie here on earth, shall undoubtedly
find confusion in heaven: and be which affects to be the first, shall not be
numbered among the servants of Christ. And upon the Epistle to the Galathians,
speaking of Saint Paul, He had, says he, Idem in Epist. ad Galat. c. 2.
before declared, that he was equal to the rest in honor, but now he
compares himself to the greatest, that is, to Saint Peter; showing that
every of them had received equal dignity. Now if the Apostles themselves
were equal, how comes there one superior among their successors? And yet
this was spoken at what time the Pope began apparently to exalt himself above
his fellows; for of this very age it was that Socrates speaking of
Innocentius, Zozimus, Boniface, and Caelestin, Socrat. li. 7. c. 10 (...).
Bishops of Rome, under the Emperor Theodosius the younger, testifies, That the Sea of Rome, like where the Latin interpreter has put in Quasi, which word is
not in the Greek it self.

Add hereunto, That in those days all the Patriarchall Churches were equally
called Apostolical, and not the Church of Rome alone: Sozom. l. 1. c. 16.
edit. Graec. 17. (...).
For Sozomene speaking of the first general Council of Nice, In this Synod,
says he, were present for Apostolical Sees, Macarius Bishop of Jerusalem,
Eustachius of Antioch, Alexander of Alexandria; but Julius Bishop of Rome was
absent by reason of his age: ranking Julius in the same order and degree with
the rest. In which sense the Bishops of the East, as Theodoret reports,
writing to Pope Damasus, Theodoret. li. 5. ca. 9.
call Antioch the most ancient and that of Jerusalem they term the Mother of
all Churches. So likewise Ruffine, Ruffin. li. 2. c. 1.
though himself a member of the Western Church, as being a Priest in
Aquileia: In the city of Rome, says he, Syricius succeeding unto Damasus, and
Timotheus in Alexandria unto Peter, and after Timotheus came Theophilus, and
John in Jerusalem after Cyril, restored the Apostolical Churches: And
therefore this usurpation of the Bishop of Rome proceeds from the devil, and
from none other.

Neither do we in all this age find any trace of that pretended donation of
Constantine, but rather we light upon many arguments to prove the contrary;
witness the very production of the Instrument, and the Vatican it self. And
for further Boniface the first, and Eulalius, contending together for the
Popedom) Symmachus governor of the city wrote unto the Emperor Honorius, he
says in this manner; Baron. vol. 5. an. 418. art. 81. and sequent. Absoluta
iussione. Idem an. 419. art. 2. and 3.
That since the knowledge of these matters belonged to him, he thought fit to
consult his Majesty out of hand: who thereupon (rightly informed or not, I
will not say) by his absolute command gave order, That Boniface should
presently void the place; and if he obeyed not, that forthwith he should be
cast forth by force. And when a little after, for his more due information, he
had assembled a Synod out of diverse Provinces, To the end, says he, that the
cause being debated to the full in our presence, Ib. art. 10. and sequent.
may receive a final and absolute decision. And thereupon he sent for Paulinus
Bishop of Nola (a man at that time Aurelius Bishop of Carthage, and sent for
Italians, French, Africans, and others; Ib. art. 15.
and in the mean time provided the Church of Rome of a Bishop, namely,
Achillaeus Bishop of Spoleto, to the end the people of Rome might not be
unprovided of a Bishop at the feast of Easter: Commanding the Church of Lateran
to be set open to him, and to none other. And when Eulalius offered, contrary
to the Emperors command, to intrude himself into the city, the Emperor, by
the advice of the Bishops there assembled, gave sentence in favor of Boniface,
commanding Symmachus the Governor to receive him into the city; which he did
accordingly, with these words: Your Majesty has confirmed his Priesthood,
Statutis coelestibus per me publicatis and edictis de more positis.
etc. And when I published your Edict every man rejoiced And to conclude,
Boniface falling sick, to prevent the like inconvenience against hereafter,
wrote to Honorius, to provide by his authority, that the Popedom might no more
be carried by plots and canuasses: The Epistle it self in the Councels bearing
this Title, Supplicatio Papae Bonifacij; and being full of these and the like
clauses, God has given you the regiment of worldly things, and the Priesthood
unto me: You have the government of worldly matters: and therefore we were
worthy to be blamed, if what was heretofore observed under Heathen Princes,
should not now be observed under your glory, etc. Under your reign my people
has been much increased, which now is yours. Neither does the Emperor put
this from him, as a thing not properly belonging to him: But let the Clergy,
says he, know, that if God If therefore the Bishop of Rome had been at that
time Temporal Lord of that city and territory thereunto adioining, would he
have used these kinds of language? Neither was it far from this time that
Synesius Bishop of Ptolemais in his 57 Epistle, Synes. li. 57. (...).
To couple the civil power, says he, with the Priesthood, is to join those
things which will not hold together: they busy themselves in worldly causes,
whereas we were appointed only for our prayers.

11. PROGRESSION.
Of the Pretense which Pope Leo the first made unto the Primacie.

An. 450. Leo. 1. in Anniuersar. de Assumpt. Sermon. 2. and 3.
ABout the year 450 Leo the first would not give over his pretense unto the
Primacie, and therefore took for a ground those words of our Savior, Tu es
Petrus: For, says he, Peter is here called a stone, or foundation, etc. and
all his power was in his See, there his authority was principally seen, etc.
He is the Primat of all Bishops, etc. Whatsoever Christ bestowed on the rest,
he bestowed it by his means, etc. all which we read in those his sermons which
he preached among the townsmen of Idem Epist. 8. ad Flauia. Constantinop.
And farther, he challenges Flauian Bishop of Constantinople, for that he had
not first advertised him of the state of Eutiches cause, taking occasion
thereupon to doubt of the lawfulness of his excommunication: and would feign
have persuaded Flauian, that he had done much wrong to him and to Eutyches
both, in not giving way to the appeal which Eutyches had put in to the Sea of
Rome. Idem Epist. 89. ad Episc. per Viennens. prouinc. constitut.
This same Leo also complains to the Bishops of Viennois in France, That one
Hilarie Bishop of Arles took upon him to install and to depose Bishops without
his priuitie: which he terms to be no less than a Petri soliditate
deficere, to fall away from the soliditie of Peter; whom, says he, our Lord
associated to himself in the individual unity, and commanded him to be
called as himself was called. And yet in their ancestors oftentimes were
pleased to consult the Seo Apostolic; seeking by these sugared words to make
them swallow the bitter pill of his tyrannous Supremacy: and branding Hilarie
with the name of a turbulent Bishop, and one who ordered Church matters by
force and violence. Last of all, this Leo writing to the Emperors, Idem in
Epist. 12. ad Theodos. and ad Pulcher.
assumed the title sometimes of Pope of the Catholic Church of the city of
Rome, and sometimes, of the Roman Catholic Church, and in the end, of
Universal Bishop. And because by virtue of the second general Council of
Constantinople, to which, says he, no man may presume to add: Idem Ep. 55. ad
Pulcher. August.
falsely grounding his pretense upon this Council, as his predecessors had done
before him. But now comes the question to be decided, How far forth the
Fathers of Chalcedon gave way to his demands and chalenges.

OPPOSITION.
First therefore Leo himself tempereth his style in many places with sober
language: Upon this rock will I build my Church: that is, says he, Leo. sermon.
2. in Natali Apostolor. Petri and Pauli.
Upon the sound foundation of this faith my Church shall raise and exalt it
self; and the gates of hell shall not prevail against this confession, and
the bands of death shall not restrain it. Which confession surely was proper
to no one man, but common to all the Apostles, and all the Orthodox Churches.
And would God he had stayed here, and not suffered himself to be carried down
the stream of his own ambitious humors, in claiming his pretended privilege.
Secondly, upon the complaint which he made to Flauian Bishop of
Constantinople, Flauian gave him the reasons of his proceedings, and why he
could do no less than excommunicat Eutyches for his heresy: But, says he,
this I do to the end that your Holiness having knowledge what has Which was
nothing else in effect, but to request him to execute his sentence for him,
within the limits of his jurisdiction, as in the like case he would have done
for him. And we must farther understand, that Eutyches seeing himself
condemned, had presently recourse, by way of supplication, unto Leo: wherein he
gave him to understand, That he had appealed from Flauian, and from the rest of
the Bishops of the East, unto him; requesting him to take his cause into his
own hands: which made Leo to demurre upon the cause. And thereupon Flauian
showed him, that as in other things, so also in this, Eutyches had abused him
with a tale: Flauian. apud Leon. Epist. 9.
giving him thereby therefore, says he, as it becomes thy Priesthood, and as
thy manner is, so make the common cause thine own, and confirm even by thy
writings his condemnation, so canonically pronounced against him. Wherefore
though we should grant that Eutyches did appeal, yet it appears that Flauian
never gave way thereunto, no more than the Fathers of the African Council did
before, in the case of the Pelagians. Thirdly, though we have nothing
concerning this Hilarious, but what we have from his opposite and adversary
Leo, yet is it evident, that he bent himself against this pretended Primacie:
For, says Leo, this man cannot endure to be subject to Saint Peter: Leo.
Epist. 89. ad Episc. per Viennens. prouinc. constitut.
and why? because, says he, he presumes to ordain Bishops in France. And
again, He derogateth, says he, from the reverence of Saint Peter, etc. whose
Primacie whosoever shall deny, that man is filled with the spirit of pride,
and has plunged himself into the pit of hell: Whereas indeed the question, as
it appears, was touching the Primacie either of the Pope in general, or of
Leo in his particular; not at all of the dignity of Saint Peter. And these
demands were ever made at the solicitation of certain Bishops, which
complained to him of the censures of their own Provinces, which they requested
might be revoked at Rome, as appears by the Epistle of Leo himself, who yet
ever uses this protestation, that he thereby pretended no right in himself to
ordain Bishops in their Provinces, as Hilarie would persuade them, but only
sought to maintain them in their own against novelties, and usurpations says
he, our privileges: Which he sought under the name of Saint Peter, to extend
to all causes whatsoever; yet this I find, that all his plottings had not much
prevailed here in France, about the elections of our Bishops, in the year 478:
An. 478. Sidon. Apollin. in Concion. quae sequitur Epist. 9.
for we find in Sidonius Apollinaris, Bishop of Clermont in Auvergne, that the
choice of the Metropolitan of Bourges being by common consent of the Bishops of
that Province, after the death of Eubodius, referred unto him, he nominated
absolutely Simplicius to succeed in his room, having first made a very
solemn oration to the Bishops, in these words: In the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the holy Ghost, Simplicius is the man whom I nominat to
be Metropolitan Summum Sacerdotem.
and High Priest of your city: and therefore was not Simplicius to hold his
See in fee from the Bishop of Rome, or to do homage for it. And it is pretty
to observe, how this canting of Rome was not understood in those days in
France, seeing that he himself writing to Lupus Bishop of Troies in Champagne,
calls him our Lord the Pope, directing his letter, Domino Papae Lupo; this
title being at that time common to all Bishops, not proper to any one: and
which is more, he calls him Father of Fathers, and Bishop of Bishops, which
watches over all the members and parts of Gods Church. What wonder then if we
find that Stephen a simple Archdeacon wrote so to Damasus, or Isidore to
Hormisda Bishop of Rome?

Fourthly, this question concerning the Primacie was clearly decided by
occasion Leo made thereunto in the general Council of Chalcedon, where he
thought to have set the Bishop of Constantinople clean beside the cushion: and
these are the very words of the Canon, taken out of the Greek copies of that
Council, Council. Chalced. can. 28. (...).
Can. 28. The decree of the mayor part of voices of that holy Synod, made
concerning the prerogatives and degree of the Sea of the most religious Church
of Constantinople: Following in all points the decrees of the holy Fathers,
and acknowledging the Canon of 120 religious Bishops, now read in our hearing;
We here assembled under Theodosius of holy memory, late Emperor of this
royal city of Canstantine, called new Rome, do ordain by common consent and
assent, for the honor, degree, and prerogative of that most holy Church of
Constantinople, called new Rome, in all things (...).
because it was the royal or imperial city (and not in regard of Saint
Peter's chair.) And likewise those other hundred and fifty Fathers moved with
the same reason and consideration, did heretofore impart like privileges and
honors to the Sea of new Rome, thinking it fit in their discretions, that the
city which they saw honored with the name of the Imperial seat and presence
of the Senate, (...).
and equalled in every point of civil honor to the old Rome, should likewise
in matters of the Church be equally advanced, as being next unto her. By which
we see no prerogative belonging to Rome by virtue of Saint Peter's chair, and
Constantinople equalled in all things to her, save only in precedencie; which
being a matter Gratian, to gratify the Pope, has corrupted this Canon; and
where the Fathers say, Dictinct. 21. c. Renouantes.
In matters likewise of the Church, he has shamelesly altered the words, and
says, Non tamen in rebus Ecclesiasticis, i. But not in matters of the Church;
turning vpside down, by the change of one word, the whole drift and purpose of
the Council: yet he cites this Canon out of the sixth general Council,
because it is there again repeated. But see, I pray you, the bounds and limits
which this Canon prescribes to him: So that, says that Canon, the
Metropolitans So that, as you see, the Bishops are to be ordained by the
Metropolitans, and the Metropolitans only by the Archbishop of Constantinople;
and consequently the Bishop of Rome is likewise restrained in his jurisdiction,
which is limited to him no less than to the other. This decree pleased Leo but
a little, though agreed upon by the common advise and consent of 630 Bishops.
Neither is that true which Gregory the Great affirms, That this Council of
Chalcedon, in honor of Saint Peter, Gregor. in Registro Epist. 32. and 38.
lib. 4.
offered And that none may say, That howsoever the Greek copy has it, yet it
is otherwise read in the Latin, it is apparent that this 28 Canon is expressed
in Latin in the same words: Aequa antiquae Romae priuilegia tribuerunt: i.
Aequis antiquae Romae priuilegijs frui, etc. i. They gave equal privileges
with those of old Rome. Now the Popes Legates there present opposed against the
passing of this Canon; for Lucentius, one of the Legates, seeing them all
subscribe, stood up and said, They have subscribed before the Canons are
written; meaning, before all the acts of that Council were written. The
Bishops thereupon made answer, Council. Chalced. Act. 16. pa. 930.
That no man was compelled thereunto. Lucentius replied, That they stood upon
the Canons 80 years agone, by 150 Bishops (meaning the second Council of
Constantinople, which yet, as we have showed, was confirmed and ratified by
Pope Damasus) and went from the decrees of 318 Bishops (meaning the Council of
Nice.) Whereupon the Judges there present, who represented the person of the
Emperor, to maintain peace between them, commanded each party to allege
the Canon for himself: and then did Paschasin, another of the Legates, allege
that forged fifth Canon of the Nicene Council, with this Preface, Pa. 938.
Quod Romana Ecclesia semper habuit Primatum. But Constantine Secretary to the
Council, taking the book, which was delivered to him by Aetius a Deacon of
Constantinople, recited it as it was indeed, beginning that Canon with these
words, Antiquae i. Let old customs stand: where there is nothing to be found
for the Popes advantage. Whereupon the Judges took again the voices of those
which had subscribed, who all and every of them answered, That before God they
had subscribed of their own accord, and according to the true intent and
meaning of those Fathers: especially Eusebius Bishop of Dorylaeum, Euagr. de
Eusebius. Doryl. li. 2. c. 2.
a principal agent in procuring this Council to be called against Eutyches: I
have, said he, subscribed willingly and of mine own accord, because I my self
did read this very Canon to the Pope, in presence of the Clerks of
Constantinople, and the Pope then acknowledged and received it. Where, by the
way, there is this marginall note set, Either be lies, or for the present he
deceived Saint Leo. But the Judges thereupon pronounced This is a just
sentence, we all say the same thing, it is the opinion of us all; we all will
bide by this: only Lucentius the Legate protested, That the Apostolic See
which had sent him thither, could not give way to such proceedings: requiring
that Canon to be retracted; if not, at least his protestation to be admitted,
and entered in the acts; to the end, says he, that we may have what to answer
to the Apostolic man, Pope of the Universal Church; and that he may thereupon
advise upon the injury now done unto his See, and of the means to redress
this wrong, and to reuerse this Canon. And when the Bishop of Sebasta had said
to the Judges, We all refer our selves to the verdict of your Magnificence;
What we have pronounced, the whole Synod has approved. And this was the
resolution of that Council of Chalcedon. These things standing as they do,
Baron. vol. 6. an. 451. art. 136, 137.
tell me Reader, in thy conscience, what reason has Baronius to affirm, that
this Canon was clandestine, and carried by secret practices? But it should
seem that there were good wits at Rome heretofore as well as now: For this
whole Action of the Council was long since expunged out of the old Roman
Code, contrary to the truth and credit of all other copies in the world. And
where is the honesty of Bellarmine and Baronius both together, Bellar. l. 2.
de Pontif. Romans c. 13.
while they affirm, that when Paschasin had alleged for himself the said
fifth Canon of Nice, Liberatus the Archdeacon affirms, That the opposition
made by the Popes Legates was not regarded neither by the Bishops, Liberat. in
Breuia. c. 13.
nor yet by the Judges: And although (says he) that the Apostolic See
excepteth against that Canon even to this day, being supported by the Emperor,
yet the decree of the Synod continues still for firm and good: and seeing
also, that we have the Epistles of Pope Leo himself to Anatolius Bishop of
Constantinople, written after this Council was concluded, wherein he debateth
this point with all eagrenesse, and upon this occasion rejects that second
Council of Constantinople, Leo epist. 53. ad Anatol. Item ep. 54, 55, ad
Martian. and Pulcher. Et epist. 62. ad Maximum Antiochenum.
calling it a rotten ruinous Council and drawing the Bishop of Antioch into
the quarrel, complains sometimes to Martian the Emperor, sometimes to
Pulcheria the Empress, not knowing to what Saint first to turn himself: and
all this partly under color of these words, Tu es Petrus (though to me it
seems a strange matter, that those 630 Bishops should not be able to reach
unto the mystery of these words) and partly upon a false supposition of that
Canon of the Nicene Council, which he protests that he will ever hold as
sacred and inviolable, and which he will never suffer to be infringed; whereas
yet there is no one word to be found in all that Council, which makes for his
pretended Primacie.

It remains now, the better to understand what degree of authority and power
the Bishop of Rome had at this time aspired to, (for Leo by his good will would
not loose one ynch of his height) that we consider who it was which called this
Council, and who presided in it. Concerning the former of these two, the first
action of this Council tells us. Council. Chalced. Act. 1.
That it was called by the commandment of the most religious and Christian
Emperors, Valentinian and Martian. And Martian himself in a certain
Constitution of his, Martian. l. 3. Co. de sum. Trinit.
says it was called by his commandment. And the Fathers themselves, when all
things were now ended, asked leave of the Emperors to return every man to his
own home. But perhaps it were best to hear what Leo himself says concerning
this matter: Leo therefore upon Theodosius in this manner: Leo. ep. 9. ad
Theodos. Iubeatis.
If your piety (says he) will vouchsafe to yield so much to our petition,
command, we beseech you, that a Council of Bishops be assembled in Italy.
Where you see, that even in Italy, where himself was all in all, he requested
that a Council might be called by order from the Emperor. And not long after
understanding that Theodosius had assigned it to be held at Ephesus, Idem ep.
12. and 17. Constituit.
Since so it is (says he) that your piety has appointed a Council to be
held at Ephesus, I have therefore sent thither my brethren Julian a Bishop,
Reinold a Priest, and my son Hilarie a Deacon, to supply And afterward,
Vicem praesentiae meae.
when he was pressed to be present in person at the Council which Theodosius
commanded to be held, he very mannerly excused himself, upon the shortness
of the time, and the troubled estate of Italy. And again, You have commanded
it (says he) to be held at Ephesus: and having showed the inconveniences of
holding it at that place, Command (says he) I pray you, Leo epist. 13. ad
Pulcher. Augustam. Idem ep. 23, 24, 34, 49, 50, 51.
that it be held in Italy. Which request he therefore so often made, that he
might thereby justify the Appeal which Eutyches had formerly put in, to the Sea of Rome, as he affirmed, and which Flauian Bishop of Constantinople had
remonstrated to be false. And in the 49 Epistle to the Emperor Martian he
uses the like style as before: We hoped (says he) that your clemency would
have yielded so much to our entreatie, And even like terms and phrase of
speech does he use in his 50 and 51 Epistles. And we farther observe, that all
these his Epistles bear date according to the Consuls, as the use and custom
of those times was, as an evident mark and argument, that the Pope at that
time acknowledged their authority, without claiming to himself the dominion
and seigniorie of Rome. Neither may we give credit to Bellarmine when he
affirms, that Dioscorus was thrust out of this Council, for presuming to
call a Synod without the authority of the Pope; quoting these words which was
never lawful to be done, nor never was done before; for so is he pleased to
abuse his reader: for these are the words of Lucentius, one of the Popes
Legates, and not of the Fathers of the Council. To be short, Epist. Synod. ad
Leon. in Council. Chalced. Baron. vol. 6. an. 450. art. 7, 8, 9. (...).
the Epistle of the Synod unto Leo would not suffer him to doubt who they were
whom they acknowledged as Authors of that their assembly, namely, the Grace of
God, and the most religious Emperors: and so speaks that Epistle throughout,
and Baronius himself does not deny it.

As for the Presidencie, which we distinguish from the Precedencie or
Preseancie (for we deny not, but that in regard of the honor of that City,
he held the first place) Leo tells the Emperors, Leo. ep. 12. and 49.
that he sent his Legates to supply his room And in his Epistle to the Synod
he speaks yet more aduantagiously for himself, saying, Idem ep. 47.
That in the person of his Legates or Vicegerents they should imagine that he
himself was there to preside among them; whether he meant properly of the
Presidencie, or else of the Preseancie, I know not: but this is certain, that
in the Acts of this Council we find no certain order observed. Which disorder
grew from hence, because that Leo had drawn Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople
into suspicion, and Dioscorus of Alexandria was already attainted: for not to
enuenome their minds, which were already but too much exasperated toward each
other, their order in speaking was many times of set purpose altered: and
sometime the Judges, who represented the person of the Emperor, were feign to
Council. Chalced. Act. 1. Cognit. 2.
That the Patriarche should take each of them one or two of his own Province
unto him, that they might handle the points of faith each of them with their
several companies, and so report to the whole Synod what they in particular
had agreed upon. Whereas if the Popes Legates had presided, this action should
have belonged to them, and not unto the Judges. Yea, but says Bellarmine, They
sat first; Bellar. de Council. and Eccles. l. 1. c. 19.
a good argument for their precedencie: and they spoke first; no good argument
for their presidencie: for every man knows that the argument had been
stronger, if they had spoken last. But That they pronounced in the name of the
Pope, and of all the Council, the definitive sentence against Dioscorus, and
that they degraded him from his Priesthood. But he should remember, that it is
one thing for a man to give his voice, as Paschasin did, and that first before
all others, for Leo, and another thing to give a sentence. In which matter we
shall need the less proof, because Paschasin himself having given his voice,
Council. Chalced. Action. 3.
adds farther, Let the holy Synod (says he) now decree; meaning of
Dioscorus his cause. Then follows Anatolius Bishop of Constantinople, and the
rest, every one in his order, which take up ten or twelve leaves; and then in
the end, and not before, was his condemnation signed. To conclude (says
Bellarmine) the Synodall Epistle it self written unto Leo says, Tu sicut
membris caput praeeras, i. Thou were there over the rest as a Head over the
members, in the person of those who supplied thy room. I grant, in order of
sitting: as for the Presidencie, read on, and thou shall find toward the end of
the letter, that the Emperors themselves, Imperatores ad ornandum decentissime
praesidebant.
to grace and honor that assembly, presided in a comely order. But grant
we, that the Pope did preside in that Council in the person of his Legates;
what gets he thereby, more than this, That to his face, and in the midst
of all his ruff, he lost his cause, condemning himself by his own mouth, and
pronouncing equality where he pretended superiority, and that in so great and
so renowned a Council as that of Chalcedon was?

Neither may we here forget, how that when as about this time the Bishops
Valentinian thought it fit to meet with this inconueience, by making a law
against them: Many (says he) complain of Episcopal jurisdiction, it is fit
therefore to make a law for the restraint thereof. Iurgium.
If therefore there shall happen to fall any brawle or debate between
clerks, and the parties shall be pleased to compromit the matter, let the
Bishops hear the cause, and determine of it. Which course is also permitted to
lay men, if the parties can so agree upon it, otherwise we no ways suffer them
(meaning the Bishops) to be Judges. In Cod. Theodos. inter Novel. Valentinian.
lib. 2. tit. 12.
For it is apparent, that by the laws, Bishops and Priests have no
jurisdiction: neither ought they to take knowledge of any causes by the laws
and ordinances of Honorius and Arcadius, contained in the Theodosian Code, save
only in cases of religion. If But because this law is long, and extends it
self to so many particulars, therefore I refer the reader to the place it
self, where this law is set down at large. But welfare Baronius, Baron. vol.
2. an. 452. art. 52, 53.
who says, That the making of this law incensed the wrath of God, and caused
Attila, with the Hunnes, to come down upon the Empire. And why should we not
rather believe the Writers of those times, who impute that calamity to the
corruption of the Church and Churchmen? witness Saluianus Bishop of Marscilles.

Baron. an. 444. vol. 6. art. 30.
But to return from whence we came, Baronius is bold enough to affirm, were we
as forward to believe, that the Popedom gat ground exceedingly under the
reign of Leo the first. And first he says, that Dioscorus, that coile-keeper,
which according to the custom says he, dispatched away letters unto Leo;
which dispatch of his Baronius interprets for no less than a plain homage.
But can or will he be ignorant of this custom used among them? namely, that
Bishops, especially those of the greater Sees, so soon as they were elected,
were wont to send away their letters general to all the Churches, at least to
the most principal among them, together with a brief confession of their
faith, thereby to advertise them both of their election, and also of their true
profession, for the better maintenance of that bond of peace and love which was
between them? How many such entercourses and reciprocal letters have we
recorded between the Ep. 42. edit. Pamel.
And so likewise did Cornelius Bishop of Rome advertise those in Afrike of his
election; whereupon S. Cyprian and his Colleagues congratulate him; and which is
more, approve of his election: for the very Epistle which Cyprian wrote unto
him in answer to his letter, bears this inscription, Of the election of
Cornelius approved by him, the said Cyprian. And yet he never demanded Annats,
by virtue of such his approbation. Yea but (says he) Leo reproved Dioscorus
for certain ceremonies used in the Church of Alexandria, and calls him back
to the vsages and customs of the Church of Rome, because that S. Marc was a
disciple of S. Peter. Leo. ep. 81.
No man can doubt but that Leo was ever harping upon this string: but tell me,
Cyprian. ep. 68.
when Cyprian Bishop of Carthage either Cornelius, or sharply reproved Steven
(both Bishops of Rome) did he thereby pretend or challenge any primacie over
them? if so, by the like reason we may say, that S. Paul challenged a
superiority over S. Peter, Paulus Ep. ad Galat. 1.
when he withstood him to the face. Secondly, in the case of Hilarie Bishop of
Arles, Baronius would prove unto us, that Leo disposed absolutely of all
matters in France: Baron. an. 445. art. 9. vol. 6.
For (says he) upon the difference which fell between the two Bishops of
Vienna and Arles, by petition made unto Valentinian the Emperor, he obtained
that famous Rescript, directed to Aetius, Lieutenant General for the Emperor
in France. It is true, and the History says as much, that the Emperors of
that age growing weak in the reins, used all means possible to hold in with
the Bishops of Novel. Valentin. post Codic. Theodos. tit. 24. de Episco. ordin.
That no man presume or attempt to do any unlawful act against the
authority of this See. Item, that he shall be believed concerning this
variance now in question. Item, that whatsoever the Pope of the eternal City
of Rome shall decree in this case, shall be taken, reputed, and held as a law.
I could wish that this man would but remember a saying of his own, so often
reiterated by him, and with so vehement exclamations: O how dangerous a thing
is it for Princes to meddle with matters of the Church, Jdem, an. 448. art. 47.
for they wrest them to their own purposes: which words he uses of this very
Emperor Valentinian. But I wonder, that he observes not in this very
Rescript, that the Emperor there testifies, that these pretended successors
of S. Peter, held the worthiness and deserts of S. Peter, the glory of the
City, and the authority of the Synod, have established this Primacie of the
Popes: Of what Synod, save only as they made him to believe of that of Nice?
Now if the law of God ordained it, what needed the honor and dignity of the
City? But his words are plain, where he wills them to observe in all points
what the Fathers have granted to the Church of Rome. But in doubts and
questions of this nature, I would know who is most to be credited, Valentinian
or Hilarie? Hilarie I say, who (as Baronius confesses) was the first which
subscribed to the Council of Orange; an Prosper, Gennad. de Script. Eccles. c.
69.
and the scourge of the Pelagians which were in France: a man commended in the
writings of Antiquity, for his zeal, charity, and learning; so much honored
by Prosper, and one which deserved to have his life written and published by S.
Honoratus Bishop of Marseilles, reckoned in the number of Saints, Martyrolog.
Roma. 5. Maij.
even in the Martyrologie of Rome it self; and to conclude, so much renowned
in the Histories of the Lumbards, for opposing himself against this Leo: which
yet, in all probability, so good a man would not have done, had not Leo passed
those bounds which the laws and customs of the Churches had prescribed to
him. Thirdly, Baronius extends this omnipotency of Leo as far as Spain;
for (says he) he assembled there a General Council of all those provinces.
Turibius a Bishop of Asturia, who had in times past been his Notarie,
consulted him concerning the Heresy of the Priscillianists, which much
infested the Churches in Spain (as the Popes wits ever served them to take all
occasions at the first bound, if they made for their purpose,) Leo returned him
an answer, in all choice and select terms of advantage which could be
devised, interpreting this consultation of theirs for an argument of their
subjection; and in stead of counsel, which the other requested, laid his
commandments upon him, Leo. ep. 93. c. 17.
Let there be (says he) a Synod of Bishops called amongst you: which words may
seem to proceed only from advise and counsel; but a little lower in that
Epistle, We have written (says he) to the Bishops of Arragon, i. and have
commanded them, or as Baronius renders it, have enjoined them to call a Synod:
although a Latinist would peradventure say, that it should be written Consilium
Synodi, and not Concilium: as if he had given them advice and counsel only to
call a General Synod; for what can Concilium Synodi be, seeing that these two
words signify one and the selfsame thing? But this is not all: for the first
Council of Bracara (which he alleges as held under Honorius the first, about
some 180 years after) teaches us, that even at that time the calling of
Synods belonged to Kings, Council. Baracaren, ian praefat.
and not to Bishops: We (say they) here assembled by the commandment of King
Aremirus, who has licenced us by his royal commandment etc. Shall Flauian
Bishop of Constantinople, in a certain Council of Bishops of his
jurisdiction, degraded Eutyches from his Priesthood, Epist. Flauia. ad Leon.
post ep. 8.
and deprived him of his Church by occasion of his Heresy: having so done, he
advertised Leo thereof, to the end that he should shun him in his Church. This
brotherly office Baronius interprets for a servitude: Knowing well (says
he) that to this first See it appertained of right to take knowledge of such
Heresies as should arise: Baron. vol. 6. an. 448. art. 53.
whereas the words of Flauian show sufficiently, that that care was cared for
already, Epist. Flauia. post epist. 9.
We have given you to understand (says he) by our letters, Which shows, that
the blow was already given, without expecting any advice from Rome. To what
purpose then, may some man say, served his advertisement? his words declare,
That your Holiness (says he) knowing what has been done in his case, may
inform the rest of your Bishops of his impiety, for fear least any, through
ignorance of his opinion, should communicate with him, taking him to be
Orthodox. As if he should have said, We have discovered his venom, and do
advertise you thereof, that you may Baronius falsely seeks to persuade us?
Fifthly it is to be noted, that Eutyches, old fox as he was, fell in first with
Leo, and knowing his humor, told him, That he had appealed unto him, but that
Flauian would not give way thereunto. Whereupon Baronius infers, that such
Appeals were ordinary and usual in those times; and yet hitherto we find not
one. True it is, that in the second Council of Constantinople, which ensued
shortly after, Leo made instant suit for it, and was earnest to see the Acts,
where he found it thus written, Constantine a reverend Deacon says, Extant in
Council. Chalced. Act. 1.
Eutyches when his condemnation was read unto him, appealed to the Council of
the Bishops of Rome, of Egypt, and of Jerusalem, I would ask now, Whether this
Appeal seems to have been made to the Bishop of Rome, or to a General
Council? and it follows, Florens said, The assembly being broken up, in the
midst of the prease, he told me in my ear, that he appealed to the Council
of Rome, of Egypt, and of Jerusalem. Basil Bishop of Seleucia adds farther,
Eutyches the Abbot, while the company was yet sitting, said, That if the
Fathers of Rome and of Alexandria should tell him, that he ought to confess
that there were two natures in Christ inseparable, though not confounded, no
not after the union, then he will confess it: but he spoke not these words by
way of Appeal. But this is it which I would know, Whether by virtue of this
surmised Appeal the Bishop of Alexandria might not also take as much upon him?
and Leo himself, as he confesses in his Epistles, was almost surprised by
this stratageme. Sixthly, Theodosius the Emperor, by occasion of this trouble
in the Church, assembled another Council at Ephesus: he called thither Leo
Bishop of Rome, Vol. 6. an. 449. art. 65, 66, 67, 68.
Knowing well (says Baronius) that a General Council could not be assembled
without his authority: a thing (says he) deeply to be graven in the readers
memory. But now what proof? Leo (says he) in the beginning of his Epistle to
the Synod of Ephesus tells them in this manner: The religious Emperor has
yielded this respect and reverence to the divine ordinances, to use the
authority of the Apostolic See, for the bringing of his holy intents and
purposes to pass. All which I confess, was fit and requisite to be done: but
is there no difference whether the Emperor call Leo to the Leo him; or whether
the Emperor by his authority call a Council? And he adds these words, As if
the Emperor had been desirous to have that now declared by Peter himself,
which was once so highly commended in his confession: and thereupon he falls
to ruffling with his Tu es Petrus; as if these words had been spoken not by
Leo, but by the Emperor himself. But see the frothinesse and vanity of this
man, who never considers, that this very Theodosius wrote in like manner to
Dioscorus Bishop of Alexandria, and to all other Bishops, threatening them, That
for default in appearance they should not be held excused either before God or
him, In Council. Chalced. art. 1.
because no man could now absent himself, but such as was wounded with a
guilty conscience. Neither does he regard, that the Emperor was purposed to
make Dioscorus We (says the Emperor) according to the Canons of the holy
Fathers, do give and grant unto him the authority and Primacie etc. The reason
was, because he thought (as well he might) that the Bishop of Rome would not be
there in person, no more than he had been in the former Synods, and held
Flauian Bishop of Constantinople as a party in this quarrel: Wherein (says
Baronius) the Emperor usurped the authority of the Pope, seeing that Hosius
presided in the Council of Nice, and Cyrill at Ephesus, both of them as Legates
from the Pope. All which are mere surmises, and as we call them, demands of
Principals, Petitio principij
taking those things for granted, which are principally in question, and most
contradicted. But where was shame, when he adventured thus to abuse, unto his
own purpose, Eutyches) the Popes Legates were by Eutyches challenged and
refused, as partakers with Flauian Bishop of Constantinople. Whereby Leo first
began to have his eyes opened, and to perceive the trick that Eutyches had put
upon him. And Flauian himself was there condemned, and degraded, as a man set
upon by a company of rogues and thieves, (...)
and therefore was this Council afterward called an Assembly of Thieves.
(...).
In this extremity Flauian Appealed from them: and this is the first place
where we read this word used properly, and as a term of law. And hereupon
Baronius groundeth himself, Liberat. in Breuia. c. 12.
and says, That he Appealed to the Bishop of Rome; and Liberatus Archdeacon of
Carthage, who says, That he Appealed in writing to the Sea Apostolic: an
author whose estimation Baronius himself has cried down in so many places.
Add hereunto, That the Council of Chalcedon, wherein the acts of this Synod
are repeated, reports, That he said only, Appello a te, i. I Appeal from
thee; without specifying to whom. And Hilarie a Deacon of the Roman Church,
says only, That upon the sentence given, contradicitur, that is, It was
gainsaid: meaning, that he appealed from that roguish company to a more lawful
Synod, which he entreated Leo to obtain of the Emperor, for the justifying
both of his cause and person. And to speak a troth, there was none other now
left to whom he might address himself, the Bishops Flauian was outragiously
beaten, and shortly after partly of grief, partly of his wounds, dyed. And
even such was that Appeal also of Theodoret, unheard, and yet condemned; who
in his Epistle to Leo, uses these words, Help me, says he, who do Appeal
unto your Holiness, and command me to appear before you, that I may yield an
account of my faith unto you. Now whether he spoke this properly, and as a
term of law, or only by a metaphor, we should better discern if we had the
Greek, though the Greek word it self, (...), he not always taken in this
rigor: For when the Fathers in the Council Athanasius, in their Synodal Epistle
request all Bishops to receive him unto their communion, they use these words,
(...), Epist. Synod. ad omnes Episcopos.
that is, We Appeal you, or call upon you, as reuengers of such injustice; In
which sense this word is found in many other places. Wherefore when it is said,
That he Appealed to Leo, the meaning is, that he had recourse unto him; hoping
by his means to procure a more lawful Synod. And in effect the letters of
Valentinian the Emperor, Extant in Council. Chalced. act. 1.
who at that time resided at Rome, and of Galla Placidia to her son
Theodosius, testify the same: In which letters, at the suit of Leo, they
request Theodosius, That upon this Appeal in writing, he would be pleased,
that Leo in a Synod of Bishops, assembled out of all quarters of the world, in
And Galla in her letters plainly shows, that this was the drift and purpose
of Flauian, Who, says she, has already sent his libell to the Sea
Apostolic, and to all the Bishops of these quarters, by them whom the Bishop
of Rome had sent to the Council at Ephesus. This Appeal therefore was put in
as well to them as to the Bishop of Rome (save only that he was the more
eminent person) and was to be heard and determined by them all, in the Council
which was to be assembled; as Galla in her Epistle concludes, That the matter,
says she, may be ended in a Council, and by the Sea Apostolic: So that all
Baronius makes so much account of, Valentinian speaking of the Bishop of Rome,
says, as has been already alleged, That Antiquity was it which gave him
the Primacie, or chief place among the Priests. And Galla in her Epistle: It
is fit, says she, that we reserve in all points that respect which is due unto
this city, as to the Lady of all other cities. And like terms uses she
unto Pulcheria, whence it follows, An. 451.
that this Primacie was taken as founded upon the positive law of man, and that
the claim from S. Peter comes but as accessarie to the principal.

Flauian had no other purpose, appears by the proceeding of this cause; for
the year following, at the suit of Leo, Martian the Emperor appointed a
general Council to be held at Chalcedon; wherein are to be seen the traces
of the former Synod, and the whole cause opened in a second hearing, to the
confusion of Eutyches, and shame of all his partakers and abettors, and to the
justifying of Flauian, and of his memorial after him in the presence of the
Popes Legates; who there saw the Church of Constantinople before their face
equalled with that of Rome, by an express Canon, made in confirmation of that
other of Constantinople. And let our adversaries now show us any one Appeal
after this made from Constantinople to Rome. Eighthly, Baronius is feign to make
the best Baron. vol. 6. an. 451. art. 149.
that this Canon was made under the correction and good leave of Leo: Grant it
were so: and that the Synod in their Epistle required his confirmation: and
thereupon, after his manner, makes a great flourish: See thou, O Reader,
says he, how these six hundred Fathers thought this Canon, though resolved on
in two general Councels, yet to be of no force and virtue, without the
authority of Leo? and indeed a man not acquainted with his tricks might happily
suffer himself to be lead away with his discourses: but the Canon it self is
too plain, and the continual practice of the Church shows, that the
validity of that Canon never depended of his confirmation. True it is, that
they were willing to draw Leo to some reason by fair words and remonstrances
which they made unto him: and Baronius, who commonly spares for no paper to
set down things in the largest size, concealeth one part thereof: but thus run
the words of the inscription, The holy Oecumenicall Synod assembled by the
grace of God, and by the commandment of the most religious Emperors, at
Chalcedon, to Leo Archbishop of the Romans. Whence it appears, that this
Synod was not called by his authority, neither was he accounted for Universal
Bishop by that Synod, as Baronius would make the world to believe: Baron. ib.
Confirmauimus.
and as for the prerogative of the We have, say they, confirmed the Canon of
150 Bishops, meaning, of the second general Council: and therefore after this
confirmation of 600 Bishops, Baronius should a little blush to bring such cold
conjectures. And again, We have so defined, say they, thereby to cut off all
confusion, and to establish the order of the Church. And in the end they use
these terms, Vouchsafe holy Father, to embrace this our decree, as is fit
and seemly for the love that ought to be between us. And what reason then has
Baronius of a sentence definitive to make an interlocutorie, especially seeing
that they so often repeat the same thing? We believe, say they, that the honor
of the Sea of Constantinople was confirmed in a general Council, we now
entreat you to honor And the cause why they sent him the Acts, was this, That
he might thereby perceive that they were led in all their consultations by
divine instinct; which they never expected to be sent from Rome, neither did
they look to have their doings reformed there. Martianus apud Palladium.
We read indeed, that the Emperor by whose commandment they were there
assembled, confirmed their Acts: The things, says he, Per nostra precepta
stabilita sunt.
agreed upon in the Council of Chalcedon are established by our authority:
neither shall they go unpunished who shall in any point contemn this law. And
indeed after this time matters passed according to the tenor of this decree,
do Leo what he could to the contrary, who yet did openly bear out the
Bishops of Antioch and Vol. 6. an. 457. art. 23.
Ninthly and lastly Baronius says, That in the Epistle which the Clergy of
Alexandria, oppressed by Timotheus, wrote to the Emperor Leo, they request that
his impieties might be made known to the Roman Pontife, and to others. But why
does he not speak plainly, and say, as indeed it is, As to others; for they
make no distinction between him and others: The words are these, Vouchsafe, we
pray you, to write to the Bishop of Rome, also to the Bishops of Antioch, of
Jerusalem, of Thessalonica, of Ephesus, and others, as your Mightiness shall
think fit: and For our cause has been already manifested to Anatolius
Archbishop of this royal city, meaning Constantinople: which they did by
virtue of that Canon of Chalcedon. Extat inter Epist. Illustr. Council. Chalced.
And the truth is, that this Anatolius in the Epistle which he wrote to the
Emperor Leo upon this occasion, brandeth Pope Leo with the mark of an
heretic, and censureth him to be unworthy of the Priesthood.

12. PROGRESSION.
Of sundry variances which fell out between the Churches of Rome and
Constantinople, by occasion of the Canon of Chalcedon.

AFter this Canon of Chalcedon there was ever debate continuing between the
two Churches of Rome and Constantinople; the one refusing a superior, the
other not admitting of an equal; the one seeking to stretch the wings of his
authority and jurisdiction over the East, the other over all. And this was the
cause why the Bishops of Antioch and of Alexandria, seeking to cross the
attempts of the Bishop of Constantinople, who was lately start up to this
authority, and was therefore the more obnoxious to hate and envy, had
recourse oftentimes to him of Rome, and as it had been in despite of the one,
subjected themselves to the tyranny of the other. Baron. vol. 6. an. 482. art.
1.
Whence the Pope himself, and Baronius his Simplicius hereupon gave
confirmation to Calendinus Bishop of Antioch: Simplicius Epist. 14.
having no other proof or ground than this, That Simplicius in a certain
Epistle of his to Acatius Bishop of Constantinople, says, That he had received
under the wing of the Sea Apostolic, Euagrius li. 3. c. 10.
the Priesthood of Calendius. But Euagrius an Historian of that time, says
simply without any reference unto any, That Calendius undertook the stern of
that See, and persuaded all which came unto him, to pronounce Anathema against
Timotheus, as against one which troubled the Church of Alexandria, and whose
predecessor as Baronius himself affirms: but he adds farther, That
Simplicius had made Acatius his Vicar general in the East. His reason is, for
that Simplicius, upon the troubles of the Church of Alexandria, Simplic. Epist.
17 Delegatum tibi munus attendes sensus tuos prudenter attolle.
complains to him, That he had not advertised him thereof, willing him to
behave himself wisely in the charge which was delegated unto him. Committed
then it was, but by whom? must we needs understand, that by him? and why not as
well either by the Church, or by the people, seeing nothing is expressed? And
farther, these are Simplicius his own words. And, if he did delegate such a
charge unto him, yet where shall we find that the other accepted of it, as from
him? Acatius in Epist. ad Simplic.
And I would know whether in his Epistle to Simplicius he ever calls him by
any higher Title, than Archbishop of Rome? and in the cause of Timotheus he
professes, That as for his so great a dignity, he held it only from Christ
the Prince of Priests. And a man may easily perceive by the complaint which
Simplicius made unto him, Simplic. Epist. 1.
that if ever he did make him offer of such an office, he made but little
reckoning of his kindness. And the like may be said, when he offered to make
Zeno Bishop of Seuile his Vicar in those parts. Simplicius also in his Epistle
to Acatius, speaking of one John, who was elected in the room of the said
Timotheus: It remained only, says he, that after our thanksgiving unto God, he
should by the assent of the Sea Apostolic receive his desired confirmation.
Whereupon Baronius sets his mark in the margent, Baron. an. 482. vol. 6.
art. 14.
with these words, It belongs to the Bishop of Rome to confirm the
Patriarchs: and, do thou see, O Reader, says he, that the ancient custom
was, that the election neither of the Bishop of Alexandria, neither yet of
Antioch, was held for good, without the authority of the Bishop of Rome? and
yet he produces no one Canon to this purpose, or any one case wherein it was
so practiced. Nay, we find, that when Acatius made light of his command, and
when he was willed by the Emperor Zeno to bear out Petrus Moggus against
John, who was an Orthodox Bishop, he qualified his style with fair words and
reasons: It was reason, says he, that one condemned by public decree (meaning
this Petrus Moggus) should also be acquitted in a common assembly. Where was
then this omnipotency of the Pope, when he spoke in this manner? Yea but in
the end, says Baronius, when this John was deposed, be appealed and for proof
hereof voucheth Liberatus the Archdeacon, Liberatus in Breuia. c. 18.
who dwelt too far off to be a good witness in this cause. But if his
appeal was no other than was that of Athanasius, we are at an accord: for we
have already proved, that Athanasius did not appeal in form of law, as we
commonly call Appeals, but had only recourse unto him: and so Euagrius
expounds it unto us; John, says he, as Zachary reports, Euagr. Histor.
Eccle. c. 12. and 15
having given a sum of money, contrary to his oath taken, to the Emperor,
was chosen Bishop of Alexandria, whence the Emperor commanded him to be
banished; who flying thence went unto old Rome, where he made much trouble;
saying, that for observing the decrees of Leo, and the Canons of Chalcedon, he
had been deposed from his See. Where you For, says he, Simplicius moved with
these words, wrote unto Zeno thereupon: who sent him word again, That he was
deposed indeed, but that it was for perjury: And shortly after Simplicius
died, and John withdrew himself into Italy, where the Bishopric of Nola was
conferred upon him. And Liberatus also says, That Acatius by his letters
required the Sea of Rome, That if any of his Clergy fled unto him, Ad eundem
confugerint.
he would be pleased not to receive them: which are the proper terms used in
these and the like cases.

OPPOSITION.
All these contentions about jurisdiction proceeded from that Canon of
Chalcedon, An. 472.
to which the Popes would by no means stand; and yet they never talk Leo the
Emperor, Leo Imperat. li. 16. c. de Sa^ros. Eccles.
in this manner: We decree and ordain, That the holy Church of this most
religious city, Mother of our piety, and of all Christians whatsoever, of the
Orthodox religion, and the most holy See of this royal city (meaning
Constantinople) in regard that she is the royal city, shall have all
privileges and honors, concerning the creation of Bishops, and taking of
place before all others, and all other points whatsoever, which they now have,
or at any time heretofore have had. Baronius says, Baron. an. 472. art. 3, 4,
5.
That the good Emperor was overtaken by the wiles and subtilties of Acatius:
and indeed it were hard if he should have nothing to say. But in vain did
Simplicius oppose against it, whether before Leo, or before Basiliscus: and
therefore Gelasius, An. 493.
which came after, changed his style, and not alleging for himself either the
Nicene Canon, as Leo did, or the ancient observation of the Church, as others,
held himself fast to his Tues Petrus: This goes not, says he, by any
Synodall constitutions, Gelas. in Epist. ad Dardanos.
but by the very voice of the Gospel, Tues Petrus, etc. And why then did his
predecessors, especially Leo, make their very throats hoarse with crying out,
and alleging always the Nicene Council? But Gelasius hereupon deprived
Constantinople of the right of Patriarchship; and having so done, pronounced
openly, That the Sea of Rome might without a Synod, of himself, either absolve
those whom a Synod had wrongfully condemned, or condemn such as had deserved
it; and Ib.
And again, The Canon, says he, has so ordained, that all Churches ought to
appeal to this See, and from this See to none; because this See judges of all
Churches, and no Church of it, as being without spot or wrinkle: and yet as
much without spot or wrinckle as she was, his very next successor Anastasius
(see, I pray you, whither this pretended prerogative carried the Church) was
defamed, for the heresy of Acatius, which was oppugned by Gelasius; and he was
indeed a mere Acatian, do Baronius what he can to free him from this
imputation. Liber Pontificalis.
For the Pontifical book, in express terms says, That many Priests, and
others of the Clergy, withdrew themselves from his communion, for that without
the priuitie or knowledge of the Bishops, Priests, and Clergy of the Catholic
Church, he had secretly which yet he could not effect, being prevented by God,
and stricken by his dreadful judgment. By these Maxims therefore of Gelasius,
it appears what a large step he had made into this tyranny over the Church;
but yet he forbore to meddle with the civil government: and it seems he
prophesied to us, as sometimes Caiphas did, Gelasius de Anathematis vinculo.
when he gave us this rule following: There were, says he, before the coming
of Christ, some in figure appointed over temporal affairs, who were both
Kings and Priests, as was Melchisedech: which manner the devil also imitated
in some of his servants (as his custom is ever to attribute to himself those
things which I refer me now unto the Reader, whether Gelasius his successors
have kept themselves within those bounds which he prescribed; and whether they
have not fallen within the compass of his condemnation, as followers of the
Pagans, and guided by the instinct of the devil, Instinctu diabolico.
while they thus encroach upon the temporal estate? For what Bellarmine, or
what Baronius can reconcile those maxims and positions of Gregory the
seventh, called Hildebrand, with these of Gelasius? And for conclusion, we may
not forget, that because Gelasius wrote once in approbation of certain writings
of Honoratus Bishop of Marseilles, whom Gennadius to have sent him his books;
Baronius infers, That it belongs properly to the Bishop of Rome, to
approve and censure books. What a little wind will serve to fill the sails of
these men's pride and arrogancy! Belike so many learned personages as wrote unto
Saint Augustine, Hierosme, and others, for their approbation of their writings,
took them to be Popes, and so did they take others, when they Imparted their
books unto them: which is so absurd and frivolous, as nothing can be more. And
thus come we now to the year of our Lord 500.

13. PROGRESSION.
What wicked and unlawful means men used about this time, to aspire unto the
Popedom.

ABout the year 500 Italy was all wasted by the Northern nations, An. 500.
who swarmed there in great numbers, which had been enough to have suppressed
their ambition, had it not passed the bounds of all humanity: But it was such,
that every day it attempted something; and for want of work abroad, would
sometimes busy it self at home: Insomuch that it grow an ordinary matter, to
put in for the Popedom many years before the Pope was dead, to get voices
Synod. Roma. sub Symmach. can. 2. and 3.
as appears by the Synod which was held at Rome under Symmachus. Whereof
ensued commonly, sedition, murders, and slaughters; insomuch that it was
necessary for the Emperors, even such as they called and accounted barbarous,
to prevent the mischiefs which usually ensued of their factious combinations.
Wherein those holy men would never have been so eagre a they were, had they
not needed something else more than they did the sheep of Christ. And yet, if
we may believe Gratian, in the midst of all these villainies Symmachus had the
face to say, D. 40. C. non nos. Ennod. in Ap^log. Symmach.
That Saint Peter had transmitted and passed over to his successors, together
with the inheritance of his innocence, a perpetual says he, but that he is
holy, whom we see now exalted to so high a degree of dignity? who if perhaps
he want merits of his own, yet is he sure to be well furnished with the merits
of him which went before him in that place: for he either provides, that none
shall be preferred thither out such as are worthy; or if any other happen to
be preferred, he makes them worthy so soon as they are preferred. Gregory
in our time took the pain to reuiew the Canon Law, and taking especial
notice of this Canon, is bold to equal it with the Apostolic Decrees. And I
fear, that ere it be long, a man may more truly say, that this See has this
especial prerogative Symmachus say to Gratian, who speaking of Anastasius the
second, D. 19. c. Anastasius.
his predecessor, says of him, That he was stricken by the judgment of God,
because he communicated with Photinus the Deacon, a disciple of that master
heretic Acatius: Anastas. Biblioth. in Pontific.
which is auerred also by Anastasius Bibliothecarius in his life.

OPPOSITION.
An. 472.
Odoacer therefore, Captain of the Rugians, having made himself King of all
Italy, about the year 472, for prevention of tumults which might ensue, if
Simplicius should happen to die, made a Law, and published it by Basilius in
the open Vatican, and before the Bishops there assembled, That in case
Simplicius should happen to die, for the auoidance of trouble and hurt, both in
Church and City, none should be elected without his priuitie. Baron. vol. 6.
an. 476. art. 1, 2, 3.
Which Odoacer has at least this commendation from Antiquity, That he was
never offensive or troublesome to the Catholic Church, in matters belonging to
Religion, though himself were a professed Arrian: Cassiodor. in Chron.
and farther, is reported to have been of so good a temper, that in thirteen
years space, which he held Italy under his command, he never took unto him
either the title or the robe of the Emperor; who, all barbarian as he was,
shall yet one day rise in judgment against these men's insolency Sigonius
reports, that this law was made by the advice of Simplicius himself, Sigon.
de Occident. Imperio, l. 15. and 16. Synod. Roma. 3. sub Symmacho, an. 498.
but what author has he for it? For the third Synod of Rome, which was held
under Symmachus, says no such thing, but terms it in precise terms, The
Law of Odoacer. And there was good use to be made of this Law about the year
498, at the election of a Bishop after the death of Anastasius the second: For
by reason that Anastasius the Emperor had filled the fists of a great part of
the Clergy of Rome, to this end, that he might have always a Pope at his own
devotion; it came to pass, that one part set up and named Symmachus, Theodor.
Collectan. l. 2.
and the other Lawrence, and each faction kept quarter apart; until in the end
some being wiser than some, the matter was referred to Theodoric King of the
Ostrogothes, who at that time reigned in Italy; and he preferred Symmachus,
who not long after in a Synod at Rome abrogated this very law, as Sigonius
reports: And we doubt not of the man's good will, but yet we find that this
Law stood in force until the time of Benedict the second; whom the Emperor
Constantine P^goratus, Synod. Roma. 3. sub Symmach.
about the year 68^, absolved from the observance of this Law, as Onuphrius
himself acknowledges. But these matters stayed not here: For four years
after this wound began to bleed afresh. Lawrence was called home to Rome, where
the factions fairly ^^ll to blows: whereat Theodoric took great offense, and
deposing them both, he placed Peter, Paul. Diacon. l. 15. Nicephor. l. 16. c.
35.
Bishop of Al^in, in the room. Paulus Diaconus and Nicephorus speaking there
were infinite spoils and murders committed by either party; the greater part
of the Priests, many Clerks, and a multitude of the Citizens were there
slain, Sabell. Eun. 8. l. 2.
and the holy virgins themselves, as Sabellicus writes, were not spared in
those seditions. Yet must all this pass for zeal toward the Church; Ennod.
in Epist. ad Faustum.
insomuch, that one Ennodius, a Writer of that time, makes them all Martyrs,
who died in the cause of Symmachus: Their blood there shed (says he) enrolled
them in the Register Book of the Court of Heaven. And Baronius is of the same
opinion: and for proof he voucheth a saying of that great Denis, Bishop Denis
wrote to the schismatike Nouatus, who would have made him believe, that he was
taken by force, and made Bishop whether he would or no: whereupon Denis told
him, That it had been better for him to have suffered any mischief, Eusebius.
Histor. Eccles. l. 6. c. 37.
than to have broken the unity of the Church, and that it had been as
glorious a martyrdom unto him, as if he suffered for not offering unto Idols.
True, if rather than thou would be made a Bishop in a Schism, thou would
suffer thy self to be killed: But the case is altered, if thou put thy
self in danger, or causest either thy self or others to be slain, not to
avoid, but to obtain a Bishopric. And such was the case of those which died
in Symmachus his quarrel. And we must remember, that Symmachus, Iornandes de
Robus Gothicis, Synod, Roma 4. sub Symmacho.
where the greatest part of the Bishops of all Italy were assembled, was
called by Theodoric. True it is, that at the first the Bishops began to
remonstrate to him, That the calling of the Synod belonged to the Pope: but
Theodoric produced Symmachus his own letters, wherein he requested him to
assign the place, and Symmachus himself in open Synod gave him humbly thanks
for so assigning it.

Here Baronius puts on his brazen face: Vol. 6. an. 501. art. 2.
He knew well (says he) that to assemble a Synod of Orthodox Bishops
appertained not to him, and therefore treading the steps of his predecessors,
he assembled it by the authority of Pope Symmachus, and the very Acts of the
Council testify as much. And then falls he to his accustomed acclamations:
A memorable matter (says he) that a Prince, a Barbarian, a Goth by nation, a
stranger, an heretic, and an Arrian, do the schismatikes what they could by
importuning him to the contrary, should yet yield such respect and reverence
to the Sea Apostolic. But what if the whole proceedings and the Acts
themselves of this Synod show the contrary? It is therefore to be understood,
that the year before, Theodoric at the instance of the adverse part, had sent
Peter Bishop of Altin to Rome, in quality of a Visitor, to inform himself of
the crimes which were laid to Symmachus his charge. And so it seems, that
Theodoric and Ennodius were not both of the same mind; when Ennodius says,
That the Pope is accountable to none but unto Heaven. Afterward Theodoric gave
order, that this difference should be taken up, Ennod. in Apelog. in l. 20. l.
Council.
or Synod. Roma. 4. Palmaria dicta.
The Synod here assembled out of diverse countries, by the commandment of the
most religious King Theodorie etc. And again, The Royal authority having so
commanded, that the Bishops should assemble here at Rome out of diverse
Provinces etc. The reason is, for that one Metropolitan has no power over
another: and therefore when Bishops of diverse Provinces had occasion to
assemble themselves in a Synod, it could not be done without the Kings
authority: and in this Synod were present the Bishops of Liguria, Emilia, and
Venice, to decide this cause, wherein the Bishop of Rome was defendant. Yea,
but says Baronius, the Bishops told him, that it belonged not unto him; true:
but That the Pope himself had by his letters declared his will touching the
calling of this Synod: which was, that Theodoric should call it; and thereupon
thanketh him for so doing, as having thereby given him the means to justify
and to clear himself. And it follows afterward, That this Synod presumed
not to decree any thing without making the King first acquainted therewith.
And again it is there said, That Symmachus was forced by the Emperor to enter
the lists against his adversaries, and that before the Fathers assembled in
this Synod, as before his lawful Delegates or Commissioners: Nunquam
commisisset.
For (says he) he would never have committed this cause to them as a new
cause, had he held him as already convict. Then follow the Acts themselves,
Whiles they were in deliberation what was fit to be And having expressed the
violences which his adversaries had used toward him, the Fathers spoke and
said, That they must yet again fly to the justice of the Prince etc. who
declared there openly, That the knowledge and ordering of Church matters
belonged unto them: that he brought nothing but reverence with him when he came
to the hearing of such causes: and that he committed it to the power of the
Bishops to hear or not to hear it, and to dispose thereof at their
discretion, provided that by the care and wisdom of the Council the
Christians might have peace within the City. By all which it appears, that
he did not put off his authority from himself, to confer it upon the Bishop
of Rome. In the end these Fathers proceeding according to the commandment
Symmachus again; leaving the judgment to God, of those things which could not
sufficiently be proved by men. And let the reader note these words of the
Fathers, According to the command of the Prince, which gives us this power:
But we restore all Ecclesiastical power to him again, as well within the
City as without. And who will say, that by these words they acknowledged the
Pope for Bishop of all the world? or that Theodoric called this Council by the
Popes authority? especially seeing that we find at An. 509.
That the Council at Agda in Languedoc, of Orthodox Bishops, was assembled and
held by the authority of Alaric, an Arrian by profession, and a Goth by
nation: which yet the Fathers themselves acknowledge in the very beginning of
that Council: Acta Council. Agath.
This Synod assembled (say they) in the name of the Lord in this City of Agda,
by the permission of King Alaric; and therefore they ordained prayers and
supplications to be made for his prosperity. And seeing also we read, that
shortly after, whiles the same Symmachus was yet Pope, the first Council of
Orleans was held: whereof Hincmar speaking in the life of S. Rhemigius says,
That by the advice of S. Rhemigius, An. 512. Acta Council. Aurelian. 1. in 1.
to. Concilior.
Clouis called a Synod of Bishops at Orleans, where were many good things
ordained. And the Fathers themselves of that Council in their Clouis speak in
this manner: We (say they) whom you have commanded to come unto this Synod,
here to treat of necessary matters etc. Which things they desire afterward to
be confirmed by his rightful judgment, though in his Patent directed to them
he speaks with as much respect to them, as he could have done to the Bishop
of Rome himself. King Clouis (says he) to our holy Lords, the Bishops most
worthy of the Apostolic See etc. and at the foot thereof, Pray ye for me, my
holy Lords, Popes most worthy of the Apostolic See. This good King had never
yet learned this lesson, though instructed by S. Rhemigius, that there were no
more Popes but one, no other Apostolic See but that of Rome. All which we have
been feign to deduce at large, to right the History of that wrong which

14. PROGRESSION.
Of sundry opportunities and means which the Popes about the year 500 had to
raise themselves to their pretended Primacie.

IN this age, which came to close up the first five hundred years, many
opportunities offered themselves, to open the passage to the Popes ambition.
First the

OPPOSITION.
Such were then the proceedings of the Popes: yet when he presumed to pass his
bounds too far, there never wanted some one or other to lay a block in his
way: which we should now more clearly discover, had the writers of those days
been as careful to record unto posterity the oppositions of the one part, as
they were to set down the attempts of the other. But this appears, that Leo
his pretencions were ever opposed by the Churches: and we may perceive by
Symmachus Symmach. in ep. ad Presbyt. Illyr. Dardaniae, and Daciae.
his authority was little esteemed. And in Rome itself his own Clergy
accused him to Theodoric, at what time he was wiser than to reply, as now they
do, that no man may presume to ask him, Domine cur ita facis? Neither did his
predecessor Anastasius the second find the Bishops of France and Germany over
gentle in taking their bitt into their mouths, when they wrote unto him in the
time of Clouis the first, and first Christian King of France, that memorable
Epistle, whereof we will here insert some few of the most important clauses.
Non putatiue sed veraciter affirmant Episcopi, that is, The Bishops do
constantly and truly affirm, Epist. episc. Gol. and German. ad Anastas. 2. in
Collecta. Auentin.
that a Council is of greater authority than is a Pope Anastasius. Paul the
Apostle which cries out, Be ye followers of And again, Our weak wit (say
they) cannot conceive what this new kind of compassion means, which these
Physicians of Italy use in the cure of the disease of France: They who pretend
to cure our Bishops, are themselves shaken with a continual fever: they who
promise sight to us, are themselves blind: they take us to be crouchbackes, and
have themselves such a bunch of avarice growing on their backs, that it will
not suffer them to enter in at the narrow gate: they let their own sheep go
astray, and call our Shepherds into the way of truth, going about to persuade
us, that the that is to say, We have no need of your Treacle. Let them take
this for a warning, not to make show of too great zeal of justice, thereby to
draw us into the snare of their King like judgments, least we answer them as
it is in (that is, they which will make themselves gods) shoot their arrows
beyond the stone of salvation, because they are not planted in the house of the
Lord, after that is, are not called by a lawful vocation. And although (say
they) by the shaking of our Oxen of France the Arc of our covenant should be
like to fall, yet it belongs to our Bishops to hold it up, and not to them.
But if they by their evil speaking slander the Arc of our Church, the like
mischief befall them as befell Vzzias the Leuit. To conclude, let them learn
this Syllogism, If there be equal power in all Bishops, then is it equal in
every one: but it is equal in all, ergo in every one. And by this you may
see what reckoning the Bishops of France made of the Bishops of Rome in those
days.

15. PROGRESSION.
That Pope Hormisda took upon him to constitute diverse Vicars of his See in
the West.

AFter Symmachus succeeded Hormisda, who would lose no time. If we may believe
his Epistles, he made diverse Bishops his Vicars in sundry Provinces of the
West: as Auitus Bishop of Vienna in the Province of Narbona, John of Arragon in
Spain, on this side the river Betis; and on the other side, Salust Bishop of
Seuile. These Bishops accepted of this title, thereby to advance and to set
themselves aloft above their brethren: and the Pope cunningly soothed
Anastasius, who would not receive it. The Pontifical Book says, That he did
it by the advice and counsel of Theodoric, forbearing to say, By his
permission, D. 50. c. Si ille qui.
though indeed it had been far more honorable for the Pope to have been
the author of so good an advise himself. And yet, how earnest soever he would
seem to be in the defense of this Council, it is evident that he renounced

OPPOSITION.
These Legates therefore coming to Constantinople, were very honorably
received by the Emperor Anastasius: but because they came as minding to
command John the second, Patriarch of Constantinople, as Basilides reports,
made head against them: I know (says he) that it is fit for an Emperor to
command, not for a Bishop: But if there be cause why, and if he which has
charge of spiritual things must needs command, it is fitter a great deal,
that in this place I should command rather than be commanded. The Pontifical
Book here adds, That the Emperor (no doubt offended with both their
behauiors) sent them out at ab^cke door, and shipped them in a rotten vessel,
commanding the Master of the Ship not to land them at any City. And so in
this business we find ill dealing on all bands. After Anastasius succeeded
Justin in the Empire, an undoubted Orthodox, who called a Synod at
Constantinople Baronius, the Bishop of Constantinople, as it were in despite
of the Pope, is ever qualified by the name of Universal Patriarch; so far
were the Bishops of the East from yielding this authority to the Sea of Rome.
And yet in the reign of this (...) Iustine, Baron. an. 518. art. 70. vol. 7.
Baronius fisheth for some thing, which he may make to se^^e for his own
advantage: he says therefore, That the Bishops of the East saw that they
labored to no end without the Bishop of Rome, and that therefore they treated
with him: That the Emperor Justin sent an ^mbassage unto him: that the Synod
and the Patriarch wrote unto him to send some thither in his behalf, for the
maintenance of the To Hormisda my religious brother, and companion in service?
when Hormisda himself uses no other style but this, (...).
The Bishop Hormisda to John Bishop of Constantinople? Secondly he says, That
the Emperor sent forth the chief of his Court to meet them a great way off:
true, but is it fit that they should interpret the reverend respect which this
Prince used to them, for an argument of his subjection? But he Hormisda in this
manner, Baron. an 519. vol. 7.
Adorando Apostolico Patri: and another of Preuasi and Epirus, To the Father of
Fathers, of equal merit with the Angels. And by this, says he, you may
perceive what respect the Bishops of the East bore unto the Pope of Rome. And
tell me, I pray you, is it reason that of these fooleries, or rather impieties,
Baronius should make a rule of law? or should he not rather look unto the
proceedings of the Councels? It is certain, that Hormisda had delivered his
Legates their lesson in a book, to which the Bishops of the East must first
subscribe, before they might join in communion with them. And the good
Emperor Justin, because he much affected the peace of the Church, and
therefore feared to offend him by Tues Petrus, together with that which they
infer in consequence of that text; and having this for a close, Following in
all things the Apostolic See, and preaching as it ordains. Which clauses the
Bishop of Constantinople shunned as so many rocks, and refused to subscribe
unto them; requesting them to content themselves with this, That he was ready
to testify his faith by his letter, which himself would write to that
purpose. In the end it came to this, That he should begin with a preamble unto
the articles, directed to Hormisda in form of a letter. Which he did, and To
our most blessed brother and companion of service; which suteth but ill with
the Popes Tu es Petrus. And whereas the Pope magnified the Sea of Rome, he
takes occasion to say, I hold these two holy Churches of the old Rome and of
the new, to be but one and the self same Church: where instead of Senior is
Romae, they make us to read, Superioris Romae, by an abreuiation, of set
purpose and wittingly corrupted. For who ever heard speak of a superior Rome?
(...).
or what is more usual, than to say, the elder and the new Rome? And then
follow the articles of Hormisda. Thirdly, when this was done, both the Emperor
himself, and the Patriarch John, wrote unto Hormisda; the one in this manner,
The Emperor to Hormisda Archbishop and Patriarch, etc. And perhaps upon this
ground it is that Isidore in his Chronicle says, That the Pope received this
Title first of all from Iusti^e the Emperor. The other, with the usual
terms of Brother and fellow Minister. Wherein he lets him to understand,
That this general peace proceeded from the piety and virtuous disposition of
the Emperor to the end that he should not offer to arrogat the praise thereof
to himself; and puts him often in mind, that their two Churches were indeed
but one and the same Church; and is far enough from making the one subordinat
to the other. Understanding always, says he, That the sed (...) Churches,
Senior is and noua Roma (and so by this place we may correct the former) of the
old and the new Rome, are but one; Indiuisibilem adunationem.
out indivisible union, and equal confirmation of both Churches. By which
words I would know, whether he intended to subject his Church to that of Rome,
or rather to make them equal each to other? For whereas the County Justinian
terms the Bishop of Rome Arch Pontife, which imports no more, as Baronius
himself confesses, than Archbishop; this argues not any superiority, but
only a Primacie of this See. Neither do those words in the letters of
Pompeius, Archbishop of the Universal Church, make any thing at all for
Baronius his cause, as if the (...).
For it is in the Greek only, of the Catholic Church: a Title long before
given (as already has bin declared) unto Basil, and to Athanasius, and to
sundry other Bishops: Because, as Saint Cyprian says, the Church is but one,
of which every Bishop governs his part or portion alone without a consorts
and the Bishop of Rome had at that time a great part under him. For I would
know, when Pope Agepete consecrated Mennas by the name of Universal Bishop,
whether he purposed to make him Pope or no? and Dorotheus Bishop of
Thessalonica, though inferior in degree to the Patriarchs, yet calls he the
Bishop of Rome Father, and fellow Minister, and Companion in service. Fourthly,
we shall best judge of the cause by casting our eye Hor^isda his Legates had
been foulely outraged at Thessalonica Dorotheus, which had ever much favored
them before, was accused as author of that outrage: Whereupon Hormisda sent
unto his Legates, That they should be instant with the Emperor, that Dorotheus
might be deposed, and banished into some far country, or otherwise sent to
Rome under sure and sufficient guard and withal, that one Aristides, who was
supposed to have had a finger in that business, should not succeed him. The
Emperor his answer was, That there was no reason why he should be sent to Rome
to be heard there, where they might easily acquit themselves for want of an
accuser. And so all his punishment was, to be sent for a few days to Heraclea,
and then was he Hormisda. Here Baronius, Baron. vol. 7. an. ^19. art. 140.
as his manner is, cries out, Is it possible that Justice under an Emperor,
who takes his name from Justice, should be thus forestalled through money, in
the cause of the holy Father for that was the imputation which John, one of
the Legates, laid upon the Emperor. But if somewhat staieth Baronius his
stomach, that the Emperor shortly after consulted the Pope upon certain
points of faith. And what of that? for, his place considered, what more usual?
or what would he infer thereupon? Moreover, he pleases himself much in a
certain sentences taken out of a certain letter Hormisda; which sentence he
causes to be printed in great letters: Ib. art. 98.
We believe and hold for Catholic, that which was intimated to us by your
religious answer. O how dangerous a thing it is to deal fairly with this kind
of people! And what, shall we oppose this fair dealing against all those
proceedings formerly by us declared? And yet he cutteth off this sentence with
an etc. whereas commonly he is no niggard in reciting whole Epistles: and
therefore we have reason to suspect that something follows, which if it were
known would ma^e his cause, especially considering that these Epistles are
taken out of the Vatican, and the greater part of them as yet remain
unprinted. Fifthly and lastly, he makes much of one Possessor a Bishop of
Afrike, who sent a certain commentary Paul, unto Hormisda, and complains
that he could receive no answer: The reason was, says he, Ib. an. 52^. art.
12, 13, 14.
because he well knew that the Catholic Church admits of no interpretation
of holy Scriptures; but only such as were first approved by the Apostolic
See. And where, I pray you, can he show us, that Saint Cyprian, Hilarie,
Ambrose, Augustine, Jerome, Chrysostom, and others, ever sent their books to
him for his approbation? or what should they have done, to have gotten their
books approved, when Pope Marcellinus sacrificed unto Idols, and when Liberius
became an Arrian? and when many of the rest turned Heretics? To what purpose
therefore serves all this discourse of Baronius, but only to busy and to
abuse men's thoughts with childish vanities.

16. PROGRESSION.
That John Bishop of Rome was sent ambassador from Theodoric to the Emperor
Iustine; and what honor the Emperor there did unto him.

An. 524.
ABout the year 524, when Iustine the Emperor had deprived the Arrians of
those Churches which they had in Constantinople, Theodoric then king of Italy,
and a professed Arrian, took offense thereat, and sent John Bishop of Rome his
ambassador unto him (The Popes now use to send kings in their errands)
assisted Liber Pontif. in Johan. 1.
And the Pontifical book says, That they entreated the Emperor with many
salt tears, and that in the end they obtained their request. Which he
repeateth two several times, howsoever Baronius would feign disguise the
matter. And Nicephorus reports, That when John Bishop of Rome was brought to
an equal seat where Epiphanius Bishop of Constantinople was to sit side by
side with him (for he never contested with him for the precedencie) he was not
therewith content, but required to be placed up above Epiphanius, in a throne
by himself: which perhaps was granted unto him, in regard of his quality of
ambassador. Marcellinus speaking hereof, says, That dexter dextero Ecclesiae
assedit solio: ^eaning, that Epiphanius gave him the right hand; which, if we
will credit Baronius in many places of his book, is the less honorable
place. But the Pontifical book makes sure work, and says, That the
Emperor Iustine, in honor unto God, prostrated himself before the Pope, and
adored him.

OPPOSITION.
Theodoric, though an Arrian, yet much commended for his great moderation,
whether it was because he could not endure this pride, or whether he had been
informed, that he had suffered himself to be led away by those extraordinary
honors Iustine had done unto him; immediately upon his return to Rauenna,
chipt him up in prison, where he continued to his dying day: Which made the
Popes for a while after not to carry themselves so bri^kly as before. Yet
persuaded they the common people, Paul. Diac. l. 25.
that a certain good man had seen the soul of Theodorie carried between this
John and Symmachus the chief Senator (whose head he had taken off) into the
isle of Lipara by Sicilie, there to be cast headlong into Vulcans boiling
(...). For we now enter into an age wherein the people was not fed but with
such fables. Now this Pope John passes for a Martyr, and was enrolled among
the Saints, as having suffered for converting the Arrian Temples into Christian
Churches. But Anast^sius Bibliothecarius seems to report the contrary:
Anastas. in Johan. 1. Greg. Turene^s. de gloria Martyr. c. 40.
and Gregory of Boethius and Symmachus lost their heads, for that they had
intelligence with the Emperor against Theodoric. For it is clear, that John
crowned the Emperor at Constantinople, though he had bin already Sacred by the
Patriarch: which was too much for an ambassador to do, who would not
voluntarily fall into suspicion with him which sent him.

An. 525.
So likewise it was a mere matter of State which moved Theodoric, when he
Felix the fourth. Whereupon Athalaric, who succeeded his grandfather Theodoric
the same year, Athalar. Epist. ad Senate. Roma. apud Cassiodo. li. 8. Epist.
much rejoiced, as appears by the letters which he wrote to the Senate of Rome,
which had received him: You have, says he, received a personage instituted by
God, and approved by the judgment of the Prince. And had reason, seeing that
Baronius proves out of this very Epistle, that for the space of fifty eight
days which the Sea was vacant, the citizens of Rome had been in continual
ielousies, ready always to come to blows; as in the former schism which was
between Symmachus Laurence, had not Theodoric interposed his authority. But
Baronius can by no means be brought to dispense with Theodoric for this
grievous sin; but whereas he was wont highly to commend his moderation, he
now blazoneth him for a barbarous and a cruel tyran: And see Reader, says he,
who it was which first made the ouerture to Emperors to confirm the Popes, a
Barbarian, a Tyran, and an Arrian: Yet should he have remembered, that for
prevention of the like confusion Odoacer long before had made the same law:
Which they never imposed upon other places, because they saw no where else the
like disorders. And which is more, Athalaric was feign, at the request of the
most Orthodox among them, though himself and Arrian, by a law made, to
repress their unlawful simonie: Valentinian the second, Athalaricus apud
Cassiod. l. 8. c. 24.
by which they were iusticiable in all causes both civil and criminal, before
the secular Magistrate, in like sort as any other persons were; and ordained,
That in the first instance they should go only to the Bishop of Rome, Idem
li. 9. Variar. Epist. 15
and not to the secular Judge but by Appeal: of which more at large hereafter.
And likewise in the East, the Emperor Justinian was feign to meddle in Church
government, to rectify what was amiss therein. And this sticks sore in the
stomach of Baronius, and of his companions, for that the more to repress the
ambition of certain Bishops which haunted the Court, L. 14. Co. de Episc. and
Cler.
by a law directed to Epiphanius Bishop of Constantinople, Atarbius Grand
Master of the household, he ordained, That so often as any See fell void, the
inhabitants should nominat three men of Orthodox religion, and of sound life,
of which one to be chosen to the Sea, whom the Emperor should think fit; with
many other circumstances there added: forbidding L. 42. Co. de Episc. and Cler.
Novel. 123.
but by occasion of a strange dissolution and corruption of discipline, in
suing for dignities in the Church. And farther, he was constrained to proceed
to the reformation of the ordinary Liturgy, and of the Sacraments,
commanding under pains both temporal and spiritual throughout the Empire,
that both the one and the other should be celebrated in a known language; and
that in such absolute and mandatorie terms, as a man may well perceive that
they proceeded not from a borrowed jurisdiction:

17. PROGRESSION.
Of Boniface the second, and that he restored the Churches of Afrike to the
communion of the Roman Church.

An. 530.
ABout the year 530, upon the death of Felix, successor unto John the first,
new strifes arose about the election of a Pope, some standing for Boniface, and
Dioscorus: Lib. Pontif. in Bonifac. 2.
but Dioscorus happening to dye about eighteen days after, left the room
void for Boniface the second of that name; who, under color of preventing the
like inconvenience in time to come, called a Council, where he passed a
Decree, That a successor should there present be created; and thereupon he
nominated to it Vigilius the Deacon: but finding him to be a man of more
sufficiency than he thought for, he called another Synod, wherein he declared
Vigilius to be guilty of treason; Reum maiestatis
and thereupon burnt the nomination which was made of him: So well was this new
form of election already ordered by the holy Ghost. And yet this man in a
certain Epistle of his to Eulalius Bishop of Alexandria, Bonifac. in Epist. ad
Eulaliu^ in 1. to. Council.
vaunteth, That he had received authority from Saint and that he ought to have
a superiority over other Priests and Pastors of the Church, as the Archangels
have over the ordinary sort of Angels. Which comparison serves well for
Archbishops; but unless he will compare himself to God, how will he find a
Pope among the Angels. And it follows in that Epistle, That by virtue of this
authority he had by his Legates restored the Church of Carthage to the
Communion of the Church: Which Church of Carthage the Popes had excommunicated
long before, for that those 227 Fathers of Afrike, assembled in the sixth
Council of Carthage, had decreed, as has been already declared, That they
had no need of their Legates, a Latere, nor yet of Appeals to Rome: and that
they were able enough, by the grace of Aurelius Bishop of Carthage (that was he
which presided in the said sixth Council of Carthage) with his Colleagues (so
many great personages as there were, and among them Saint Augustine himself)
by the instigation of the devil, in the time of our predecessors Boniface and
Caelestine, began to exalt themselves against the Church of Rome: But Eulalius
now Bishop of Carthage, seeing himself, through the sin of Aurelius, to stand
separated from the communion of the Roman Church, has repented him thereof,
entreating to be received to peace and communion with her: And by a certain
writing signed by himself and his Colleagues, has condemned by the Apostolic
authority all and every such books written, by what spirit soever, This poor
Eulalius brought to this extremity by the eagre pursuit of these holy Fathers
of Rome, who would never let go their hold, but took their advantage of the
miserable estate which those poor Churches were in, being spoiled by the
Vandals, and oppressed by the Arrians, so that they were never after able to
hold up their head. Bellarmine therefore, Bellar. de Romans Pontif. l. 2. c. 25.
who would needs persuade us, that the variance between those Popes and these
poor Africans, was not such as the world takes it to have bin, let him tell
me, seeing that by occasion of that variance Rome did excommunicat them,
Augustine himself, being all dead in state of excommunication, which was
thundered our against them in a time when they were already vexed with the
heresy of the Pelagians, and oppressed with the schism of the Donatists, and
wholly ouerrun with that inundation and deluge of the Hunnes and Vandals, and
other barbarous nations? Baronius to save themselves from this scandal of
excommunicating Saint Augustine, condemns this Epistle as forged, and
consequently staineth the credit of him which compiled all their Councels: his
reason is only this, That it is directed to Eulalius Bishop of Alexandria,
whereas Timotheus was at that time Bishop of that See, and not Eulalius. But
Harding, one of his strongest pillars, Harding. de prima Papae sect. 28.
answers for us, That it was directed to Eulalius at that time Bishop of
Thessalonica. Wherefore let them agree among themselves as they will, it is
enough for us that we have it from them, though indeed to justify this
Epistle we may farther say, That it is taken in among their own Decrees, and
stands for good in the late edition of Gregory the thirteenth, ca. Ad hoc.
7. with these words, This chapter is read word for word in the Epistles of
Boniface to Eulalius, then Bishop of Thessalonica: which may serve for an
answer to all these frivolous conjectures of Baronius. Moreover, Baronius
thinks that he has gotten a great catch, in that the Emperor Iustine,
Justinian, sent unto the Pope a confession of their faith; which was a custom
used by the Emperors, upon their installation in the Empire; and not only to
the Pope, but also to sundry other Bishops of the better sort: to the end that
they should publish to the people, That they were of the Orthodox faith;
because there had been many Arrian, Nestorian, and Eutychian Emperors elected,
who had caused no small trouble in the Church.

OPPOSITION.
But that the Emperors meaning was not thereby to acknowledge him as Universal
Bishop, besides that they did the like to other Patriarchs, An. 533.
appears moreover Novel. 131.
no law could be a bridle strong enough to hold in that headstrong and unruly
ambition of the Popes. We have already scene the laws of Odoacer, and of
Theodoric; and Athalaric, who succeeded after Theodoric, was feign to do the
like: For when as upon the death of Boniface there went an open and a violent
canuasse throughout the city, wherein some were neither ashame nor afraid to
offer the Senators themselves money for their voices, the Se^at took high
displeasure at these proceedings: and thereupon they passed a certain Decree,
which we read Cassiodorus in these terms: Whosoever, for the obtaining of a
Bishopric, Cassiod. li. 9. Epist. 15.
shall either by himself, or by any other person, be found to have promised
any thing, that contract shall be deemed and held as execrable: He that shall
be found to have been partaker in this wicked act, shall have no voice in the
election, but shall be accounted a sacrilegious person, and shall be forced by
course of law to make restitution of it. Moreover, the Senate complained of this
great abuse to the king Athalaric, and the Defendor of the Roman Church joined
in petition with them to the king, who ratified their Decree by an ordinance of
his own, directed to Pope John: The Defendor, says he, of the Roman Church
came lately to us weeping, and showed unto us, that in the late election of a
Bishop of Rome, some men making their benefit of the necessity of the time,
And a little after, having mentioned the above named decree, he adds, For
this cause, all that which is contained in that decree, we command to be
observed and kept to all effects and purposes, against all persons which either
by themselves, or others shall have any part or portion in those execrable
bargains. What a pity was it, that the Defendor of the Church should be
constrained to lay open this filthy nakedness of the Church unto an Arrian?
Baron. vol. 7. an. 533. art. 32. and seq.
But Baronius to make the best of a bad cause, says, That he did it by the
exhortation of Pope John: but the Reader may observe, that neither in the
History, neither yet in the ordinance it self, there is any such mention
made. The conclusion is as follows, Our will and pleasure is, Cassio. lib. 9.
variar. epist. ep. 16.
that this our Ordinance be intimated to the Senate and people by the governor
of the City, to the end that all may know, that we are desirous to find out
those who run a course so contrary and repugnant to the Majesty of God: and
you also (says he) shall intimate the same to all Bishops, which by the grace
of God are under your command and government. Which words are plainly
directed to the person of John: but in that which he wrote to the governor of
the City he adds farther and says, To the end that this benefit of ours may
continue firm and steadfast in time to come, we ordain, That as well this our
Ordinance as the said Decree A great honor, no doubt, unto the Prince
himself, but an everlasting blemish and reproach to the Clergy of tha^ time.

L. 8. Co. de summa Trinit.
But in the vsages of Justinian the Emperor toward John the second, Baronius
imagines, that he finds much for the Popes advantage. It is certain, and we
have often said as much, that the Emperors being now retired into the East,
had need to hold intelligence with the Popes of Rome, by their means to find
always a door open into Italy. Wherefore this Emperor being newly come unto
his Crown, sent an honorable embassage unto him, to Baronius observes in his
Epistle, that he says in this manner: We are all careful to advertise your
Holiness of all such things as concern the estate of the Church: with those
other words following, To submit and to unite to your Holiness all the Bishops
of the East etc. Your Holiness, which is the Head of all the holy Churches.
And thence he concludes, that the Emperor acknowledged this full and absolute
authority of the Pope; and consequently, that all the Churches of the East did
the like; not caring how many pages he fills with this argument. But to let
pass, that the most learned Ciuilians of our time hold this Constitution as
neither lawful nor legitimate, it would trouble his conscience to have all
this Epistle To the holy John, Archbishop of Rome and Patriarch, as the
Emperor Justin his predecessor had styled him before. Does this title, I would
know, import an universal charge and authority over all? But what then shall
we say, when we see this very Emperor, writing to Epiphanius Bishops of
Constantinople, to use these terms following, L. 7. and 8. Co. de sum.
Trinit.
To the most holy Archbishop of this royal City, and Oecumenicall, that is
to say, Universal Patriarch? What would Baronius have said, had the Emperor
so written to the Bishop of Rome? And farther, does he We will (says he) that
your Holiness know all matters which belong to the State Ecclesiastical: and
we have written to the same effect to the Pope of old Rome. And all this we
read in an Epistle, which Baronius himself acknowledges to have passed in
nature of a public Edict. Wherefore Baronius has nothing to stand upon but
this, that the Emperor says, We endeavor to submit and to unite unto your
Holiness all the Bishops of the East. Which words Pope John laid hold on with
both his hands in his answer to this letter: where he tells him, that among
other his virtues this was most eminent, that he subjected all things to the Sea of Rome. And tell me I pray you, when he expounds this word subijcere by
that other word vnire, does he not the Head of all the holy Churches; true:
but so does he likewise, and that not by letter only, but by an express law,
pronounce the Church of Constantinople the Head of all other Churches: and Zeno
the Emperor does the like. Caput. l. 16. Co. de sacros. eccles. and l. 24.
ibid. Baron. vol. 7. an. 534. art. 36.
But had either of these therefore any purpose to subject the Church of Rome
to that of Constantinople? And if Baronius reply, that their meaning was of
all the Churches of the East, Why may not I as well say, that the other was
likewise meant of all the Churches in the West? And because he will needs
interpret this place by Nouel. 131.
that the Bishop of old Rome should hold the first place, and he of
Constantinople the second? which we deny not: but it follows not that
therefore the one is subject to the other. But both of them stand upon equal
ground by the Canons of Constantinople and of Chalcedon, to the which the
Emperor from the beginning promised to hold himself. For whereas he farther
alleges the ninth Novel, directed to John the second, wherein he grants
this privilege to the Church of Rome, that she shall not be prescribed but by
an hundred years, calling that City the Foundation of Laws, and Fountain of
the Priesthood, not to say, Nouel. 10. in ed. Holoan.
that this Novel is not found in the Greek, he should rather have observed,
that The Patriarch of the City of Rome; that he distinguishes in express
terms between the Churches of the East and of the West, and grants the
same privilege to them both, and had granted into the Church of
Constantinople seven years before the other. Likewise, that which he enforces
out of the 42 Novel, directed to Mennas Patriarch of Constantinople, Nouel. 42.
(which he here alleges before the time) That Pope Agapete had deposed the
Patriarch Antymus, because he agreed not with the Church of Rome, is not truly
alleged, and therefore it is that he does not allege the text it self. The
truth is, that Agapete being then at Constantinople, presided in the Council
wherein Antymus was deposed. And this is that which the Emperor means when
he says, That he was put from his See by Agapete, (...).
who then held the first See in the old Rome. But how was he deposed? it is
there said, By the common suffrage of him and of the Synod there assembled. And
the reason is also added, for that he usurped the place, contrary to the holy
Canon, and had departed away from the sound doctrines of the holy Councels.
And this deposition of him was also authorized by the Emperor in his 42 Novel
directed to the said Mennas, who is there again qualified with the name of
Universal Patriarch: which place Holoander, for fear of the Popes
displeasure, has translated, Patriarch of all that quarter; whereas the word
there used, (...), signifies all the habitable earth.

Wherefore it is to be understood, that all those Patriarchall Sees are sundry
Oecumenicall, without prejudice of each to other, because the Bishops of those
Churches being placed in the midst of the enemies of Christianity, were
always taken as watchmen over the whole Church, who were to look every man
not to his own peculiar charge only, but to all in general, that Satan by
schisms and heresies infected not the body of the Church; like unto fellow
tutors, who though by consent they administer every one his portion of the
pupils goods apart, yet is every one of them answerable for the whole.
Wherefore we see, that sometimes these Patriarchs without blame put their
sickles into each others corn, and upon the first alarm given by any of
these, they all sought presently to procure an Oecumenicall Council; which was
then so esteemed and Justinian yielded the cause, which was, for that (says
he) we have sundry times been reformed by the Church of old Rome. L. 7. Co.
de sum. Trinitat.
But so soon as either the Pope, or any other Patriarch began to abuse this
honor, and to encroach thereby upon the liberties of their fellows, every
man began presently to cry out of tyranny

18. PROGRESSION.
1 That the Gothish Kings used their authority in the election and creation of
the Popes.

2 That Belisarius, by the command of the Empress, thrust out Syluerius, and
placed Vigilius in the Popedom.

3 That Vigilius condemned the Council of Chalcedon, and confirmed the Heresy
of the Eutychians.

4 Baronius his censure of Vigilius.

1 IT cannot be denied, that the Popes of this age were sharply set upon this
desire of sovereignty and dominion; but they met commonly with one or other,
who knew well how to provide a Martingall for a jade: and so much the rather,
because men began now to grow jealous of their authority and power, as they
saw them to use it in favor of one or other. Wherefore these Gothish Kings
used ordinarily to bear a hand in their elections, which were carried
otherwise after a fashion more befitting rogues and thieves than ingenuous
competitors. And Agapete was no sooner elected Pope, Anastas. in Agapete.
but Theodatus immediately sent Justinian the Emperor of Constantinople, to
excuse him of the death of Amalasuntha his wife, daughter to Theodoric, and by
him recommended to the Emperors protection: a fit commission for a Pope. And
the same Theodatus upon the death of Agapete placed Syluerius in his room,
being the natural and lawful son of Pope Hormisda. Si^e deliberatione
Decreti. An. 536.
The Pontifical Book says, That it was done without any deliberation of the
Decree: and he made many Priests to subscribe thereto by force and fear. How
then can these men, who boast so much of their Mission, justify this calling,
with sundry actions ensuing thereupon? Syluerius accepted of his kindness:
but Vigilius, whom Boniface had formerly nominated to the Sea, by solicitation
of the Empress, put in now again for his interest. And here the Reader may
well observe an apparent progress and proceeding of the iniquity of this See:
the relation therefore of Liberatus Archdeacon of Carthage is as follows, 2
Liberatus in Bretuario, c. 22.
The Empress Theodora (who was of the Eutychian Heresy) called unto her
Vigilius, sometime Deacon to Pope Agapete, requiring him to promise her under
hand, That if he were made Pope of Rome, he would abrogate the Council
(meaning that of Chalcedon) and that he would write his letter to Theodosius,
Anthymius, and Seuerus, heretics of the same profession, and therein ratify
and confirm their faith; promising him to send her command to Belisariu^,
that he Centenaria septem.
This Vigilius, what for love of the gold, what for desire of the Popedom,
accepted of the offer, and thereupon came to Rome, where he found Syluerius
already created Pope: wherefore he went to Belisarius, who then lay at
Rauenna, to whom he delivered his message from the Empress, and of those seven
promised him two hundred marks, if he would thrust out Syluerius, and put him
in his place. Belisarius thereupon returned to Rome, and called Syluerius
before him into the palace, laid to his charge, that he had entertained secret
intelligence with the Goths, to surprise the City: and it is reported, that
one Marcus a scholar, and Julian one of the guard, had forged certain letters
as from Syluerius to the King of the Goths, whereby he was convicted of
conspiracy against the City. And unto Patara, a City of Lycia.

3 Belisarius immediately upon the installation of Vigilius demanded
performance of promises which Vigilius had made unto the Empress, and the two
hundred marks which he had promised unto him: but he, what for fear, what for
avarice, refused to perform his promises. Syluerius in the mean time arrived
at Patara, and the Bishop of that City went and acquainted the Emperor with
his cause: the Emperors answer And it came to pass, upon the examination of
these letters, that Syluerius returned into Italy: Whereupon Vigilius fearing
least he should be deposed, told Belisarius, That unless he would deliver
Syluerius into his hands, he could not perform that which he had promised.
Wherefore Syluerius was delivered to a couple of his guard, and was by them
carried prisoner to Palmaria, where he starued in their custody. Then Vigilius
to perform his promise to the Empress, wrote by Antonina, wife to Belisarius,
that letter which Liberatus sets down all at large, directed to the chief
Eutychians, as the Empress had required him to do: That he holds and ever
did hold the same faith which they did, requesting them not to let any know
what he had written, but rather seem to mistrust him. And he farther declared
his faith in these words, We do not confess two natures in Christ, but one
Son composed of two natures, pronouncing Anathema against all such as should
affirm the contrary. And now let the champions of the Roman Church tell us,
what vocation or calling this good Pope had.

Baron. vol. 7. an. 538. art. 20.
4 Baronius to defend the matter, says, That the like schism was never seen
in that Church: (and yet we may remember that his predecessors had their
errors) A Pope (says he) thrust into the Chair by a secular authority, a
thief in at the window, a Wolf amongst the Sheep, a false Bishop amongst the
true, an Antichrist against And yet shortly after, when he had murdered
Syluerius, he makes him a Saint, and a Vicar of Christ, Jb. art. 19.
excellent, beyond comparison. He labors by all means to prove, that this
Epistle in Liberatus smells of the forge: for, What probability (says he)
that in his inscription he should call the Emperor and the Empress Lords and
Fathers? Dominos and Patres.
But he is egregiously mistaken, not seeing, that this Epistle was not directed
to them, Libera. c. 22.
but to the chief heretics, Theodosius, Anthymius, and Seuerus, according to
the promise which he had formerly made unto the Empress. And Liberatus in the
end of that discourse says, That Vigilius writing privily as he did, continued
Tues Petrus.

Agapet. in ep. ad Justin.
Agapete, who made his moan unto Justinian, That Epiphanius Bishop of
Constantinople had received Achilles an heretic unto penance, without his
authority, being himself at Constantinople, would needs use his power and
authority, even to the deposing (if any man think fit to believe them) of
the Patriarch Anthymus, and to the setting of Mennas in his place. But we will
show how this was done by authority of the Provincial Synod. And Vigilius,
who grows violent in his Epistles, and pronounces, That unto Peter was given
the pre-eminence Cephas, that is by interpretation a Head (by which it
appears, that he was much better seen in the ambition of the Latins, than
in the language of the Grecians) that for this cause all Appeals must come to
Rome, and all greater causes be referred to the hearing of the Consistory
there. Vigilius ad Euterium.
To be short, That all other Bishops may peradventure be said to be called in
partem sollicitudinis, i. into part of the cure, but not into that plenartie of
power and absolute jurisdiction. A profane speech, and well befitting
Antichrist; and so Baronius himself doubts not to call him.

OPPOSITION.
We have seen how far their ambition would have gone: let us now see how
far it went. For the case of Anthymus, Liberatus says briefly, That
Anthymus seeing himself deposed at the suit of Pope Agapete, delivered up his
Pall unto the Emperor, and went his way; and that Agapete to content the
Emperor, ordained and consecrated Mennas in his place. But reason would, that
in this case we should give more credit to the Emperor Justinian himself, in
whose presence these things were done. Nouel. 42.
He therefore tells us in his 42 Novel, That Anthymus was cast out, being
first condemned and deposed by the common consent and suffrage, (...).
as well of Agapete as Where Baronius, by occasion of this word First, (...).
will needs show a trick of wit, and thence infers, that he was first
deposed by Agapete, who used (says he) therein the fullness of his power.
Whereas the Emperors meaning was only to show a legal proceeding in the
cause, and that nothing was done by violence against him; as the word (...)
does properly signify, not first, but before, Prius, non primum.
with relation to that which follows: as also those words, By the common
suffrage of Agapete, what sense have they, unless they be joined with that
which follows, and of the Synod? And so has Holoander himself translated
it. For how can the suffrage of one alone be termed common but only in
relation to some other man? Moreover, if he by his full and absolute authority
had deposed him, what Though this be a matter unusual to the Majesty of a
King, (...).
yet we also now set our hand to the making of this Decree and Ordinance: For
so often as the general suffrage of Priests and Bishops has deprived any of
their Priestly Sees, as unworthy of their place and calling (such as were
Nestorius, Eutyches, Arrius, Macedonius, Eunomius, and others not inferior to
them in wickedness and malice) so often has the Regal dignity contributed
the vigor of her authority with the authority of sacred persons: Which
terms express and declare, that the confirmation depended of him, not of
Agapete, which had already passed his sentence of him: (...).
To the end that both the divine and secular authority may concur, for the
establishing of lawful and just decrees. But if perhaps the Emperors credit be
not good, we can, for a need, produce the testimony of Agapete himself, whose
Synodall Epistle we find registered in the Acts of the fifth General Council,
written by him to all Bishops in the name of the Synod: where speaking in the
name of the company, he says, We have pronounced him unworthy of all holy
function: Council. universe. quintum, act. 1. vbi ep. Synod. Agapeti.
and speaking of the placing of Mennas in his room, Though the Emperor (says
he) elected him, yet the whole Clergy and people gave also their consent, so
that he may well seem to have been elected by all. What therefore do we find
in all this to prove the Popes authority, but only a bare consecration, which
any other Metropolitan or Bishop Baron. vol. 7. an. 536. art. 59.
he was pleased himself to grace him with that office. Here Baronius alleges
a certain writing taken out of the Vatican, as he says, and which contains
the Acts of Agapete, during his abode at Constantinople; where he says simply,
That Agapete thrust Anthymus out of the Church, and enjoined him his penance.
But to go no farther, he might as well have observed out of that Script which
he alleges, that he is there only called Antistes prima sedis, i. Priest or
Bishop of the first See, and not Universal Pope: as also that when Justinian
and he met, it is not there said as in the Pontifical Book, That the Emperor
adored him: but only thus, The King and the Bishop kissed each other with a
holy kiss, Rex and Pontifex sancta delibans oscula, and alter alterum
veneratus.
and each did reverence naming the Emperor as first in order. And again, he
might have observed, that the Sea of Constantinople is there called an
Apostolic Throne, as well as that other of Rome. And of the ordination of
Mennas it is there said, That the Ministers of the Church, to the great
rejoicing of the Catholic Emperor, took counsel to prefer him to that
place, and recommended him to the Bishop Agapete, Praefuli.
to ordain him their Bishop: That Mennas then delivered his confession to Pope
Agapete, who meant to present it with his own hands to S. Peter at Rome: and
that, this being done, he then obtained the universal Bishopric, by the
imposition of hands of the Prince of all Bishops; Principe.
whom a little before he called only the Bishop of the first See. Subiectarum
sibi prouinciarum.
Which word of Universality, Baronius expounds, as meant only which belong
to his jurisdiction: And why then may not we make the like construction, when
any man lets fall the same, or the like word of the Pope of Rome? But this
is much after their ordinary Grammar, when by saying the Catholic Roman
Church, they make a particular Universal. And thus much for Agapete.

Baron. vol. 7. an. 540. art. 6, 7, 8, 9
Now follows Vigilius, whom Baronius immediately after the murder of Syluerius,
of an Antichrist, as he termed him before, now makes Christ's Vicar, and which
is more, a very Saint. He was no sooner set in his chair, but presently he
became a new man: Whereupon our Annalist cries out, What a miracle is this
from God upon this chair, which thus transformeth a bad man into a good*
Belisarius, gained before hand by money, the fear of a present uproar in the
city if they had presumed to elect any other, which made them in this election
to leap over all Laws and Canons of the Church: for these are his very
words. But let us see whether there were any greater miracles wrought upon him
after his election. Anastas. in Vigilio.
Anastasius Bibliothecarius, not a flatterer, but a very Idolater of the
Popes, in the life of Vigilius, tells us, That he was no sooner established
in his See, but the Romans presently accused him before the Emperor: We make
it known, say they, unto your Majesty, And are these the miracles which this
chair works? Now upon these complaints the Empress, as it is there
reported, sent Anthemius the Scribe to apprehend him by maine force, yea though
he found him in the Church; and to bring him by sea sure prisoner to
Constantinople: who following his commission, seized on him in Saint Cecils
Church, and carried him away forthwith to ship him upon the Tiber; the people
following him with cursings, and casting stones at him, and crying out, Hunger
and pestilence go with believes nothing of all this which Anastasius
reports; his reason is, because Procopius says nothing of it: Procop. de
bello Gothico. li. 3.
And no marvel, seeing that the scope of Procopius was to write the wars of
the Goths, not the lives of the Popes. Now when he was brought to
Constantinople the Empress challenged him of his promise, Baron. ib. an. 552.
art. 11.
which was, to restore Anthymus. Whereupon Baronius would feign canonize him
for a Martyr, and presumes to affirm, That in this man, when he now sat in
Saint Peter's chair, Christ himself, not only as he was man, but also as he
was God and man, sat also with him. Now whether this was the true cause, or
only a color, I cannot say. But Anastasius reports, That they reproached
him with the Syluerius, and of his own Notarie, and of his sisters son,
haling him along the streets with a rope about his neck. Nicepherus adds
farther, That he had excommunicated the Patriarch Mennas, whom his predecessor
Agapete had himself consecrated in the room of Anthymus the Heretic, who
excommunicated him again, and could not forbear his wonted violence: So that
in the end, to stint these strifes, Ib. an. 553.
there was a Council called at Chalcedon. Baronius here observes, That
Eutychius, who was chosen in the room of Mennas, tendered the profession of
his faith unto Vigilius: and we on the contrary have already showed, Brother,
and Companion of the Priesthood; knowing, as he there says, how much good
proceeds from the peace of God: And that in the end of the letter he
subscribeth himself, Eutychius by the grace of God Bishop of Constantinople,
without any reference to the Pope. Where also Baronius observes, That
Eutychius requested Vigilius, That the difference which yet remained between
the Orthodox, De Tribus Capitulis, might be referred to a Council, in which
your Beatitude may preside over us, and where the holy Gospels may lie open
before us.

Well then, says Baronius, by this it appears that he acknowledged his
Presidencie. Baronius runs to his old shifts, and says, That the Emperor
decreed it to be called, by the Pope Vigilius his advise; Ib. art. 20, 21, 22,
23, 24. Euagr. li. 2. c. 37
being loath to speak plainly, and to confess that he called it: and
thereupon he cites Euagrius, where he says, That Vigilius consented by his
letters to the Council (which he sent from Chalcedon, whither he had
withdrawn himself at that present) but himself would not be at it. And why
then will he not as well believe him, when he says, That Justinian called the
fifth Council? or if Vigilius had called it while he was present at the place,
why did he afterward refuse to be present at it? The best is, that the
Histories make this matter clear enough. Nicephorus says, Nicephor. li. 17.
ca. 27.
That the And the Emperor himself unto the Fathers of the Council: We have,
says he, assembled you in this regal city. And the Fathers themselves, We,
say they, here assembled, according to the commandment of the devout
Justinian. And Baronius in that writing which he alleges unto us out of the
Vatican, teaches us, That Vigilius did what lay in him to have this Council
held in Sicilie, as a more in different place for the Bishops of the East and
West to meet in; and yet he could not obtain it. As for the Presidencie, it is
evident, that at the first Mennas Bishop of Constantinople presided in it, and
there gave sentence against Anthymus and other Heretics; which sentence is yet
to be seen in the Mennas his death, Bellarmine cannot deny, Synod. Constant.
quin. vniuersa. actio. 4. Bellar. li. ^. de Council. ca. 19.
but that Eutychius, who succeeded him in the Sea, succeeded likewise in the
Presidencie: and the whole course of the Acts show as much. But, says he,
Vigilius might have presided if it had pleased him. It should seem, by his
leave, that Nicephorus was of another opinion, when he says, When Eutychius
was by the Emperor put in the room of Mennas late deceased, Vigilius, though
agreeing with him in points of doctrine, yet refused to sit by him: which was,
no doubt, because he affected a higher seat; and thereupon, though he was at
that time in the city, yet would he not stay at the Council, pretending that
there was but a small number of the Western Bishops there: whereas the true
cause was, because he saw his Bellarmine replieth out of Zonaras, Zonar. to.
3. pa. 55. and 74.
That Vigilius was chief of this Synod. How chief, if he were not there at
all? But that place of Zonaras answers for it self: There were, says he,
165 Fathers, (...), quorum princeps fuit, says the Latin translation, that
is, of whom was chief Vigilius Pope of Rome, and Eutychius, and Apollinaris of
Alexandria: where we see that this word (...) is referred to all three, as
Heads of these three Patriarchall Churches. So likewise he speaks in another
place of the sixth general Council, (...), i. of which were chief, or
Captains and Leaders, the Vicars of Agatho Pope of Rome, George of
Constantinople, and Theophanes of Antioch: where the translator renders the
word (...), by Principes fuere, and so are they usually termed Explanatio
Sanctor. and venerabil. Conciliorum etc. an. 1553.
There is a book entitled, The Explanation of the Holy Councels, taken out of
the kings Library: this book speaking of the Council of Nice, In that
Council, says he, were Heads and Presidents, Syluester Bishop of Rome,
Alexander of Alexandria, and Macarius of Jerusalem. And again speaking of the
second general Council, The Presidents there were Damasus Bishop of Rome,
Nectarius Bishop of Constantinople, Timothy of Alexandria, Cyril of Jerusalem,
Miletius of Antioch; all which were Patriarchs: But he adds afterward,
Great Gregory the Divine, Gregory of Nissa, and Amphilochius of Iconium, by
reason of their great learning: Zonar. to. 3. pa. 30.
where Zonaras uses a higher strain, and says, That among all these Gregory
the Great, and Gregory of Nissa, and the sacred Amphilochius, in all
encounters, were chief and principal: which word used in the singular number
by the Author, is by the Interpreter referred to all three, as was also that
other word (...), referred to Vigilius, Eutychius, and Apollinaris. And this
same book speaking of the Council of Ephesus, says in like manner, In this
Council presided Calestin Bishop of Rome, Cyril of Alexandria, Iuvenal of
Jerusalem, Memnon of Ephesus. And so likewise of other general Councels of
Chalcedon, Constantinople, the second Nicene, and the rest; where the Greek
words are, (...), and the Latin Interpreter renders it, Huic Concillo
praefuerunt, i. They were chief in this Council; naming always the Pope for
company among the rest, and that most commonly when himself was not there in
person, and sometimes no man Bellarmine yet urges out of that Epistle which
Baronius alleges, That Eutychius Bishop of Constantinople, writing to
Vigilius, says unto him, We desire to treat and to confer of these points
together, Praesidente nobis vestra beatitudine, that is, Under your blessed
Presidencie. But this is to grate too far upon the plain speaking of these
letters, contrary to all course of history. And it is not improbable (which a
learned man has observed) that this place is corrupted, Iuni. Controuers. 4.
pa. 186.
and Praesidente written in stead of Residente, that is, While you are here
abiding with us; as we find this word used upon like occasion in many other
Councels: Council. Matisco. 2. and passim.
Residentibus Prisco Euantio, Praetextato, etc. that is, Assisting in the
Council: For at the first sitting of this Synod Vigilius (...) and (...).
and if we should read Praesidente, yet there is a large difference between
Preseancie, which imports only a prioritie of place, and Presidencie, which
implies a superiority. But more than this, a great part of that action is
spent only in requesting him to be present at the Synod; and in the end they
protest against him, Council. Canstant. 5. art. 5.
and openly reproach him. That he is an offense and scandal both to the
Emperor and also to the Churches; as one which naught regarded the curse
pronounced by our Savior, against those who offend even little ones. Yet he
stirred not, only he sent them word, That they should receive his advise in
writing. Now what can a man imagine to have been the cause of this his
tergiuersation, but only this, That he saw his pretended Presidencie
neglected, and himself called Narses gotten leave to return home again, he
died by the way in Sicilie.

And thus we see that the calling of the general Councels was not as yet
deuolued, nor did belong to the Bishop of Rome, no not so much as the calling
of National Synods: seeing that we find the second Council of Orleans, which
We, say the Fathers, being now to deliberat concerning the observation of the
Catholic law, by the commandment of the most glorious King, etc. and that
other of Auvergne, That they were there assembled by the consent of our most
renowned Lord the King Theodebert: and so of others. And which is more,
Justinian himself, whose favor toward them they do so much magnify and
extol, made no difficulty to create a Pope by his own authority: which
appears in that which Anastasius reports, and Baronius cannot deny it,
That he put the citizens of Rome to their choice, Whether they would receive
Vigilius again, or take Pelagius his Archdeacon to be their Bishop. Neither
was this a matter of fact only, but a lawful right: For Onuphrius, Onuphr. in
Pelag. 10.2.
a man Vigilius, That when the Goths were turned out of Italy by Narses, and
both Italy and Rome were now annexed to the Eastern Empire, under the
Emperor Justinian, by the authority of Vigilius, there was brought in a new
fashion to be observed in the creation of Popes, which was, In Comitijs
Pontificalibus.
That so soon as the Pope was deceased, the Clergy, Senate, and People, should
presently fall to the choice of another, after the custom of their
forefathers. More maiorum.
But the Pope so elected by them, might not be consecrated by the Bishops,
until his election were first confirmed by the Emperor of Constantinople, and
his pleasure herein signified by his letters patents, for the authorizing him
in the execution of his Pontifical jurisdiction: for which license the Pope
elect was to send the Emperor a certain sum of money: (How far is this
from which done, he was then consecrated, and took upon him the administration
of that See. Whereas before that time he was ever elected and consecrated all
in a day. And it is certain, that either Justinian himself, or Vigilius by
his authority, brought in this fashion; to the end that the Emperor might
stand always assured of the Popes inclination toward him, because his
authority was grown great in Italy, since the time that the Emperors seated
themselves in Greece: and the fear was, least that if a Pope should happen to
be chosen either of a factious and turbulent disposition, or peradventure ill
affected to the Emperor, he might by his authority draw Italy from his
allegiance, in favor of the Goths; a thing once before attempted by
Syluerius, at least the Emperor was so persuaded. And this custom, as he
says, and cites many authors for Benedict the second.

19. PROGRESSION.
That Pelagius the first caused the fifth general Council of Constantinople to
be received in Italy.

AFter the death of Vigilius, who deceased in Sicilie as he returned from
Constantinople, Pelagius the first, who succceded him in that See, never
consulting upon the matter, but only seeking to gratify the Emperor who had
named him to the place, went about to make the Bishops of Italy to receive the
fifth general

OPPOSITION.
The Bishops of Italy fearing some attempt against the Council of Chalcedon,
and purposing to be better informed of the matter, refuse to admit of that
other of Constantinople at that present, especially those of Liguria, Venetia,
Sigon. de Imper. Occident. l. 20.
and Istria, and among them Macedonius Bishop of Aquileia, Honoratus of Milan,
and Maximinian of Rauenna; all which presently assembled in Synod at Aquileia,
to deliberat of the admittance or refusal of that Council which Pelagius
sought to Macedonius Archbishop of Aquileia fell sick and died, and Honoratus
Archbishop of Milan, consecrated Paulinus in his room: and all with one
consent rejected the Council, under color of certain chapters therein
contained, which pleased them not, and farther drew their necks from under the
yoke of the Roman Church. Pelagius then thought it high time to run to Narses,
whom he requested by his letters, to send the chief of those Bishops prisoners
to Constantinople, and to repress the rest by rigor of law, and his own
authority. Where we may observe, that he alleges not his own interest, in
that Paulinus was ordained Archbishop of Aquileia, without receiving the Pall
from him, but only the interest of the Emperor: Seeing, says he, that even
then That therefore Narses should make no scruple to use his authority upon
these fellows, because such persons were by order of the Canons to be
excommunicated; to be ordered by rigor if reason could not rule them. Narses
hereupon grew so violent, that he drew an excommunication from the Bishops upon
his own head. Pelagius egged him on still by his letters, which we find
recorded in the Councels, and reported by Sigonius and Baronius; and importuned
him again to send Honoratus and Paulinus prisones to Constantinople: until at
length Narses apprehended some of them, made others Vitalis Bishop of Altin
fled to Meuce in Germany. And hence it is that some writers hold opinion, That
this Pelagius was the first which decreed, to pray in aid of the secular power,
against such as stood condemned for schism or heresy.

An. 556.
Neither was he any thing better respected or obeyed in Tuscanie, which yet
lies even at Rome gates; witness his own letters which he wrote unto
Gaudentius, Baron. vol. 7. an. 556. art. 31.
Maximilian, Gerontius, Iustus, Terentius, Vitalis, and Laurence, his beloved
brethren (as he terms them) throughout Tuscanie: where he complains, That
they had separated themselves from him, and consequently from the communion of
all the world, in not mentioning his name in the ordinary service of the
Church. All Pelagius himself was feign, for his own discharge, to send unto
them the confession of his faith: as it appears by that Epistle. As for those
other Bishops of Venetia and Istria, they proceeded so far, as to constitute
and ordain the Bishop of Aquileia Ouerseer of their Church, by the name of
Patriarch; a knot which the Popes were never afterward able to undo: Baron.
vol. 7. an. 570. art. 11.
and Baronius himself gives that Patriarchship no other beginning than this.

As for France, he was as little obeyed there as in any place whatsoever: For
the second Council of Tours says, Iuxta conniventiam.
That they were there assembled by the sufferance and the fifth of Orleans, That
they were assembled by Childebert, to learn from the mouth of these Fathers
what was holy. Pela. in Epist. ad Childibert. in 2. tom. Concilio.
And the like is to be seen in the second Council of Paris, where Pelagius
writing unto Cheribert then king, What pain, says he, ought we to take to
free our selves from scandal and suspicion, by presenting to you the obedience
and duty of our confession: that is, to give them an account of their true
belief and Orthodox profession: adding a reason far different from the
learning of these times, For that, says he, the holy Scriptures do command,
that we also be subject to higher powers. Synod. Paris. ca. 8. to. 2. Council.
Satisdandum 25. q. 1.
provision should be made by the joint election of Clergy and people; and
that the Metropolitan, assisted by the Bishops of his own Province, or of some
Province next adjoining, should consecrate and ordain him, according to the
ancient Canons, without any reference at all to Rome: though we find, that even
at this very time John the third, successor to Pelagius, pursued the chase of
his predecessors, writing not only to the Bishops, but to all in general in
France and Germany, in manner following: We will and command, that you and
every of you, all Bishops also and Priests whatsoever, to observe all the
Decretals and ordinances of our predecessors, in matters Yet we find, Greg.
Turon. l. 8. c. 20.
that Vrsicin Bishop of Cahors at that very time was excommunicated in the
Synod of Mascon, which was there called by the commandment of king Gontran,
for entertaining Gombalt, who then stood out in rebellion against him: and that
upon his humble confession, and penitent acknowledgement of his fault, they
enjoined him, not to cut either his hair or his beard, neither yet to drink
wine, nor to eat flesh, nor to celebrate the office, neither yet to minister
the Communion, during the space of three years. An evident token, that these
Bishops assembled in Synod, held still in their own hands an absolute
authority over their delinquent brethren. And no marvel if Honorius and his
successors had made the seat of the Empire, from thence to look a little
nearer, and to see what was doing in the East: and where, at that time,
Justinius the second had commanded Longinus his Exarcke, or Vicar general of
the Empire in Italy, to reside, with power to command over all Dukes and
other officers of those Provinces: who upon the first entrance of the Lombards
into Italy, planted strong garrisons in every city of defense, especially in
Rome and Rauenna. Whence it ensued, that the Pope could do nothing in temporal
matters,

Neither was that his power at all acknowledged at Aquileia and Milan, Sigon.
de Regno Italiae li. 1.
where the Archbishops pretended, That they held not of the Sea of Rome: not at
Aquileia, because as Rome gloried in Saint Peter, so did she in the Evangelist
Saint M^^ke, as first founder of her Church, which had since that time been
ennobled with sundry holy Bishops and Martyrs: Not at Milan, because her
Church was first founded by Barnabas the Apostle, and after that honored by
the Bishopric of Saint Ambrose; and had either of them a multitude of
Suffragant Bishops under them: and peradventure they thought that tradition of
Saint Peter's chair not to be all of the truest, and easier to be said than
proved. And this is that which Sigonius reports, though a writer of their
own: Guicciard. Histor. li. 4.
and which Guicciardine also delivers in these words, In this time (says he,
meaning of the Exarchat) the Bishops of Rome had nothing to do in matters
temporal: and because the beauty of their ancient manners and piety was now
decayed, men had them not in such admiration and reverence as before; but they
lived under the command and subjection of the Emperors and Exarchs, without
whose leave and license they might not accept, or presume And of this we shall
find examples in that which follows.

20. PROGRESSION.
That John Bishop of Constantinople assumed to himself the name of Universal
Bishop.

THe two general Councels of Constantinople and Chalcedon had, as we An. 580.
in all points of prerogative equalled the two Bishops of Rome and of
Constantinople, saving always the prioritie of place to him of Rome. This much
offended the Bishop of Rome, who never looked with a good eye upon an equal;
neither could the other brook the dealings of him of Rome, as loath to
acknowledge a superior. Wherefore when the Bishop of Rome carried himself in
the nature of an Universal Bishop as far as men would suffer him, Jeuinator.
John the fourth, surnamed the Faster, Bishop of Constantinople, thought to
prevent him, by assuming to himself the title of Universal Bishop, about the
year 580: being the more emboldened thereunto, because he saw the seat of the
Pelagius the second, who was elected during the siege, after the death of
Benedict the first, could not send to the Emperor for his approbation: and when
the siege afterward broke up by reason of the wet, Gregory, who was at that
time but a simple Deacon, was feign to take a journey to Constantinople, to
pacify the Emperor: Plat. in Pelag. 2.
because (says Platina) his election made by the Clergy, was of no validity
and force, without the good liking of the Emperor first had and obtained
thereunto. And this attempt of the Bishop of Constantinople we have thought fit
to reckon among the

OPPOSITION.
This Pelagius therefore, so soon as the siege was broken up, took heart, and
wrote his letters, 2. To. Council. in decret. Pelag. 2.
directed To all the Bishops who by the unlawful calling of John the Patriarch
(for so he speaks of him) were assembled in Synod at Constantinople: wherein
having flourished a while with his Tu es Petrus, at length he tells them,
That they ought not to assemble themselves without the authority of this See:
John as Universal Bishop, unless they purposed to depart away from the
Communion of all other Bishops. And let no Patriarch (says he) use so profane
a title: for if the chief Patriarch (meaning himself) should be called
Universal, the name of a Patriarch should thereby be taken from all others.
But God forbid that it should ever fall into the heart of a Christian to assume
any thing unto himself, Which clause is word for word inserted by Gratian
into his Decrees, save only, that in stead of S^^inus Patriarcha, that is,
Chief Patriarch, as it is in the Epistle, he has Vnus. D. 99. c. Nullin 4.
And yet the summarie of that very chapter, even in the late edition of
Gregory the thirteenth, is this, That the Bishop of Rome himself may not be
called Universal. But Pelagius goes on, and gives the reason of that his
saying: For (says he) the devil our adversary, goes about like a roaring
Lion, exercising his rage upon the humble and meek hearted, and seeking to
devour not now the Sheepcoats, but the very principal And, Consider my
brethren what is like to ensue etc. For he comes near unto him of whom it is
written, This is he which is King over all the children of pride: which words I
spoke with grief of mind, seeing our brother and fellow Bishop John, in
despite of the commandment of our Savior, the precepts of the Apostles, and
Canons of the Church, by this haughty name, to make himself his forerunner;
that is, of Antichrist: alluding manifestly to that place of the Apostle in his
Epistle to the Thessalonians, where he calls him (...), that is to say,
Lifted up, or which lifts himself up above all that is called God, or
Deity. And farther he adds a second reason, which our best disguisers cannot
put off, which is, Vniuersa and omnia quae soli vni capiti cohaerent videlicet
Christo.
That hereby John went about to attribute to himself all those things which
belong which, as he says, proceeded from the Tempter, who tempted our first
father, by casting unto him the like bait of pride. And now tell me, whether
all that which the Bishops of Rome have since that time attempted in like
manner, can proceed from any other spirit. But he goes on, willing them to
take heed least the poison of this word prove fatal in the end to the poor
members of Christ: for that if this title be once granted to him, there are no
longer any Patriarchs left in the Church: and so it might come to pass, that
if John himself should happen to die in this his error, there should not be
left a Bishop in the Church, persisting in state of truth etc. That they must
beware that this tentation And yet ever by the way he puts them in mind of
the Canons of Nice, in favor of the Primacie of his own See, to which all
matters of importance (says he) ought to be referred: and yet, as we have
already declared, no such matter. And Gregory, at that time his Deacon,
Gregor. li. 4. ep. 38. and l. 7. ep. 69.
and afterward his successor in the Popedom, in his Epistle which he wrote to
John upon this very argument, Thou (says he) which acknowledgest thy self
unworthy to have been made a Bishop, do thou in disdain of thy brethren
make thy self sale Bishop in the Church? Intimating thereby, that there is no
difference whether we call him Sole, or else Universal Bishop. And concerning
the Council held at Constantinople in the Gregory Bishop of Antioch, Propter
nefandum elationis vocabulum.
Pelagius (says he) disannulled the Acts of that Synod, because of this
execrable name of pride; and forbad the Archdeacon, which according to the
custom he sent Ad vestigia Dominorum, i. to the feet of the Lords, i. the
Emperors (let the Reader observe these words) to celebrate the solemn service
of Masses with thee. And in like manner wrote he also to the Bishop of
Thessalonica. And this is that which passed in those days between the two
Bishops of Rome and of Constantinople. Where we observe, that Pelagius
absolutely condemns both the name and office of an Universal Bishop; which
none offers to usurp and take unto himself, but only he which is the
forerunner of Antichrist; as being an honor due to Christ, to whom only and
properly it does appertain.

An. 580.
Moreover we may observe, that about this time, when Chilperic King of France
had assembled a Synod of Bishops at Paris, to judge of the cause of
Praetextatus, Bishop of Rouen (whom he had formerly exiled, until the next
Synod which should be called) he declared openly unto them, that he had cause
enough to condemn him for the enormitie of his crimes, that yet he brought him
forth, there to be heard and judged by them, that he might not seem to do
any thing contrary to the Canons. Antiquit. de Fauchet, to. 1. fol. 212. and
218.
And then Gregory Bishop of Cahors (though favoring the person of
Praetextatus) stood up and said, If any of us offend, it is in thy power, O
King, to punish us. Whereupon, notwithstanding the ernest suit that was made
Gontran commanded a Synod to be called at Chaalons, Gregor. Turon. l. 5. c.
18. Aimon. Monach. l. 3. c. 26, 27, 28.
upon the river of Saosne (or as Gregory of Tours reports, at Lions) against
Salonin Bishop of Ambrum, and Sagittarius of Gap; where there were many crimes
of high nature laid unto their charge, for which they were degraded and
deposed from their charges: in which Synod Nicetius Bishop of Lions presided,
whom Gregory of Tours calls by the name of a Patriarch. It fell out after a
time, that these complained of injustice and wrong done unto them, and
thereupon became petitioners to the King, That the Bishop of Rome might review
their cause; which he granted: and to that effect, at the instance Constantine
long before wrote unto Miltiades Bishop of Rome, and others, in the case of the
Donatists. The words of Gregory of Tours are these, They knowing that the King
was favorably inclined toward them, asked leave to go to the Pope of the
City of Rome, which by his letters he permitted them to do. Baron. vol. 7.
an. 570. art. 23. and 24. An. 589.
Now upon this example Baronius infers, that it was belonging to the Popes
ordinary jurisdiction to appeal from the Synods in France to Rome: but had it
been so, they would no doubt, immediately upon sentence given, have put in
their Appeal to Rome, and not have gone by way of request unto the Prince. And
as for authority of calling National Councels, we find another Synod Gontran,
wherein the Fathers speak in this manner, We (say they) here assembled in the
City of Valentia, Ex imperio.
by the commandment of the glorious and renowned King Gontran: And the
Bishops of those other Synods of Mascon and Chaalons speak in like manner, Ex
iussu.
saying, That they were assembled by the commandment of Prince Gontran. And
Gregory of Tours speaks of them after the same fashion. And in the third
Synod of Toledo, When as (say they) the renowned King Recared had commanded
all the Pontifes or Bishops to assemble themselves etc. And Recared himself in
his letter to them, We (says he) have commanded you to assemble in this
Synod. But because this Council is famous, by reason of the conversion both of
Baronius chalengeth this honor as due unto Pelagius the second: For this
General Council (says he) was not held without the priuitie, consent, and
authority of Pelagius. And farther he adds, That Leander Bishop of Seuille
was there in quality of Legate from the Pope. But when as the Fathers of that
Council, and when Leander himself says, The king has commanded us, what
has he to reply? Seeing also, that we find no mention made of Leander in any
such quality, nor yet of the Pope himself: and seeing that Leander himself
in that Oration which Mausonius and Euphemius; and Leander in the third place,
with the addition only of Metropolitan of the Province of Betica. And I would
but know of Baronius, whether this be a meet place for a Popes Legate to stand
in or no; moreover, in some copies there is no mention at all made of his
subscription; and lastly Isidore neither in his Chronicle, nor yet in the life
of Leander, speaks aught of his Legatship: so that a man may well say, that
Baronius here speaks more like a dreamer than an Annalist. The like is of
that Recared caused to be held at Narbone, a City at that time of his
dominions; which Council Baronius produces for himself: and yet there the
Fathers say that they were assembled per ordinationem, by the ordinance of the
most renowned Recared. Neither may we forget a certain Canon which was made in
that Council, namely, Baron. vol. 8. an. 598. art. 30. extra locum.
That no Clergy man might wear Scarlet, it being a color more properly
belonging to worldly pomp and ostentation, than to any dignity of Religion,
whose inward devotion ought to show it self by the outward habit of the body,
and because the Scarlet Robe belongs rather to lay men which are in
authority, than to professors of Religion. And there also is a certain
punishment inflicted upon the transgressors of this Canon. Baronius to justify
the use of Scarlet Pelag. ep. 1. ad Episcopos Istria.
and it appears out of the Epistles of Pelagius the second, though we have
not theirs, that they questioned and debated his Title, seeing that he in his
Epistles complains, that they had sent him an answer in nature of a
definitive sentence: and seeing also that he paineth himself so much in
telling them, That Leo never ratified the Council of Chalcedon, but only for
points of faith, and that he retracted and disannulled all the rest; meaning
especially Smaragdus the Exarch to force them to obedience. Smaragdus (says
Paulus Diaconus) coming from Rauenna to Grado, Pau. Diaco. l. 3. de gestis
Longobard. c. 27.
drew Seuerus with his own hand out of the Temple, and carried him by force to
Rauenna, with three other Bishops of Istria, John Parencius, Seuerus, and
Vindemius, whom he constrained through fear of banishment and other violence
to communicate with John Bishop of Rauenna. But Paulus Diaconus adds farther,
That when at the years end they were returned from Rauenna to Grado, having, I
warrant you, first given full contentment to the Pope, the people

21. PROGRESSION.
That John the fourth, Bishop of Constantinople, made means to be called the
Universal Bishop.

AFter Pelagius the second succeeded Gregory, surnamed the Great, An. 590.
about the year 590, at which time John the fourth, Bishop of Constantinople,
stood stiffely in the maintenance of his usurped title: God in his wonderful
providence having so ordained, that this question should be now argued and
debated to the full, to the end that the Popes of ensuing ages might be
condemned out of Gregory, so eminent and renowned a man among them. Now this
John was borne out by the Emperor Maurice, who made Constantinople the
ordinary place of his abiding, and sought by this means to win the greater
credit and authority to that City, and therefore wrote his letters to
Gregory, commanding him to maintain peace, and to join in Communion with
John: but Gregory, under a color of humility, sought to enlarge the bounds
of his own jurisdiction the most that possibly he could, as we shall see
hereafter.

OPPOSITION.
Gregor. li. 4. ep. ^4.
Gregory much offended with those letters, wrote presently both to the
Emperor Maurice himself, and to Constantia the Empress: To the Empress,
that Maurice indeed had done like a godly and religious Prince, in commanding
the observance of such Christian duties to men of the Church, But far be it
(says he) that your time should be thus defiled by the exaltation of one man:
(...)
alluding manifestly to him which is said to be exalted or lifted up, in the
second Epistle to the Thessalonians, cap. 2. neither may it ever be said, that
you gave way to this crooked name of Universal. And again, It is an
insufferable thing, that he should seek to be called the Sole Bishop. By which
it appears, that to be called Universal Bishop and Sole Bishop was all one
in his construction. And he adds farther, By this arrogancy and pride what
else is portended, but that the time of Antichrist is now at hand: in that he
imitateth him (Lucifer) who making light of that happiness which he possessed
in common with the whole Army of the Angels, would needs aspire to a
singularity above all the rest: saying, as it is in the 14 chapter of Esaias, I
will exalt my Throne above the stars of heaven etc. and will be like to the
Almighty. And to the Emperor he wrote much after the same manner, Epist. 32.
All those (says he) which have read the Gospel know well what the Lord said
unto Peter etc. The Care and Primacie of the whole Church is committed unto
him, yet is he not called the Universal Apostle, and yet behold my fellow
Priest John seeks to be called the Universal Bishop: Consacerdos meus
Johannes.
I am now forced to cry out, O the times, and O the manners of men, Europe is
now exposed for a prey to the Barbarian, and By which words he plainly
condemns this title of Universal, as well in all others as in John, and
thereupon in opposition to him, he took unto himself first of all the
Appellation of the Servant of Servants: which title his successors after him
have used until this day. But Gregory proceeded yet farther, and joined to
him Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria, and Anastasius of Antioch, as in a common
cause, requiring them to help stop this breach against the torrent of this his
pride and elevation. And he would feign have persuaded them, that the Council
of Chalcedon did offer that title to the Bishop of Rome, Epist. 36.
(which yet we have And God forbid (says he) that this should ever enter into
the heart of a Christian, requesting them never hereafter to call any man by
that name in their Epistles, and repeateth that saying of Pelagius, That he of
whom it is written, This is he which is King over all the children of pride, is
near at hand. And that John by thus exalting himself, makes himself his
forerunner, and assumeth to himself that which belongs only to the Lord
Jesus. And using no less liberty of style, he wrote unto John himself, When
thou were (says he) to the office of a Bishop, thou said, that thou were not
worthy to be called a Bishop, and now thou would have none a Bishop but thy
self* etc. What will thou answer unto Christ, who is the true Head of the
Universal Church, in that day of judgment, seeing that by this name of
Universal thou seek to enthrall all the members of his Body unto thy
self? whom do thou imitate herein, save only him, who in contempt of those
Legions of Angels which were his fellows, sought to mount aloft to the top of
singularity, where he might be subject to none, and all others subject unto
him? that is to say, Lucifer: And he doubts not to apply unto him that which
is said in the 14 of Esaias. Verily (says he) the Apostle Peter was the
principal member of the Universal Church: as for Paul, Andrew, John, and the
rest, what were they but only the chief of their particular and consequently,
neither S. Peter himself, nor the Bishop of Rome, who claims from him. But
hear what follows, My little children (says he) this is the later time,
which Christ himself foretold: the pestilence and the sword now devour the
earth etc. all prophesies are now fulfilled, the King of Pride is at the gates,
and which I dread to speak, Sacerdotum.
an army of Priests or Bishops stands ready to receive him: for they who
were appointed to chalk out the way of meekness and of humility, are now in
pay under that neck of Pride which lifts it self up: Ceruici militant
elationis.
meaning by the King of Pride Antichrist, who relieth upon the strength of his
guard, which are the Paul had spoken in the second to the Thessalonians, cap.
2. and Gregory in this and sundry other places speaks after him, and by
warrant from him. And we must here note, that he charged his Deacon Sabinian
not to communicate with John, if he renounced not this pretended title of
Universal Bishop. And when Cyriacus, who succeeded unto John, persisted in the
ways of his predecessor, he wrote again to Anastasius Bishop of Antioch in
this manner: I have received (says he) his Synodall Epistle, Epist. 34.
wherein he requires us not to trouble the peace of the Church; and I have
likewise advertised him of that superstitious and haughty name of Universal
Bishop, that he could have no peace with us, unless he did reform the
haughtiness of this word etc. otherwise (says he) we corrupt the faith of the
Universal Eleuationem.
if there be one called Universal Bishop, then must the Universal Church go
to the ground, if he which is Universal happen to fall: but never may such
foolerie befall us, never may this weakness come unto my ears. But to
Cyriacus himself he wrote, requesting him, at his first entry to abolish that
word of pride, by which there was so great scandale given in the Church: for
whosoever (says he) is desirous of honor contrary to the honor of God,
shall never be accounted honorable by me; tearming this title of Universality
a thing contrary to God and to his honor: And because Antichrist, that enemy
of the Almighty, Epist. 28.
is now at hand, my earnest desire (says he) is, that he may find nothing of
his own, or any ways appertaining to him, either in the manners, or in the
names of the Priests. And Maurice commanded, that for a frivolous name there
should no such scandale arise between them, Consider (says he) unto the
Emperor, that when Antichrist shall call himself God, the matter it self is
but small and frivolous, yet most pernicious: if you look to the quality of
the word, it consists only of two sillables, but if you regard the weight of
iniquity which depends thereon, you shall see an universal enemy.
Wherefore I speak it boldly, that whosoever calls himself, or desires to
be called by others, the Universal Priest or Bishop, is in his elation of mind
the forerunner of Antichrist; because that in like pride he prefers himself
before others; like, I say, for that as that wicked one would seem as God
above all men, so will this man exalt himself above all Bishops. And in like
manner writes he to Eulogius Bishop of Alexandria. Epist. 30.
And that no Gregory went to take away that from another, which he yet
reserved as due unto himself, in his Epistle to the same Eulogius, he thus
writes: You have been careful, says he, to advertise me, That you forbear
now to write unto any, by those proud names which spring merely from the root
of vanity; and yet speaking to me, you say, Sicut iussistis, i. As you
commanded. Let me, I pray you, hear no more of this word Command: for I know
well enough both what I am, and what you are. In degree you are my Brethren,
and in manners you are my Fathers. Wherefore I commanded you nothing, only I
advised you what I thought fittest to be done. And yet I do not find that you
have perfectly observed that which I desired to leave deepest graven in your
best remembrance; for I told you, That you should not write in any such manner
either to me, Distinct. 99. c. Ecce. in praefatio. 5.
All which part of his Epistle is inserted in the Decret; Gregory the
thirteenth, in his Reformation of the Canon Law, knew not how to redress, but
only by giving S. Gregory the flat lie.

Now we may not for all this think that Gregory would lose any thing of his
own, or was careless to set foot and to encroach upon another man's; for it
appears by his Epistles, that he spread his wings as far, and farther than
his neast would give him leave, taking all occasions to gain credit, and to be
dealing not only in Italy, but also in other more remote Provinces of the
West; making himself sometimes arbitrator between parties, and sometimes
Judge of controversies between Church and Church, and eftsoons a sanctuary
and refuge for those who had been censured and cast out by their own
Metropolitans; Virgilius Bishop of Arles, and by virtue thereof conferred upon
him his Vicarship over the Churches of king Childebert, with power to watch
over their doctrine and behauiours. But it has been right well observed, that
those Epistles are of another growth, because the whole course of the History
of Gregory of Tours, who lived in the same time with Gregory the Great,
sufficiently teaches us, That the authority of our Prelates and Archbishops
Greg. li. 4. Epist. 51. and 52.
because that in so many changes of Bishops and Metropolitans, as we read of,
we find no mention at all made thereof. Wherefore those words, Idem ad
Interroga. Augustine. ca. 9.
Quod iuxta antiquum morem Pallij vsum, ac vices Apostolicae sedis postulasti:
And, Cum priscam consuetudinem Fraternitas vestra repetat, by which they say,
That Virgilius requested of Gregory the use of the Pall, and the Vicarship of
the Roman See, according to the ancient custom, were ill devised. And how
unlikely a thing is it, that Childebert should entreat the Pope to commit the
oversight Gontran, with whom he might in time upon occasion have open war?
Add we hereunto, That notwithstanding this pretended Pall, Gregory expressly
forbad Augustine his Legate, to exercise any jurisdiction over the Churches of
France: We, says he, give you no authority in the Churches of France, etc.
Thou may not presume to judge them by thine authority, but only by warning
and speaking them fair, and by making thy virtues to shine before them: To do
otherwise than this, were to thrust thy sickle into another man's corn.
Wherefore what ever is to be done by authority leave unto the Bishop of Arles,
whose jurisdiction reaches as far as to Lions. The like may be said of that
Pall, which, they say, was sent to Siagrius Medard Bishop of Soissons, bearing
date the year 593, Indictione 2, whereunto Theodoric his hand is set, as if he
had been then reigning in Soissons; who yet was never there, and was scarce of
age to speak, at what time that privilege bears date: neither did the Popes
of that time date after the manner which is there expressed. But this I say,
that Gregory had that name of Universal Bishop in such abomination, that as
he condemned it in another, so he would never accept thereof in himself, being
verily persuaded, that whenever it came to be accepted, the morrow after
Antichrist should set foot into the Church.

Baronius replieth to all this. Baron. vol. 8. an. 595. art. 27.
Saint Gregory, says he, imitated our Savior, who strove not with Satan in
his divine Majesty, but in the humble and low estate of his flesh. A weak
ward to bear off so great a blow: for did Christ, to overthrow Satan, play
Satan himself? For what else did Gregory, when he called every man the
forerunner of Antichrist, and Satan himself, if in the mean time he reserved
this high Title and prerogative to himself? Secondly he says, That Gregory
would not indeed be called Universal, Ib. art. 32, 33, 34
as Father of all the world, because the other Bishops were not his children,
but his brethren. But in another sense, says he, he does not refuse it,
namely, that they remaining his brethren and fellow Bishops, he might yet be
reputed and taken as Of the Privileges of Saint Medard, to all Bishops. But I
would learn, where they can find a ground for this distinction in Saint
Gregory's own words, seeing that he so often repeateth these and the like
words, That none would ever be called by that name: and takes offense that his
brethren the Patriarchs call him so, and reckons thereof as of a great wrong
done unto him. Me think so great an Annalist should have brought some better
proof than that privilege of S. Medard, which who so does but see it,
condemns presently as a fable, and which himself confesses to be subscribed
by those Bishops which were not at that time created Bishops, namely, by
Augustine Bishop of Canterbury, and Mellitus Bishop of Eulogius Bishop of
Alexandria to subscribe this privilege? Neither did Theodoric at that time
reign in France, as Baronius himself confesses, Ib. art. 81. an. 593.
but Childebert and Gontran. And who can warrant us, that there is more truth
in the privilege it self than there is in the subscription? or is not the
falsehood of the subscription enough to overthrow the instrument it self? And
yet is he not ashamed of this false coin, clipped by himself, and rounded at
his pleasure, but uses this forged instrument not only as a law to bind us
poor men withal, but even as a definitive sentence against the lives and
Crowns of Princes: For, says he, Gregory pronounces, That Seeds Roma
speculationem suam toti orbi indicit: i. The Sea of Rome Perfect good Latin,
no doubt: but he goes on, If any King, Bishop, or Judge, violate or infringe
the Decrees of our Apostolic authority, and of this our commandment, of
what degree or estate soever he be, let him be deprived of his honor, and cut
off from the communion of Christ: that is, says Baronius, Kings from their
kingdoms, for violating the privilege of one poor hospital: Greg. 7. li. 8.
Epist. 21. and li. 4. Epist. 2. and 23.
And so did Gregory the seventh understand and extend these words. And is it
then possible, that having himself cried down this Epistle, he will now so
much enhaunce the price of this base coin? Thirdly, says he, when Pelagius,
predecessor unto Gregory, says in his first Epistle, That no Patriarch may
presume to use this profane name, his meaning Gregory to Natalis; where
indeed he speaks of four Patriarchs, Epist. 37. li. 2.
but not a word to this purpose. But not to go farther, a man that reads the
text it self, had need to blush for him which cannot blush for himself; for
these words follow immediately upon the former, Pela. 2. Epist. 1. ad universe.
Epise.
If, says he, the Sovereign and chief Patriarch (such as he supposes
himself to be in all that Epistle) be called Universal, then is the name of
Patriarch taken from all others: but far be this from the thought of a
Christian. Which then of these two did he? Did he give the Title of Sovereign
Patriarch to any one of Universal to any man, does he exclude himself out of
the number of men? Fourthly he says, That this very John of Constantinople,
Baron. vol. 8. an. 565. art. 34.
who challenged this Title, yet still acknowledged Gregory as Head or Chief
above him; as appears, says he, in the case of John of Chalcedon, which
stood condemned of Heresy, and yet John of Constantinople suffered him to
carry his cause by Appeal to Rome: and for proof hereof alleges the
Epistles of Gregory to John of Constantinople, Greg. Epist. 52. and 64. li. 2.
and unto Narses. It is true, that in the former of those Epistles he
complains, That whereas he having written to him concerning certain wrongs
done to John of Chalcedon, and to of that which of right belongs to him by
the Canons: which also he repeated unto Narses. Now no man ever doubted of
their protections. But what is all this to an Appeal to Rome, seeing that
there is not so much as the name either of an Appeallant or of an Appeal to be
found in all those Epistles? And as for those 15, 16, 17 Epistles of Gregory,
which he cites out of his fifth book, they prove nothing but this, That John
upon the wrong which was done unto him, had recourse to Gregory, who made his
cause to be reuiewed in a Synod; Gregory requested the Patriarch of
Constantinople to receive him again with favor, as one which had been abused
and wronged by such as he had put in trust with the examination of his cause;
and entreated the Emperor to assist him therein: all which sauoureth not of
the nature of an Appeal, but only of that ancient recourse which the
oppressed used to make to the chief Sees; and which the Bishop of Rome used
commonly to draw to a consequence of Sovereignty and Dominion. The like is to
be said of the case of Adrian Bishop of Thebes, whose process, as he says,
Gregory read over: for the Appeal there spoken of, upon the accusation which
was mixed, and partly Civil partly Ecclesiastical, belonged properly to the
Civil Court, in the point for which the Emperor in the first instance
committed it to John Bishop of Iustineana Prima; and secondarily to the
Ecclesiastical Court, in that which concerned his deposition. And Gregory
there speaks in very proper terms, when he says, That Adrian being
wronged by his brethren and fellow Bishop, as by his enemies, fled to the city
of Rome. And again, He is, says he, Confugit.
come to Rome, to complain with tears. And in like sort does Baronius abuse
the other examples which he alleges. Fifthly he says, That Gregory dealt
about his Palls, amongst the Archbishops of the East also: making us believe,
that this custom Vices tibi meas committo, i. I make you my Vicar, he
infers presently, That he sent him the Mantle or Pall withal: which he
brings in, as if it had now suddenly sprung out of the ground; it being a
thing which former ages never heard of. But let us see upon what credit, though
we now come to enter into an age which was wholly set upon new fangles and
devises. For proof hereof therefore he cites the 55 Epistle of Gregory,
lib. 4. whence he collecteth, That he bestowed this Mantle or Pall upon John
Bishop of Corinth: whereas yet his words are only these, You know, says he,
that heretofore this Pall was given for money, but we have taken a strict order
in a Synod, Pallium pro Commodo.
that neither And I see no reason, but that by the same argument he might have
said, That he sent him his Orders also. True it is, that the two Bishops of
Rome and of Constantinople pulled who could pull hardest, to get all
jurisdiction into their hands, as if the Church had been a prey between them
two: and this was the cause that Gregory's letters slew so thick as they did
into Greece. And so much be said of the power which he challenged over the
Church.

As for the Emperor Maurice, Baronius takes pepper in nose against him; a man
otherwise well reported of, and much commended by Historians. His grieuance is
only this, That according to the law of his predecessors, he took upon
Gregory in his Popedom; and is scarce friends with Gregory himself for
suffering it. In the end he says, That the Emperor was a Tyran, Baron. vol.
8. an. 590. art. 2, 3, 4, and sequent.
and Gregory forced to do what he did: and that it was of this Maurice that
he meant, when upon the fifth Penitential Psalm he used these words, That he
is no King who makes the Church a Chambermaid, whom God appointed to be free
and Mistress of the house: if so, then was Gregory a notorious hypocrite;
neither is there any trusting of him, seeing that he said one thing and meant
another, in all the dealings which he had with Maurice. For do but read the
Epistle which he wrote unto Maurice, concerning that law which he had made to
this effect, That no soldier until he were dismissed, no accomptant without
his discharge first had and obtained, He is answerable, says he, for it before
Almighty God, whosoever is either in word or deed found faulty against his
gracious Lords: And so were I your most unworthy servant, if in this case I
should hold my peace, etc. Greg. li. 2. Epist. 62. and 65.
Thou were my good Lord before such time as thou were Lord of all, etc. And
when I thus presume to speak unto my Lords, what am I but dust, and a very
worm of the earth, etc. Power is given from heaven unto my Lords over all men,
etc. and Christ shall one day speak unto thee, saying, To thee have I
committed my Priests, or Bishops, etc. And in the end, I have, says he, Meos
Sacerdotes.
now in every point fulfilled my duty, seeing that I have yielded my
obedience to the Emperor, and have not Who can read this, and think him a
Pope which wrote it? And in like manner speaks he to Theodore the Emperors
Physician, My tongue, says he, is unable to express the good which I have
received of the Almighty, and of my Lord the Emperor; and what shall I give
again for all this good, but only this, Vestigia pure amare, i. To love the
ground he goes on: in the same sense in which he elsewhere often says, Greg.
li. 2. Epist. 64.
ad Dominorum vestigia transmisi, i. I have sent it to the feet of my Lords.
And at the foot of that Epistle he says, God has not given him power to rule
over soldiers only, Idem Epist. 52.
but also over Bishops: where he uses the word Sacerdotibus, meaning thereby,
All men of the Church. And shall then Baronius his plea be admitted, Baron. an.
593. art. 15.
when he says, That Gregory spoke as one which lived Nero, or a Dioclesian?
especially, when he makes such open protestation, That he speaks the truth
wholly, without all reservation: and thereupon is so bold in the same Epistle,
as to say unto him, What will thou answer before the judgment seat of God,
when he shall say unto thee at that day, Of Notarie I made thee Captain of the
guard; of the Captain of the guard, Caesar; of Caesar, Emperor? Was it fear,
or duty, which drew these words from him? But if you will take a true view of
the judgment which this man had of the Emperor, then read the Epistle which
he wrote without all passion to Anastasius Bishop of Antioch: Whereas, says he,
men which are Orthodox in the faith are daily preferred to holy Orders, we
have great cause to render all thanks therefore to the Almighty, and daily to
pray for the And in like manner writes he to Isicius Bishop of Jerusalem, Greg.
li. 7. Epist. 11.
and to sundry others. But the conclusion of all was this, That the law of
Maurice stood still in force, and Gregory himself was feign to publish it, by
his letter directed to the Metropolitans and to the Bishops of the chief Sees;
in which he calls him Most religious and most clement Emperor. Baron. to.
8. an. 593. art. 22. and 23.
But yet Baronius, like a man that would sail with every wind, tells us,
That Gregory corrected this law before the publication thereof; and that
thereby Baron. ib. art. 49
shall find that he does nothing therein, but only declare the intention of
the Emperor, to put it in execution, and to justify this law, rather than to
reprove it.

22. PROGRESSION.
Of the murder of the Emperor Maurice, by Phocas. What flattery Gregory used
unto Phocas: and that Boniface the third of Rome got to be called Universal
Bishop.

WE have already seen the controversy which was between Gregory of Rome,
and John of Constantinople, it remains that we now come to the issue
thereof. The Emperor Maurice, unto whom Saint Gregory had written so many
letters, Zonor. li. 3. pa. 64, 65. and sequent.
came to fall into dislike and hatred of soldiers, and one Phocas a Centurian
made himself captain of the mutiners, and was afterward for his pains by
them proclaimed Emperor. Maurice seeing that, fled away with his wife and
children; and presently was Phocas crowned by the Patriarch, and forthwith
Maurice; and when he had overtaken him, Paul. Aquileg 1. li. 17.
slew his wife and children before his eyes, not sparing the little one which
hung at the breast, and afterward caused his throat to be cut likewise. Maurice
had sent away his son Theodosius, to reserve himself to better fortunes with
Cosroe king of Persia; but he was also taken, brought back, and murdered: so
was the Empress Constantina also, with her three daughters. And the Historians
know not well which of the two they should most condemn in him, his Treason,
or his Cruelty. Phocas therefore was no sooner chosen Emperor, but Gregory
presently wrote unto him, and that with abominable adulation and flattery: He
begins his Epistle with Gloria Deo in excelsis, which is the song of the
Angels at the Nativity of our Savior: Greg. Epist. 36. li. 11.
Glory be to God on high, says he, which changes the times, and translateth
kingdoms; who some times in his justice sends Princes to afflict his people,
and other times in his mercy those which shall lift them up again: For which
cause we rejoice that thou art come unto the Empire. Let the heavens rejoice,
and let the earth leap for joy, and let all the people be glad thereof, etc.
Epist. 44.
And to Leontia the Empress he writes in this manner: What tongue can speak,
what heart can conceive the thanks which we owe to God for the happiness of
your Empire. Let the Angels give glory unto God, even the Creator, which is in
heaven above; and let all men give thanks here in earth beneath, etc. But the
conclusion of this Epistle is this, That they would take the Church of Rome
into their protection, and always continue mindful of Tu^es Petrus; assuring
Peter would not be unmindful of them, nor fail to undertake the protection of
their Empires: All tending, no doubt, to the establishing of his own
authority. But he happening to dye shortly after, and Sabinian, his successor,
suruiuing but a little time; An. 605.
Boniface 3, in the year 605 (who also lived not above eight months and some
odd days) to effect that which his predecessors had proiected, took his
advantage, seeing the Emperor Phocas on the one side displeased with Cyriacus
Patriarch of Constantinople, because he would not approve of such his murders;
and on the other, jealous least the hatred of his dealings might happily cause
Italy to revolt from under him; and thereupon he asked, and by the profers
which he made of his good service, obtained of Head of all other Churches; and
the Bishop of Rome should be called the Sovereign and Universal Bishop. And
thereupon he published that Imperious ordinance in a Synod at Rome, consisting
of 62 Bishops; and from that time forward used ever in his Mandats these words,
Volumus and iubemus, i. We will and command, and that in the Provisions of
Bishops, whom though they were elected by consent of Clergy and people, yet
would he not suffer to be either called or accounted as Bishops, but by virtue
of his letters patents, with that clause of Volumus and iubemus in them: and so
says Platina in plain terms. Which pretentions of his, Platina in Bonifaci^.
though sometimes they found some crossings, yet were they the beginning of
that schism

OPPOSITION.
Suppose we now that Gregory himself had risen again from the dead, and
seen his successor using that Title, which he before hand had so formally
condemned in his Epistles, how could he have saved him from this so necessary
a conclusion, drawn from the propositions of his own words, and so oftentimes
by him repeated, Whosoever will be called Universal Bishop, is the forerunner
of Antichrist, Boniface the third wills and requires, and ordains himself
to Bellarmine here finds out two creepeholes: The one is concerning the fact,
Bellar. de Romans Pontif. l. 2. c. 17. Non instituendo, sed asserendo. Lib. 4. de
Gest. Longobard. c. 37.
where he says, That Phocas did not ordain this by way of a new Institution,
but only of declaration of a thing ever before acknowledged in the Church. But
let him read the History it self: Paulus Diaconus (who lived not far off
from these times) speaks after another manner: Phocas (says he) at the suit
of Pope Boniface ordained, That the Sea of the Roman Apostolic Church should
be the Head of all other Churches, because the Church of Constantinople wrote
her self, The first of all other Churches. And so testify all the Historians
which came after him, namely, Freculphus, Rhegino, Anastasius, Hermannus, the
Chronologicall Compilation, Otto Frisinghens. l. 5. c. 8. Chron.
Otho Frisinghensis, and others: All which affirm, That Boniface requested and
obtained of Phocas, that the Church of Rome should be called the Head of all
other Churches; Ipsius authoritate.
and that, as some do add, By his authority. As for Sigonius, he denies
not, but that Boniface sent an ambassador to Phocas, by whose negotiation he
purchased a Decree, That the Church of Rome should be the first of all other
Churches: Where also he adds, According as it was decreed by the ancient
Canons. Now if Sigonius mean only for the Preseancie, we deny not; but if of
superiority and jurisdiction, there we differ, and we have already proved the
contrary. Bellarmine for his purpose objecteth an Gregory to the Bishop of
Syracusa, where it is said, Who doubts but that the Church of Constantinople
is subject to this Apostolic See, as our most religious Emperor, and our
brother Eusebius, Bishop of that City, daily do acknowledge. And this Epistle
(says Bellarmine) was written five years before Phocas his reign began. But
how should Gregory father this Epistle, seeing that he himself so often
complains, that Maurice did bear the other out in his unjust demands? Or
where will he find an Eusebius, who was Bishop of Constantinople at that time?
Or where will he place him when he has found him, seeing that Onuphrius
himself names for Bishops in all this time only John, surnamed the Faster,
Cyriacus, and Thomas Sacellarius? And Gregory, who runs them Eusebius? Who
sees not therefore, that this is an Epistle written long after, and hammered
upon the same anuill, on which many others are? Bellarmine argues yet farther
and says, That long before that time, Justin. l. in ep. ad Johan. 2.
Justinian called the Church of Rome The Head of all the Churches: True; but
still in that sense, in which he calls also that other of Constantinople by
the same name, Jdem Co. de sacros. eccles. l. 24.
saying, that she is The Head of all other Churches: Neither of these sayings
being true in strict construction, but only in a large signification, and as
they were Patriarchall Sees; and consequently, Head and Chief of those
Churches which were under them. The other creepehole of Bellarmine Gregory
indeed condemns this title of Universal, as John meant it; that is, that by
virtue thereof all other Bishops should be nothing but his Vicars: Whence it
follows (say we) that he pronounced Anathema against the Council of Trent,
which so many years after made all Bishops nothing but his Commissaries or
Officials. But not (says he) if this word Universal be understood only to
signify a general care of the Church, by means whereof the other Bishops
have nevertheless a particular care every of them in his peculiar Church. But
for answer hereunto, I would entreat the Reader Gregory, and then say,
whether they can admit of any such interpretation. Well (says Bellarmine) I
am sure, that the Pope was called Universal Bishop before Phocas his time, and
that therefore it cannot be said, that this title depends of his
Constitution. And we say again, That so were the other Patriarchs as well as
he, being according to the fashion of those times appointed, as so many fellow
or joint Curators of the Universal Church: but that Phocas was he who
appropriated that title to the Bishop of Rome, neither can he derive this title
from any higher: Justin. Co. de summa Trinit. l. 7. Co. de episcop. audientia.
L. Certissime, and Nouel. 3, 5, 7. Jdem Nouel. 2. and seq. Council. Chalced.
act. 1. passim. Council. Nice. 2. Act. 2.
for so Instiman called Epiphanius Bishop of Constantinople, sometimes
Oecumenicall, and sometimes, which is all one, Universal Patriarch: so does he
Anthemius and Menna in his Nouels. So Leo call Stephen: And the Chalcedon
Council it self in sundry places calls Menna by the name of Oecumenicall
Patriarch. So Adrian the first, Bishop of Rome, in the second Council of Nice
calls Tharasius, the General Patriarch. Lastly, so are the Bishops of
Alexandria and Antioch often called, being indeed all and every of them an
Universal Bishop, in as much as the whole charge of the Universal Church was
jointly committed unto them, and a particular, in regard of the several
Churches committed to their tuitions. Wherefore as it has been already said,
the appropriating of this title to the Bishop of Rome was from Phocas: and from
thence came that separation and rent between the Churches of the East and
West, which dureth unto this day, Gregory so often does inculcate it in his
writings, That this was the time when Antichrist began to set foot into the
world. And it is farther to be observed, that in this mean while sundry
abuses crept into the Church; as prayer for the dead, used in the public
Liturgy or Service of the Church, brought in by the Decree of Pelugiase the
invocation of Saints inserted in the common Letanies by Gregory, and by him
the whole Body of the Liturgy altered, by borrowing part from the Heathenish,
and part from the Jewish ceremonies; and the language it self, by reason of
that medley of the Northern nations, came by little and little to be clean
altered, so that no man now understood what was said or done in the Service of
the

But now come we to Baronius, to see what he says to all this: First therefore
he extenuateth that wicked parricide and those other butcheries of Phocas, the
more to defame the Emperor Maurice. But what may not be said of a Prince in so
tickle a State as he lived in, or what on the contrary can be added to those
praises and commendations which Historians have given of him? Or who can but
tremble when he reads what S. Gregory in cold blood writes of that murder?
Phocas (says he) and Leontia his wife were crowned in the Palace called
Secundianas, Gregor. epist. 7. indict. 6.
and the Emperor Maurice murdered with all his make children, da^^ely
Theodosius, who was already crowned, and Theodosius, Tiberius, Paulus, and
Justinian; also and all this done in pure treason as could be devised. Secondly
he relleth us, that Phocas was a good Catholic: Baron. vol. 8. an. 603. art. 3.
for (says he) it is very likely that he sent his confession to Gregory out
of hand. But if that be not, this is certain, that he sent his own and his
wives Images unto him, which he caused presently to be erected within the
Palace, in the Oratorie of S. Caesarius the Martyr. And what? is this the way
to expiat so horrible a murder? Or can he, which was so much offended with
Gregory his humble and lowly behauior toward Maurice, be well pleased with
this toward Phocas; under color that he complained, that at his coming
Apocrisarius, Gregor. lib. 11. ep. 43.
for so they called him, or Responsalis, that is, no Deputy or Solicitor for
the Roman Church Lieger and resident at Constantinople? Which were those,
Hincmar. Rhemen. ep. 3. c. 13.
as Hincmar describes them, who after the translation of the Imperial Seat to
Constantinople, solicited the Church causes at the Emperors Court, as well for
the Church of Rome, as for the other Prime Sees. And therefore in this the
Popes could not challenge it as due from the Emperors, neither had they in this
any prerogative above other Bishops. But Gregory goes on, What thanks
(says he) owe we to God that we are now come to sit under the pleasant shade
of your gracious Empire, and are brought from the day of sorrow and sadness
into this time of liberty and gladness? Poor Heathenish creature as thou
were Papinian, O how shall Those (says he) who heretofore feared to go unto
the Court, Ad vestra vestigia.
now run with joy unto thy feet: meaning to reside there in quality of Deputy
or Solicitor for him. And seeing that Gregory here uses the same term of
submission unto Phocas, which before he used to Maurice, will Baronius say (as
he did in hatred of Maurice) that it was fear, or that it was respect and
reverence which made him so to speak? And yet this Phocas, for whom this Saint
summoneth the holy Angels to rejoice, what was he but a drunkard, a
whoremaster, bloody, cruel, violent, brutish, and heretical, Cedren. in
Chron.
and so was his wife also, as Cedrenas reports of them: and which is more, he
was the man under whom the Roman Empire suffered more calamities than The Air
grew pestilent, the Earth became barren, the Sea was frozen with ye, with a
general mortality of men, beasts, and fishes. When as therefore all Elements
mourned, and all creatures groaned under the burden of such a monster, was it
well done of Gregory to rejoice alone? Thirdly, Baronius deduceth this Decree
of Phocas, made in favor of the Sea of Rome, in this manner: Gregory (says
he) had done what he could to obtain this Decree of Maurice, but could not
prevail: afterward upon summons from Phocas he sent Boniface to reside in
quality of Solicitor near unto the Emperors person. This Boniface continued
there until the death of Gregory, and became very gracious with the
Emperor: so that when Sabinian happened also shortly after to die, he thought
good to put Boniface made good use of the hatred which Phocas bare unto
Cyriacus the Patriarch of Constantinople, and made it serve for his own
advancement to the title of Universal Bishop. But what was the ground of this
hatred; Theophanus and Cedrenus (whom Baronius himself alleges) tell us,
That one Scholasticus an Eunuch, in the fourth year of the reign of Phocas,
having saved the old Empress Constantina and her three daughters, and hid them
secretly in the Church, at the length Phocas having notice thereof, sent some
of his guard to make them away: Cyriacus withstood them, and before he would
deliver them, took an oath of the Tyran (so speak they) that he should do no
violence to their persons: who indeed for the present thrust them into a
Monastery; but Boniface, but only to abuse Phocas his tyrannical passions,
to the quenching of that greedy thirst of his own ambition? And what reason
then have they to be offended with us, when we say, that the first founder of
their Universality was a Parricide, or rather a monster of all Parricides that
ever were? For whereas he says, That he gave not this privilege to the Bishop
of Rome, but only decided the controversy between him and the Bishop of
Constantinople, when they contended for it; besides that we have already
showed, that all Historians Boniface, and an absolute command of Phocas?

But let us now see a little farther, what Baronius alleges for the Popes
authority about this time. An. 603. art. 7. Gregor. lib. 11. ep. 10.
First he produces a certain privilege granted by Gregory to the Hospital
of Authun, wherein he deposes every King or Prince which shall offer to
infringe that privilege: A privilege, no doubt, taken out of the same budget
that that other of Saint Medard was: For how could he who was so crouching to
Kings and Princes all his life time, be so audacious to depose them Ib. ep. 8.
that Queen Brunchaut requested leave of him to call a Synod in France: But
we have already showed, that our Kings of France knew well enough how to call
Synods of their own authority: and the place it self (which he alleges out
of S. Gregory) says only thus, That she requested him to send some one in
his behalf into France, Facta Synodo.
who in the Synod which should there be held might correct all which should be
done contrary to the Canons: and himself sticks not to tell us, that she
did this only to claw poll with him, because the French had at that time
occasion to use his favor toward the Emperor; which makes him to say as he
does, Vtinam serio and non per imaginem etc. Moreover, Baron. ibid. an. 603.
art. 18.
Baronius produces a certain Appeal made by Ianuarius Gregory thereupon
sent one John to have the hearing of the cause upon the place it self: Where
by the way we must observe, that the question was not concerning any sentence
given against Ianuarius, but only of an outrage committed upon his person by
one Comitiolus, a Lord of great authority in that country; and that therefore
this was no Appeal, but only a Refuge. But he had forgotten to tell us, how
in his Instructions Gregory commanded John to have always before his eyes
the laws of Justinian, to govern themselves thereby, forthese are his words,
Concerning the person of the Bishop Ianuarius, you must remember that this was
done contrary to the Law, in that he pulled him by violence out of his Church:
Ib. ep. 54.
Which fact he says ought to have been Arcadius and Honorius, alleging the
Law it self all at large, with many others, by which the cognizance of such
causes is committed to the Civil magistrate. And now what makes all this for
that absolute authority of the Pope? Moreover, the Council of Toledo, which
was held under King Gondemar in the time of Pope Boniface the third, and that
after that Decree of Phocas, declares that of Toledo to be the first See,
Council. Tolet. sub Rege Gondemaro.
not so much by virtue of any new grant, as by the Synodall Decree of the
ancient Fathers, commanding all Bishops to veil bonnet unto him, under pain
of Anathema. Which Decree of the Synod was also confirmed by the King Gondemar.
As for the Pope, in all that long Epistle we find no one word spoken of him,
Baron. an. 610. art. 14.
and yet Baronius is Gregory to Constantius Bishop of Milan, Brixia, ep. 37.
lib. 3.
whom a certain Bishop of Bresse would not acknowledge, because it seemed that
he as well as the Bishop of Rome derogated from the authority of the Chalcedon
Council. But under his successor Sabinian the matter went a little farther:
Baron. an. 605. art. 2, 3, 4.
For we may learn out of a certain Council held at Mantua (for which we are
beholding to Baronius his Library) That when as there was question about the
choice of a new Patriarch of Aquileia, and Agilulpha^ John to be elected, the
Exarch of Rauenna, to gratify the Pope, set up against him one Candidian at
Grado: and so were there for a long time two Patriarchs; of which, he which sat
at Aquileia would never acknowledge the Popes authority.

23. PROGRESSION.
Of the attempt of Honorius against the Bishops beyond the Po.

THe Lumbards at that time lying heavy upon Italy on the one side, and the
Phocas; though in the mean time their ambitious humor, and desire of
soueraignetie and power, never ceased to put forth upon all occasions. Honorius
therefore Bishop of Rome, about the year 623, took his advantage upon a
lamentable and wretched accident. The Bishops of Istria, Venetia, and Lumbardie
(as we have already said) held no good correspondencie with the Bishop of
Rome: and it came to pass that Adelwaldus, fifth King of Lumbards, fell
somewhat distracted in mind; whether by force of a poison which is said to have
been given him by Eusebius the Emperors ambassador, Sigonius de Reg. Ital.
lib. 2.
at his coming out of the Bath, or Adoaldus his brother in law in his room:
yet was the kingdom hereupon drawn into factions; some holding for the old
King, some for the new: and among others, they beyond the Po held for the new
election, as well clerks as lay men. Which Honorius perceiving, took
presently part with the adverse faction, and dealt with the Exarch to
reestablish Adelwaldus; but above all, to apprehend those Bishops, and to send
them safe to Rome, to answer there for their offenses: to the end (says he)
that this their wickedness may not escape unpunished. But

OPPOSITION.
If that Decree of Phocas, made in favor of Boniface the third, found such
opposition at home, we may easily conceive what light regard was had thereof in
more remote Provinces and Churches; especially in that point which Boniface so
much enforced, That no provision of a Bishop was good in law, without his
authority: for the fourth and sixth Councels of Toledo, at also the first and
second Honorius, make open show thereof, seeing that the Bishops assembled in
these Councels openly profess, that they were assembled by the care and
industry of Sisinandus their King, Eius imperijs et iussia commoniti.
Chintillae salutaribus hortamentis.
who roused them up by his commands to the due handling of matters concerning
the discipline of the Church: as likewise speak the fifth and sixth, By the
wholesome exhortations of King Chintilla: and the first of Bracara, By the
commandment of King Arimire. Moreover, we find the Chapter of the Greek
Synods translated by Martin Bishop of Bracara, as we find them in the second
Tome of the Councels, authorized in that Synod: for a final definition (say
they) of this dissension, this holy Synod has thought fit that another
Metropolitan of some bordering Province should be sent for, to confirm and
ratify that opinion which he should think most agreeable to the Canons. But
here is to be noted, that not long after this ordinance of Phocas, made in
favor of the Sea of Rome, the Church might plainly see, in Honorius whom we
now speak of, how dangerous a thing it was that she should depend of one man:
Which Gregory well foresaw when he said, That if there should be one
Universal Bishop, and he should happen to fall, the whole Church must needs
unto the ground. For the heresy of the Monothelites then rising in the Church,
Honorius with the first fell into it, and was convicted thereof by his own
hand writing, which he had sent to Sergius Bishop of Constantinople: neither
was this a small heresy, or of any mean consequence, for that not to
acknowledge two wills in Christ, is consequently to deny two natures in him
also. His letters were produced in the sixth General Council, Action. 12. and
13. 2. To. Council. Act. 12. and 13. Council. Universe. 6.
and were there by general consent condemned to the fire: the sum of them
Sergius, that is to say, a pure Monothelite. Yet Bellarmine, Onuphrius, and
others of that whet, seek to justify him: but alas they cannot, unless they
will first condemn this Council. If they say that the copies were corrupted
by the Greeks, we answer, that we take them as we find them in the Latin:
where we farther find, that the copies of his letter were compared with the
Original it self, taken out of the Library of Honorius, as following in
every point the drifts and purposes of Sergius, Cyrus, and other accomplices in
this Heresy: all which is to be seen more at large in the Body of that
Council. But which is more, Honorius for this very Heresy was afterward
again excommunicated in the seventh General Council and last Action, Synod.
Nicen. 2. act. vlt. and 3. Synod. Constant. 8. Universe. act. 7. and 3. and 6.
Beda de sex aetatib. Liber Pontific. in vita Leonis. Psellus de septem Synodis.
and in the eight by Pope Adrian the second himself, and by diverse others. And
of this Beda Psellus, and for these later times Melchier Canus (though our
adversary) bears record: and is all this so easily puffed off, by saying,
That the Greeks perhaps did corrupt the copies? or that I know not who has
thrust these words into Beda? Had Pope Agatho known the contrary, or had the
least doubt thereof, what conscience had he had to hold his peace? Is it enough
to say, that he did it to avoid farther brable? Or should not the zeal of his
See rather have moved him to speak? For whereas they tell us a tale of one
Maximus, out of the Popes Library, we answer, That such a domesticke witness
ought not to be admitted without better caution for his honesty: no more may
Nicholas the first, who lived two whole ages Emanuel Galleca, who lived no
less than 500 years after. And, by the way, it is to be observed, That the
Legates of Pope Agatho assisted at the condemnation of Honorius, with 289 other
Bishops; Council. Tolet. 4. Can. 16.
as also that at this very time the fourth Council of Toledo decreed, That
the Apocalypse should be read in time of Mass, that is, of full service,
between Easter and Whitsunday, with Anathema to him which should fail herein:
as well perceiving, that the time now approached, when all men had need to arm
themselves against that Antichrist, who is in that book plainly foretold, and
by many circumstances most graphically described: which gave life to the Beast
which was dead, that is, to the Roman Empire, in that downfall of the temporal
Estate, as Gregory himself had mentioned.

An. 633. and 680. art. 17.
Here Baronius grindeth his teeth, contesting violently, That Honorius was not
an Heretic; he turns and windeth, new casts and mouldeth the words, to
save him thereby from this imputation: For what likelihood, says he, seeing
that the Councels held under Martin at Rome, make no such mention; and seeing
that Pope Agatho himself pronounces so peremptorily, That it was never known
that the Sea of Rome did err, etc. But what, shall we hearken to those forced
interpretations which Baronius makes of his words, rather than to those which
two general Councels made of them, when all matters were either present to
their view, or at least fresh in memory unto them? or because the Pope said,
That they Agatho by his Legates condemned him and his memorial after him in the
sixth general Council, shall it be enough for them to say, That the Greeks
added this parcel, and the two Sessions following, and thus to put off
whatsoever they are not able to defend? or may not we rather think, and say,
That those other passed it over with silence, because they had not what to say
in excuse thereof? Give way to this, and what Council can stand for good? In
the end he tells us, That one Theodorus Bishop of Constantinople, Ib. art.
17. an. 680.
being himself an Heretic, and one of those which should have been condemned
in the same sentence given by the Honorius his name to be put into the scedule
in stead of his own. Base shift, for where does he find Theodorus so much as
named in all that Session? or must so many authorities, so many pregnant
proofs, give place to his bare conjecture? what printed author, what
manuscript does he allege? But the truth is, Gratulabor mihi tibique.
this man desires not to be relieved but upon alms: Reader, says he, if thou will accept of this, I shall be glad that I have not lost my pains; if not,
nevertheless Honorius shall be still a good Catholic. And this is all the
fruit of 50 pages, which he had spent upon this argument.

Now after Honorius succeeded Seuerin the first. At that time, says Blondus,
the manner was, Blond. li. 9. Deca. 1.
That the Pope elected was not crowned till the Exarch would come Platina in
Seuerino.
and so also says Platina. Here Beronius observes, That the decree of Phocas
was observed in certain places: And we deny not, that this Mystery had his
proceedings; for one Sergius Archbishop of Cyprus, writing unto Pope Theodore,
inscribeth his letter, To Theodorus the Universal Pope: and so much the
rather, because he was at variance with the Bishop of Constantinople. Summo
omnium Praesulum Pontifici.
So likewise a genernll Synod of Afrike writing to Pope Martin, inscribeth
their Epistle, To the Sovereign Pontife over all Bishops: though they Victor
Bishop of Carthage, a man much renowned in that Synod, when upon his election
he sent his confession to Theodorus, kept the old style, and wrote only, To the
most blessed Lord, and our honorable holy brother, Pope Theodore; beginning
his Epistle with these words, The good works of your holy Fraternity, etc.
and so all along: giving him fairly to understand, That all the Apostles were
endowed with equal authority: and certifying him only, An. 649.
That he was consecrated Bishop of Carthage, without ever asking confirmation
at his hands; only he requesteth him to recommend him in his prayers unto God,
that he might well Martin, who taking occasion upon the fame and suspicion that
was of the Patriarchs of the East, that they were Monothelites, sent thither
certain Bishops, and made some of those which yet remained Orthodox in the
East, his Vicars. This was a fair attempt; but the Emperor Constans hindered
him in his walk: for the year following he sent and caused him to be
apprehended in Rome, and to be brought prisoner to Constantinople, where he
died a banished man, having been accused for conspiring with the Sarasens
against the Emperor, as appears by his letters written to Theodorus.
Martinus in Epist. ad Theodor. 14. Sanctu^ Audoenus in vita Sancti Eligij.
Sacerdotalem Concilium.
This Martin was a man of a hautie mind, and a great undertaker; yet could not
he maintain his pretended authority, no not in the West: For when a certain
Ouin, That by his commandment a Council of Priests or Bishops should be
called at Orleans: where the Heretic was condemned, and banished the realm of
France, without expecting any higher authority. So likewise under Pope
Eugenius, his next successor, there was a Council held at Chaalons, upon the
river of Saosne; which, as appears in the very front thereof, Ex euocatione
and ordinatione Domini Clodouaei Regis. Synod. Epist. ad Theodo. Arelat.
was assembled by the convocation and ordinance of king Clouis, as also in the
Synodall Epistle to Theodore Archbishop of Arles: wherein they presume to
declare unto him, by the authority of that Synod, That considering the time of
his penance was not yet expired, he might not offer Ib. can. 10.
That upon a vacancie no successor might be chosen but by the Clergy and
people of that Province; that otherwise the election should be held as void and
of none effect: where you shall find no exception or reservation at all to the
Pope of Rome. And in Spain there were held at that time, the 7, 8, 9, and 10
Councels of Toledo, all which acknowledge their assembling to have proceeded
only from their own care, and from the authority of the Prince: namely, the
seventh, By our devotion, say they, and by the care of king Chindasuinda: the
eighth, By the command of the king Reccesuinda: and the tenth, By his most
holy desire: Sanctissim^ Vote.
without any mention of the Pope at all; though in those Synods the highest
points of our The Decree of the Universal Council published in the name of
the Prince. And again, A law published in the same Council, Imperante
Principe glorioso.
by the commandment of the renowned Prince. In all which, besides those high
points of Christian religion, order was also taken against intrusions,
extortions, and other abuses of Bishops, proceeding to the punishment of some,
and final deposition of others: insomuch that in the tenth Synod one Pontamius
Bishop of Bracara, a thing never before heard of, accused himself, and was
thereupon deposed by the Synod, and Fructuosus Bishop of Duna chosen in his
place, with these words: We do here constitute and appoint by a common
election, Fructuosus to be Governor of the Church of Patrum sententia.
And this was done by the Decree of the Fathers, annexed to his letters of
Ordination; without binding him to take a journey to Vitalian at Rome for
confirmation, who sat not in that pride which Popes now use to sit in. For as
Anastasius reports, when the Emperor Constans came to Rome, he with all his
Clergy went to meet him six miles off, and there received they him with all
tokens of submission and reverence, though he was a sacrilegious and bloody
Emperor, and one which had confined Pope Martin the first to a certain place
in banishment, as Baronius reports.

24. PROGRESSION.
Wherein the religion of this age principally consisted; and what was the
purpose of the Popes, when they sent Preachers into foreign Countries.

THe good Bishops of the Primitive Church heeded only the building and
reedifying of the spiritual Temple of God, in gathering together living
stones; but from hence forward shall you find the Histories stuffed only with
relations of material Edifices, Oratories, Images, Marbles, Incrustations,
Ouerlayings with gold, and such like: which the worser sort of men were ever
most Beda l. 1. c. 20. 26. 29. Histor. Eccl. and l. 4. c. 1. 2. 16. 19. Galfri.
Monumet. l. 8. c. 4.
And if any Bishops of Rome did send to make a conquest of some far country,
as Gregory the Great into England, and after him Honorius, Vitalis, and
others, it was not principally to preach the Gospel, but to broach their own
ceremonies, their Singings, their Service in Latin, Hours, Organs, Altars,
Tapers, Anelings, and such other nifles; stirring up Princes to enforce their
subjects to the use and practice of them, who would feign have kept themselves
to the first institution of the Church in the purity of Malmesbu. de gest.
Anglo. li. 1. c. 50.
And the more to win unto themselves credit in foreign parts, where ever they
saw any ambitious spirit, thirsting after some pre-eminence over the rest of
his brethren, presently their fashion was to send him their Pall, either as a
bare token of honor, or as a liuerie of their Vicarship, and to use means to
draw all causes unto them: yet found they not credit in all places alike, but
as they carried it away clear in some places, so in others they met with a
balke, especially in those Churches which being well planted at the first, grew
up and prospered in purity of doctrine.

OPPOSITION.
Wherefore do they what they could, yet the Churches of the East ever rejected
that Decree of Phocas, 2. To. Council. Epist. Vitalian. 2, 3, 4. Sigo. de Reg.
Italiae l. 2. Blond. Deca. 1. li. 9. An. 680.
neither would Paul Archbishop of Candia suffer John Bishop of Lampeon, when
he had been condemned by his own Synod, to appeal to Rome; as may appear
out of the letters of Vitalian, by which he retracteth the sentence given in
that Synod against him, absolueth, and as much as in him lay, restores him to
his See: and for execution of this his sentence, used his credit in the
Emperors Court. So likewise at the gates of Rome it self, the Archbishop of
Rauenna would not acknowledge him; where, after the decease Bonus, Maurus being
canonically elected and consecrated by his Suffragan Bishops, refused both the
Pall and the consecration at the Popes hands, and himself also consecrated his
own Suffragans without him; and when the Pope excommunicated him, he
excommunicated the Pope again. And in this state continued the Church of
Rauenna, until the time of Pope Domnus, which was in the year 680, all the
time of Pope Martin the first, Eugenius the first, Vitalian, and Adeodate.
Whereupon they called her Heretical, and termed this her Heresy by the name
of Autocephalia, meaning thereby, That she should be her own Head. And we be
sure, that had they known worse by her, worse they would have spoken of her.
And Anastasius says plainly, That it was for the Primacie. Causa primatus.
As for Lib. Pontif. in Vitalian. and Domno.
in regard of such demaines as he held; without which he could not be reputed
as Bishop. But the sixth general Council held about this time at
Constantinople, can best inform us of the opinion which the Church then held
concerning that constitution of Phocas, made in favor of the Pope, and with
what limitations they received it.

25. PROGRESSION.


AGatho, a Sicilian borne, being made Pope, pronounced openly, D. 19. c. sic
omnes 2.
That all Decrees made by the Sea Apostolic, ought to be received as if they
had proceeded from S. Peter's own mouth. And bearing himself as Head of all
the Churches, directed his letters, To all Bishops. Which Canon was taken by
Iuo into his Decrete, Iuo. c. 4. pa. 122.
and afterward canonized by Gratian, and farther, lately authorized by Gregory
in his last Edition, notwithstanding that pretended reformation. And not
without cause, Council. 6. universe. Sess. 4. Council. 6. universe. Act. 18. in
Exempla. Iussio. diuinae. Dom. Constant. etc.
if we will be so mad as to believe that which he doubts not to say in his
Constantine Barbatus, That unto that day the Church of Rome had never been
stained with any error, neither yet would be, by reason of that promise
heretofore made by our Savior unto Saint Peter. But easily may he fall into
the foulest error, who is most confident that he cannot err. And the Emperor
out of his honesty seems to applaud him, saying in answer to his letters,
That he admired all which he had said, as the very voice of S. Peter. But
notwithstanding all this, we must now see what the sixth general Council,
which was holden under Constantine Barbatus, said, did, and ordained of this
matter.

OPPOSITION.
Zonar. to. 3. in Constable. 4. C. Habeo librum. and Can. sexta Synod. Did. 16.
Lib. Pontif. in Agatho. Council. universe. 6. Action. 18. Epist. Leo. 2. ad
Constant.
was assigned by the Emperor: so speaks Zonaras, The Emperor, says he, for
the unity of the Churches, assigned a Council at Constantinople. And Gratian
in his book of Decrees, The Emperor, says he, assembled it, and it was held
by his care and providence, and he assisted there in person. And the
Pontifical book says, That Pope Agatho received the sacred commandment of
the Princes, Constantine, Heraclius, and Tiberius, Emperors: who requested and
exhorted him to send his deputies to Constantinople. And Pope Leo the second,
in his confirmation of the Acts of this Synod, This Council, says he, lately
assembled by the Emperors command in the royal city, etc. And Agatho I
offer, says he my ready obedience to what is commanded to me by your sacred
Patent: which was, to seek out persons fit to be sent unto the Synod which the
Emperor had called, Act. 2.4.
among all the Bishops of his jurisdiction, and others; all which he there
calls by the name of his Fellow servants: Confamulos suos
and that, as he says, for the discharge of his duty and service; causing
them to make all the have they could to the Emperors feet: as well from Rome,
which he terms the servile city of the Emperor, as of the places
thereabout. Speaking all along in that Epistle, of the most religious commands
of their clemencies, and of the duty which he owed unto them. And to
conclude, he requesteth them to accept of such as he had sent unto the Synod,
though small scholars, Flexo mentis poplite.
And a little after he falls to such submission, as to say, That he entreated
him upon the knee of his heart. Such was the style of this Agatho in those
days: and such also was that of the Synod it self of Rome, in their answer to
the Emperors letter. Moreover, the Synodall Epistle it self, written to Pope
Agatho, alleged by Baronius, declares, That their assembly was caused by the
religious ordinance of the Emperor, endorsing it, To Agatho Pope of the old
Rome, and within calling him only, The Bishop of the first See of the
Universal not Universal Bishop, or Bishop of the Universal Church. And now
tell me, how all this stands with that pretended superiority, or rather
Monarchy of the Church of Rome. Secondly, the Emperor sent unto all the
Patriarchs, and amongst the rest to him of Rome; willing them and every of
them to assemble the Bishops of his Apostolic See and jurisdiction, in a
Synod, and to make choice of some of the fittest among them, to deliver in the
Council at Constantinople, what was done and agreed upon in every one of
their Synods: which also the Pope observed to a hair, sending thither some to
represent his own person, and others in the name of the Synod of the
Apostolic Roman See. In which Synod we find none subscribed but only the
Bishops of Italy. By all Domnus and Agatho Bishops of Rome, as also to George
Bishop of Constantinople, to whom he wrote to the same effect, with the like
respect, honor, and Title, as to the other, save only that he called the one
Universal Patriarch, and the other Universal Pope. Likewise out of the
Synodicall Suggestion (for so is it called) which Pope Agatho sent unto the
Emperors, where we find this superscription, Agatho Bishop, Servant of the
Servants of God, with all the Synods which are under the Council of the as
also out of that Epistle which he wrote to the Emperors upon the receipt of their
Patent; where he repeateth again the Mandat of the Emperor unto him, De
familiari Cler^.
for the sending of deputies to the Synod assigned, as well of the Synod which
was held not far off from the Apostolic See, as of his own particular Clergy.
And yet we find none subscribed but Italians; and Agatho himself signeth in
these terms, Act. 4.
With the generality of the Council of all the Apostolic See, that is, of
all his jurisdiction. Act. 17.
And in the subscription of the seventeenth Action, the Legates of Pope Agatho,
and of the Bishops of Alexandria, Antioch, and Jerusalem, Lieutenants of the
Apostolic See, meaning every one of his own Church. And Abundantius and John
both Bishops, subscribe in particular, by the name of Legates of the whole
Council of the holy Apostolic See of Rome. This Council therefore represented
his See, and his See was, according to his own definition bounded within the
precincts of Italy. And in like terms does the Emperor Constantine make
answer to Agatho and to his Synod, in the 18 Action. Thirdly, Act. 18.
in all the Actions of this Synod things are generally noted to have been done
Praesidente Constantino, etc. where also all the Nobility and Senators, who
assisted, are ever named before the Popes Legates, who are there said sometimes
to Reside, and sometimes to Preside, as in the sixth and seventh Actions. And in
the Emperors absence Proposito venerando sessu pijssimi Imperatoris, etc. Ex
persona ipsius, secundum iussionem eius, praesidentibus and audientibus: Whereby
we see, Lib. Pontif. in Agatho.
that the Pontifical went about to abuse the Reader through the likeness of
the word, when he says in the life of Pope Agatho, That his Legates were
received Rsidente sub Regali cultu Imperatori, not daring to say Praesidente:
with like honesty as before, where he makes the Bishop of Constantinople
writing to Vigilius, in stead of Residente nobiscum, to say, Praesidente nobis
vestra Beatitudine; thereby to get an authority for the Presidencie of the
Pope: the word Residere Agatho, Residere praecepti, vna cum nostris, etc.
Residente Synodo cum eius pietate: Residente vna cum principe: and so
throughout in this whole Council. By which we may perceive with what face
Bellarmine affirms, That Agatho his Legates presided; alleging for proof
Zonaras: whereas yet he says in express terms, That the Legates of Agatho,
(...).
and Gregory of Constantinople, and Theophilus of Antioch, were chief Leaders
in this Council: where, as you see, he joyneth them all together. Fourthly,
the Synod, contrary to that which Agatho had formerly boasted of, concerning
the infallabilitie of his See, condemned Honorius, one of his predecessors, of
Heresy, and that in the face and Fautorem, concursorem, Action. 12. 13. 17.
and 18.
and confirmatorem, A favorer, a concurrent, and an abettor of the Heresy and
impiety of the Monothelites, and consequently an instrument of Satan, to whom,
with sundry others, they deliver him over, and damn the memorial of him for
ever. Which sentence was first published in full Council, and afterward
ratified by express letters sent from Leo the second, his successor: Epist.
Leo. in 6. Synod. universe. D. 19. c. Sicut omnes.
Which overthrows that goodly Canon of Pope Agatho, Sicut omnes, which
says, That all the Decrees of the Bishops of Rome ought to be kept and obeyed,
as the voice of Saint Peter himself. And as for the rank and place of the
Pope, they bring him back again to the ancient (...). Council. Constant.
universe. 6. in Trullo. Can. 56. C. Habeo librum and C. Placuit. D. 16. Council.
Nicae. 2. universe. 7. Action. 2. and 4.
That the Sea of Constantinople should have equal privileges with that of
Rome, and in all Church matters should be honored as much as the other, as
being next in order after her. Neither is it enough to reply, That this
Council made no Canons, and that therefore this is false: for it has been
elsewhere sufficiently declared, and Gratian himself affirms as much, That
this Synod was assembled at two several times, and that at the second
assembling they enacted an hundred and three Canons, as Onuphrius himself
acknowledges; which were afterward authorized by the second Council of Nice,
being the seventh Universal Synod, Act. 14. in the presence of Pope Adrian his
Legates, the said Canons Justinian the second (after that he had quieted the
troubles of the Empire) taken out of the Records of the first meeting. As for
the temporal Estate, Agatho before acknowledged, That Rome was the servile
City of the Emperor: Lib. Pontifical. in Agatho.
and as a great and high favor obtained of him a Release or discharge of a
certain sum of money, which the Bishop of Rome was wont to pay into the
Emperors coffers for his ordination: yet with condition still, D. 63. c.
Agath. 21.
That his election should never pass unto ordination without the Emperors
priuitie and express command, as the ancient manner was. And this Law has
Gratian himself inserted in the Decrete. So that it is no great wonder, if
their power reached not altogether so far as their desire, in the ordination
of others: which Council. Tolet. 12. Ca. 6.
which was held in the time of this Agatho, of whom we speak: where we find,
that the Prince appointed those for Bishops which were elected by the Province;
and if they happened to let the Sea lie void too long, the Archbishop of Toledo
furnished the Church, yet so, that he that was elected within a certain time,
might present himself to the Metropolitan of the Province.

Baron. vol. 8. an. 681. art. 47, 48.
Yet Baronius will not be satisfied, but says first, That they which were
condemned in this Council appealed to Rome; and secondly, that the Fathers of
this Agatho: but how may we believe him, seeing that no man, besides himself,
ever spoke of any Appeal in this case? For the Epistle of the Emperor to
Agatho speaks in this manner, They were thrust out of their Priesthood by the
general voice of the Synod, Actio. 17. sub finem Anast. in Agatho.
and left to the approuement of the holy Pope: meaning only that he should
judge of their hearty repentance afterward, according to their behauiors. And
Anastasius makes this clear, when he says, That they were banished to the
City of Rome. True (says Baronius) but yet Constantine in his Epistle to Leo
the second says, They have petitioned to our Grace, that we would send them to
your blessed presence; which we have granted, and have sent them unto you,
referring them and their cause unto your judgment. I grant: but how Baron.
ib. art. 49.
wherein (as he says) it is thus written, We have clearly preached unto you
the clear light of the Orthodox faith, which we entreat your brotherly
Holiness to confirm by your honorable rescripts or answers: Which words
implie not any suit for ratification, but only a request for consent: For it
is clear, that the Fathers never dreamed that their sentence stood suspended
for want of his confirmation: for (say they) we have driven them by Anathemaes
out of the Courts of the Lord etc. And again, God moved and God crowned this
assembly. All of us with one heart and tongue and hand have pronounced this
definitive sentence, void of error, certain and infallible, by the assistance
of the holy Spirit. Is this spoken as if they either expected the Popes
pleasure, or attended his leisure? But because they tell him, that he by his
letters had somewhat helped them in this business, therefore they infer,
That without him they did and could do nothing. By which reason we may as well
say, when Leo sent the Acts of his Synod into Spain, requesting them to
receive and put them in execution, that he requested confirmation of them,
making them verier Popes than the Pope himself: Leo the Pope of old Rome (say
they) entreated us by his letters, Council. Tolet. 14. c. 2. An. 683.
that the Acts which he sent unto us might stand good, borne up by the force of
our authority: and thereupon they made this answer, We (say they) not able at
this present to assemble our selves in a General Council, by reason of the
times, have met at several times and places, and have read them, approving
what is there ordained touching the doctrine of two natures in Christ etc. And,
we have thought good to confirm these Acts, thereby to satisfy the Bishop of
Rome, and to declare our consent of faith in plain and open words. And
Baronius himself calls it a Confirmation of the Acts of this Synod. And for
a farewell to the time of Agatho, we may remember, An. 681.
that in his time was held the 11 Council of Eringus, wherein were handled
matters of great importance.

26. PROGRESSION.
That the free election of the Popes was restored to the Clergy and people of
Rome; and how they abused this freedom.

LEo the second, successor unto Agatho, in the year 683, An. 683.
upon the letters of the Emperor Constantine received the Council of
Constantinople, written in Lib. Pontific. in Leo. 2.
and (as we have already declared) condemned and excommunicated those whom the
Synod had excommunicated, and among the rest Pope Honorius himself: And
Constantine to gratify him again ordained, That the Archbishop of Rauenna
elect should come and take his ordination at Rome, but so, that he should not
pay any thing for his Pall: whereby appears, that this corruption,
notwithstanding the constitution of S. Gregory, continued still at Rome. But
Benedict the second, successor unto Leo, went a step farther, and obtained the
Emperors Patents, directed to the Clergy, people, and army of Rome (for the
garrison within the City made a party also in these elections) containing,
That he who in a lawful assembly and by common consent should be elected,
without expectance of which was never seen before, since the time of Justinian
the first. But soon appeared, how necessary a tie that was to be laid upon
them: for Benedict happening to die within the year, and his successor John
sitting but a little longer, when they came to the choice of a successor,
Sigon. de Reg. Ital. l. 2.
The City (says Sig^ni^s) seeing her self at her old liberty, fell likewise
to her old divisions: The Clergy chose Peter, the Army Theodore, and after a
while let both those fall, and by a general consent consecrated Conon for
their Bishop: who happening likewise to die at the end of eleven months, the
like division fell among them as before, which continued for the space of two
months and upward: Lib. Pontific. Sigon. de Reg. Jtal. l. 2.
For during the time of his sickness Paschal an Archdeacon had written to John
Exarch of Rauenna, promising him a great mass of money, which Conon (who then
lay on his death bed) had bequeathed to the Clergy and religious houses. John
thereupon made his party good within the City: Wherefore Conon had no sooner
his eyes shut, but the City was divided, some standing for Theodore the
Archpriest, Illat. in Leo. 2. Benedict. 2. Johan. 5. Conone, Sergio.
others for Paschal the Archdeacon: the one part making head within the
Patriarcha^ (for so called they the Palace of Lateran) the other without,
either party being ready to come to blows; when upon the sudden the chief
of the Army, Clergy, and people, to prevent this mischief, took one
Sergius, a poor Priest, out of the midst of the company, and proclaimed him
Pope; and presently all, even the Sigonius adds, That they adored him; but
this is spoken after the manner of these times: Anastasius says, That they
humbled themselves, Blondus, Dec. 1. l. 9.
or bowed down before him: so great was the pride of that See, such corruption
was there used to aspire unto it. The Exarch being loath to lose his money, came
thither in all have, and finding Sergius quietly in possession, demanded of
him the money which was promised to him by Paschal: Sergius to content him,
gave him the Vessel and Crowns of gold which hung up before S. Peter's House,
and yet all was too little. This fell out about the year 690. And so within
four years, after their liberty of election restored to them, fell out two
schisms, next kin to commotions, in the State; and the soldiers began
already Anastas. in Sergio.
And Anastasius farther reports, That this Paschal, one of the competitors,
was afterward thrust into a Monastery, for worshipping of trees, for
lotteries, and other enchantments which he used. Also we may observe, that
after the time of Leo the second, the Popes were consecrated by three Bishops,
namely those of Ostia, Port, and Velitre, as all other Bishops were; whereas
before he was only consecrated by him of Ostia: but after all, they grew
impatient, to see themselves so ordered by the sixth General Council; and
Justinian the second son to that Constantine, of whom they had received so
many and so large favors, felt it to his cost.

OPPOSITION.
Sigon. l. 2. an. 692.
This Justinian therefore, after the death of his father, who had before his
death associated him in the Empire, following (as Sigonius says) the steps of
his father, wrote presently to Pope John the fifth, That he had found the holy
books of the sixth General Council, digested and set in order by his father,
which eftsoons he presented to the Patriarchs, Sacra Justin. ad Johan. 5. in
2. To. Council.
and to his Holiness his Solicitor, to the sacred Senate, to the Metropolitans
and Bishops, to the chief officers both of his Court and Army, to be read
before them, and to be subscribed by them, to the end that they might never
hereafter be falsified or corrupted: whereof he thought good John dead, Lib.
Pontif. in Conone.
and Conon placed in his room, who received the letters: and the Emperor
shortly after understanding of his election, spared for no kind of
gratulations, which are not, I warrant you, forgotten in the History. But this
Conon happening to die shortly after his election, having been all the while
sickly, Sigon. l. 2. de Reg. Jtal. Anastas. in Conone.
and Sergius succeeding in his place, Justinian sent like letters unto him,
requiring him to subscribe to this Council, so carefully compared with the
Originals, and already subscribed by his Lieger Solicitors. Sergius because
there were some Acts there which pleased him not, namely, those which concerned
the ordering of his See, took occasion to say, that some body had falsified
the Acts, Anastasius says, his Legates) and refused to subscribe unto them:
Anastas. in Sergio.
Whereat Justinian took such offense, that he renounced the Church of Rome,
which until then he had ever maintained, and sent to apprehend John Bishop of
Port, and Boniface chief Counselor of the Sea. Moreover, Zachary
Protospatarius, or as we say, High Constable, came himself to apprehend the
Pope. But Sergius had taken such order, that all the souldierie of Rome was at
his devotion, Anastas. in Sergio.
so that Zachary was feign to submit himself, and to cry him mercy. The
pretense of his not subscribing was (as Anastasius says) Paul. Diacon. de
gest. Longobard. l. 6. c. 11.
or (as Paulus Diaconus reports) to a Synod of Error, as if they had been
Monothelites. But the Canons which are come unto our hands have no such smell
about them, but in express terms they pronounce Anathema against them:
neither indeed was there any thing in them that troubled his conscience, save
only that they equalled the Bishop of Constantinople with himself. And
Anastasius seems to say as much, when he says it was by reason of certain
articles there added, contrary to the Rites of the Church, and therefore not
contrary to any article of religion, or point of doctrine: but in the life of
John he speaks plainly, saying, it was for certain articles contrary to
the Roman Church: for indeed the Emperor sent him an Orthodox An. 700.


Baronius seeks to discredit and to annihilate the Canons of this Council,
Baron. vol. 8. an. 692. art. 1, 2. Pseudosynodum.
but we have sufficiently justified them elsewhere: he calls it a false and
erroneous Synod, grieuing to see his Head bounded and limited by law and
reason, as if all the members should thereby fare the worse: But let him thank
those Fathers for it, and the Popes Legates themselves, who were present at it.
But above all, Tharasius Patriarch of Constantinople is he which offends him,
for that in the second Council of Nice he says, Syno. Nice. Act. 2.
What ignorance is this of some which trouble themselves about these Canons? It
is a scandale to doubt whether they are of the sixth General Council or no:
Know all men therefore, that that Council was first assembled under And is it
enough now to find some little error in the date, thereby to reject all these
Canons? And Balsamon Bishop of Antioch pleases him as little, Because (says
he) that the fifth and this sixth Synod had made no Canons, this therefore came
in supplement unto them etc. and is also reckoned as General. For although the
Western Bishops, to wit, Italians and Latins, because they are there touched,
say it is no Council, and that the Popes Legates were not there etc. yet I
find, looking over the old Nomocanon, Balsamon in Nomocanone.
that Basil Bishop of Gortyna, Metropolitan of Candie, and another Bishop of
Candie were there as Lieutenants of the whole Synod of the Church of Rome; and
not they only, but a facie, who also had particular jurisdiction, as appears
by the second title of the fifth book Imperial. What sponge can wipe this out?
or who can think that this can be controlled by giving Balsamon the lie, or by
saying that he was an heretic? Can Gratian endure this injury, who has
canonized these Canons? Or the second Council of Nice, Actio 2. and 3.
or the Popes Gregory the second, and Adrian, who have cited them for good
proof, alleging the 83 Canon to justify their use of Images? Or is it enough
for Baronius to say, that these Popes kill the Greeks with their own swords,
when as by approving them they rather cut the throat of their own cause? What
speak I of their approving This picture (meaning of the Lamb) is received by
the Canons of the sixth Synod, published by humane and divine ordinance etc. As
for that which he says, That Anastasius in his translation of the seventh
Synod testifies, That none of the Patriarchall Sees received them, besides his
proper quality, as vassal to the Popes; this author makes himself otherwise
too too much suspect in this business, when in his Epistle Dedicatorie to John
he sticks not to say, That in this Synod (meaning the second of Nice) there
are many things of the Canons of the Apostles, and of the sixth General
Council found, which with us (says he) are not found either interpreted or
received: of so good dealing were the ministers of this See

26. PROGRESSION.
That Aripert King of the Lumbards bestowed the Cottian Alps upon the Pope:
and that Justinian the Emperor sent for Pope Constantine to come to
Constantinople.

An. 705.
THe greatness of the Bishop of Rome at this time was such, that the Emperors
residing in the East, being harassed what with the invasions of the barbarous
Anastas. in Joh. 7. Paul. Diacon. l. 6. c. 28. Blond. Dec. 1. l. 10.
In the year therefore 705 John the seventh entered upon his See. Aripert King
of the Lumbards gave him (as Paulus Diaconus reports) the inheritance of the
Cottian Alps: Blondus and Platina say, that he gave him all between Turin and
Gennes, and from thence as far as France; and this they call, Giving to Saint
Peter: and he made no great difficulty to be liberal of another man's. Paulus
Sigon. de Reg. Jtal. l. 2.
That all this did formerly belong to the Sea Apostolic, meaning, by that
pretended donation of Constantine the Great; and that they were taken away by
the Lumbards; and that he sent the Act of the donation in letters of gold to
Aripert. But Platina marreth all when he says, Plat. in Ioh. 7.
That this is reported without an author, and that seeing there is no
certainetie of the donation it self, and that the Canonists reckon it as a
Palea or chafe, without corn or substance in it, how can the confirmation
hold for good? Wherefore this was either a mere device of the Popes to
encroach upon it, or else a humor of Aripert, thereby to redeem the many
enormious cruelties by him committed, and mentioned by Sigonius, according to
the common error of the times: but he, shortly after pursued by his enemy,
Justinian the second wearied with his homebred trauerses, being now at length
restored to the Empire which he had lost, purposing to be revenged of his
enemies, thought good first to gratify the Pope, and therefore sent him the
Acts of the fixed Council by two Metropolitans, exhorting him to receive them.
Anastasius the Popes Library keeper says it was with request, to strike out
what he thought fit: But Platina their Historian says, That it was absolutely
to have him subscribe unto them: but both of them agree in this, that he sent
them back again, as wanting courage to contradict or censure them. An. 708.
But in the year 708 Pope Constantine made better use of the times: for
Justinian having made away the chief of the adverse faction, Callinicus the
Patriach of Constantinople his eyes, sent him prisoner to Rome, thinking
thereby to do the Pope no little pleasure: and thereupon sent to him to come
into the East, with purpose to use his advice in matters, and to oblige him to
himself with honors which he means to do unto him. The History says, That
he gave order to have him received in all places as his own person, That he
fell at his feet, and kissed them, with his diadem upon his head: Paul. Diaco.
de gest. Longobard. l. 6. c. 31.
but withal it lets us understand, that he used his authority to make him
come. Paulus Diaconus says, That he commanded the Pope Constantine to come
unto not, as Sigonius an author of these days, that he beseeched him. And
Anastasius himself says, That he sent his sacred Patent, by which he
commanded him to come up to the royal City, and that he with all readiness
to obey the Emperors behests, Anastas. in Constanti.
caused shipping to be provided; and these are the authors who lived nearer
unto the times: so that Baronius is idle when he interprets his commands to
be but prayers and requests: Wherefore the rest that the Emperor did, was in
devotion and compunction, and not in duty or obedience. And indeed Paulus
Diaconus reports, That the Emperor renewed unto him all the former
privileges of his Church, so that he was to hold them from him in time to
come. And Anastasius gives the cause, Requesting him (says he) to pray for
his sins; for these were the the Emperor dismissed him to return to Rome.
Who durst speak thus in these days? But Platina after all, Justinian (says
he) for all these calamities changed nothing of his former life, only he had
the Apostolic See in a greater awe and reverence than before, and so long, as
good friends as might be.

OPPOSITION.
Notwithstanding this strong support, yet were there always some or other who
would not endure this Tyranny. The Church of Rauenna was but lately come to
the yoke, and that by the command of the Emperors: Wherefore Felix Damian,
came and presented himself unto Pope Constantine, to be by him approved, and
consecrated at Rome: but says Anastasius, he would not enter caution according
to the custom, that is, Anastas. and Plat. in Constanti. Blond. lib. 10. Dec.
1.
as Platina and Blondus more ingenuously deliver, would not oblige himself to
a set form of obedience, and to send a certain sum of money to Rome;
wherein the magistrates themselves of Rome assisted him. The tale goes, that
his Caution being laid by the Pope upon the holy confession of S. Peter, that
is, upon his Relikes, it was found shortly after all black, and as if it had
been burnt with fire. These were the petty miracles of those times, to put to
children: but the matter stayed not here. Blond. ib.
The Archbishop being thus repulsed by the Pope, returned to Rauenna, made his
moan to his people Sigon. de Reg. Jtal. l. 2.
Pope Constantine on the other part made his plaint to Justinian, who
dispatched thither Theodore with a navy: the Archbishop with other adjoining
congregations, as of Ceruia, Comachio, Forlim Popoli, Cesenae, Imola, Faenza,
and others, all great peoples in those days (as Blondus testifies) prepare
themselves for the encounter. Theodore after many hot skirmishes landed,
besieged the City, took in by composition as well the citizens as the
Archbishop, proceeded notwithstanding against the chief of them, by seizure of
their goods and persons, hanged some, banished others, and the rest he caused
to fine deep for their lives. This they called to be tried by S. Peter's
judgment. that damnable heresy, of not paying money to the Pope (for so
Platina is pleased to term it) he submitted himself to give such caution as
they demanded, and so doing, was restored to his See. And so says likewise
Anastasius. Yet was this Felix (whom we see so hardly used) recommended in
History for sanctity of life, and miracles; called in his Epitaph (which
Baronius rehearses) Terbeatissimus Archiepiscopus. But he would feign persuade
us, that those barbarous and cruel vsages of the Pope were the cause of this
his sanctity. Yet Benedict Archbishop of Milan, a man of reputed holiness,
Hieronym. Rubaeus.
found a little better usage. He pretended, That Paul. Diacon. l. 6. c. 29.
was feign to have the cause heard at Rome; where it was agreed, That anciently
the Bishops of Pauia were consecrated by the Bishops of Rome, Anastas. in
Constanti.
whereas yet Pauia was ever of the Province of Milan: but the Pope was judge in
his own cause.

27. PROGRESSION.
How and upon what occasions the Popes ruined both the Estate of the Exarches,
and the kingdom of the Lombards in Italy.

TO fulfill the prophecy of the Apocalypse, it was necessary that the second
Beast should enter upon the place of the first; and the Empire declining, and
the Apostasy increasing, the Papacy should plant it self in the room of the
Empire. The Emperors were long since confined in the East: but the Exarches of
Rauenna, who had always their Judges under them at Rome, remained still as a
moat, or rather a thorn in the Popes eye: and the Lombards on the other side
held them continually at a bay, and in fear of a sudden flaw: and now shall we
see how cunningly they rid themselves of both. Immediately upon the enteruiew
between the Emperor Justinian, and Constantine the Pope, Justinian abandoned
Helias General of the army for Philippicus Bardanes, who slew him, and
farther caused his son Tiberius, who was fled to the Temple of Blachames, to
be there murdered, and then sent Justinians head to Philippicus, and he to
Rome. Constantine the Pope somewhat amazed with this sudden alteration, yet
bethought himself how to do most for his own behoof. There was at that time
a certain Monk called John, who had persuaded Philippicus to turn
Monothelite, which Heresy had been formerly condemned in the sixth general
Council. And Justinian had caused the chief of those Fathers which assisted
at that Council to be pictured in a table, and to be hung up in the poarch of
S. Sophia in Constantinople. Philippicus, by the persuasion of that Constantine
the Pope, in despite of Philippicus, caused a table, containing the Images not
only of the Fathers of the sixth Council, but of all the six general Synods,
to be hung up in Saint Peter's Church at Rome; and in a Synod there ordained,
That Images should be set up in Churches: So the question about Images came now
to be principal, which at the first was but accessarie. Insomuch that from
thence forward, though the Emperor elected were never so Orthodox in other
points, and though he received the six general Synods with all readiness, yet
was he not obeyed nor acknowledged Constantine therefore, taking occasion as
before, refused Philippicus his Patents, which he sent unto him, pronounced him
an Heretic, forbad the people of Rome to receive either his name, or his
letters, or his image, or his coin: suffered not his pourtrait to be placed in
the Church, Paul. Diac. li. 6. c. 34.
nor his name to be mentioned in Divine which was in effect, as much as in him
lay, Anastas and Platin. in Constant.
to depose him from the Empire. Whereupon shortly after there arose against him
one Arthemius, who pulled out his eyes, and thrust him from the Empire. So that
Onuphrius in his Annotations upon Platina, in the life of this Constantine, had
reason to say, Onuphr. in Annotat. in Plat. in vit. Constant.
That he was the first which durst resist the Greek Emperor to his face,
because he was fallen into the Heresy of Iconomachie, which forbad the use of
Images; not for that he was a Monothelite, not that he denied either two
natures or two wills in Christ, but only upon the difference concerning Images
in Churches: And Sigonius gives the same reason, Sigon. de Reg. Ital. li. 3.
and none other. So small an occasion took they to depose the Emperors, whose
room they had so long desired to enjoy. But Gregory the second, who succeeded
after Gregory who, as Sigonius reports, for his excellent vein in that
kind, was surnamed the Dialogist; An. 716.
and it may be that he meant, that this Gregory was the author of those
fabulous Dialogues which go under the name of Gregory the first. Leo the
third, surnamed Isauricus, in the year 717 was called to the Empire: This Leo,
so soon as he was quietly seated in his throne, ratified the Edict formerly
published against the use of Images: An. 717.
for other Heresy than this his greatest enemies lay not to his charge. And
thence, says Sigonius, took their beginning those great seditions, by means
whereof that huge Dominion of the Church in Italy was established. Some
Historians say, That he attempted against the life and liberty of Pope
Gregory, as well knowing that he Zonaras, An. 718.
though a Monk, and a great maintainer of Images, says no such matter; no
more does Cedrenus. But the Popes must have some color for so hau^ an
enterprise. Gregory hereupon called in the Lombards against the Exarch, who
poasted to Rome in all have, but was repulsed by the Lombards, and feign to
return unto Rauenna; and there brake off the peace between the Exarches and
the Lombards (which had continued ever since Rhotharis his time) to the final
ruin of both Estates, and first of that of the Exarches, whose chief seat and
city Rauenna, Luitprand king of the Lombards took and sacked. But Gregory
liked not this sudden increase of the Lombards power, and therefore altered his
course, and Paul in the Exarchat of Rauenna. In the mean time the Emperor Leo
ceased not to exhort Gregory to forbear the maintenance and support of Images
in the Church. Gregory replied, That it belonged not to the Emperor to
innouat any thing in matters of faith (for so he termed the use of Images.)
Neither stayed he here, but farther, as the Histories report, he solicited the
Venetians, and the inhabitants of Rauenna, to rise in arms against the
Emperor and his Exarch, caused cities and towns to thrust out their lawful
magistrates, Blond. Dec. 1. li. 10. Sigon. de Reg. Ital. li. 3.
and to put others of their own choice in their rooms, persuaded the citizens
of Rome to abandon him as an Heretic, if he persisted in those his opinions,
and in the end Paul Exarch of Rauenna, pulled out Peter's eyes, who was Duke of
Rome, killed Exhilarate Duke of Campania, and his son, Zonar. p. 8. 85. to.
3. Cedren. p. 373. 1
filled every corner of Italy with sedition and blood. And in conclusion,
finding themselves so far engaged in these disorders, that they saw no hope
of reconciliation left them with the Emperor, they shook off, and first of
all the citizens of Rome, the yoke of the Emperor, taking a solemn oath to
become liege servants, obedient in all points, and to all purpose, Baron. 9.
an. 726 art. 34.
to the Pope. And here, says Baronius, was an end of those Dukes and
Governors This revolt would he feign justify, Onuphr. in Annot. ad Plat. in
Constant.
under color of conspiracies made against the Pope, which no Author reports
but Anastasius, a domestike of the Popes. And therefore Sigonius says also,
That Rome, and the dukedom of Rome, were translated from the Grecians to the
Pope of Rome, by reason of their wicked Heresy and impiety. What impiety,
save only that pretended sin against the use of Images? But he goes on, and
sets down a beadroll of places which came to the Pope by this new conquest;
Rome, with her castles and borough towns in Tuscanie, Zonar. to. 3. in Leo. 3.
p. 85.
Port, Centocella, Cere, Bleda, Matuta, Sutri, Nepet, Castelgalesi, Orta,
Polimarte, Ameria, Tuderta, Perusia, Narni, Oricoli; and in Campania di Roma,
Cedren. pa. 373.
Anagnia, Ferentino, Alatrio, Patrico, Frusigno, Tiuoli; and in Terra di
Lauoro, Sora, Arces, Aquino, Teano, and Capua: whereunto we may add, That
Luitprand king of Lombards, who at his entry unto his kingdom redemanded the
Cottian Alps, as a part of his demaines, restored them again, and confirmed
the grant of Aripert; having as good right the one as the other, to grant away
that which belonged to neither of them. And thus by the Bishops of Rome were
the Emperors thrust out of Italy, whither they never after looked but with a
sigh. Onuphrius speaking of Gregory and this his fact, says in plain
terms, That he was more hardy than his predecessor Constantine, and that he
lawfully rest out of Leo the third his hands all the Empire of Italy, which
was not possessed by the Lombards, in Gregory stood in bodily fear, because
Luitprand their king coming with his army before Rome gates, Sigon. de Reg.
Ital. li. 3.
had already forced him to entreat for peace: moreover, Gregory saw that he
was linked with Charles Martell, at that time Mayor of the kings house in
France, Blond. Dec. 1. li. 10.
who had sent unto him his son Pepin, with request that he would adopt him as
his own, and in token thereof, after the manner of the Lombards, to cut off
his locks; Aimon. li. 4. ca. 57.
which Luitprand accordingly had done: though Aimonius says, He did it as his
godfather, and after the manner of the Christians. Wherefore to prevent a
mischief, he sent unto Charles a solemn embassage, the Keys of the Peter's
Chains, with other rich presents, which, as Aimonius says, had never been
heard of, nor seen before; upon condition, That he should free the Church of
Rome from the present tyranny of the Lombards, and preferring heavenly
rewards before earthly and transitory respects, should break off all
alliance and confederacy which he had with them. Charles hereupon dispatched
another embassage to Rome, to ratify an accord with the Pope; whereof ensued
the deliverance of the Pope out of that imminent danger wherein he was,
Appendix Greg. Turmens. 1. c. 110.
and the utter ruin of the Lombard State in Italy. Gregory in his Epistle
unto Charles brings in the Lombards speaking in this wise, Let Charles now
come with his French men and help thee if he can, etc. And again, Saint Peter
could do well enough of himself, Howbeit Baronius would attribute this
Epistle to Gregory the third, his successor.

Gregory the second died in the year 731, and after him succeeded Gregory
the third, An. 731.
both in place and also in purpose. Concerning Images, he decreed in a Synod
of 93 Bishops, That whosoever would not do them religious honor, should be
cut off from the body and blood of Christ, and from the unity of the whole
Church, thereby putting Leo and his son out of all hope ever to reenter
again upon Italy. As for the Lombards, it happened that Thrasamond Duke of
Spoleto intended to Luitprand, and for that purpose made alliance with
Gregory, and to oblige him the more, because his power was great in Italy,
he surrendered unto Gregory certain places which had been formerly litigious
between them, and thereupon rise in open rebellion. Luitprand presently came
down upon him, and forced to cry to Gregory for help, Gregory, according
to their articles, received and defended him. Luitprand summoned Gregory to
deliver him into his hands, An. 739.
if not, threatened to take him for an open enemy; and when Gregory refused
to do according to his summons, Luitprand moved from Spoletum, where he lay,
took by the way sundry places of the Popes dominion, and at length came and
encamped before Rome gates. Sundry gentlemen of the city, grown weary, and
scorning Luitprand, and offered him their service. France was too far off to
help in time, yet Charles entreated Luitprand, by an ambassador sent unto him,
to raise his siege; which he did, holding only in his hand what he had
already taken. Luitprand was no sooner returned to Pauia, but Thrasamond,
supported by Gregory, took the field again, surprising many of those cities
and places which he had lost. But shortly after, all in one year, died the
Emperor Leo, Charles Martel, and Gregory the Pope. An. 741.
After Gregory succeeded Zachary, who redemaunded his places of Luitprand,
and took part, as his predecessors had done, with the rebels: but seeing
himself in danger, entreated a parley, and there got of this virtuous prince
(for so they term him) Rachis, successor unto Luitprand, sometimes trying his
patience, and otherwhiles flying to his mercy, but still abusing his devotion;
until at length, building upon the foundation which his predecessors had laid,
he resolved to ruin this over powerful neighboring Estate of the Lombards,
by a foreign power, which though greater in it self, yet was less dangerous
to him, and of less annoyance to his proceedings. And the ambition of the
French easily hearkened to such a motion. Pepin succeeded his father Martel in
his Mairaltie of the household, and under this name in the royal authority.
But not content with the thing Zachary, Whether it were not reason that he
which took all the pains in administration of all affairs of the kingdom,
should be king, rather than he, Aimon. l. 4. c. 61. Sigon. li. 3. Blond. Dec.
2. li. 1.
who contenting himself with the Title, took care of nothing, but only in
pleasures and pastimes? pointing at Chilperic his Lord and Sovereign, whom he
would feign have pulled from his throne by force, only he wanted authority,
cloaked with devotion. Zacharis, who vnderstoood by the half what the whole
meant, presently commanded, as says A^monius, by his authority, That Pepin
should be created king, who was accordingly that same year sacred, by the
Archbishop Boniface, the subjects discharged of their allegiance, and Chilperic
degraded. Pope Zachary, says Sigonius, ante^posing his What authority but
that which was foretold us by the Apostle, of that son of perdition, placed
in the Temple of God, 2. Thessal. 8.4.
exaltting himself above all that is called God, and carrying himself as if
be were God: God, says the Prophet, to whom alone it appertains to set up
and to pull down kings, to continue kingdoms, or to translate them from one
stock unto another. And Sigonius cannot hold, but must needs say, That he
dyed, having carried matters more for the behoof of the Church and of the
Apostolic See, than according to rules of true piety and religion. And this
fell out in the year 750. An. 750.


Pepin now owed Zachary a good turn, and quickly had occasion to requite his
kindness. Rachis king of the Lombards entering into religion, Aistulphus his
Aistulph grew more insolent than before, or whether a fright took the Pope, to
see such proceedings, Stephen, who had now succeeded Zachary, resolved, for
prevention, to fly to Pepin. And Aistulph, by his predecessors examples grew
wise, and would not be led with words. Stephen knew not whom to trust, and to
pass himself in person over the Alps, had been to run into the devils
mouth: wherefore he used the credit of Pepin to make fair weather with him, to
win him to withdraw his forces, and to grant him safeconduct through his
countries Pepin at Pontigon, An. 754.
in the year 754, exhorted him in remembrance of the kindness which he had
received of Zachary, to stand Saint Peter's good friend: (nothing came amiss
under so plausible a name) And Pepin desired no better office, both in regard,
says Sigonius, of the kindness of Zachary in degrading Chilperic, making
that just and lawful by his sacred authority, which otherwise seemed utterly
unlawful: as also because he desired to have this right of succession
established by Stephen upon his two sons, Charles and Carloman. The
conclusion of all was, That the next Summer Pepin should pass with his army
into Italy, and force Aistolph to surrender the Exarchat, Pepin, That he would
not restore either the Exarchat, or Pentapolis, unto the Emperor of Greece,
who had made himself unworthy thereof by his cowardice and heresy; but that
he would bestow them upon Saint Peter and his successors for ever, for the good
of his soul, and for the remission of his sins. Which Pepin swear unto him
to perform and made his two children take the same oath; and he presently
delivered him a Patent thereof, signed with his own hand. Pepin had no sooner
set foot in Italy, but Aistulph Pepin had no sooner turned his back, but
Aistulph immediately repented him of his surrender, drew his forces into the
field, and Pepin was feign to repasse the mountains, and to hasten back into
Italy again. Then was Aistulph feign to person his promise with effect. And
when the Emperor of Greece required him to restore to him the Exarchat and
Pentapolis, as to him properly appertaining, and not unto the Pope, his answer
was, That he had bestowed it upon the Church for his souls health, and for the
remission of his sins. And thereupon renewed his grant to Stephen, giving him
liuerie and seisin, for him and his Peter's Confession, that is, in the place
where Saint Peter's supposed relics lay. Which largess of his to Stephen, was
as justifiable as that other of Zachary was to him, either being very
liberal of what belonged to neither of them, yet the fact more sufferable in a
Captain than in a Bishop. And yet by this Title it is, that the Popes got
Rauenna, Boulogne, Imola, Faenza, Forlimpopoli, Furli, Cesena, Bobio, Ferrara,
Commachio, Adria, Figaruolo, Gabelo, all which belonged properly to the
Exarchat. Also to him accrued by that conueyance of Pepin, Arimini, Pesaro,
Stephen unto Pepin, where are these words: We may now say, as said Susanna,
Anguishes on all sides: And we know not what to do, etc. what we feared from
the Lombards is now come upon us: Forsake us not, despise us not; so may God be
good and merciful unto you, when he shall come with Saint Peter to judge the
world: and so may you never hear that saying of his, Nescio vos, etc.
Threatening him with little less than hell it self, if he made not the more
have. This letter was sent by Warnherus, who passed the watches when the city
was invested, and so went a Peter himself, with this inscription, Peter an
Apostle of Jesus Christ, the Son of the living God, etc. the Epistle
directed, To the French in general: the contents whereof were, That they
should nothing doubt but that he was in the very flesh present with them: That
by the special grace of God he had taken them into his particular protection:
That therefore he adjured them to deliver his city of Rome from the danger of
the Lombards: That they should make the most have they could, before that
living fountain, by which they were sanctified and regenerated, were dried up;
and not to depart from thence until they had set her at liberty: upon pain
to be excluded from the kingdom of God, and delivered over to the devil and
his angels: and whatsoever they should request of him. And these were those
Piae frauds, as they termed them, those religious knackes and knaueries, with
which they gouzeled the world in those days. This passed in the year 755, and
756, and shortly after dyed Aistulph. An. 755.
After him succeeded Didier, his high Constable, who found some difficulty in
the beginning of his reign, by reason of the contradiction of some of the
nobility: and Paul succeeded his brother Stephen in the Papacy, in the year
757. But Paul happening to dye that same year, and Did^er, during his
sickness, having made a strong party to procure a Pope which would be at his
devotion, Toto Duke of Nepete, by his command, at the instant when the Pope
gave up the ghost, seized one of the Constantine, of a lay man to be made
Subdeacon, and Deacon, and after that to be created and consecrated Pope all
in a day. Thereupon arose a schism, seditions and murders within the walls of
Rome, till at last they agreed all upon one Stephen, the third of that name,
and made him Pope. This Stephen cast his eye presently upon France, sent an
embassage unto Pepin, requesting him to send him the most learned and
understanding Bishops of France, whose help and advise he meant to use in
settling the Estate of the Church of Rome. This embassage found Pepin dead, but
the two brothers, Charles and Carloman, though not well agreeing in other
matters, yet jointly concurred to satisfy this desire of the Pope. The Reader
may not think that he did this to reform Constantine, Mar. Scot. in Chron.
and to make him burn alive in the Presbytery of S. Savior of Lateran,
causing him first to be miserably beaten by the Priests, and pronouncing all
his consecrations made, to be void and of none effect. Whereby a man may guess
how ragefully he was incensed against the Lombard king himself. And it is
worth the noting, That when he understood that Charles began to hearken to a
motion of marriage with Bertha, Didiers daughter, he presently forbad him,
under pain of excommunication: his reasons are such as we find them in his
own letters. Having therefore remonstrated to Charles and Carloman the
dangerous fall of our first father by occasion of his wife, the frailetie of
Consortium nequissimae adinuentionis.
and tells them, That this was a suggestion of the devil, no coupling in
marriage, but a companying of a wicked invention: now follows his skill in
Divinity, We find (says he) in the holy Scriptures, that many have gone out
of the right way by marrying strange women. But strange women in Scripture, are
they understood of a foreine nation, or of a different religion? Or is not this
to play with the Scriptures, seeing they were Orthodox of one side and other?
But he goes on, Must your noble race (says he) be polluted with this
perfidious and loath some generation of the Lumbards, who are not so much as
named among the nations, and from whom it is certain that all Leapers took
their beginning? And thereupon would persuade What fellowship (says he) has
the believer with the infidel, the light with darkness: never did man who
married a strange woman continue innocent. Who ever thought to have heard such
divinity come from a Pope? And yet his adjurations prevailed so far with
him, that a whole year after the marriage he divorced the daughter of Didier,
whom he had married by the advice and counsel of his mother, and presently
married (as Eghinard writes) Hildegarde of Sueuia: For the match with Didiers
daughter being broken off, the Pope never made more mention of a precontract in
Stephen dying in the year 772, and Adrian succeeding in his room, An. 722.
Didier sought to oblige him to himself by some alliance, and to make him sure
against France: but missing of his purpose, and being confident that the two
brothers living in jealousy of each other, would never pass into Italy, he
set up an army, and invaded the Exarchat, took Ferrara, Comachio, Faenza, and
entered very far upon Romagnia and la March. Adrian hereupon sent an
embassage by sea to Charlemaigne in France; and the more to interest him in
the quarrel, told him, That Didier would force him to anoint the sons of
Carloman his brother; that his Adrian all this while was in a piteous plight:
for Didier, either for, or under color of devotion, came before Rome gates,
when by means of an excommunication which Adrian cast out against him, his
private family and others would not suffer him to pass any farther. But when
Charles was once passed the Alps, those of Spoleto and Riete, and others, came
presently and yielded to the Pope: Moreover, those of Didiers own dominions
fell from him by heaps, so that he was forced to break up the siege. Then
came Charlemaigne to Rome, where he was received, as the sole author of the
life and liberty of the Church; the people singing before him, by the
appointment of Adrian, as the children once did at the entrance of our Savior
Blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna etc. And after some
few days spent in pompous devotions, Charles was requested to confirm the
donation of the Exarchat, Romania, and la March, which his father, himself,
and his brother Carloman, with all the Judges of France, had long before
promised at Creci in France: all which he presently accorded, giving over and
above, of that which was none of his, the Islands of Corsica, Sardinia, and
Sicilie, the territory of the Sabines, with the Duchies of Spoleto and
Tuscanie, which belonged to the Lumbards, reserving always to himself the
soueraignetie That from the time they received the Christian Religion and
Catholic Faith, they had ever been great Iusticers, and devoutly given,
witness (says Sigonius) their good laws, which so severely punished thefts,
robberies, rapes, murders, and adulteries, carefully preserving every man in
his own estate, goods, and liberty; witness also the sumptuous Temples and
ample Monasteries with which they beautified and adorned Italy, the fair and
goodly Cities which they either built or repaired, the honors they did to
holy persons, the Lordships and riches which they bestowed upon the Popes,
with the great reverence they used toward But the Popes ambition was great,
and the Lumbards paid the price of their devotion toward that See, by the
final ruin of their state and kingdom. Neither is Onuphrius ashamed to
vaunt, Onuphr. in Constant.
that Gregory the second had chased the Emperor out of Italy: That Gregory
the third, by the help of Pepin, had begun the war upon the Lumbards, which
being pursued by his successors, must needs, as it did, end in the ruin of
that Kingdom: And this fell upon the year 773. Where note also, An. 773.
for the more perfect view of these proceedings, that about the year 740 the
King of West Saxons in England purposing to take the Frocke upon him, first
made his realm tributarie Offa King of Northumberland, under Adrian the first.
The Author sets down the cause, which was, the fear he had to be punished
for his sins, as thinking he should never be able to make sufficient
satisfaction to God for them (though he had already given the tenth of all his
goods) unless he gave other men's goods also, and made the kingdom to bear
the penalty of his offenses; so well did the invention of Purgatory suit
already with their ambition. But Gregory the seventh, called Hildebrand,
Gregor. 7. in ep. ad Pet. Alban. and G. Principem Salernitanum.
would make the world believe, That Charlemaigne, in humble acknowledgement of
S. Peter's help in his victories upon the Saxons, had given the country of
Saxony as an offering to Peter Bishop of Alba, and G. Prince of Saleme, his
Legates, to make demand of those said pence in France: But the French ever
laughed at such claims, and Charlemaigne was too wise to fall into such a trap.

About this time also was it, that Boniface, falsely surnamed the Martyr, a
great champion of the Popes, and Pope himself, published the Decree Si Papa,
containing, That if the Pope happen to neglect his own salvation and others
etc. he ever draws with him multitudes of souls to hell. Distinct. 46.
A great mischief: but what remedy? This no mortal wight may presume to
reprove him for his faults, because he himself judges all men, and is judged
of none, unless he be found erring in faith. Which doctrine once laid for a
ground, what wonder if Popes have always run so headlong to all manner of
impiety? And the better to see how the Apostasy from true doctrine has
always increased with the Tyranny of the Papacy, we must further note, that
the most gross abuses grew up in this lamentable time. We have said before,
that Gregory the first altered the Liturgy of Rome: this was now received in
Italy by the means of Adrian the first, in Germany by the diligence of
Boniface, and in France by the authority of Charles; and where ever they
found opposition, there they brought it in by force and violence. Council.
Turoni. An. 813. sub Charo. Magno. Council. Nice. 2.
and to entreat the Emperor to stay the current of this abuse. And lastly, in
the year 788 was held that second Council of Nice, called the seventh
General Council, under Constantine the seventh and Irene; wherein after
strong opposition, was finally established the adoration of Images: Adrian the
first there assisting by his Legates, whom Irene the Empress hoped so to
satisfy and content, by giving way to this Decree, that by his favor she
might once more set foot in Italy.

OPPOSITION.
Neither may we think, in this so great an alteration, both in the doctrine,
and also in the government of the Church, that every man held his peace: for
the doctrine, we have elsewhere declared how every article, and when it came
to be corrupted; as also what opposition was always made against it: so that
we shall An. 713. An. 729. An. 755.
consisting of 338 Bishops) in the year 755, all held in the times of
Constantine, Gregory the second, and Stephen the third, who were those that
did abuse this article of Images, to thrust the Emperors out of Italy; it
being I say clear, that all these condemned the adoration of Images, Is it not
manifest what they judged of the Popes proceedings against Anastas. Biblioth.
in ep. ad Joh. 8. Baron. in Annal. an. 794. art. 40.
witness Anastasius, a Writer of that very time, and Baronius of this
present: and seeing that a Council held at Gentilli, others say at Saumur in
France, under Pepin himself, not daring to speak more plainly for fear of
the Pope, yet counseled the Emperors of Greece to hold them to the ancient
usage of the Church: seeing also, that another Council of the Western
Charlemaigne at Francford, composed (as says Sigonius) of a great multitude of
Bishops, of France, Germany, and Italy, present there the Legates of the
Pope, condemned openly and shamefully that second Council of Nice; and
consequently censured all those Councels which were held at Rome in the year
713, 716, 742, 768, under Constantine, Gregory the second, Zachary, and
Stephen the third, for the support of Images. Moreover, they published a book
against that second Council of Nice, declaring it to have been a false Synod,
and no Council at all, against Pope Adrian, who had approved it: Pepin and
Charlemaigne themselves would have condemned it, but that they could not meddle
with the point of state, without quarrelling the Pope upon a matter of the
Church. But to come unto the History of those times: Zachary had helped Pepin
in his usurpation of the Crown of France, and Pepin in thankfulness came to
assist him in his exaltation over the Emperors and Lumbards in Italy: Carloman
his own brother, which was entered into a Monastery at Mount Cassin in Italy,
took a journey of purpose into France, to dissuade the enterprise, Annon. lib.
4. c. 62.
and with great earnestness in open Parliament pleaded the cause of the
Lumbard King; which how could he do, without condemning the Popes ambition?
Some say he did it not of his own will, Sigon. l. 3. de Reg. Jtal. Anastas. in
Stephan. 3.
but by the commandment Charles came to an end of his conquests in Italy;
then was he moved to ratify to Adrian the pretended donation of Pepin, at what
time Charles let him to understand well enough, that he held not his Crown
from the Pope, but that the Pope held both his dignity and Rome it self in
fee from him, and homage to his Empire: for there it was by general consent of
Bishops and Abbots ordained, That Charles should be Prince of the Senate (in
which very point Adrian encroached upon the prerogative of the Emperor, to
whom only it appertained to give that title) and that he should have power to
inuest the Archbishops (meaning of Italy) with prouiso, That if they were not
allowed and invested by him, they could not be consecrated by any: moreover,
that he should elect the Pope and dispose of the Sea Apostolic: all which we
find in Gratian in the Decrete, standing yet, after the correction of Gregory
the thirteenth. So likewise Sigebert Abbot of Gemblons, D. 63. C. Hadrianus 22.
Sigon. de Reg. Ital. l. 4. Dignitatem Principatus. Sigibert. in Chron.
Charles (says he) held a Council at Rome with Pope Adrian, with 150 other
Bishops and Abbots, to whom the Pope with the whole Synod gave authority to
elect the Pope, and to provide the Sea Apostolic, and gave him also the title
of Prince; ordaining farther, that the Archbishops and Bishops throughout the
Provinces should receive inuestiture from him, and that a Bishop not approved
and invested by him, should not be consecrated by any, and that such as should
be refractarie to this decree, should Which Gratian expresses in these words,
Whosoever shall do contrary to this decree the Synod lays the band of
Anathema upon him, and ordains, that his goods shall be confiscated if he
repent not. So also says Sigonius, adding farther, that this Rite of
Inuestiture was so called, because it was given them by a Ring and a staff; in
regard, no doubt, of those lands which they even then possessed. This Rite of
confirming the Popes, continued (as we have already showed) in the Emperors
hands until the time of Constantine Pogonatus, who about 100 years past had
released it to Pope Benedict the second, and so it continued until now, when
Charlemaigne took it into his hands again. Sigonius grants all this to be
true: but he adds, that Charlemaigne out Baronius here sets upon poor
Sigibert, Baron. vol. 9. an. 774. art. 10, 11, and seq.
and cries out, o scelus, o imposture, o fraus, laying to his charge, that he
was of the Emperor Henry his faction, and that in favor of him he invented
this fable, and that the Historians of Charles say no such matter. But what?
was Gratian, were all the rest of later times schismatikes for reporting the
same thing after the same manner? Was Gregory the 13 a schismatike, who has
in his late correction left that Canon standing, and uncontrolled? yea but
Gratian had it from Sigibert, and gave too light credence to him: It is true
that Gratian has set it down in Sigibert his own words; But is this all the
esteem he makes of this great Oracle of the Canonists? And I Hildebrand, or
in any other, where this case was so hotly debated, was Sigibert ever
condemned of a falsehood, or accused of forgerie? If we should reject their
authors as peremptorily as they do their own, what villainy would they not say
against us? For whereas he says that this word Inuestiture was not then in
use, every man knows that it came in with the Lumbards.

But I return to Charlemaigne. In the partage which he made of Italy, he left
Apulia and Calabria to the Emperor of Greece, as heretofore in the time of
Justinian; and appointed Dukes of Beneuent, Spoletum, and Friul, as under the
Lumbards. As for the Exarchat of Rauenna, Romania, la March, the Duchy of
Perousa, of Rome, Tuscanie, and Campania, which he had given to the Pope,
Sigon. de Reg. Jtal. l. 4.
I T. R. do promise to be faithful all my life long, without fraud or mal
engine to Charles my Lord, and to his children etc. And the truth is, that it
appears by Adrians Epistles, that he held not himself all of the best
contented with Charlemaignes dealings, seeing he so often puts him in mind
of the great debt he owed to S. Peter, and that therefore he should remember
the promises which he had made unto him; Ep. Adrian. ad Charol. 30, 31, 39.
complaining ever and anon of those whom he had left behind him in Italy, to
command even in matters of the Church: That the Bishop of Rauenna, since his
coming into Italy, was grown stouter than Peter. All which we shall see more
at large hereafter.

An. 796.
In the year 796 died Adrian, in whose roame succeeded Leo the third, by the
election of the Clergy and people of Rome: who presently upon his election
dispatched an ambassador unto Charlemaigne, to advertise him of his election,
and to present unto him the keys of the Confession, i. of the Sepulcher of S.
Peter, with the maine Standard of the City, and many other honorable
presents, in token of fealty and homage; requesting him to send some
principal man of his Court, to minister the oath of Allegiance to the people
of Rome, thereby to Ad suam fidem et subiectionem. Aimoni. lib. 4. cap. 86.
as Aimonius in his History reports: whereupon Anguilbert, Abbor of S.
Ritharius, was dispatched thither to that effect. Shortly after, the nobility
of Rome grown weary of the Popes yoke, and willing to shake it off, set upon
Leo as he went in solemn procession, threw him from his horse, and left him
there half dead: his followers took him up, and carried him to the Vatican.
It is reported, that they pulled out his eyes, but that God by miracle put them
into his head again. We may well doubt of this miracle, Lib. 4. c. 89. Zonar.
to. 3. page 97.
seeing that Aimonius reporting it, adds, as some thought. But Zonaras
speaks plainly and says, That they who were put in trust to pull them out
spared them, and only beat him about the eyes, without perishing his sight:
and yet these A miracle. Leo hereupon took a journey into Germany as far as
Westfalia, where Charlemaigne then was, to crave justice, telling him, That the
Romans, who had long since taken their Bishop for their Lord, seeking now to
return to their ancient liberty, and not able to oppress him with false
criminations, had attempted upon his life. Whereupon Charlemaigne resolved in
the year 800 to make a voyage into Italy. An. 800.
Upon his arrival at Rome he assembled a multitude of Italian and French
Bishops, commanding the accusers and the accused, i. Leo the Pope, to appear
before them, himself presiding and sitting in the midst Anastasius the Popes
Historian says, That the Bishops then and there declared openly, that they
might not judge the Sea Apostolic: Aimoni. li. 4. c. 90.
but Aimonius a great deal more sincerely reports, That there being none
found that would come forth and charge him with his crimes, he purged himself
by oath. And upon this sedition took Charlemaigne occasion to seize into his
own hands all authority over the City of Rome: for as an Italian Author of
that time reports, He thereupon resolved to make all the great ones of Rome,
as well Bishops as Lays, Author quidam Jial. apud Viguerium.
to become vassales of the Empire: That they and the whole people should swear
fealty to the Emperor: That the Emperor should always have his L. Deputy
residing within Rome in the Palace of Saint Peter, at a certain stipend by the
day, to void all contentions arising among them: Missum suum.
and this (says that Author) unto the time of Lewis the second, son of
Lotharius. This is certain, that upon a Christmas day (as Ado Viennensis
writes) Pope Leo set the crown upon his head before S. Peter's altar, all the
people crying out, To Charles Augustus, crowned of God, Ado Viennens. in
Chroni. an. 798. Ab eodem Pontifice adoratus est.
great and peaceable Emperor of the Romans, life and victories. After which
salutations he was adored by the Pope himself, after the manner of the ancient
Princes: and from that time leaving the name of Prince, he took the title of
Emperor and Augustus. And if you would know what is meant by the manner of
ancient Princes, Saluian tells us, Saluian. in ep. ad parent.
for servants to kiss their Lords and Masters feet. And in such quality did
they acknowledge Charlemaigne, even as liege Lord of the City of Rome: as
Paulus Diaconus speaking to him says, You shall find expressed the names of
the streets, gates, bridges, places, and Tribes, of your Romulean City, that
is, of Rome. Aimo. l. 4. c. 90. Paul. Diacon. in dedicat. Festi Pompeij.
And thus did Charlemaigne make the Bishop of Rome know himself, eue^ in
Italy and in the proper place of their magnificence. And this was the cause of
his coming thither at that time, not as they would have it, to kiss the Popes
pantofle, or to visit S. Peter's threshold: for we find even at this very time
one Claudius Bishop of Turin crying out against those Rome-wandrings, or
Pilgrimages made to Rome, Jonas, l. 3. aduers. Claudi. Turinens.
That it was a folly to run thither for penance, or there to seek remission
of their sins: Peter: That the keys and power of binding and losing had
another meaning: That none but idiots had recourse to Saints and relikes: That
the place and See was nothing: That he was not to be deemed Apostolical, who
sat in the Chair of an Apostle, but he that did the office of an Apostle. And
more no doubt should we learn of him, if we had his books themselves, for now
we have no more of them than we find in the inuectiues of those that write
against him: and no marvel, since the Council of Tours before mentioned
complained of these abuses, and feign would have found a remedy against them.

As for the spiritual power, the Emperor Constantine and Irene his mother
Council. Nicen. 2. in princ. to. 2. Ib. in epist. ad Johan. Presby.
yet as touching the second Council of Nice, they say in their Patent, That
they themselves called it by their commandment, at the suit of Tharasius,
Patriarch of Constantinople etc. And in the Acts of that Council it is said,
This Synod assembled by their religious Decree, in this famous City of Nice.
So likewise speaks the Synodall Epistle, directed as well to the Emperors in
special, as to all Bishops in general; and so does the said Patriarch
Tharasius, writing unto John the Priest. Zonaras says, Zonar. to. 3. page 95.
By the permission of the Emperors: and Theophanes, The Empress Irene (says
he) assembled all the Bishops to celebrate the Council at Nice: and which is
more, Pope Adrian himself writing to the Emperors, acknowledges as much,
requesting them upon his As for the Presidencie, though the Popes Legates were
indeed there present, being summoned as other Patriarchs were, and though they
had their prioritie of place, Council. Nicaen. 2. Act. 3.
yet it no where appears of their presiding: The Patriarch Tharasius most
commonly propounded, gave order, spoke last, and concluded, as appears in the
third Action. And when any Decree was to pass, it passed always under the
name of the whole Synod, The Synod says it, The Synod ordains it. And when
the Council was broken up, Those, says Zonaras, who were of it came to
Constantinople, Zonar. to. 3. pa. 95.
and there in open Court, the Emperors presiding, read the Acts of that
Council in the ears of all men; which Acts were there approved, authorized,
and subscribed Adrian. in Epist. ad Tharas. in Synod. Nicaen. 2. Action. 2.
And Adrian himself writing to the said Tharasius, in the second Session of
this Council, styles him by the Title of Universal Patriarch. Bellarmine
says, That the Emperor did nothing there. Nothing at Nice, I confess, for he
was not there: and yet it cannot be denied, but that he sent thither the
Proconsull Petronius, Bellar. de Council. li. 1. c. 19.
and other Senators, to see good order kept. Bellarmine adds, That
undoubtedly the Popes Legates Presided there; his reason is, because they are
named first, and first subscribed. Wherein, as ever, he confounds Preseancie,
or prioritie of place, with Presidencie. But what will he say, if a man tell
him, That the Bishops of Sicilie at the entry of the Synod make this
proposal, as of a matter fit and convenient, That the Sovereign or Supreme
Pastor of the Imperial city of Constantinople Council. 7. universe. Action. 1.
Aperiat Ianuam
and the Synod ordains, That it should be done according to the desire of
those holy Bishops, and so it was.

As for the Western Emperor, and the Council which was held at Francford,
there is no color of controversy; whether we speak of the calling of it, or
of the presidencie in it: though the Bishops of Italy, and Adrians Legates,
were there present. For the Epistle of Charlemaine to Elipand Archbishop of
Toledo, Iussimus.
speaks plainly, saying, We have commanded a Council to be assembled of
all the Churches of our Provinces of Germany, France, Spain, England, and all
the Provinces of Italy: which he there specifieth, inuiting thither by his
special mandat, the Patriarchs of Milan, Aquileia, and others, immediately from
himself and by Adrian Bishop of Rome, to have his opinion concerning the
Heresy of Elipand: but he presently adds, That he had likewise called
certain personages out of England for the same purpose, well seen and
conversant in the discipline of the Church; the one and the other to assist
with their skill and knowledge, neither of them to supply any want of
authority in himself. And as he in person presided, so is the Synodall
Epistle sent forth in his name. And as was this of Francford, so likewise were
all those Councels of Germany and France, held at Arles, Aix, Tours, Chaalons,
and Meuce, all, I say, assembled by the authority of the Emperor, with these
words, By the command, By the iniunction, etc. of the most Neither can that
Council held at Rome shield it self from this authority, seeing that both
Yuo and Gratian speaking thereof, say as before, That Charles appointed to be
held that Council with Pope Adrian, in the Patriarchat of Lateran, D. 6. c.
Adrianus.
in the Church of S. Savior, celebrated with fifty three holy Bishops and
Abbots. If then the Pope could not of himself call a Synod in Rome, what could
he do in other countries? who though he had shaken off the yoke of the
Emperor of the East, yet by a kind of continuation of respect, dated always
his Councels by the year of his reign. So did Pope Zachary that Council
Adelbert, Godescale, An. 745.
and Clement, bearing date, Imperante Domino Pijssimo, Augusto, Constantino
Imperatore, anno 26 Imperij eius, etc. so did they certain ages after. To be
short, at this time Princes every where according to the exigencies and
necessities of their several Churches, assembled Synods by their own
authority: which Synods, if need then were, provided for the vacancies,
reserving always to the Prince the right of consent and approbation of them,
in regard of the great possessions and lordships which even the^ they stood
seized of: So that where it is said in that Synod of Rome, That the Bishops
should receive inuestiture from the Emperor, it was no novel constitution,
but only a renouation of an old ordinance, of long time suppressed by the
Waltram Bishop of Naumbourg to this purpose speaking, Gregory the Great, says
he, wrote to Theodoric, and to Brunichild, To grant inuestitures of Bishops
without simonie: so that this right began in the first race of the kings of
France. And it follows, That long time before that decree of Adrian and his
successors, the kings once anointed, and the Grand Master of their household,
Waltramus apud Naumburgensis.
granted inuestitures of Bishoprics, as did Dagobert, Theodobert, and
Sigebert; by whom were in throned Remaclus, Amandus, Audomarus, Antpertus,
Eligius, Lampertus, and other holy Bishops, etc. We also find in histories,
how the Bishops of Spain, Scotland, England, and Hungary, came in always by
the authority of the kings, following the ancient custom, until this
meaning, which the Popes brought in about the year 1100: So that where we
read, That about the year 779, Charl^maine would have Turpi^, or Tilpin,
Archbishop of Reims, to accept of the Pallas Pope Adrians hands, we must take
it for a special favor which he meant to do him at their present, and which
he knew well how to restrain, when he saw himself at an end of his purposes
which he had in hand. Add we hereunto, That both Pepin and Charles made laws
merely Ecclesiastical, not concerning Church government only, but also
concerning points of doctrine; whereof we have the articles to this day,
Capitularia.
and at Modena, says Sigonius, are those laws yet kept, by which he fashioned
the State of the Church after a new order, whereof he alleges the pr^^me
only but thereby Hadrianus, in reforming the Church and (...) Apostolic See
it self. But no cable could hold the violent ruin and corruption of that
Church; and all his diligence served only to their greater condemnation. For
the Scripture must needs be fulfilled, That this ambition must raise it self
upon the ruins of whatsoever was good, just, or holy? As indeed their (...)
devotions, and whatsoever seemed in them to participat most of the spirit, had
over reference to some worldly respect and purpose. Gregory the second and
third sent Boniface into Germany, where they found Christian Churches of long
continuance; yet they call Boniface the Apostle of the Germans, as if he had
first co^^ed them to Christ: For Gregory the second at his going, in these
words, I do promise to S. Peter, and to you his Vicar, etc. that with all
integrity I will serve and bend my course to the behoof and profit of thy
Church etc. If I shall otherwise do, let me in the day of judgment incur the
punishment of Ananias and Saphira: and he delivered him this oath signed with
his own hand. And yet Gregory writing to the Germans, says, That he sent him
for the illumination of the Gentiles: promising to whomsoever that should
assist him, place with the blessed Martyrs; 2. To. Council. in Decret. Greg. 2.
and threatening every one that should resist him, with Anathema: who yet
preached naught unto them but the authority of the Pope, and Romish
inventions. The like may we learn by the letters of Gregory Boniface, Ib. in
Epist. ad Epist. Praebyt. Diac^n.
wherein he rejoices with him, for that God had opened to him among these
nations the way of salvation, and the door of mercy, and had sent his Angel
before him to prepare his way: This Angel was Charolus Martellus, who favored
him; and the cause why, we have seen before. Neither does he stick to tell us
in this very Epistle, To. 2. Council. in Epist. 2. ad Bonifac.
what this way of salvation was, to wit, the Apostolical Tradition of creating
Bishops there, ex nostra vice, that is, in true construction, after his own
mind and humor. Neither did Boniface fail one jot of his promise, as we may
farther learn by his Epistle to Zachary, Ib. Epist. Decret. Zachar.
wherein he protests, That look how many auditors and disciples God had
given him in this his embassage, be had not ceased to draw them every one to
the obedience of his See: As also by that Epistle of Zachary to the Bishops of
France and Germany; wherein he congratulateth them, not for the union which
they had with him in Christ, but that they were converted to Saint Peter, whom
God had appointed as a favorer, and master over them: that is, That they
acknowledged the Bishop of Rome; delivering them withal a doctrine, no doubt,
very necessary to salvation, to wit, That Christians, above all, must beware
of eating Gaies, Dawes, Storkes, Beauers, Hares, wild Horses, etc. with such
like fooleries; for more necessary doctrines of salvation shall you there find
none: referring himself for the rest, to the sufficiency of Boniface in these
matters; Ib. Epist. Greg. ad Bonifac.
to whom he writes, and holy brother, says he, thou art well instructed in
all things by the holy Scriptures.

Yet could not the Popes effect all that they attempted in France and Germany,
for all their support by Princes: For Gregory the second is feign to write to
Charolus Martellus, upon the information of Boniface, and to request, That he
would repress a certain Bishop accused of some idleness in his charge. And
Zachary was not well content with the Bishops of France, for that, contrary
to promise, they regarded not the Pall when it was sent unto them. It may be
he took too deep of them, as he can hardly deny in his Epistle to Boniface:
but in the end, If they will not, says he, advise them. But which is more,
Carloman himself in the Synod which he assembled in his kingdoms, assisted by
Boniface, says in express words, By the advice of our Bishops and great men,
we have appointed Bishops, and Missum Sancti Petri. Synod. Franc. sub
Carlomanno. An 742.
the messenger or deputy of Saint Peter: by which it appears, That Carloman
himself provided or appointed them. And this is the first time that we ever
find a Legate of Rome assisting in any of the Councels of France, namely in the
year 742. To be short, if Boniface sought to blemish any of the Bishops whom
he found there at his coming, they died not in his debt, calling him, Auenti.
Annal. ^oior. li. 3.
The author of lye^ the disturber of peace and piety, and the corrupter of
Christian doctrine; who yet were Monks, and the most learned of those times,
Clemens and Sampson of Scotland, Adelbertus of France, disciples of Beda, and
others, whom they seek to stain by sundry imputations. But if any angered
him, or seemed to be more learned than himself, his next way was to accuse him
of Heresy, Virgilius a Bishop (much renowned for his piety and learning) in
Bauaria, for affirming, That there were Antipodes; as he was indeed a man
seem in all sciences, especially in the Mathematikes: Which Boniface persuaded
Zachary (a couple of scholars well met) to condemn in him as Heresy and
irreligion: And thereupon were letters dispatched to Vtilo king of Bauiere, to
depose him from his charge. To conclude this section, we may not forget, that
this Adrian was the first that is said to have sealed in lead; as also, that he
laid the Adrian. in Epist. ad Charo. mag. de Nicae. Synod.
That if any man hold any Church goods, if he refuse to restore them, he is an
Heretic. The very seed of so many excommunications, spoils, and reuolts of
subjects from their lawful Lords and Sovereigns: and under this color did he
animat Charlemaine against the Emperors of the East; and hereupon also Leo the
third took occasion to crown him Emperor of the West, and, if we will
believe Baronius, to translate the Empire upon him.

Now from this coronation of Charlemaine at Rome by Pope Leo, Baronius, after
his accustomed boldness in this kind, draws in consequence a cruel and a
bloody That the Bishop of Rome has authority and power to translate Empires
and kingdoms; Baron. vol. 9. ^^. 800. art. 6, 7, 8, and sequent.
filling with this argument six or eight pages. Leo set the Crown upon
Charlemaines head. We grant, what follows? Ergo, says he, Leo collated the
Empire upon him, translated it from the Greeks to the French; did it, and had
right so to do. What Reader can endure such a non sequitur as this? For when
the Patriarch of Constantinople was wont to crown the Emperor, or when
Archbishops in other places crown their kings, do they bestow the Empire or
kingdom on them? or because they are instruments used for the performance of
this ceremony, does it implie a power or right in them, of conferring
kingdoms, whether hereditarie or elective? No Charlemaine by the Pope, were
nevertheless teermed (...), i. crowned of God; as appeared in Charles, by the
acclamation before mentioned of the people, made at his coronation, Charolo a
Deo coronato, etc. But peradventure his authorities are better than his
reasons: All this, says he, was according as it is written, Dan. 4.
The most high rules over the kingdoms of men, and he gives it to whom it
pleases him. True, but how does he prove that the Pope is God, or that the
most high has surrendered his place to him? And again, By me kings reign, and
by me princes bear rule: Proverb. 8.
which words Solomon spoke of the eternal wisdom of God. And where does he
prove Reader, says he, consider well this matter, etc. and what I pray you
follows of this wide gaping, but mere gallerie and cogging? Secondly, Who
doubts, says he, but God has given as great authority to his Church, as
heretofore he gave to the Jewish Synagogues? And do we not for how Samuel
translated the kingdom of Saul to David; Elias and Eliseus from the house of
Achab to the stock of Iehu? Nothing but tricks again: for where reads he
that the Synagogue had ever right to translate the kingdom, that ever it did
it, or meddled with it? And if the Pope for this purpose will needs be master of
the Synagogue, and circumcise himself; yet how will he prove Thirdly, says he,
it was said to Jeremy, Ierem. 1.
I have set thee this day over nations and kingdoms, to pluck up and to
destroy, to plant and to build. And it was also said by the Prophet Haggei, The
glory of this house, i. of the second Temple, shall be greater than the
glory of the first. And Saint Paul says, If the ministration of condemnation,
i. the Law, was glorious, much more shall the ministry of righteousness
exceed in glory, meaning the ministry of justification by faith in Christ:
Ergo, says Baronius, much more has the Pope power to pluck up and to pull
down, to collate and to translate kingdoms. Who can but grind his teeth to
hear such profane abuse and blasphemy of the word of God? For was Jeremy
either Synogogue or High Priest? or was he to denounce and threaten the ruin
of the Jewish Estate by the Babylonians, as a Priest of Anatoh, or as a
Prophet? and was it not said unto him, when he would have excused himself,
Ierem. ^.6. and 9.
Before thou came out of the womb I sanctified thee, And did nor the Lord put
forth his hand and touch his mouth, saying, Behold I have put my words into thy
mouth? What can Leo and the rest of such companions allege for themselves like
unto this? And last of all, does he make no difference between denouncing the
judgments of God, as they were revealed unto him by special command from
him, and the intruding himself without commission to the deposing of one king
and installing of another? Jeremy, though founded as you see upon a greater
power, yet, did he presume to depose Sedechias, or to anoint Nabuchadnezzer in
his room? Saint Jerome truly was of another mind concerning this place of
Scripture, who expounds it by another in the five and twentieth of the same
Prophet, where God Jerome will go a little farther, and allegorise this piece
of Scripture, he expounds these words of planting and pulling up, the one of
bad doctrines, which are plucked up; the other of good, which are planted by
the word of God: as also those other of pulling down and setting up, of the
efficacy of the spirit of his mouth. Yea but the glory of the second Temple
should be greater than the glory of the first: What second Temple, caitife
divine as he is, Caiphas or Herod; or, because he chalengeth both
jurisdictions, Caiphas and Herod all in one? And what is meant by that glory
of the ministry of the Gospel which the Apostle speaks of, 2. Cor. 3.
but Christ reigning powerfully in us by his spirit: Which the Apostle also in
that same place terms the ministry of the Spirit, not of the letters
opposing that Law graven in stones unto condemnation, against the faith of
Christ written in Chrysostom upon this place; The glory, says he, In 2. Corinthians. c. 3. Hamil. 7.
of Moses was outward to the sense, for they saw it with their eyes; but the
glory of the New Testament is not to be discerned but by the eyes of the
Spirit. Wherefore they that seek for glory in temporal and carnal things,
do not they renounce this other glory? And again, He has opposed, says he,
the stone to the heart, and the letter How far is this construction from that
of Baronius, which sauoureth naught but flesh and blood? Saint Ambrose also
upon this place, Ambros.
It is manifest, says he, that the grace of the Law of Faith is greater than
that of the Law of Moses. This holy Father expounds this glory to consist
in grace, in stead of Baronius his tyranny and oppression. And again, The
gift of the righteousness of God by the faith of Christ, is greater than the
gift of the old Law. And now see how these men always follow the
interpretation of the Fathers. Too much already said, I confess, but the
Reader will pardon me in a case of such absurd positions; which yet to deny,
or doubt of, is no less with them than open heresy. Fourthly Baronius
affirms, Baron. to. 9. an. 806. art. 26. Arbitrio Romani Pontificis electiuum.
That Charlemaine when he parted his kingdoms amongst his children, disposed
not of the Empire, as knowing, says he, that it depended of the election of
the Pope. But the very Testament which he produces for his proof, gain
says his assertion (which yet is an uncertain writing, in the judgment of
Peter Pytheus, from whom he had it) for in the very instep thereof, it is thus
written, We desire, says he, with the good pleasure of God, Regnivel Imperij
nostri.
to leave our children heirs of this our Realm or Empire. And again, Such
partages we have thought fit to make of our Realm or Empire. And indeed he
divided among them his whole Estate, namely, Italy, even unto Rome, on the
right hand and on the left, save only that which we call at this day the
kingdom of Naples; which was yet possessed

28. PROGRESSION.
How the Popes encroached upon Lewis the son of Charlemaine: and of

CHarlemaine kept his temporal power safe enough from the intrusion of the
Popes, leaving sometimes the spiritual as a prey unto them: for by his law it
was, that the Bishops of France finding themselves agrieued with the judgments
of their Metropolitans, or comprouinciall Bishops, were permitted to run to
Rome: Yet his words are carefully to be noted, When a Bishop, says he, has
had sentence against him, it shall be lawful for him to demand a reuiew, and
if need be, to go freely to the Bishop of Rome: where this word liceat, as
also in another place placuit, import a novel grace and favor granted by the
Prince: not that the Let him, says he, be judged either by the Bishop of the
Diocese, or by the Bishop of Rome. And this was termed a Proclamation, or an
Appellation, the source of so many debates and quarrels which ensued between the
Popes and the Bishops of France. Charles had treated with the Emperor of the
East, An. 816.
and particularly agreed about the partage of Italy between them two, each of
them retaining the Title of Emperor, the one of the East, the other of the
West: Which he did the rather, to set himself safe from that raging ambition
of the Popes. But when Charles was dead, though he used his power with such
moderation, as they in discretion had no reason to complain, yet they
presently set Lewis, son and successor unto Charles. After Leo succeeded
Stephen the fifth, Electus and ordinatus.
contrary to the law, being after his election presently consecrated, without
expecting the Emperors command, as says Aimonius. Aimoni. lib. 4. c. 103.
Thega. de gestis Ludoui. c. 16, 17, 18.
Yet to daube this fault committed, he commanded (says Theganus) all the
people of Rome to take the oath of fealty unto Lewis, and came himself in
post have into France, sending two ambassadors before him, as it were to
demand consecration at the Emperors hands; all which was nothing but to try
his patience: and after a while when he had crowned him, he returned home laden
with rich gifts and presents. Yet it should seem that he was taught his duty
while he was in France; for we find an ordinance of his in the Decrete C. Quia
sancta, in these words, For D. 53. c. 28. Deo autore.
by the will of God we are now placed, upon the death of the Pope) many times
suffers violence, because the election and consecration of the Popes are made
without the advice and knowledge of the Emperor, and because (according to the
Canons and ancient customs) there are present no ambassadors or other from
the Emperor to hinder such disorders; Canonico ritu.
we therefore will and command, That when a Bishop (of Rome) is to be chosen,
the election be made by the Bishops and Clergy, in the presence of the Senate
and people, and that the Bishop thus elected be afterward consecrated in the
presence of the Emperors ambassadors. Which ordinance is a foot at this day,
having escaped Gregory the thirteenth his censure in his late edition: Baron.
vol. 9. an. 616. art. 101
and what matter then though Baronius (as he says) doubts of it. Yet Paschal
in the room of this Stephen. This Paschal being solemnly and fully
consecrated, sent away presents and letters of excuse unto the Emperor,
Aimoni. li. 4. c. 105. post completam solemniter ordinatione^.
telling him, that the Papacy was laid upon him against his will, and after
much resistance. This excuse presupposes a confession of an act done contrary
to the law: yet shortly after he sent another ambassador, to entreat the
Emperor, That what had been heretofore accorded between the Popes and his
predecessors, might stand good (meaning between Charlemaigne and Adrian and
Leo) which we have seen before; Hostien. li. 1. c. 18.
for of any other accord can it not be understood, and so Leo Hostiensis
expounds it: all which was granted. Here the Historians of the Popes Lewis;
which the more ample it is, the more also is it to be suspected: And this is
the first Grant which is suffered to come abroad; as for those others of
Charles and Pepin, they only quote them, but produce them not to our scanning,
especially that of Charlemaigne, produced by Anastasius, Anastas. in Adriano.
of the same style and tenor with that Palea of the donation of Constantine,
though written so long after, and in so different an age: which grant of Lewis
contains (as they say) an absolute renunciation of all right in the election
of Popes, expressed in the Canon Adrianus, recited all at length by Sigonius
and Baronius, and taken by them word for word out of the Decrete of Gratian,
which the more learned sort have ever rejected as false and counterfeit, and
that Maud the Contesse made unto the Church. Secondly, because that of many of
those lands there passed, the successors of Lewis disposed as of their own.
Thirdly, because there are granted many Provinces, Islands, Demaines, Ports,
and Rivers, unto which the Emperor Lewis never did or could lay any claim,
and which in the treaty between the Emperors, were left for a partage
properly belonging to the Emperor of the East. Fourthly, because Lewis giving
Italy afterward to one of his sons Guicciardine records) Imperante domino
nostro etc. Sixthly, because this renunciation is not found observed in those
Elections which ensued afterward: which were (as we shall hereafter see)
ordered and confirmed by the Emperors; who took it in great redainder, if
any thing happened to be attempted to the contrary. Seventhly, because the
Authors of that time, as Nitare, Aimonius, and other Annalists make no mention
thereof, no not Anastasius himself in the life of Paschal, who for the good
will he bare unto the Popes, would not have omitted so high a point of their
honor. Eighthly, because the Popes never pretended any such grant, until long
after, and when the house of Charlemaigne was fallen to the ground. Ninthly,
and which cutteth the throat of all, because Otho the third, Diploma Othonis 3.
Emperor, in that donation which is kept in the Muniment house of the Charters
of the Church of Rome, at the Cordeliers of Assisa, having by way of Preface
declared, That he purposed to give unto S. Peter and to Syluester the second
his master things of his own, gives him in that Charter eight Counties,
Pesaro, Fano, Senigallia, Ancona, Fossombrone, Call, Haesio, and Occimo, being
the very same which are contained in the donation of Lewis, pretended to have
been made so Otho in that his Charter have used these words following? We not
regarding those forged Mandats, and imaginary writings, do out of our own
bounty and liberality give unto S. Peter things of our own, and not as ours,
that which is his already. By which words it is apparent, that he dasheth that
donation of Lewis and all others whatsoever. And Syluester the second accepted
of this donation, though he understood his writings as Lawyer like as any Pope
that went before him. But whether that donation of Lewis be true or false, we
cannot doubt of their ambitious encroaching upon other men's estates, seeing
that Paschal pulled out the eyes and cut off the nose of Theodore, Anastas. in
Valentin.
chief Secretary to the Leo the Nomenclator, his son in law, for carrying
themselves loyally toward Lotharius, son to Lewis, and associated in the
Empire: and as little doubt may we make of their pride, seeing that Anastasius
their Historian glories in this, That Pope Valentine, elected in the year
828, made all the Senate of Rome come kiss his foot. And this was the first
Pope that ever suffered this so to be done unto him; and God suffered not him
to sit above forty days. Helmold. in hist. Sclauor. l. 1. c. 4.
But Helmoldus observes a huge increase of the pride of the Church in the
days of this Lewis, where he says, That he made them, who in the regard of
their care of souls were Princes of Heaven, by his largess and liberality
Princes of his kingdom.


Lewis, for all his kind nature, yet suffered not the Popes to do what pleased
them, and there wanted not those who spoke broadly enough of the encroachments
and usurpations of the Popes. The Emperor himself took Paschal in hand, and
sent Adalong Abbot of S. Vast, and Humfrey County of Coire, to enquire upon
the murder committed, as was said, either by his commandment, or not without
his priuitie and advise. Paschal thought to prevent him by his ambassadors,
whom he sent to request him not to give credence to any such report. But when
Adalong and Humfrey, continuing on their journey, were come to Rome, they found
that the Pope had purged himself by oath in the presence of many Bishops, and
had Peter, pronouncing those that were slain guilty of treason, Aimoni. de
familia S. Petri.
and consequently their murder justified. So that Sigonius himself let fall
this word, That the ambassadors of Lewis could not search out the verity of
this fact, nor so much as begin to take knowledge of it. This was about the
year 823. But when Lotharius came the year following, after the death of
Pascal, An. 823. Iusticias facere.
into Italy, to see justice done in those parts, he found the cause of these
mischiefs to proceed from the misdemeanors of the Popes, and conniuencie of
the Judges, by means whereof many men's goods had been confiscated; all which
he caused to be restored to the right owners, Aimoni. lib. 4. c. 112.
reviving withal an ancient custom of sending some certain personages a
Latere with special commission from the Emperor Author vitae Ludoui.
without respect of persons, as often as the Emperor should think fit. All
which was done with the consent of the new Pope Eugenius (say the Historians)
and to the contentment of Lewis, when he understood thereof. Sigonius also
produces a certain ordinance which he left behind him, for the ordering and
composing of matters within the City of Rome, wherein is contained, That none
should intrude himself into the election of the Popes, but such as are called
thereunto by the Canons, under pain of banishment; which article tended to
prevent all canuassing for the Popedom: also therein was contained, That all
those who were to exercise any place of judicature in Rome, should first come
into his presence, that he might inform himself Item, that the King himself,
or in his absence others in his room, should assist at the consecration of the
Popes: And so (says he) was it for certain years after observed, and last of
all established by a new Constitution.

In the year 824 came there ambassadors from Michael and Theophilus, Emperors
of Greece, to Lewis and Lotharius, to crave their advise and the advice of the
French Church, concerning the use of Images, and withal to entreat them to be
a means to the Pope, that he would graciously accept the embassage which they
purposed to send unto him upon the same question: whereupon there assembled a
National Council of the French Bishops, to give their advise jointly unto
Synod. Paris. sub Ludoui. and Lothar. an. 824.
where they openly declared unto them, as well the evil practices of Adrian in
the carriage of the Council, as also the pestilent contagious error and
abominable superstition, which under Images he had brought into the Church:
But above all they plainly show, that the position concerning the Popes not
erring, was no article of their learning or belief, when they say, That the
Pope suffered himself to be carried down the stream of this error, partly by
ignorance, partly by wicked custom: That it was pity to see those who were
placed in chief authority to direct others, themselves to forsake the high
way, and to run astray into paths of error. And in their Epistle to Eugenius
they stick not to write plainly, That the matter of this miserable rent and
distraction was a thing, without which, that the Empress Irene and her son
in the passing of that Edict concerning the adoration of Images, were abused by
a pestilent illusion of the devil. And the book which thereupon they wrote to
the Emperors Lewis and Lotharius is so well grounded both upon the authority
of the Scriptures, and interpretations of the Fathers, that it may easily
appear, that the divinity of Italy was no way comparable to that of the
French Clergy. As for the Pope, when the Emperors requested to hear some
proofs for the adoration of Images out Simoneta, c. 5.
That they were arrogant fellows that made such questions. Add we here one
observation of the manner of speaking which that Synod so frequently used, We
(say they) hold the place of S. Peter, to whom Christ said, Whatsoever thou
shall bind etc. All the Bishops then holding themselves as the Vicars of S.
Peter, saying farther of the simple Priests, That they were the porters, to
whom were committed the keys of the kingdom of Heaven. And what can the Pope
challenge more?

In the year 827, upon the death of Valentine, was elected Gregory the
fourth, Sigon. lib. 4. de Reg. Jtal.
with due observation of the Law which Lotharius had left behind him: For the
Gregory could not be consecrated until he was returned, and had fully
informed himself of the proceedings in that election. And the Annalist says
in express terms, That his consecration was deferred, till the Emperors
pleasure was known thereupon. Author vitae Ludouici. An. 833.
Certain years after, about the year 833, his children made a conspiracy
against him. This Gregory, to oblige Lotharius to himself, took his part,
and came into France, in show to mediate a reconciliation between the father
and the sons, but indeed (as Aimonius reports) to set them farther out,
Aimoni. lib. 3. c. 14.
and to give countenance to a certain Synod, which the sons assembled at
Compiene, to depose their father: This attempt (as say the Authors of those
times) the working of the devil, Thega. de gest. Ludoui. Chronichon Dionysian.
which wrought by his ministers in the hearts of the children against the
Emperor. The Bishops of France took part some with the father, others with
the sons: on the sons side was chief Hebo Archbishop of Rheims, a slave by
birth, and a man of lewd conditions; against whom the Historian cries out,
saying, Miserable wretch, how have thou recompensed thy masters kindness:
Purpura vestiuit te and pallio.
he made thee free (for noble he could not) clothing thee with the Pall, and
Scarlet, and thou make him to put on hairecloth. How have thou despised those
precepts of the Apostle; Be ye subject to every higher power, Fear God,
Honor the King? Who persuaded thee hereunto but he, who is only King over the
children of pride, who said to his Creator, All these things will I give unto
thee, For the father, stood principally Drogo or Dreux, Bishop of Mets, a great
man in his time, with many others; all which perceived plainly, that this
Gregory was a part taker in this conspiracy: The Emperor said, If he be come
into France as his predecessors have done before him, Vita Ludouici. Aimon. l.
5. c. 14.
why comes he not unto me all this while? The Bishops said, If he be come to
excommunicate, we will send him away excommunicated again. And Hincmar
Archbishop of Rheimes writing to Pope Adrian the second, Flodoard. in Hist.
Rhemensi. Jdem, l. 5. c. 16.
tells him in plain terms, That Gregory came into France with an evil
intent, and purposing to bear out the children against the father, He came
(says he) into France, and after his coming our peace continued not: also he
returned not with so good credit as And the Chronicle of S. Denis, The
ministers of the devil (says he) prevailed so far, Chron. Dionys.
as to unite all the sons against him, and maliciously made the Apostolic of
Rome to come into France under color of piety, as it had been to mediate a
peace between the King and his children: but the truth it self afterward
appeared. And of the Apostolic it was commonly said, That his coming was
only to excommunicate the King, and the Bishops if they supported the father,
and were not in every respect obedient to the sons: but when the Bishops
heard say this, they protested, That they would never obey him for fear of his
excommunication: for (say they) the authority of the ancient Canons is far
different from this course. And when Lewis was fully reestablished in his
Gregory, but as the Historian of the Church of Rheimes reports, by the
common consent of the Bishops, Gregory unable to maintain those Bishops whom
he had drawn into this practice, they were glad (though under a most gracious
Sovereign) yet to save themselves in Italy from the rigor of the laws: the
others were feign to confess the action, and plead guilty, acknowledging
themselves unworthy of the place they held, and in effect to be deposed,
especially Hebo Archbishop of Rheimes, and Agobard of Lions. And this was in
those days all the fear that the Bishops of France had of the Popes
excommunications. And in this time it was, That Claud of Turin taught openly
both by tongue and pen, That he was not Apostolical who sat in the And this
reaches unto the death of Lewis, An. 839.
which fell in the year 839. Add we hereunto, that the Emperor Lewis
treading the path of Charlemaigne and other his predecessors, with the advice
and counsel of the Prelates and the rest of the learned of his kingdoms,
enacted laws for the better ordering of the Churches of his dominions; not
only concerning their policy and government, but also touching Faith, without
asking leave, or expecting a Mandamus from the Pope, whatsoever Baronius and
his Benedict the Leuite prate unto us, as may appear by the Articles of Lewis;
Capitularia.
and the Abbot Andegisus, who collected those Laws, makes no mention of the
Pope in the Preface to them. Also he assembled Councels Extat ante Council.
Paris. To. 3. Council.
By the command, By the wholesome command of the glorious Prince, By the
grace or gift of God, Emperor etc. making books of this subject. And in the
Council of Aix la Chapella, the Body of the people speaks of the Clergy in
general, and says, By them are we made Christians, who having the keys of
the kingdom of heaven in their hands, judge in a sort before the day of
judgment: and so had no need to be beholding to Rome for the keys. An. 828.
But in the year 828 we find a particular Edict of Lewis, whereby, to appease
the wrath of God incensed at that time against him and his people, for the
many corruptions grown in among them, he commanded a fast to be held
throughout his kingdoms. And to handle, discuss, and find out things
belonging to Christian Religion: Council. Aquisgra. 3. to. Council.
what the Prince, what the people held, either answerable or contrary to the
revealed will of God: what had been retained, what omitted, either in part or
in whole: how the Clergy behaved themselves; wherein they erred and departed
away from the rule of holy Scripture: And in all this no mention made of the
Popes authority.

Baronius makes much of certain Epistles, written about this time by a Monk
of Greece, named Theodorus, with his accomplices in Idolatry, to the Baron. an.
817. art. 21, 22. and sequent.
by reason of the haut titles which he gives him, magnifying him above all
other Bishops. It were a very sufficient answer to say, That this was a
Monk, offended with his Patriarch of Constantinople for taking away his
Images, and therefore no matter what he says. But yet examine we his letters:
Coaequandum Angelis.
First he calls the Pope, Equal to the Angels; Will Baronius abet this
flattery? seeing that the Apostle to the Hebrews, after the Psalmist,
speaking of our Lord and Savior Christ, says, Thou have made him little lesser
than the Angels? How can he make the Pope equal to them, but as he is more
than a Paul speaks in the second of the Thessalonians, chap. 2. Secondly he
calls him, The Great Light, Prince of Bishops, and Apostolic Pope. In that
he calls him Prince of Bishops, it imports nothing but the Primacie of his
See. But you shall see how this same Monk wrote at the same time, scarce
changing a pen between to other Patriarchs: for to him of Alexandria he
wrote, To the most holy Father of Fathers, and Light of Lights: Do not these
words weigh down those other of Great Light? And as he calls the one Pope of
Rome, Apostolicum verticem.
so does he the other Pope of Alexandria: as he calls him of Rome Apostolic,
so the other, The crown or top of all Apostolikes. And what advantage now has
Baronius gotten for the The supreme Light, and the other is called only the
Light of Lights. First, what fair play to turn a die? And whereas but two
pages before, by his own confession, the Monk called him only Magnum Lumen,
a Great Light, now to make him say, Supremam Lumen, the Supreme Light.
Secondly, who knows not, that Light of Lights in all tongues, especially in
the language of the Scriptures, implies more than a Great Light? Baronius his
reply is, That the Bishop of Alexandria was so called, in regard that Cyrill,
his quondam predecessor, was Legate a Latere for the Pope of Rome: First, that
has already been proved to be false: Secondly, I would ask, Whether all
they who in any Council heretofore were the Popes Baronius himself
confesses; but will you see what he wrote to him of Jerusalem, to whom
Baronius does not afford this title: he concealeth the subscription, and for
any thing we know it may be the same with the other: but what says he toward
the foot of the letter, Thou (says he) art Prince of the Apostles, though thou
be reckoned the fifth in order: and so by his reckoning the Pope of Rome is a
Patriarch, as others were, but he of Jerusalem was the chief, in regard of
those holy devotions done under him, as is there said. And he adds farther a
For (says he) where that Bishop of Souls, and High Priest Christ Jesus, was
borne and wrought his heavenly miracles, where he suffered and was buried,
where he was raised again to life, and lived, and thence taken into heaven,
there also must needs be the supreme or sovereign dignity and honor, viz.
of the Church. See good reader, what light and frivolous arguments these men
are feign to hunt for in every idle flattery of a Monk, to exalt and
magnify that See of Rome.

29. PROGRESSION.
Of Sergius the second, and of the open Simonie used in his time.

AFter the death of the Emperor Lewis, his sons, who so well agreed against
him, fell to variance among themselves; and (says Sigonius) as the dignity of
the French, by occasion of these divisions, diminished, so that of the Italians
(meaning of the Popes) increased. Charles sumamed the Bauld, Carolus Caluus.
Sigibert. en. 844. Platinae in Sergio. Sigon. de Reg. Ital. lib. 5.
had for his partage the kingdom of France; Lewis, all Germany Eastward of
the Rhine; Lotharius, all the Low Countries, Burgundy, Prouence, Italy, and
Rome, with the Title of the Empire: So that of all the children, the Pope had
especially to deal with Lotharius, Lewis whom he associated in the Empire in
the year 844, and proclaimed king of Italy. An. 844.
In this year died Gregory the fourth, who had already begun to make his
profit of their dissentions. The Clergy and Senate of Rome immediately after his
death elected Sergius the second, and consecrated him, without expecting the
Mandat of the Emperor: Though Anastasius their own Historian, Anastas. in
Leo. 4.
in the life of Leo the fourth, successor unto Sergius, says in express
terms, That the Romans durst not consecrate a Pope without authority from
the Emperor: Which he would never have written, if that pretended Renunciation
of Lewis the first, Emperor, had taken place. But Sergius making his hay in the
Sunshine of their division, went through with it. This is he, as Platina
reports, that Onuphrius attributes it to John the twelfth: also who first
ordained, That no Bishop might be convicted but in the mouth of seventy two
witnesses; and yet himself put to death a certain Cardinal Priest, and an
enemy of his, called Athanasius, upon the testimony of far fewer witnesses.
Also this is he whose reign is so foulely stained and blotted with detestable
simonie: Author. Coaetaneus apud Vignerium pa. 214. and 215.
He had, says a certain Author of that time, a brother called Benedict, and
surnamed Brute, being indeed of brute behavior, who growing upon the
weakness of the Pope, usurped the execution and administration of all
affairs, as well Ecclesiastical as Civil, and had by briberie and corruption
obtained of the Emperor Primatum and dominium Romae, that is, as we interpret,
the chief place and government of Rome: And the Histories from hence forward,
are full of these calamities. But let us look back and see what the Emperor
Lotharius did.

OPPOSITION.
So soon as Lotharius understood of the consecration of the Pope made without
his priuitie, and in prejudice of the Empire, he presently sent his son Lewis
into Italy with an army: Baron. vol. 10. an. 844. art. 5.
Sigebert says, he sent to confirm him. Baronius speaks all save good of
him for so saying. But what ever the cause was, he gave him his uncle Drogo
Archbishop of Mets, for a guide and conductor in this voyage. They lay to his
charge, That he passed with great terror and cruelty through Italy: And the
truth is, that he chastised with some rigor the city of Boulogne, for not
receiving him as they ought; borne out, as it should seem, by the Pope. But
Sigonius will needs report, Osculum sancto pedi infixit. Anastas. in Sergio 2.
Plat. ib.
That he kissed his holy foot: but the world was not yet come to that.
Anastasius, who uses not to loose any of the Popes prerogatives, says only,
That the Emperor and the Pope embraced each other. And Platina, That they
entertained each other with a mutual kiss. And then the Pope using his Church
power, and standing at S. Peter's Church door, which was shut, If thou art
come, said he, for the good of this Church and City, then enter by my
command; if otherwise, by my good will they And when Lewis had graciously
assured him of his good meaning, he caused the doors to be set open to him,
and to the great ones that were about him: Yet did the whole army also rush
into the city, to see it, and to visit the Churches. So much had the Clergy
of Rome already prevailed by their dissentions. The issue of all was, That
Sergius ancled, crowned, and proclaimed Lewis; Anastasius says, King of
Lombards; Ado and Leo Hostiensis say, Ado Viennen. in Chron. Leo Hostien.
King of Italy, and Emperor, with a joyful acclamation of the people; and
both Platina and Sigonius speak after the same manner. And Anastasius says
farther, That the Pope would not suffer the Romans to swear fealty to Lewis,
but only to the Emperor Lotharius: whereof other Authors make no difference.
And a certain Author. Coaetaneus apud Vigner. pa. 214.
says in express words, That after many mischiefs done upon the people of
Rome, they made them swear fealty to the Emperor, and confirmed Sergius in
his See again: as not holding his Title of the Popedom for good before, much
less of the Seigneurie of Rome. And Anastasius does not stick to tell us,
That the Popes authority was then and there questioned and debated: for, says
he, Drogo Archbishop of Metz, and other Archbishops and Bishops gathered
together against this Universal Church, and Head of all other Churches,
without the leave of their Metropolitan, and did every day make new quarrels
against our most holy Pope and his Bishops. And if you ask who they were that
joined with Drogo, he tells you, That they were Gregory Archbishop of that
is, the better part of the Bishops of all Italy. Insomuch that Anguilbert
Archbishop of Milan separated himself wholly from the Roman Church, which one
of his predecessors had newly acknowledged some sixty years before. And this
separation dured, as the sequel of this history will declare, two Sigonius
observes this separation, but concealeth the cause, which was the pride of
that See, Simonie, and other disorders there used in the time of Sergius.
Besides that, Theodorus Abbot of Fulden reports of this Anguilbert, That he
was much affectioned to the memory of good S. Ambrose, whose liturgy
continued in the Church of Milan at that day, and long after.

To go on with the time, Baronius upon the year 839, produces out of the
Vatican a certain Epistle of Gregory the fourth, An. 839.
written to the Bishops of France, Germany, of Europe, and of all Provinces:
(he might have made shorter work, and have written to all the world:) wherein
upon the complaint of Aldric Bishop of Man's, made of the wrongs done unto him
by the other Bishops, he gives them to understand, a Latere; exhorting them in
all have to take horse and come away to him. This pretense of the Popes was no
news to them; and we have said already, That Charlemaigne was content to
sooth the Popes in their humor. But Baronius tells us not what became of this
letter, or whether the Bishops of France gave way to this Appeal, or no: and
it is very likely, that no; for had there been any thing for his purpose, or
not something against it, we should have been sure to have heard of it.

Baronius told us before, That Charlemaigne disposed not of the Empire, as
properly depending of the Popes election; and we there showed the contrary:
Lo now Lewis, surnamed the Courteous, Charlemaines son, he from whom they
claim that goodly donation, who disposes absolutely of the Empire, and of
Rome it self, Thegan. de gest. Ludouici.
as we have already declared. And farther Theganus says, That he named his
son Lotharins, after his decease, to receive all the kingdoms which God had
given him by the hands of his father, Nomen and Imperium. Nitard. li. 1.
and to have both the name and Empire of their father: which the other sons
much stormed at. And Nitard says, That he divided his whole Empire among his
sons in such sort, that Pepin should have Gascoine, Lewis Bauiere; but
Lotharius after his decease should have the whole Empire, and suffered him in
his life time to bear with him the name of Emperor. And when the brothers,
after many hot bickerings, Helmold. l. 1. c. 4
came at last to an agreement, In the end, says Helmoldus, by the mediation
both which were writers of that time, or not long after.

30. PROGRESSION.
That Leo the fourth was consecrated without the Emperors leave, and how the
matter was excused.

An. 847.
WHen Lewis was returned into France, Pope Sergius the second dyed in the year
847, and the same day was elected Leo the fourth, and presently consecrated,
contrary to the law, and without expecting the pleasure of the Prince. The
people excused their doing by reason of the Sarasens, who at that time pressed
sore upon them: and Leo his sufferance, as being forced thereunto by the
people; Anastas. in Leo. 4.
who yet, as Anastasius reports, lived in fear of Lewis his second return
to Rome upon the like occasion, as feeling their wounds yet bleeding of his
first being there. And farther he observes, That they carried him to the
Patriarchs Palace of Lateran, and there, after the ancient custom, kissed his
feet. And yet all the antiquity of this custom was but since the time of
Valentine, who, as Leo which walled and fortified the Vatican against the
Sarasens.

OPPOSITION.
An. 854.
Leo about the year 854 cried for help to Lotharius, against the Sarasens,
who presently sent his son Lewis with an army into Italy; but withal,
because he was informed, That the discipline as well of the Church, as Estate
of Italy, established heretofore by his father and grandfather, was much
fallen to decay; he commanded him, as soon as the wars would give him leave,
to call together Lewis having assembled them at Pauia, and calling unto him
Anguilbert Archbishop of Milan, he who, as we have already said, separated
himself from the Roman Church (judge Reader by that which follows, how far
the regal authority then reached) and Andrew Patriarch of Aquileia, signified
unto them, That his pleasure was to take a particular account of the lives and
duties of the Bishops and the rest of the Clergy, of their sermons, of the
rep^^ation of Churches and Hospitals, of the regularitie of Monks, of the
jurisdiction De Jurisdiction Comitum.
and to reform in every person and degree what he could find amiss:
commanding those two to make relation of what he had said, unto the other
Bishops; who were so far from declining his jurisdiction, that they yielded
him a particular account upon every of the said articles: humbly requesting
him, to grant such as had been faulty and negligent, sometime to amend their
manners; confessing that sermons had been a long time omitted, Sigon. de Reg.
Ital. lib. 5.
through the negligence partly of the Prelates, partly of the people, who by
having private chapels adjoining to their houses, neglected the frequentation
of the public Churches; with many other matters of like nature: all which he
took order to redress as to him seemed best, sitting in his palace, and by
the advice of his privy Counsel. Gratian, a Master of the camp, and a man of
great credit and authority, who sought to sow discord between the Temporal
Estate and the Clergy, practicing under hand to translate the whole Empire
back unto Greece again; Lotharius hearing hereof, sent to his son Lewis, to
march immediately unto Rome, and there to prevent such inconvenience. And
Platina reports, That Leo the Pope was accused as party in this conspiracy.
But in the end Lewis having hanged one Daniel, who had falsely accused him,
Pope Leo wrote to Lotharius, That he did, and ever would observe the behests and
commandments of his progenitors: Requesting him withal, That the Roman law
might still take place, as now and heretofore. And we have the extract of that
letter in the Decret of Gratian, De Capitulis vel praeceptis imperialibus
vestris, D. 10. c. 19.
vestrorumque Pontificum praedecessorum irrefragabiliter custodiendis, quantum
valuimus and valemus Christo propitio and nunc and in aeuum modis omnibus nos
conseruaturos profitemur: Et si fortasse quilibet vobis aliter dixerit vel
dicturus fuerit scias eum pro certo mendacem. Where Baronius, after Isidore, in
stead of vestrorumque Pontificum, reads nostrorumque, Baron. an. 853. art. 17.
contrary to the credit of all copies and glosses, only to avoid Leo his
tying himself to the observation of such Edicts and Injunctions as our kings
shall make in the assemblies of their Bishops in their dominions. Capitularibus.
And how far kings of those days proceeded in matters of this nature, we can
learn no whence better than from the Decrees and ordinances of Charles and
Lewis, Capitulos.
and those which we have Baronius himself, and called, Capitula Charoli Calui,
The Injunctions of Charles the Bauld; which concerned the whole policy and
discipline of the Church. And the same Leo in another Epistle speaks to the
Emperor as humbly as in the former: In the proceedings of this cause, says
he, we have done some things incompetently, not observing in your subjects
causes the ordinary course of law: we are ready to reform what ever is
amiss, as you and your Commissioners shall think fit, etc. Wherefore we
earnestly entreat your clemency and greatness, That you would send some such
into these parts, to take knowledge of these matters, etc. and of all matters
great or small, which any man has informed you of concerning us, etc. By which
we may easily perceive what hand the Emperor in those Baronius contesteth, That
Leo withstood Lotharius and Lewis the Emperors, in the claim which they made
to their right of confirmation upon the election of Popes; and that he
prevailed so far, that the election from that time should be made according
to the Canons; meaning that Canon by which they pretend, That Lewis the first,
Emperor, renounced all right in the election: But for proof he alleges
naught but a Palea of the Decret, which is unable to stand against the current
of all Histories besides. And yet the words of that Palea import but this, That
between the Emperors and the Pope it was accorded, That the election and
consecration of the Bishop of Rome in time to come should not be made but
justly and canonically: which no Logic can wrest to prove Gregory the
thirteenth.

Hincmar. Epist. ad Charol. Ca^n. de Episc. Syluanectensi. Idem ad populu^
Bellouacensem. Liberam and Regularem Electionem.
This Leo, as he could not keep himself from encroaching, so met he sometimes
with rubs in his way. Charles the Bauld reigned at that time in France. The
order was, when a Bishopric fell void, that the Clergy and people joined in
petition to the king, to grant them leave to make a free and a regular
election, and that he would send thither, according to the holy Canons, a
Visitor to assist at the election: And thereupon did the king signify to the
Metropolitan which of his Bishops he would have to assist as Visitor, to see
the election in all points canonically made, yet so, as without any prejudice
of his own Canons. Hincmar Archbishop of Reims, but especially out of that
which he wrote to Charles the Bauld, touching the vacancie of the Bishopric of
Senlis; himself being chosen Archbishop in a Synod held at Beauuais, in the
place of Hebo, which rebelled against the Emperor Lewis. And though there be
one which writes, That at the entreatie of Lotharius he received the Pall at
Leo his hands, to wear every day, a privilege which the Pope said he would
never grant to any other: yet Hincmar himself, holding this Pal for a badge
Idem ad Cler. and pleb. Cameracensem. Idem ad Laudunenses c. 6.
rather than for a mark of subjection, spares not to say openly, That it was
not lawful for the inferior Bishops upon any public or general occasion, to
consult the Pope, unless they had first advised thereof with their own
Archbishops: and yet the question was only of consulting. That it was
needless for Archbishops to expect resolutions from the Sea of Rome concerning
such things as were already sentenced in the holy Scriptures, in the
Councels, in Canons and Decrees of the Church: And thereupon inhibiteth his
nephew Hincmar Bishop of Laon to Appeal to Rome, declaring the letters
monitorie, Ib. c. 34.
by which the Pope warned him to appear before him, to be void and of none
effect; forbidding him to obey his summons: and expounding these words, Tues
Petrus, etc. in this manner: Upon this sure and solid And as touching the
power of binding and loossing he spares not to write to the Pope himself,
Idem in Epist. ad Hadrian. 2.
telling him out of the writings of Leo the first, That that power was passed
and derived from Saint Peter, and from the rest of the Apostles, to all the
chief Heads of the Church, meaning to all Bishops, and consequently to
himself as well as to the Pope of Rome: And that Saint Peter's privilege
takes place only where men judge according to the equity of Saint Peter, and
is of force wheresoever that equity is used: no more at Rome than at Reimes;
no less at Reimes than at Rome; in every place alike, according as the
Bishops do, or do not their duty. So likewise when this Leo, presuming upon
the pretended Apostleship of Boniface, encroached upon the Luithpert Archbishop
of Mence writing to Lewis king of Germany, Luithpertus Episc. Moguntinens.
spares him not: The cause, says he, will not suffer me to keep silence; for
I were inexcusable before God and your Highness, if seeing with my eyes the
imminent danger of the Church, I should dissemble my knowledge, as an hired
servant, and no longer a true Pastor of my sheep. The Primacie therefore and
the dignity thereof now shakes, and is grown infamous in the very chair of
Saint Peter: for after a secret and unheard kind of persecution she is wronged,
not by those who know not God, but by such as ought to be conductors and
leaders of the In Capite.
will quickly distill upon the members, etc. You know the danger wherein the
people of God stands, every man sees it, and the very elements tremble at
it, to see how the governors and conductors thereof, whose duty is to seek
to save the weak, forsake themselves the way of salvation, and run headlong to
their downfall, drawing those which follow them into the like pit of perdition.
Wherefore I exhort your wisdom, which loves verity and justice, that
according to the knowledge given you by God, you would advise with such as know
the Law, and are lovers of equity and justice, how peace and unity may be
restored to the Church, etc. For the whole body of the Church is not hurt,
though the Head being wounded, This Luitpert was a man much esteemed for his
integrity, wisdom, and sanctity of life and conversation, and for this
cause of so great authority

Neither may we here forget, before we pass any farther, that we have a
certain Canon of this Leo his making, Leo. 4. ad Epist. Britan.
by which he takes away all authority from all Decretall Epistles of Popes,
until the times of Syluester and Syricius; and so blotteth out with one dash
of a pen all those which are attributed to them, D. 2. ca. de Libellis.
during

Here now are we to observe, shall I say a Proceeding, or rather a headlong
stumble of this Mystery of Rome, that prodigious accident and monster of this
time: A stumble indeed, and a fall withal it should have been, if either the
Church of Rome had had any forehead, or the people eyes: I mean that which
fell out in the year 854, after the death of Leo the fourth: An. 854.
which yet I had rather set down in Platina his words, Plat. in Johan. 8.
as we find them in his History which he dedicated to Pope Sixtus the fourth,
A woman, or rather a wench sitting in the Sea of that mother of fornications
foretold in the Apocalypse: Johannes Anglicus therefore, says Platina, borne at
Mence, aspired to the Papacy, as it is said, by evil practices: For being a
Female, and dissembling her sex, she went with her paramour, a learned man, to
Athens, and there grew so expert in the liberal Sciences, that coming
afterward to Rome, she found there few equal, none superior to her self: And
what by lecturing, what with disputing, both wittily and learnedly withal,
grew so far in grace and favor with all men, that upon the death of Leo, as
says Martinus, by a general consent, she was chosen Pope in his room. But
not long after, being great with child by her servant, we in English may call
it by Platina (for fear no doubt of the hole or dungeon, where he had long
lain in the time of Paul the second) after all this adds that which
follows, That (says he) which I have said, is a common bruit, the authors
thereof uncertain, and of no great name, which yet I thought good briefly and
nakedly to set down, that I might not seem wilfully to omit a thing which
every man almost affirms: but let us err for once with the multitude,
though it is certain, that this is one of those things which are both credible
and possible: so much it troubled him to carry an even hand in this matter.
And we must now enter the lists of this question, because this History (which
ever heretofore passed for current without contradiction) finds in these
days some opposition: especially Onuphrius upon Platina thinks Onuphrius ad
Plat. in vitae Johan. 8.
First therefore he says, That Anastasius (who lived at this time) says no
such matter: for answer we say, Rainulphus, l. 5. c. 32.
That to argue ab authoritate negative* proves nothing. But Rainulphus in his
Polychronicon gives a reason why the Historians of that time omitted it, which
was, Propter turpitudinem Rei, for the beastliness of the matter, as they did
many other things of like nature. But if some in reverence to the Popes have
thought good to smother it, yet others in their love to the truth would not
conceal it. Neither may Onuphrius take on in such eagre sort against Martinus
Polonus, as the first noiser of this report, to whom, in regard he was
penitentiarie to Nicholas the third, and afterward Archbishop of Cosensa, they
should in good manners owe Onuphrius himself testifies, That he had seen
certain Commentaries of Damasus and Pandulfe of Pisa, written in that very
time, where, in the margent, between Leo the fourth and Benedict the third
this woman's name is inserted: but (says he) written with another ink: so, or
not so, I leave unto his conscience. But not to stand any longer upon this,
Marian. Scotus, l. 3. Chron. An. 854.
Marianus Scotus (a Monk of the Abbey of Fulden, of the order of the
Benedictins, and a great Chronicler, and one by whom themselves have dained to
govern themselves in the dating of their Councels, says, That in the year
854 Leo the fourth died the first of May, and after him succeeded Johannes
Mulier, Ione the woman, for the space of two years, five months, and And it
is to be noted, that he had it from those which were before him, for he was
brought up in the said Abbey of Fulden, where this Ione also her self had
sometime lived. They would ward this blow by saying, That they have copies of
Marianus his book, wherein no such words are to be found: but our copy was
taken out of the Library of the College of S. Bartholomew in the City of
Francford, by the commandment of the Bishop of Mentz. Baronius to make this
pill swallow the better, reads these words of Marianus, with an vt asseritur,
i. as it is reported, but without author or manuscript for his proof. And this
Marianus Trithemius) in the year 1080. Sigibert. in Chron. an. 853.
And Sigibert Abbot of Gemblons, who lived about the year 1100, The fame
(says he) is, that this John was a woman, who companied with one only servant
of hers, by whom she was begot with child and delivered, being Pope: Papa
existens.
and for this cause is he neither named nor numbered among the Popes. And here
again they say first, that he was a schismatike, secondly that in some copies
there are no such words; but we list not believe them at their word. After
these came Martin of Polonia, about the year 1270, whom Platina follows
almost word for word, save only where the one says, vt asseritur, Martinus
Polonus.
the other has vt aiunt. There was another Martin of the Order of the Minor
Friars, who in his Chronicle entitled, Flores Temporum, reports, Chron.
Martin. Minorit. vlt. impress. an. 1486.
That when this John Papa pater patrum, Papissae pandito partum,
Et tibi tunc edam de corpore quando recedam.


Tell thou me when thou will be delivered of a child, and I will tell thee when
I will go forth of this body.

This Martin lived about the year 1370. Petrarch. in Chron.
Petrarch was one who could well discern between a history and a tale, and
was for the most part trained up in the Martin, so he calls her Iohannem
Anglicum, i. John English, who (says he) was a woman, and therefore not entered
in the Catalogue of the Popes: adding farther, That he was promoted to the
highest honor of Priesthood by a general consent. Boc. in lib. de claris
mulieribus, c. 99. Anton. tit. 16. c. 1. 7. Otho Frisingh. l. 7. Annals
Augustani. Raph. Volaterran. in commenta. vrba. Sabellicus Aenead. 9. Phil.
Bergo. in supplem. Matthew. Palmer. continuator Eusebius. and Prosperij. Trithem.
Naucler. General. Albert. Crant. in Metrop. in Catal. Pontif. Cael Rhodo. l.
14. Antiq. Lectio. Continuat. John. Lucid. in Chron. Baptist. Mantu. l. 3.
Alphons. Suffrid. Leonar. in Notis, in Mart. Polon. in Ed. Antuerp. an. 1573.
And this Petrarch lived when the forenamed Martin did. Bocace also in his
book of illustrious or famous women, describes her, and represents in
picture her travail, the Cardinals and Bishops standing about her in stead of
midwiues: and to this day (says he) to continue the memory of this vilanie,
the Popes when they celebrate the Rogations with their Clergy and people, shun
the place where she was delivered, which is in the middle of their way, and
turn aside to go by narrow lanes. These were men too wise Martin, though he a
man not altogether to be neglected. And Antonin the Archbishop adds farther,
That there was there placed an effigies of Marble, to continue the memory
thereof: and thereupon cries out with S. Paul, O the height of the wisdom of
God, how incomprehensible are thy judgments, and thy ways past finding out
etc. As for that which Raimundus bableth concerning the virgin Marie, it is
too weak and foolish to avoid the authority of such an author as Antoninus
is. Likewise Otho Frisinghensis in his seventh book, where he sets down
the Catalogue of the Popes, he names Iohannem VII foeminam, placing her in the
room of John the seventh, not of the eight, by the common error of Chroniclers
in the Raphael Volaterranus, Sabellicus, Philip of Bergamo, Matthaeus
Palmerius, Trithemius in the life of Luithprand, Johannes Stella in the lives
of 230 Popes, Nauclerus Chancellor in the University of Tubinge, Albert
Crantius Deane of Hambourg, the Fasciculus Temporum, alias Carthusianus;
Caelius Rhodoginus, the supplement of Johannes Lucidus, with sundry others:
the most of these whom I have named being Churchmen, and of great place in
their times, I will only content my self with these three verses of Baptista
Mantuan a Carmelite, who places her at the very entry into hell: Hic
pendebat adhuc, sexum mentita virilem
Foemina, cui triplici Phrygiam diademate mitram,
Extollebat apex, and pontificalis adulter.


And shall all this be rejected, by saying only that Martin said it? But let
us see what more Onuphrius, the Jesuits, and Baronius himself can say
concerning this point. Their maine argument is, That we can find no space
between Leo the fourth and Benedict the third, to place John the eight there.
And we answer, let them subtract from the next precedent Popes the time which
they have added to them over and above the account of Marianus Scotus, and
other ancient Chroniclers, and she will not want a place to stand in: For
Onuphrius gives to Sergi^s Marianus does: to Nicholas the first he gives nine
years, six months, twenty days, whom Marianus makes to sit but eight
year, nine days: to Adrian the second he gives four years and eleven
months, whereas Marianus affoordeth him only but two years. And so may
Onuphrius easily cast up his account, and we find the total of ours. So
likewise Hermannus Contractus, to leave no room for this Ione, casts three
years upon Sergius, and nine upon Leo the fourth: and so do the rest which
are alleged by Onuphrius.

Secondly they say, That unto the time of Pope Formosus, that is for the space
of nine hundred years complete, there was never any Pope chosen, who had
Constantine, brother to the Duke of Nepete, was chosen Pope in the year 767,
which was neither Priest, nor Deacon, nor Clerk, but took all his degrees in
a day, and was consecrated by the Bishops of Praeneste, Alba, and Port, and sat
one year and one month: since which time they cannot deny but that mere lay
men have been elected Popes. Thirdly, they come to scan the words of the
History of Martin: Anglicus, natione Moguntinus, an Englishman borne at Mence:
What greater absurdity says he? But the absurdity is their own, and not the
Authors, for English was her surname, not Anglicus, not Anglus. Neither did
any ever understand it otherwise, no not Fasciculus Temporum, where he writes
in this manner, Some men (says he) report, that they never make Popes of
Germans, which is false. Besides that, Polonus says, a Margantine or
Mangantine by nation, and by consequent no Englishman. Fourthly they say, That
Martin makes her a student of Athens, whereas at that time there was no
learning there, but barbarism, proving it by Synesius, who so reports of it
in his time. Synes. in postrema epist. ad fratrem.
We answer, that Synesius says not there was no learning there, but not so
much as he expected; and it was no small matter that could add to the learning
of Synesius: but it is apparent, that in Greece there Zonaras tells us, that
Michael Bardas the Emperor restored learning there: and therefore as learning
was not then in her heat at Athens, so was it not likewise clean extinguished.
And whereas they say, that at this time there were no Lectures of Divinity at
Rome (a goodly commendation for the Sea of the pretended Head of the Church)
we answer them, that this great scarcity bred her the greater admiration.
Fifthly, Martin says it was done as she went from Saint Peter's to the Latran;
and the Popes (say they) at that time dwelt not in the Vatican. But we ask,
whether then and a long time before S. Peter's Church was not built, that so the
Pope might go from the one to the other in procession? And then they say it is
strange, that in all those nine months no body should perceive it. We
answer, that there is nothing more common: but should they not rather admire
the judgment of God, in proclaiming their abomination by this mystery?
Sixthly, not being able to deny, that the Popes use to turn out of this way;
they allege a wrong cause of their so doing, saying, That if they went the
right way, the streets would be too narrow for the prease of people? We
answer, Platina affirms it in those words, De primo non abnuerim. For the
first, I will not deny it, and the effigies erected upon the place (as
Antonine reports) auerreth as much, which the Jesuits themselves cannot
deny: But willing to seem more understanding than he, they would feign
persuade us, that this is the pourtrait of a Priest going to say Mass, with
the Clerk at his heels. A man may well say, that this is Rasura in loco
suspecto: for what should such an Image make in that place? Seventhly, for the
close stool, they pass it over in a word, That this is an idle tale of the
people; others say by way of Allegory, that this is to show the new elected,
that God raises the poor out of the dung. Erigit e stercore pauperem.
Antiquit. de Fauchet. vol. 2.
But for the matter it Sancta Sanctorum, where the Conclaue was wont to be held
while the Popes dwelt there? And as for the cause, if it were such as they say,
why then is there a hole in it? And why should not we believe so many Authors?
And the verses of Johannes Pannonius, long before this controversy was risen,
do they not testify as much?

Non poterat quisquam reserantes aethera claues,
Non exploratis, sumere, testiculis:
Cur igitur nostro mos hic nunc tempore cessat,

Meaning that now Popes use before hand to try their manhood by their wenching
and begetting of bastards. Eighthly they say, That Zonaras, Nicetas, Cedrenus,
and others speak not of it. We answer, that these Authors lived long after,
and speak principally of the affairs of Greece, and but slightly of them
neither. And I would know, if in a matter of the Latin Church we should
allege a Greek Author, whether they would not presently call us to the
Histories of the Latins? And what wonder, if these idolatrous Monks, shaking
hands with the beastliness of the Roman Church, were willing to conceal this
shame? But Laonicus, a Greek Author, was not ignorant of this report, After
that the voices are gathered, and the Pope declared, they keep him that is
elected in the house (meaning where the Election is made) if the house be
otherwise fit for such a purpose: and then pronouncing him Pope, they make him
sit down in a bottomless chair, to the end that some one appointed for this
purpose may touch his priuities; whereby it may appear that he is a man: For
it is certain, that there was a woman made a Pope, by error of her sex,
because it is the fashion of the Italians to wear their beards shaven: and
this woman being begot with child, as she went in procession, was delivered in
Mas nobis dominus est, i. We have a male creature to our Lord and Master: and
so goes on with the other ceremonies observed in that election. Baronius in
the mean time is well helped up to send us to Remondus, who says, That all
this was added by his interpreter Clauserus, but without all authority or
other proof, save only that Viginer (who translated him into French) has
indeed left it all out, in favor of the Popes. But that they may not say that
Laonicus only of the Greeks reports it, Barlaamus in dialog. de principat.
Papae.
I can bring you another, Barlaamus, a Greek writer, in his Dialogue touching
the Onuphrius follows the chase, and Baronius comes to the rescue. And
first he objecteth, That Nicholas the first, which came shortly after this
time, would not (writing to Michael the Emperor) have said so boldly as he
does, Our predecessors of happy memory, Leo and Benedict, who had had a fit
occasion to run upon him in terms, if any such matter had been: So likewise
had Photius, Archbishop of Constantinople, and a mortal enemy to the Pope of
Rome. We say, that what answer the Emperor made him, we cannot tell for want
of his Epistle, and for ought we know he did not spare to tell the Pope of one
that was between those his two predecessors. And it is likely Nicholas made
unto his answer, that he had stung him, seeing that he reproacheth the
Emperor, for beginning his letters with injurious and opprobrious speeches,
against the mother of all other Churches, and excuses himself for not
answering to many points of his letter, containing blasphemy against the
holy See, written (says he) with the poison of a Serpent rather than with
ink, and that therefore he chose rather wisely to contemn them etc. And
therefore we may think, that in so long a letter, or rather a volume, such a
matter as this could not be forgotten: and who knows not, that Nicholas (whom
it concerned to suppress the memory of this infamy, and to raze it out of
all Registers) was no ways bound in his answer to name it any Stephen the
fourth might well have written, Our predecessors of happy memory, Stephen and
Paul, skipping over Constantine, who yet reigned a whole year and upward,
Baron. vol. 10. an. 868. art. 39.
because his Acts were all pronounced to be void, and his name razed out of the
Catalogue. And Baronius himself teaches us, That in the year 868 Adrian the
second, successor unto Nicholas the first, obtained of the Emperor Basilius,
successor unto Michael, that the book of Photius might be sent to Rome, in
which that Epistle of Michael was contained, and which was by a decree of the
Synod publicly burned, with all that which they had published against the Sea
of Rome, Baron. to. 10. an. 854. art. 9.
to blot out the memory thereof for ever. Again (says Baronius) it may be
that Marianus, who first mentioned Cyrillus, a mignion of the Emperor Michael,
whom he would oftentimes make to play the Patriarch in scorn of holiness and
holy things, insomuch that once he deceived the old Empress his mother; and
that what was done at Constantinople he reported as done at Rome, that of a
mignion he made a woman, and of this play of a Patriarch a shee-Pope. But how
should this poor Monk make so many metamorphoses? Who could tell him what
passed in Greece? And seeing this mockery of Michael was Curopolates, he might
there have found all these circumstances, and consequently could not so have
mistaken the one for the other; for Cyrillus master John, for a male a female.
And whereas it is said, Baron. to. 10. an. 853. art. 58. Leo. 9. epist. 1. c.
23.
That in the time of Marianus, Leo the ninth in an Epistle which he wrote unto
Michael Patriarch of Constantinople, reproacheth him, for that contrary to the
Nicene Canons they elected Eunuchs to their See, and that there was a report,
that they had also been cousened with a woman; to say nothing that the most
part of these Epistles are forged, what probability, that Marianus hearing
speech Cassius his law take place, and let us ask Cui bono: to what purpose to
feign such a tale of a woman, especially Monks, who wrote the Histories for
the most part of their own times, and to whose trust and keeping the report of
these things was committed; servants and creatures, as themselves confess, of
the Pope? What should they get by this report? Or rather what might they not
fear for reporting it? Could they hope, Onuphrius says, Luitprand. l. 6. c.
6. and 7.
That But he whose occupation is to be an Annalist, does he not remember, that
there are an hundred years between? And what probability to put John the
twelfth for John the eight? And does he think with this frivolous conjecture
to shake the foundation of so many proofs? And which is more, Luitprand whom
he alleges, among all his concubines names no Ione, but Raineria he does,
whom he made gouernesse of many Cities, and gave her many Crosses and
Chalices of S. Peter; and Stephania, who died in childbed of Anna a widow, and
another which was his niece. As for Ione, which Onuphrius names first, there
is no such named in Luitprand, but Onuphrius has foisted her name in, only to
give a color to his own inventions. And now let the indifferent Reader be
judge of this strife between us.

31. PROGRESSION.
The attempts of Pope Nicholas upon the Emperor Lewis, upon Lotharius king of
Lorraine, upon the Bishops of France; and the small reckoning he made of holy
Scripture.

An. 855.
YEt could not this shame make them let go their hold; but the worser their
game, the better face they set upon it. Benedict the third then succeeded this
Ione, and was inthroned without leave asking of the Emperor, and thinking it
enough, if he sent him word afterward thereof: Whence followed that schism
Anastasius, who was borne out by those of the greater sort and quality, and by
the Emperor Lewis, at the instance of his ambassadors: so that they were
forced to return to a new election, wherein Benedict, through the favor of
the people, Anastas. in Benedict. 3.
was again preferred in the election; and then followed, by the consent of the
Emperor and in the presence of his Lieutenants, his confirmation. Whereby it
evidently appears, That there was a mere nullitie in the first Act, for want
of his authority. This Benedict lived not long, and did but little: but so
soon as Lewis, sole Emperor now by the decease of Lotharius, and who had
nothing to take unto but only Italy, heard thereof, knowing how nearly it
concerned him, to maintain this prerogative, he removed presently to Rome, to
assist at the creation Nicholas the first, who, as the manner then was, had hid
himself, to make the world believe that he was elected against his will; and
was shortly after consecrated in the presence of the Emperor. This is he whom
they use to compare to Gregory the Great, who indeed at the first entrance
into his office made his hautie mind and itching humor sufficiently to
appear: For abusing either the devotion or the present necessities of the
Emperor, whose dominion was confined with the narrow bounds of a part of
Italy, and that ouerlaid with the invasion of the Sarasens, he was content to
let him take his horse by the bridle at two several times, Idem in vita
Nicolai 1.
and querrie-like to lead him above a bow shoot, as Anastasius himself
reports; Sigonius in a more glorious manner, Sigon. de Reg. Ital. li. 5.
says, That the Emperor taking his leave, kissed his holy foot, An. 860.
and so returned into Lombardie. In the year 890 John Archbishop of Rauenna
set his old Title on foot again, declaring, That he held naught from the Sea
of Rome: whereupon he fell presently into suspicion of Heresy; for greater
Heresy than this knew they none in those days. Anastas. in Nicol. 1. Sigon.
de Reg. Ital. li. 5.
Nicholas hereupon stirred up some of his inferior Bishops against him, who
also made other complaints of him, whereupon he was deprived of his
Bishopric. John in this extremity fled unto the Emperor, who mediated for
him to the Pope. The Pope called a Synod at Rome, to hear and to sentence his
cause in the presence of the Emperors Charles the Bauld his head. Neither did
the Pope stay here: It fell out, that Lotharius king of Lorraine falling in love
with a concubine of his, called Waldrada, whom he had of long time kept,
desired to be rid of his queen Thietberga, and to marie her; and Guntier
Archbishop of Collen, whether kinsman to Waldrada, as some report, or upon what
other respect I know not, assisted the king in this his purpose. Whereupon was a
Synod assembled at Metz, where the queen made her appearance, and witnesses
were produced to testify a filthy incest between her and her brother; and
she was thereupon separated from Lotharius, who shortly after, in another Synod
at Aix, presented a bill, showing the importance Waldrada, the cause of all
this quarrel. Hereupon the friends of Thietberga began to stir, among the
rest Hubert duke of Mantiou, Transturanorum Dux
an allie of Charles of France, and uncle, though no great friend, unto
Lotharius: these complained to Pope Nicholas, who hasted to be dealing with a
Prince that was faulty, finding himself to be backed by a puissant king of
France; and thereupon dispatched an embassage to Lotharius, cited Thietgard
Archbishop of Treuers, and Gontier of Collen, to appear at Rome, to answer the
separation which they had made of Thietberga from Lotharius; Annal. inceris
Authoris.
made them deliver up into his hands the whole process of the cause in
writing, by which they offered to show, That they Latrocinium and prostibulum.
This done in the year 866, he sent Arsenius his Legate unto Francford, An. 866.
to will Lotharius to abandon Waldrada, and to receive Thietberga to his bed
again: and in case of default, declares him, and all that followed him,
Excommunicat: in so much that Lotharius durst not stand against him. This was
the first act of Excommunication and Interdiction that ever the Popes exercised
upon our kings; animated thereunto partly by continual jarres in the lineage of
Charlemaigne, partly by their faults, Lotharius, D. 63. c. Relatum est, and 2.
qu. 1. c. Qua Lotharius, where he presumes, writing to the Bishops of Italy,
France, and Germany, to use these words (The King Lotharius, if he may be
rightly termed a King:) And in the Canons, Praecipue and Ita Corporis, 11. q.
3. 24. q. 3. An non districta, directed to his own person. Yet may we see,
that this Nicholas was moved to do what he did, in zeal of policy rather
than of religion; who at that very instant took into his protection at Rome,
Baldwin Earl of Flanders, which had ravished and carried away Judith daughter
to Charles king of France, writing to the king himself, Nicol. Epist. 30. and
32.
and to Hincmar Archbishop of Reimes, and to the Synod of Senlis, in his
behalf; until in the end he Lotharius the Emperor: and that a king must not
think much to remit a small debt to his fellow servant, who has peradventure
himself need that that Master of Masters should acquit him of ten thousand
talents. It so pleasing him to show his omnipotency in his ouer-rigorous
proceeding against the one, and his too great indulgencie toward the other. By
these defaults of our Kings and Princes, the Popes grew bold upon our Bishops,
admitting of all Appeals made from them; so that if any one had been legally
condemned by his Metropolitan in a Provincial Synod, if he Appealed to Rome,
and made his Metropolitan a party to the suit, he was sure Rothard Bishop of
Soissons, which Appealed from the sentence of Hincmar Archbishop of Reimes, 2.
q. 6. c. Arguta.
who would not give way to the Appeal: Whereupon Nicholas wrote unto him, That
he should not have been so unmindful of the privileges of the Apostolic
See, to whom the venerable Canons give power to judge of the censures of the
whole Church. Which Canons yet he could hardly have found, if he had been put
to seek them. With like presumption wrote he to the Archbishops and Bishops of
France, D. 19. c. si Romanor. De Consecr. D. 1. in Eccles. 17 q. 4. e. Nemini.
25. q. 2. si quis. 6. q. 5. c. Quod been.
That it belonged to his See to judge of the writings of Likewise to the
Clergy of Vienna, That a new Church could not be built without his special
leave and license had thereunto. And to all Bishops in general, That no man,
in regard of his Primacie, might offer to judge of him, or to retract a
sentence which he had given, under pain of excommunication. And in a letter
which he wrote to Charles the Bauld, king of France, he says, That what is once
well decreed, may not afterward be called into question; with this limitation,
unless it be in presence of a greater power: Innuendo, that this greater power
was his own. This is bad enough, but that which follows is more horrible:
Baron. vol. 10. an. 865. art. 13. and 14.
And Baronius himself deserves to be commended for a steadie countenance, in
not blushing when he reports it: Hincmar Archbishop of Reimes, and others;
who for their defense alleged, That they were not to be found in the Code of
the Canons: he is not ashamed to rank them with the Old and New Testaments,
making these to depend of the same authority with the Decretals, or rather
indeed to be subordinat to them. A matter worthy the Readers observation: For
what, says he, shall we stand any longer to dispute, whether it ought to be
done or no; meaning, whether no Decretals ought to be received, but such as
were in the Code of Canons: For by the same reason we should not receive the
Old and New Testament; for neither the one As if those Testaments took not
their authority from the holy Ghost, who inspired them; from the Son, who
used them against the false Doctors, and Satan himself; and from the Father,
who has so lively and so deeply imprinted his mark upon them. But if, says
he, they shall reply (for he makes them as honest men, and as learned in
Divinity as himself) That among the Canons there is one of Innocentius his
making, A nobis vtru^que; testame^tum iam esse recipiendu^.
by which it is ordained, That the two Testaments from this time forward ought
to be received, though in the first Canons neither of them be received, I
answer, says he, That if the Old and New Testaments are to be received, not
for that they are in the Code of Canons, but because Innocent has decreed that
they ought to be received, It therefore follows, First then I ask, Had the
Old and New Testament no authority in Christ's Church, but by virtue, and since
the date of that Decree of Innocent? Was the Church four hundred years, and
those the best, because the first, without knowledge of the Scriptures?
Secondly, Whether Leo Nicholas alleges, speaks not only, De Ecclesiasticis
ordinibus and Canonum disciplinis, i. Of Church discipline and policy. We see
then the small reckoning they made of holy Scripture, thereby to advance the
credit of their own Decretall Epistles. But no marvel, since he is not afraid
to attribute to himself the very name of God, and that in a certain Decret
canonized by Gratian: It is plain enough, says he, D. 96. ca. Satis euidenter
7.
that the Pope can neither be bound nor loossed by any secular authority, whom
it is evident, that the godly Prince Constantine called by the name of God;
seeing that it is a point without contradiction, That God cannot be bound. For
if the name of God be taken in both places in one and the same sense, i. for
the Everliving God, then he calls himself The true God; if otherwise, then
are Constantine, as all Historians report, spoke those words of all the Bishops
assembled at the Council of Nice: and by the same reason all they were not to
be judged by men, least of all by the Pope, who was not in that company, and
therefore had no part in that saying of his, but only as he was of their
Order. For Syluester was at Rome whiles the Fathers were at Nice. And yet
Nicholas his successor attributes those words to himself, in prejudice of,
and excluding all other Bishops, to whom it was spoken. Gloss. ib.
And the Gloss upon that Canon well observes, That after this reckoning a
Bishop could not judge his Clergy and we may say after him, That much less
then may a Pope judge the Bishops. For, says the Gloss, 11. q. 1. c.
Sacerdoti. Omnes Clericos
this saying of Constantine is to be understood of all Ecclesiastikes in
general; meaning in that sense in which Saint Gregory speaks, saying, That
all Priests in holy Scripture are called sometimes Gods, and sometimes Angels.
The words of the Canon Futuram, though falsely attributed to Miltiades; 12. q.
1. c. Futuram. Quorundam Clericorum.
are these, Constantine the Emperor Presiding over the Council of Nice,
seeing the complaints of certain Clerks brought unto him, said unto them, You
can be judged of none, because you are kept to be judged by God alone, seeing
you have bin called Gods: and so they destroy one the other. Thus much for the
Policy. As for the Doctrine, I have elsewhere declared, That this was that
Nicholas who most violently Caelibate, or Single life, among Churchmen,
threatening Anathema to those which withstand it: whereof ensued much trouble
in the Western Churches. But before we proceed any farther, we must first see,
whether he carried all these attempts without resistance, or no.

OPPOSITION.
And first as touching the Reduction of the Church of Rauenna to the obedience
of the Sea of Rome: That Heresy for which the Archbishop was accused, Author
Coaetaneus in Appendice Historica.
is at large set down by an Author of that time, in manner following: The
Emperor, says he, not to surcharge with taxes those which had been already
pilled and spoiled harm and him, Inaudito Principe.
and to forbid the Pope to meddle with him. And because the Pope Ordines
beneficiales.
commanding them to pay nothing to Rome, etc. seized of many of the Popes
lands in Campania to his own use, and of such as were about him, etc. and in a
word, by the advice of the Nobility of Rome, established in Rome one Arsenius
for their Bishop, a man of great sanctity, and much learning, Legate This was,
as you see, all that damnable Heresy which the Pope pretended, and this was
the order which the Emperor took in Rome it self. So that, says the
Historian, when the Emperor saw fit time he came to Rome, where he was
honorably received by great and small: the Archbishop of Rauenna came also
with him, not fearing the Popes threats; which struck yet a greater heat
between the Emperor and the Pope. For the Emperor taking up his lodging at
Saint Peter's Palace, and the Pope lying at the holy Apostles, when he saw that
whateuer he attempted against the Royal Dignity came to naught, he appointed
certain Monks and Nuns (these were their old prankes) of the Monasteries
Thus we see how little he got by his Excommunication bolted out against the
Archbishop of Rauenna. The Iniunction also which he laid upon him, to come once
in every two years to Rome, turned to his loss: for he saw indeed the
Archbishop at Rome oftener than he was willing, because he was ever borne out
and maintained by the Emperor. But above all it troubled the Popes conscience
to see so great an authority so near at hand, ouershadowing his own, as less
offensive when it was farther off: For, says the same Author, whose very this
Emperor, because he resided still in Italy, made himself always a near
neighbor to Rome, and exercised his authority to the full, being assisted by
the chief of the city: who knew themselves, and gave also the Emperor to
understand, the ancient customs of the Empire: persuading him to resume into
his own hands the Sovereignty and command which in alder times belonged to
the Emperors. Which no doubt he would have done, but for the reverence which
he bore to the holy Apostles (which reverence yet was such, as that it pleased
not the Popes:) For, says he, whiles these matters so passed, the Bishops of
Rome sent

As for his proceedings against Lotharius, we will not here enter into the
merits of the cause it self: but you shall see the letters which Gontier
Archbishop of Collen, and Thietgaud of Treuers, wrote to this Nicholas; wherein
they complain of his tyrannical behauiours: The Bishops our Fathers, and our
Brethren and fellow Bishops, sent us unto thee, and we of our own accord went
willingly to Rome, and presented thee with the Acts of the whole process,
requesting thee, as a good Father, to reform Paganorum.
and thou causedst us to be debarred the use of all things both holy and
humane. There, contrary to all law, contrary to the decrees and customs of
our ancestors, without calling any assembly of Ecclesiastikes, no Bishop, no
Archbishop there present, not so much as thy self discoursing upon our error,
either by way of argument, or by testimony of witness, or out of any What
could these men have said more, unless in plain terms they should have
called him Antichrist? seeing that they Showing himself as if he were God. But
for conclusion of all, they add yet farther: For these causes, say they, we
and our Colleagues set not by thy commands, we care not for thy words, we fear
not thy Bulls nor yet thy thunders: Thou damnest all men as impious, which obey
not thy Decrees, and forbiddest them to sacrifice. But we return thy sword
into thy own throat: thou which spittest in the face of our Lord Gods
commandment and decree, thou which breakest the unity and peace of our
Christian society, the very badge and cognizance of the Prince of Heaven.
After this they come to his pretended Primacie: The Holy Ghost, say they, is
the author of all Churches in every corner of the world: The City of our God,
of which we are free denizens, reaching to every point of heaven, This
Epistle, related by an Annalist of these days, in the same sense, though
somewhat different in words, with this conclusion in express terms, We care
not for thy sentence, as being a curse unadvisedly pronounced, we will not
communicate with thee, who do communicate with the excommunicate; suffices
it us to communicate with the whole Church, which thou despisest, Annal.
incerti Author. per Pet. Pythaeum in vulgus editi.
whilst thou exaltest thy self about it: Et elationis tumore (the very word
long before used by S. Gregory) and by thy swelling pride and insolency have
made thy self unworthy of her, and have distracted thy self from her
Communion etc. Si elatio permitteret.
if thy pride would give thee leave: They should have said, Thy pride, which is
inseperable from the person of him whom thou representest at this day in the
Church. And for the matter it self we may not omit, that this Nicholas in his
letter, which we have in the Decrete, says, That he took knowledge of this
cause of Lotharius (which gave occasion to all these stirs) as an arbitrator,
by consent of parties, and consequently not as a judge founded in right of law
or nature. And Lotharius himself in his letters to Pope Adrian, who succeeded
Nicholas, says, That he committed this cause to him Ad tempus and in part,
and therefore not to use his absolute authority herein, but

As for the attempts which Pope Nicholas made upon our Bishops, in restoring so
far as he could Rothard Bishop of Soissons, deposed before by his
Metropolitanes, in the presence and with the assent of his fellow Bishops;
Hincmar Archbishop of Rheimes tells him his own, Ep. Hincmari Archiepiscopi
Rhemen. ad Nicolaum, apud Flodoardum.
Whereas (says he) your Benignity has willed me to assemble the whole
company of our brethren, and there, according to the tenor of your letters, to
reintegrate Rothard Bishop of Soissons in his former place: your Paternitie
must know that I could not so do for many sundry reasons, namely, because he
cannot be replaced but by the consent of those by whom he was deposed, of
which, a great part say they will not meddle with his restitution, because they
find not in him either meaning since he had felt the support, and tasted the
air of Rome. And whereas Nicholas alleged to him the Canon of Sardica, he
remonstrated unto him, That by virtue of that very Canon the Bishop of the
first See ought not to restore a Bishop of another Province deposed, if he came
unto him to have his cause reuiewed; but that he should send him back again
to his own Province, to have his cause reuiewed there, if the cause so
required, for Rothard, the censures of Bishops would be vilified and contemned
both by the Clergy and by the people, who already begin to speak hardly of
the Popes authority: and in a word, that he could not do this thing without
wrong not only to the privilege of Metropolitanes, but also of all
Ecclesiastical constitutions.

Vldaric Bishop of Ausbourg, with charge to put it in execution (not to
rehearse what he said of the question it self, which we have elsewhere set
down more at large) he tells him in plain terms, That he was deuoid of
reason, unjust, and insupportable: That hardly could the members of the body
continue sound, seeing the Head was so ill affected, so far estranged from
true discretion, contrary to the Evangelical Institution, contrary to the
foretelling of the holy Spirit, to the examples of many holy men, and the
common advise of the wiser sort, exhorting him to remove this Pharisaicall,
from the flock of Christ: and the very style it self of this Epistle is a
sufficient warrant against all forgerie, to those who know what belongs to it.

This Pope Nicholas went yet farther: for Michael Bardas, uncle to the Emperor
Michael, succeeding in the Empire, had divorced his wife, and was married to
his daughter in law: Ignatius Patriarch of Constantinople cut him off for this
sin from the union of the Church. Bardas offended herewith, assembled a
Synod, deposed Ignatius, and put one Photius in his place: whereupon arose a
mutiny in Constantinople, some holding for Photius, others for Ignatius. The
Emperor, to stint this strife, requested the Pope to send his Legates thither,
who Rodoald Bishop of Port, and Zachary of Anagnia, giving them instructions
withal, to set up Images again, and above all to get in, if they could, his
old patrimony of Sicile and Calabria. These Legates, contrary to his
imagination (won as it should seem by the Emperor) ratified the deposition
of Ignatius, and installation of Photius. Nicholas frustrate of his desire
(which was upon this occasion to oblige Ignatius to himself) disauowed his
Legates, and for exceeding the bounds of their commission degraded them. Now in
the declaration of this matter we are especially to observe the answer which
he made unto the Emperor, who in his letters to him had sufficiently made
known unto him, That he desired not his help as to judge of a cause already
sentenced, but only Nicholas his answers easily perceive, that Bardas spoke
mainely against his Primacie, because he is so earnest in the defense thereof:
For (says he) if they which sit in Moses chair ought to be heard, Nicol. ep.
ad Michael. Imperator. to. 2. Concilior.
how much more they who sit in the chair of S. Peter: and will not see that a
man may deny him the ground on which his argument is founded. And again he
tells him, That never any Bishop of Constantinople was deposed without the
consent of the Pope. How hard a matter had it been for him to have proved this
assertion? For what If a Clergy man has a controversy, either against his
own Bishop, or against any other, let the cause be heard in a Provincial
Synod: if a Bishop or a Clerk complain against a Metropolitan of the same
Province, let him repair to the Primat of the Dioces, or to the Sea of
Constantinople. Who would have thought that the Pope had had such Logic in
store, to What could the Synod (says he) mean by the Primat of the Dioces,
but the Vicar of the chief Apostle? Now the Canon which he means is the
ninth Canon of this Council, where it is said, Diocesis (...), Exarchum adeat,
Let him go to the Exarch of the Dioces, not the Primate: where Balsamon
teaches us, That (...) or a Dioces contained more Provinces than one, and
consequently the Exarch had more than one Metropolitan under him, but that this
power of the Exarchs is now no longer used in the Church, and therefore from
the Metropolitan the plaintiff was to go directly to the Sea of
Constantinople. But Nicholas adds farther, Whereas (says he) it is said, the
Primat of the Dioces in the singular What presumption is this to think, that
the world will hold it self well apaied with such copper coin? But with like
impudency does he allege the sixth Canon of the Nicene Council, and the
decrees of his own predecessors for the Primacie of his See; witnesses, as a
man would say, taken out of his own bosom, and brought to testify in his
own cause, such as were Boniface, Gelasius, and the rest. The only thing
which he alleges as pertinent and proper to debar the Emperor from
intermedling in Church matters, is this which follows, Before the coming of
Christ (says he) there were such as was Melchisedech, who, had he foreseen
the usurpations of his successors in possessing the seat of the Empire in
Italy, and making themselves to be called and taken for no less than Kings of
Kings and Lords of Lords, he would no doubt have forborne this clause: for what
follows thereof, but that in this point they are like Satan, D. 96. C. Cum
ad verum.
who by a tyrannical inspiration would take unto themselves both the one and
the other, as Gratian himself expresses in his Decrete.

32. PROGRESSION.
How Pope Nicholas flattered and justified Basilius in the murder of the
Emperor Michael, by his favor to increase his own authority in the East.

NIcholas having sent away this goodly dispatch to Michael by his Legates,
Donate Bishop of Ostia, Stephen Bishop of Nepete, and Marinus a simple Deacon,
died; and his Legates arrived at Constantinople at the instant, when Basilius,
whom Michael had associated in the Empire, had traitorously murdered him, to
An. 866.
that Nicholas also departed this life, about the end of the year 866, or as
other say in the year 867. After Nicholas succeeded Adrian the second, elected
by the Clergy and people, without once calling the Emperors Lieutenants to
the election, though then present in the City: And when the Lieutenants
complained thereof, answer was made, That it was done in no contempt of the
Emperor, but only to shun an inconvenience hereafter, in attending and
expecting Sigonius says, Sigon. de Reg. Jtal. lib. 5.
For fear least that by staying for the Kings ambassadors for the choice of a
Pope, there might some new right accrue unto the King. Anastasius says it was
to provide for time to come, Anastas. in Nico. 1.
least that by this means they should grow to a custom of staying for the
ambassadors: which yet the Emperor, troubled at that present, what with the
Sarasens abroad, what with secret practices at home, was feign to swallow.
Mean while it came to pass, that Basilius offered himself to receive the
holy Communion, but was put back by the Patriarch Photius, who declared unto
him, that having killed a man, and him an Emperor, with his own hand, he had
made himself unworthy so much as to come into the Church. Basilius to be
revenged of this affront, resolved Nicholas to be present at it. The
ambassadors finding Nicholas dead, and Adrian in his room, delivered their
message unto him, who knew well how to make his profit both of this murder, and
of the rage and choler of Basilius (as Boniface the third, one of his
predecessors, had done before him, in the case of Phocas) it being natural to
all things to receive their increase in the same manner as they had their
beginning: and therefore he continued those Legates before named, which Nicholas
had sent. The particular clauses of Adrians letter to Basilius are worth the
noting, He (says Adrian) which holds in his hand the power and authority of
Kingdoms, has from heaven set up thy Empire at this time in earth, by which
the Apostolic See might come and so goes on, justifying his proceedings
against the Patriarch Photius, who for his murder had barred the Emperor from
the communion of the Church: all which tended only to procure a Synod to be
called by the means of the Emperor, wherein his Legates, as he said, should
preside, Missi sui.
which to that day they never could get to do in any General Council. And
this is that Council which they called the eight General Council, wherein
Photius was deposed, and Ignatius restored. And with what violence these things
were carried, it may appear by the very preface, wherein the Patriarch
Photius is termed Lucifer, Nicholas another Elias. But the carriage of this
Council is worth the observation, being such as it is described by Anastasius
Bibliothecarius, Anastas. in Adrian. 2.
one of the ambassadors, which was this: Pope Adrian had given instructions to
his ambassadors, taken from Nicholas the first, wherein was contained, what he
would have believed and decreed concerning the primacie of the Bishop of Rome,
and the adoration of Images; with strict charge to admit none to the Council,
who had not first set his hand to Articles drawn to these two effects; which
was so exactly put in execution, that whosoever would not set to his hand, was
repelled from the Synod: and so was it no hard matter to carry a cause, where
there was no adverse part to contradict him. And it is scarce credible, what
absurdities That none might write or speak against the Pope of Rome, Council.
universe. 8. sub ^asil. Can. 21.
under pain of Anathema: That if any General Council should assemble, and
question should there happen to arise concerning the Church of Rome, the Church
her self should be reverently consulted thereupon: That they should receive
her answer, and do accordingly, without passing any bold sentence or decree,
in prejudice of the sovereign Pontifes of old Rome: and this is the 21 Canon.
And further note, that this is the first General Council wherein the Popes
Legates presided: which they mention almost in every line, so great need had
this wretched Emperor to seek their Charlemaigne, they ever cherished those
Bishops, who were most engaged in them; namely the Archbishop of Bourges, upon
the controversy which he had with Hincmar, and which was debated in the Synod
at Troies in Champaine, alluring him by the profer of a Pall; and Actard,
though not yet provided of any Bishopric: to make them sure on his side
against Hincmar, the defendor of the Liberties of the French Churches, whom
himself in his letters commends for his sanctity of life, The renown of
thy sanctity (says is never without commendation: and again, Persuade your
self (says he) that we bear as great love unto you, as if we had conferred
together a thousand times etc. and yet ceased not to persecute him with all
extremity and violence.

OPPOSITION.
But to return to this, falsely so called, the eight General Council;
notwithstanding that Basilius were very desirous to oblige Adrian to him, yet
would he not forgo his right in calling the Council: for in the Preface
thereunto he uses these words, To. 4. part. 11. editio. Venet. apud Binnium,
part. 2. to. 3. page 886, 892, 900.
The divine bounty (says he) having committed unto us the stern of the
universal ship (meaning thereby the Church) we have special care above all
other Neither was this any controuersed point between them: for the Bishops
themselves there assembled in the sixth Action say, That the Emperor crowned of
God has called this holy General Council. And in the seventh, He has used
all diligence (say they) to summon thither the Legates of the other
Patriarcha^s, and has so far prevailed as to make it a General Council.
And Pope Stephen himself in his letter to Basilius, Wherein (says he) has
the Church of Rome offended? Has not she, according to the ancient custom of
the Synods of Constantinople, Te imperante.
at thy command sent thither her Legates? And thus much for the calling of it.
As for the manner of proceeding, Anastasius tells us, That the Bishops having
committed that gross fault, in setting Basilius, who stood wholly for the
Church of Rome. But the mischief was, that the Popes Legates forecasting this
inconvenience, had gotten into their hands the papers of the most principal
among the Bishops, wherein they used the helping hand of one Sypon the
archminister, and of Anastasius himself. And hence it is, that the Grecians no
ways hold Jouerius in v^litati. de octa. Synodo.
and therefore they call the Council of Florence, held five hundred years
after, the eight universal Council, and that other a Provincial only, and
called, not upon any question of faith, but only to bring in the authority
of the Pope for the deposing of Photius in favor of the Emperor. And our
Aimonius speaking of this Council, according to the judgment, no doubt, which
men had of it in France in those days, speaks in this wise, Having (says
he) assembled a Council, which they that were at it called the eight
universal Council, Aimoni. Monachus, l. 4. c. 28.
besides some thing which they there decreed in favor of the Pope, in regard
that he had concurred with them in the adoration of Images: some things also
did they ordain contrary to the ancient Canons, and some things contrary to
their own Synod, as he shall easily perceive that will but take the pains to
read this Council: yet was he a Monk that spoke these words. Baron. vol. 10.
an. 869. art. 59, 62, 63.
And shall Baronius be admitted to say, that this was one of those old doting
Frenchmen, which could not away with Images? yet can none of all these things
be found now in the Bartholmew Caranza, a Iacobin, says, That he found the
Latin copies of this Council so false, that he knew not which to choose, and
that he could not find any Greek copy to correct them by: so that the case
thus standing, they may put any thing upon us. Baronius to prove unto us that
this is one of the General Councels, tells us, That the Popes were wont at
their election to take an oath for the observance of the General Councels,
amongst which this is reckoned the eight in order. But who sees not that they
did so for their own proper interest? and yet can he not pardon the Cardinal
Julian, who presided in the Council of Florence, as Legate to the Pope, for
that upon the reasons used by Marc Bishop of Ephesus, he consented to have this
Council I will free you (says he, speaking to the Greek Bishops) of this
fear, there shall no one word of this Council be recited etc. And again, We
care not for this Council: whereas, says Baronius, to go from this Council
were to cast away both sword and buckler of the Church of Rome. In which
Council yet there were but 101 Bishops, and all corrupted by Adrian and
Basilius.

Now in stead of repressing the impiety of this Emperor, they made good use
of it; for, to make it yet more evidently to appear, that they aimed at no
other mark but only at the greatness of the Clergy: in the 14 Canon it is
thus ordained, That Bishops should not go forth to meet Princes, and that when
they happened to meet with them, they should not alight from their Mules or
Horses: That Princes and Emperors And the 17 Canon forbids Princes and
Emperors to be present at Synods, unless it be at general Councels. And the
22 disableth them and all Lays whomsoever to be present at the election or
promotion of any Patriarch, Metropolitan, or Bishop, under pain of
excommunication: whereby no doubt the Popes Legates thought they had shut the
Emperors of the West clean out of their Conclaues, using one Emperor as a
rod always to scourge the other. As for the point of Appeals to Rome, they
could not effect it: for the 26 Canon is plain, That who so finds himself a
quo litibus finis imponatur, who shall make a full end of the controversy: and
therefore meant not to run to Rome, as Nicholas would have had them. And it was
even at the instant when the Articles were offered them to subscribe, that they
made their protestation against them.

In this Synod there appeared yet another notable ambition of the Popes: for
the Bulgarians being formerly Painims, received Christianity in the time of
Nicholas, who sent them Bishops for their instruction. Michael their Prince
sent his ambassadors to the Synod, who coming before them, That we may not
(say they) seem to err in our own opinions, we desire to be informed by you,
which supply the The Popes Legates replied presently, That they ought to belong
to the Roman Church. The Bulgarians requested, That the matter might be
resolved and agreed upon with the Legates of other Patriarchs there present.
The Romanists replied, That there was no more to be done with them: and
therefore, without ever putting it to the Synod, pronounced absolutely, That
they must belong to Rome. The Eastern Bishops put this question to the
Bulgarians, When you first took the country, said they, from whom took ye
it? and the Priests which you found there, were they Greeks or Latins? They
answered, That they took the country from the Grecians, and that they found
there none but Greek Bishops. Whereuppn the Eastern Bishops inferred, That
the Church of Rome held not that Council for a competent Judge of her
controversies, who was her self, by special prerogative, to judge of all
other Churches: That, decree they what And so the holy Ghost, who was to
Preside in the Council, Resided only in their persons. And they farther
adjured the Patriarch Ignatius, by the authority of the Apostles and of
Adrian, who had restored him to his See, not to suffer Bulgaria to be taken
from them. Who made them a doubtful answer, telling them. That he was neither
so young as to be lightly deceived, neither yet so very a dotard, as to do
that himself which he found fault withal in others. And there rested this
contestation between them, being questionless a great scandal to the
consciences of these poor conuerts, Athanasius; and had peradventure lost
their lives, but that some of their company escaping, the Sclauons feared the
matter might come to light, and they one day receive the like measure. The
issue of all was, That do Adrian what he could, the Bulgarians put out the
Latin Priests, and Adrians enterprises in the East.

33. PROGRESSION.
Of the attempts of Pope Adrian both upon the Clergy, and also upon the kings
of France.

LEt us now see whether he sped any better in the West. Hincmar Bishop of Laon,
nephew unto Hincmar Archbishop of Reimes, the most learned Bishop of France,
had surrendered certain Church goods into the hands of Charles the Bauld, to
bestow them upon a certain Norman captain, Aimon. li. 5. c. 24
from whom he would Hincmar excommunicated him: for which, in a Synod held at
Vernons, he was reproved, and sharply censured: he thereupon appealed to Rome,
but they refused to grant him any letters dimissorie; yet he continued still in
his stubbornness, until at length there was assembled another Council at
Attigni, consisting often Provinces, where he was again condemned; and
thereupon promised to submit himself to the good pleasure of the king, and of
Hincmar his Metropolitan and uncle: and yet under hand signified the matter
unto the Pope, procuring him to euocate the whole cause to Rome, and himself
to be served with Process Adrian. Whereupon Adrian wrote unto king Charles, who
yet would not license the other to go to Rome: and then did Adrian write him
that bloody letter, calling him Tyran, perjured, perfidious, and a spoyler of
the Church goods: and what not? And for conclusion, as well to him as to
Hincmar the Metropolitan, We, says he, by authority Apostolic will and
command, That thou cause Hincmar of Laon, and his accusers, to come before our
Clemency, to the end that we may pronounce our sentence of his cause. And we
shall see anon how well he was obeyed. But not long after he made a far more
violent attempt upon him. The Emperor Lewis having, as we have already said,
quietly swallowed the election of Adrian, made without calling his Lieutenants
Lotharius king of Lorraine died, and Charles king of France, and Lewis of
Germany, both uncles to the deceased, intending to succeed in his inheritance,
Adrian set up Lewis of Italy, Emperor; thundering more violently than ever
had done his predecessor, wrote to all Kings, Barons, and Prelates of France,
namely, to Hincmar of Reimes, That none should presume to invade or take unto
him the kingdom of Lotharius deceased, nor yet his subjects and vassals,
because, says he, it appertains to the Emperor Lewis, his spiritual son,
by right of inheritance, and ought to fall unto him by the others decease. And
if any officer shall presume the contrary, he declares him Anathema, no
longer Yet Charles hearing of the death of Lotharius, removed into Lorraine,
and being received by the Barons and Prelates there, as their lawful king, was
crowned at Metz, by Hincmar Archbishop of Reimes: So that Adrian pursuing his
point, charged him by his Legates, under pain of excommunication to forbear;
and Hincmar to pronounce the censures of the Church against him, and to separat
himself from him, and not to say so much as Good morrow to him. And this was a
great way gone in a little time. But let us see what answer our French

OPPOSITION.
Hincmar. Epist. ad Adria. Extant etiam apud Baron. an. 861. art. 93. and
sequent. to. 10.
Hincmar therefore, Archbishop of Reimes, answered him, That as touching
Hincmar of Laon, He had no power, without express order from the king, to send
him, or any other Bishop of his diocese, to Rome, or to any other place, much
less the Bishops of other Provinces: and that himself, without leave from the
king, might not offer to set foot out of the realm. The kings answer, though
it be long, as taking up, after his own account, four leaves of paper, and
therefore not fit to be inserted into this discourse, yet shall it not be
amiss to allege the chief points, and principal causes We read, says he,
in the book of Paralipomenon, That the children of Israel went forth to
battle with a quiet mind, because they were not to fight in malice or envy
for revenge, but with a desire, and in hope of peace. And we let you to know,
you which by letters your (little befitting the authority of a king, much
less the humble modesty of a Bishop) have disgraced us by reproaches, that you
make us write unto you otherwise than we would; to the end that you may
perceive that we are a man, though subject to men's passions, yet one that
walks in the Image of God, not void of common sense, raised to this kingly
throne by the grace of God, and by right of succession to our father and
grandfather: and which is more than this, a Christian, a Catholic, an obseruer
of the Orthodox and true religion, brought up from our cradle as well in
knowledge of Quicquid calcaueris, Rosa fiat, Whereuer you tread red Roses grow?
Or may we not rather say with the Prophet, Woe be to them which call that sweet
which is bitter, etc. Or if we should hold our peace and wink at this, should
we not confess our Argue, obsecra, increpa, Argue, beseech, reprove, in all
patience and doctrine. And saint Augustine says, That the Apostle would not
that one man should condemn another upon suspicion, neither yet should run to
extraordinary proofs, but rather after the law of God, and order of the
Church, either confessing of himself, or convicted by his accuser* And
afterward coming to the matter concerning Hincmar of Laon, You write, says
he, unto us in says he, as we have already written unto you, That we Kings of
France, and of royal offspring, Non Vicedomini, sed terrae domini.
are not to be reckoned as Vidames and Vicegerents of Bishops, but Lords of the
Earth. And so goes he on to prove by the testimonies of holy Scriptures, out
of the mouth of our Savior and his Apostles, and by the sayings of Augustine,
Leo, and of the Synod of Rome it self, what is due from all men, and from
Bishops themselves, to the royal dignity. And, says he, if you search your
offices, you shall find, that our ancestors never (to wit, that he was deposed
contrary to the Canons) we entreat you, that of your own accord, in reverence
of the Church and regard of equity, you would be pleased to grant our request.
Neither used he any other style when he wrote to the Ex^rch (who yet was
inferior to our rank) in the cause of Blondus Bishop of Ortona, whom the
Ex^rch held prisoner at Rauenna: We cannot believe, says he, that your
Excellency holds him there, without some probable cause: and therefore it is
fit his cause should be heard in a Synod, to see whether his fault be such as
may deserve deprivation, to the end we may put another in place. Thus spoke he
of Bishops not yet deposed for their crimes, and therefore judge, Vt eum nostra
fretum potentia Roman mittamus, That by our power we should send him to Rome.
Saint Augustine says unto Ianuarius, All these things which are not contained
in the holy Scriptures, nor ordained in the Councels of Bishops, nor confirmed
by general custom, I think fit they should be taken away. Where then did
your Scribe find this law, which neither the Lord has written with his own
finger, nor inspired to be written, which he never ordained in the hand of a
Mediator, which no Painim ever commanded, no Christian ever proposed, nor any
Churchman has decreed; by which he commands me to be a favorer of a man
condemned, and excommunicated by the Church; Me, I say, says he, we hold us to
that: for the Lord tells us by his Prophet, That the lips of the Priest shall
preserve knowledge, and men shall seek the law at his mouth. And therefore you
may not suffer any man in your name to write that to us which is not contained
either in the holy Scriptures indicted by the wisdom of God, or at least in
the holy Canons published by his spirit. For the Prophet says to the Priest
which commands, Thou shall declare to them that which thou have heard of me:
Of me, says he, not of thy self: and they are blamed who speak of their own
mind; because he that speaks of himself, Vbicunque; as no place it excepted,
so likewise is no Bishop which judges according to the equity of Saint Peter:
As on the contrary no Bishop is commended which judges contrary to the same,
He should have said, no not the Bishops themselves Hincmar should come a
competent accuser, to have the whole cause reuiewed in his presence, Although,
says he, this be grounded upon no reason, yet if you think Hincmar to be
lawless, and if your Emperor my nephew will be content, that I shall pass
through Italy to Rome, I will not fail to be there, so soon as by the grace
of God I shall be able to set my realm in some good order against the Painims.
And because my self accused him in open Synod, I will be there in person, a
competent accuser against him in many causes: and we will bring so many and so
great accusers of all sorts with us, that we will very sufficiently prove, that
he was lawfully and orderly accused and convicted. To conclude, because you
have ouershot your self in what is already past, we now entreat you for the
honor of God, (all which treat of the ordering which we would not insert into
these our letters, till we might see whether we may bend you to mitigat the
rigor of your commands: For look what is sent unto us in the name of the Sea
Apostolic, according to the holy Scriptures, and the preachings of our
ancestors, and the Decrees of the Orthodox Fathers, we know we ought to
follow: But what ever comes besides, come it from whom it will, we know how
to reject and to control it. Last of all, if in this answer there be any thing
misbeseeming me or you, you have forced me thereunto. Such were the letters
which passed between king Charles the Bauld, and Adrian the second, though he
had given him not long before some hope to make him Emperor, though any other
would give him bushels of gold: Baron. vol. 10. an. 871. art. 79.
offering him indeed an Charles was he which, a few years before, An. 853.
first made a breach upon the liberties of the French Synods, when about the
year 853, having held a Synod at Soissons, two or three years after he sent
the Acts thereof to Benedict the third, thinking only to gratify him, and
never considering unto what consequence his successors might draw the same. Our
French Bishops wrote much after the same manner, and upon the same argument, unto
Adrian, being assembled in Synod at Dousy: wherein they call him Primae Sedis
Papam; complaining, That they were utterly mistaken, and casting the fault upon
his multitude of other businesses, that he had not more maturely considered of
their Acts, which were

As for the Excommunication which Adrian thundered out against this Charles, we
could wish we had his own Epistle in answer to it; but Hincmars the Archbishop
of Reimes we have, who received command from the Pope to pronounce it, and we
will here produce the principal clauses thereof. And first of all, having
complained of many grievous reproves and menaces received, he declares unto
him, That he had imparted the tenor of his letters to the great ones and
Prelates of the kingdom; and which was more, had caused them to be openly read
in an assembly of Bishops of France and Lorraine, and had showed Lewis king of
Germany the above mentioned letter, wherein he was commanded by Adrian,
Lotharius deceased: I understand, says he, Qui de regno eius estis.
that like letters have been sent to the glorious king Lewis, and to the great
ones and Bishops of his kingdom, which you, who are his natural borne
subject, should best know. But coming afterward to the matter, he lets him
to understand, That he is informed by diverse, that the two kings had agreed to
divide this kingdom equally between them; without which the people had long
ere this been up in arms: That therefore he knows not what to do, seeing
he must either disobey his command, or disallow of the treaty and accord made
between the two kings. That whereas he says, That no man better than himself
knows the great wrong which Charles does herein, Charles confesses no such
matter of himself, neither stands he legally or canonically convict thereof:
But rather protests, and many there are which bear him witness, That this
part of the kingdom of Lorraine, was by the consent and assent as well of the
Bishops as of the great ones of the Empire, given him by his father Lewis, and
confirmed to him by oath by his brother Lotharius. That therefore he takes
that Canon of the Council of Afrike to be spoken to him as well as to all
other Bishops: whereby men are forbidden to lay a crime to a man's charge, which
he is not able to euict by proofs: because as S. Augustine, who was there
present, says, Many things are true, which That he has no power to put any
man from the Communion for a crime, neither confessed by the defendant nor
proved by the informer: That otherwise they should make themselves both judges
and accusers, which were not lawful; alleging for his authority the rule of
the Apostle, and the practice of the Church, with sundry places out of
Augustine, Gelasius, Boniface, and others. And whereas he is charged by him as a
partaker or rather author of this unjust invasion, because he held his peace,
and stirred not as he was commanded, his answer is, That Adrian should
remember that it was written, The cause which I understood not, I searched out
with diligence: and that Gregory says, That God, to whose eyes all things are
open, yet in the very case of Descendum and videbo.
I will go down and see, to teach us to be well informed before we believe a
fault. And whereas he commands him to separate himself from Charles, and
not to bid him so much as Good morrow, whereas yet he desires to be received
to the Communion of Adrian, that this touches him to the heart: and that many
men of great sort, both secular and Clergy, now met at Rheimes, having heard
this command, say, that the like was never heard of to be sent from Rome,
though in their days there had been wars before this time, not only
between confederat Kings, but also between the brothers, and between the
father and the sons: That for his own part he must needs think, that this
displeasure is befallen him for his other sins, seeing it fares better with
some others, Charles into the kingdom of Lorraine: That for the rest, the
Parliament of that kingdom says, That Popes and Bishops excommunications are
no titles to claim kingdoms by: That the Scripture teaches, that this right
belongs unto God, by whom Kings reign, and who gives them to whom it
pleases him: That the Pope cannot be King and Bishop all at once: That
therefore he should do well to leave the disposing of state matters unto them,
and not command them to take a king from a far off, who cannot be at hand to
help upon all occasion against the Painims; this being a yoke which the Popes
never before laid upon the necks of their ancestors, and such as themselves
could not bear, seeing they were commanded in holy Scripture, And (says he)
many such like inconveniences they show Thus it pleased this great Prelat to
let the Pope understand his mind, as in the words, and under the name of the
Great ones; which he could not handsomely do in his own. Last of all
concerning himself, That being in the kingdom of Charles, and in the chief
Augustine expounding that place of the Apostle, says, That the Apostle
teaches, that every soul must be subject to the higher power, and that we
must give to every one that which belongs to him, tribute to whom tribute,
custom to whom This letter thus written, with the advice and counsel of all
the Bishops assembled at Reimes, was sent to Adrian, who died the year
following 872, and so the quarrel ended.

34. PROGRESSION.
How the Pope conferred the Empire upon Charles the Bald: and of the donation
of Constantine.

AFter Adrian the second, according to Platina his account, succeeded John the
John the eight) in the year 873, and in the year 875 died the Emperor Lewis
without issue: An. 873.
wherefore Charles of France and Lewis of Germany began to stir, and Italy
her self was not quiet, one calling Charles the Bald of France, and others
Charles the Gross, son to King Lewis; Sigon. de Reg. Jtal. lib. 5.
and some there were who feign would have established the Empire in Italy; and
these were the Earls of Tusculana, who at that time struck a great stroke in
Rome. He of France was first in a readiness, Aimoni. li. 5. c. 32. and 33.
who ever since the days of Nicholas the first had entertained secret
intelligences in Italy: he therefore sent ambassadors to John, with great
presents and greater promises, assuring him, That upon condition he will set
the Crown of the Empire John who could better brook a foreiner than a
neighbor, and a stranger than a domestike Emperor, who peradventure would have
dimmed his light by a greater luster, bid him come and welcome, and at his
coming to Rome received and crowned him Emperor. From that day forward (says
Sigonius) the title of the Empire began to be a mere feoffment of the Popes,
Sincerum Pontificis beneficium.
and the years of the Empire to be reckoned from the day wherein they received
their consecration from the Popes. But a certain Author of that time adds
farther, That Charles of France coming to Rome renewed his covenants with the
Romans, Eutropij Continuator.
gave up into their hands the rights and customs of the kingdom, with the
revenues of many (says he) he accorded what ever they demanded, as commonly
men use to be liberal of what they have ill gotten, or fear they shall not
long keep. That which made Charles the more pliant to the Pope, was, that
Lewis of Germany invaded him in his own person in France, and sent his son
Charles the Gross to cross his designs in Italy. But (says that Author)
this is certain, that from that day no King Here the Historians and Sigonius
himself observes, that whatsoever the Emperors, predecessors of Charles,
gave unto the Pope, yet they ever reserved to themselves the Propriety,
Soueraignetie, and Lordship, even over the Exarchat and Duchy of Rome it
self: which rule began now to fail in Charles, though his successors
sometimes redemanded their ancient prerogatives and rights: also that until
this time the Empire ever passed as hereditarie from the father to the son,
and the suruiuor ever seized of the Empire by the death of the deceased. So
Charlemaigne succeeded Pepin, so after Charlemaigne succeeded Lewis, after
Lewis, Lotharius, and after him Lewis the second. So also unto this time their
crowning and sacring by the Archbishops of Milan for the kingdom of Lumbardie,
and the Bishops of Rome for the Empire, served only for pomp and solemnity.
But this Pope John took advantage of the present necessity of Charles, and
performed this ceremony in far different terms, as well in a Synod at
Rome, as afterward at Paris: where having commended Charles the Bald, and
spoken as much honor of him as Adrian the second had villainy and wrong; and
told the people, that this was formerly revealed from heaven to Nicholas the
first, trencheth smooth, And for this cause (says he) have we in the presence,
and by the suffrage of all our brethren and fellow Bishops, and of all the
Senate and people of and at his unction abused the words which the Prophet had
once used upon our Savior Christ, We anoint him (says he) with oil without,
to signify thereby the virtue and force of the inward unction of the holy
spirit, with which the Lord God has anointed this his Christ above his
fellows, in imitation of the true King Christ our Lord, so that what he has
by nature, this purchases by grace. It came to pass that Charles was no
sooner returned into France, but presently the Earls of Tusculana, chief of
whom was Marquess Albert, confederated themselves against this John, assisted
by Formosus Bishop of Port, and others: So that the year following 877 he
Charles to the Empire. But the mischief was, that passing the Alps he fell
sick of a fever, for which he took a certain powder of Sedechias a Jew, his
physician, whereof he died. It is worth the remembrance which Rhegino reports
of this John. Rhegino in Chron.
Adalgisus had kept the Emperor Lewis the second prisoner at Beneuento, whence
he could not get free, but under deep oaths. This Lewis (says he) came to
Rome, and there calling an assembly in the Yet remained there a scruple in the
Emperors conscience, by reason of his oath: John undertook to remove it, and
his successors since that time have often followed his example. Pope John
(says he) by the authority of God and of S. Peter, absolved the Emperor from
the oath with which he stood obliged, assuring him, that what ever he did or
said to save his life, needed not to trouble him, and that it might not be
called an oath which he took, though with never (O how should the very
Heathen have made him blush in the like case!) By these and the like
remonstrances (says he) the Emperor was encouraged to make fresh wars upon
him: yet fearing least his subjects (more religious than the Pope) should
reckon him a forsworn and perjured Prince, he went not himself in person, but
sent the Queen against him. These were even in those days the devises of the
Court of Rome. We have many times already spoken of that goodly donation of
Constantine: and it should seem that it was forged at this time during the
canuassing for the Empire between the two Charles, the Bald and the Gross,
the uncle and the nephew, when the uncle pursued so hotly the favor and
furtherance of the Pope: Otho the third, Emperor, in that Patent which we find
taken out of the Treasury of the Popes Charters, in a certain chamber of the
Cordeliers of Assisa, before mentioned, speaking of this donation, These are
(says he) mere inventions forged by the Popes themselves, by whose direction
Deacon John, Johannes Digitorum.
surnamed Long-fingers, wrote a grant in letters of gold, and in the name of
Constantine the Great has published a pack of lies, as if they had been
graunts of great antiquity. Now if you will know when this Long-fingers lived,
Trithemius tells you, that it was in the time of Charles the Bald, and John
the seventh, and he wrote the life of Gregory the first in four volumes; and
Platina himself says, that he was John the ninth. So that it is no great
wonder if Baronius in his third Tome, to qualify the heinousness of this
deed, says, That this donation, because it was translated by Deacon John out
of a corrupt Greek copy, is therefore doubtful rather than to be approved:
but in his twelfth Tome he flatly calls it a forged, bastard, and counterfeit
deed. And the same Otho speaking again of this donation, says, That they are
lies when they affirm that any Charles ever gave that to S. Peter which
belonged to the Emperor: For we answer (says he) That this Charles (meaning
the Bald) could not lawfully dispose of any thing by way of gift, seeing that
before such grant made he was already routed in the field, and put from the
Empire by a better Charles (meaning the Gross:) wherefore And of this routing
of Charles you may read farther in a French Chronicle now lately published by
Pithaeus. And farther, this good Prelat John learnedly sets down the
admirable virtue of the Pall or Mantle, when he sent him to Wilibert Bishop of
Colen, hoping by his commendation to raise the market, Johan. ep. ad
Willibardum episc. Coloniens.
The use of this Pall or Mantle (says he) among other rare qualities has this
special virtue, that so soon as it is bestowed upon any man, presently it
takes away all imputation of faults formerly committed: not that the mantle
does purify from sins, but because the care of him which bestows it ought
to be such, that he will not bestow it but upon one that is clear from them
already: and therefore he from i. to whom it is denied, is but an imperfect
man, and perfect can he not be on whom this holy aid is not bestowed for a
confortatiue. But seeing that it is now indifferently bestowed upon all, where
is that care, and consequently that virtue which is pretended?

OPPOSITION.
Charles enjoyed but a while this benefit of the Pope, in which time yet he
made a great breach in the imperial authority. Aimoni. lib. 5. c. 32, 33.
We read in Aimonius, That he appointed a Synod at Pontigon, by the advice and
counsel of John Bishop of Tuscanie, and John Bishop of Arezzo, the Legates of
Pope John, and Ansegisus of Sienna, by the authority Thus they began,
contrary to the ancient custom, to join the Emperor and the Pope together.
In this Synod Charles by virtue of a Decretall Epistle of John, went about to
constitute and appoint Ansegisus Primat, with this authority which follows,
That so often as the profit of the Church should require, whether for the
calling of a Synod, or for the dispatch of other Ecclesiastical affairs in
France and Germany, he should present the Popes person, and should acquaint
the Bishops with the decrees of the Sea Apostolic, and should report unto the
Pope what had been done or not, by virtue of them, and upon great and
important causes should consult the said See. Our Bishops requested, that since
the letter was directed unto them, they might have a sight of it; which the
Emperor refused to grant, That they willingly obeyed thereunto, provided that
no Metropolitan be thereby prejudiced in his rights contrary to the Canons,
and the decrees of the Popes themselves, aunciently pronounced according to the
Canons. And though the Emperor and the other Legates pressed them very
earnestly for the primacie of Ansegisus, yet could they get no other answer
from them; only one Frotharius Bishop of Bordeaux, who had skipt from Bordeaux
to Poictiers, and from Poictiers to Bourges, through the mere favor of the
Prince, made such answer as he thought would best please the Emperor: who much
offended with the answer of the others, said, That the Pope had And thereupon
taking the Popes Epistle, folded up as it was together with the Legates,
delivered it to Ansegisus, and presently caused a rich chair to be set before
all the Bishops on this side the Mounts, next unto John of Tuscanie, which sat
next above him on the right hand, and bad him sit there, above the other
Bishops, though his ancients; the Archbishop of Rheims protesting openly, that
this was contrary to the Canons. But the Emperor persisted in his purpose:
and when the Bishops a second time requested a sight or a copy of the Epistle,
they could not obtain it. Our Bishops not long after met again without the
Emperor, where were great debates between them, because of certain Priests,
who out a scepter and a staff of gold, and to the Empress gowns and
bracelets, all set with pearl. These when they came rebuked the Bishops, for
not appearing the day before: but they holding them always to the Canons in
their answers, made them give off hot words; yet the Legates still urged them
to accept of Ansegisus for their Primat: they answered in general terms, That
they would obey the Popes decrees as their predecessors had done the decrees of
his predecessors. So that the Emperor came thither in person and in great
state, clothed John Bishop of Arezzo openly to read, Quandam scedulam ratione
and authoritate carentem, A certain paper without authority or reason: which
done, there were certain Articles dictated, and set down in writing, without
consent of the Synod, each crossing the other of them, without profit, reason,
or warrantie: and therefore (says the Author) we have thought fit to omit
them: and at last, after many complaints, as well of the Emperor as of the
Legates, concerning the Primacie of Ansegisus, he went away, having done as much
So much was this Prince overtaken with this fatal Cup, more dangerous to him
than was that other of Sedechias, of which he died; so obdurate was he against
his own good having his eyes dazeled with vain shows, and colorable
illusions for the present: on the contrary, so cleare-sighted were our Bishops
of France in these affairs, descrying a far off how great a ruin would one
day ensue of this small-seeming breach made upon the liberties of their Church.

35. PROGRESSION.


AFter the death of Charles, An. 878.
the Earls of Tusculana got the upper hand in Rome, and in the year 878 clapped
Pope John up in prison, for excommunicating them: but John by the help of his
faction found means to escape, and came by sea into Prouence, whence he was
conducted to Lewis, surnamed the Stammerer, son to Charles the Bald, who then
lay at Troy: Balbus.
where he assembled a Synod of French Bishops, and made them to confirm and
ratify the excommunication which he had hurled out before against his enemies;
and there also was Formosus in person deprived of all Church dignities, and
oath taken of him John at his return found the Sarasens at Rome gates, and
shortly after had tidings of Lewis his death, so that now he was feign to cast
about again, and to take a new course; which was, to cast the Empire upon
Charles the Gross, King of Germany, who was the first that entered Italy with
his army, (and this was the third whom he had crowned Emperor) upon promise,
That he should protect the Church from all her enemies, especially from the
Sarasens: but under the generality of enemies were principally comprehended
the Earls John, An. 882.
who besides that which has been already said, left other goodly examples
behind him: for we learn by a certain Epistle of his to Charles the Gross,
Johan. epist. 9.
That he adopted for his son Prince Basin, to ease him of his worldly cares,
that he might the more freely attend upon the service of God. Whereas S. Peter
in the execution of his charge never needed a Prince for his coadjutor, much
less a swaggering captain. Also he was the first that ever presumed to grant
Indulgences to those which were already dead, or hereafter should die in
battle against Painims and Infidels: his words are these, Being demanded by
our Bishops of France, Whether those which were already, or hereafter should
die in defense of the Church, might have Johan. ep. 144.
we answer boldly (says he) By the goodness and mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that the Rest of eternal life is provided for them. If so, what need
then of so many Suffrages of Saints, Requiems, and oblations ever since? And
he proves what he had said by the example of the thief upon the Cross, which
went straight to Paradise: and yet to make the world beholding unto him
concludes in this manner, We (says he) by the intercession of Saint Peter the
Apostle, who has power to bind and to lose in heaven and in earth, Quantum fas
est, so far forth as we may by law, do absolve them, and commend them to God
by our prayers. The mischief was, that whosoever would not do whatsoever he
would have them, was censured to be disobedient to the Church, and consequently
Baronius should have noted the wisdom of the flesh in John, by reason whereof
he says, that he was punished of God, and forsaken of all the Princes whom he
had flattered, or rather (as we say) abused.

OPPOSITION.
Pope John during his abode in France, produced a certain Patent, as of a
donation Charles the Bauld to the Pope, of the Abbie of S. Denis; which was
thought to have been forged by the Bishops Frotharius and Adalgarius, to take
the said Abbie by this means out of the hand of Gausselin. But, says the
Author, Hoc argumentum sicut factio and non ratio, Aimon. l. 5. c. 37
imperfectum remansit, i. This claim, as sauouring more of faction than of
reason, remained in the suds: neither was any thing effected therein,
notwithstanding the authority and presence of the Pope. Likewise when it came
to our Bishops ears, that the Pope there present had given his consent, That
blind Hincmar Bishop of Laon, in despite of Hincmar Archbishop of Reimes,
should sing Mass, that is, should be restored to his charge; presently the
Metropolitans and Bishops of other Provinces, to show that he was not

This was the end of that variance and strife between the two Hincmars, the
uncle and the nephew; he of Laon appealing to the Pope from his deposition, the
other refusing to admit of such Appeal; borne out a while by our kings in the
defense of our Church liberties, forsaken afterward by Charles the Bauld and
his son, both stooping at the lure of the Empire, and yet he still persisting
in his cause with the other Bishops even to this last Act. Which yet Baronius
uses for Hincmar of Reimes, filling whole pages with this discourse: and yet,
poor man, what evil had he done? only this, That he would not, says
Baronius, accept of the Popes Decretals farther than they agreed with the holy
Councels. Which is, as he says, Profiteri pariter and diffiteri, i. To sup and
blow all in a breath: Would God there were no greater sin in the world. And
what, I pray you, has our College of Sorbona taught else now so many years?
Yet Baronius afterward giving his judgment of him, If, says he, we will weigh
him in an indifferent balance, for his knowledge in the Canons, Plane dixeris
eruditissimum, You would say, he was exactly skillful in them, although
sometimes he favor them too much, And what wonder if a Council be preferred
before a single man? And as touching his knowledge in Divinity, says he, we
find him to have been most exquisitly learned therein, as may appear by that
which he wrote against the Heretic Godescalcus, concerning Predestination. And
thus much for our Western part of the world.

In the East, Nicholas the first and Adrian the second labored to make their
market of that treacherous murder of Basilius, by deposing Photius, and
restoring Ignatius, all to gratify and to content the Emperor: in so much
that Adrian, what John who succeeded them, by an act of his, unawares dashed
all which they had done. Ignatius restored to his See, gave not that content to
all as was expected; the Emperor Basilius also sound him not so pliant to his
humor as he hoped; neither yet Pope John, because he would not let go the
Churches of Bulgaria, as he desired, whereupon he menaced him with a flash of
Excommunication. Ignatius happening shortly after to decease, Basilius affected
to restore Photius; and because he was deposed by authority from Rome, sent
unto John to restore him to the communion of the Church, and consequently to
his See: and the rather to move him, proposed to Ignatius and his faction,
thought it fit and necessary: That otherwise new troubles would daily arise in
the Church: That if he would give way thereto, he would furnish him with a
navy to guard the coasts of Tuscanie and Campania from the Sarasens, and would
make Photius surrender the Churches of Bulgaria into his hands. Ambition, or
rather, because Baronius will have it so, Baron. vol. 10. an. 878. art. 4. and
5.
the wisdom of the flesh, enemy to God, carried away this good Prelat, in
such sort, that contrary to his own oath, contrary to the judgment and
sentence given by two of his predecessors (namely, of Nicholas the first, whom
they call another Elias) he restored Photius, whom they had styled Lucifer, and
set him upon his throne: who yet, as he affirms, since his deposition had
showed no token of repentance, many of desperate rebellion, in despite of the
Synod, erecting altar against altar, and both made and maintained a rent and
schism openly in the Church: So indifferent is every point unto these men, so
it serve for their private interest. And by reason of this weakness, says
Baronius, was this John called a woman, and a she Pope: thinking by this means
to make us take John for Ione, of whom we have already spoken.

Photius was no sooner set in his See, but presently he called a general
Council at Constantinople: he produced certain letters of John, true or
false, ( Baronius Basilius; and caused this his Synod to bear the name of the
eighth Oicumenicall Synod. And indeed this is that Council which Zonaras, a
Greek Monk, puts in this place, and alleges by this name, with all the
Actions and Sessions thereof, in his Collection of the Synods. In this Synod
were present three Legates from Pope John, namely, Paul and Eugenius Bishops,
and Peter a Cardinal Priest, who were so trimmed by Photius, as appears in
the Acts, as never were Popes Legates in all their lives. First it is noted,
That there were in this Council three hundred and eighty Bishops, whereas
there were only one hundred and two in the other. Secondly, Nicholas the
Adrian the second were there condemned as Masters of misrule, and causers of
all evils; and Pope John for amends highly commended. Thirdly, for the Churches
of Bulgaria, the Legates were put over to the Emperor, as being a question of
confines and borders of the Empire. Fourthly, it was enacted, and that by their
consents, That whomsoever the Pope did excommunicat, the Patriarch might not
receive, nor the Pope those which were excommunicated by the Patriarch. Whereby
all Appeals from thence to Rome were abolished, for the purchasing whereof
Pope Adrian was content to make himself a consort with a murderous Parricide.
And last of all, whereas the Pope had straightly charged his Legates to Preside,
Photius in their presence ever took his place first. And Baronius so
bestirreth his stumps, Idem an. 879. art. 72. Johan. ad Photium Epist. 250.
Baron. an. 881. art. 5. and sequent.
crying out, This Council was forged by Photius, that indeed there was never
any such: Whereas yet, besides the Canons thereof, which we find in Zonaras and
Balsamon, he himself produces the very same Acts in Greek, taken out of
their Vatican: telling us farther, That this Council being brought afterward
to John, he condemned it, and disauowed his Legates. Well then, it appears
that they suffered things to pass which the Pope disliked: what other things
but those which are contained in those Acts? Whereupon ensued fresh
excommunications against Photius, and the rent made worse between the East
Churches and the West.

Besides this, Historians here observe, That under this John the city of Rome
John succeeded Marinus, or Martinus: This was he which was chief author of
clapping up John in prison, Malis artibus Pontificatum adeptus, Platin. in
Martino.
says Platina, Aspiring to the Popedom by indirect courses; who presently
restored Formosus to his Bishopric, absoluing him from his oath. Marinus
succeeded Agapit, alias, Adrian the third, brought in by the same faction: And
now also died Charles the Gross, Emperor, and with him the Empire of the
French, and the honor of Charlemaigne his race in Italy. And the Italians
themselves confess, Sigon. de regno Ital. l. 5. sub finem and sub initium.
That during the Empire of the French in Italy they flourished in multitudes
of people and stateliness of buildings, in civil policy and discipline; but
above all, that they grew glorious in sanctity of religion, and Imperial
dignity: And that when the Scepter was once translated in other hands, though
of Italians, yet their government decayed, the Church vanished, the times grew
so filthy and abominable, as the like had not been seen in any precedent
age: Wherefore from hence forward let us prepare our eyes to behold nothing but

36. PROGRESSION.
1 The Edicts of Adrian the third, and what success they had. 2 Of the
factions in Italy about the election of the Pope. 3 Of the barbarous
inhumanitie of Pope Stephen toward the dead corpse of Formosus his predecessor.
An. 885.
ADrian the third therefore in the year 885 making benefit of the occasion,
being partly persuaded by the Roman Princes, by whose help he was promoted to
the Popedom, and partly moved for his own commodity, ordained two decrees,
by which he seemed to set at liberty the Church of Rome and all Italy; and so
much the rather, Platina in Adriano 3. Sigon. li. 5. de regno Ital.
because the Normans with their ordinary outrodes and incursions held the
French and the Germans busied to defend their own country: the first Edict
was this, That in creating the Pope the authority of the Emperor should not
be required; for the attaining whereof the Popes had long before Simonet. l. 5.
c. 15. Martin. Polon. in Hadrian. 3.
That the Emperor Charles the Gross dying without sons, the kingdom,
together with the title of the Empire, should be translated to the Princes of
Italy, which not many years since Albertus Marquis of Tuscane, chief leader
of the Tusculans, and promoter of Adrian to the Popedom, striued to attain
unto. The one and the other were pernicious both to the Church and Commonweal;
and both, though proiected and resolved on before the death of Charles the
Gross, yet were they both within and without, at home and abroad, as we have
seen before, opposed. Berengarius therefore Duke of Friuli, and Guido Duke of
Spolete, whilst they both striued to attain to the kingdom of Italy, they
divided it into two factions; of which two that Guido was more strong, though
less just (says Sigonius) being vpheld by the authority of Pope Stephen, who
succeeded Adrian the third. Wherefore after certain battles fought between
them, in which he had the victory, in the year 891 he crowned him at Rome, but
yet upon condition, An. 891.
That he should confirm those donations which were pretended to have been
given by Pepin, Charles, and Lewis the first. This Stephen grew so proud and
insolent, that he made a Decree yet extant in Gratian, That whatsoever the
Church of Rome does ordain or decree, D. 19. c. Eminuero.
must be for ever, and irreuocably observed of all: For how much the less
sanctity, learning, and virtue, there is in them, by so much they think they
must be the bolder to strengthen their commands with authority and power. In
this time Stephen the Sergius of their own house and family; the other
Formosus, who by John had before been excommunicated, a man commendable for
his learning, but yet had received some impeachment of credit, having sworn,
That he would never seek after the Bishopric of Rome: notwithstanding he
wanted not sufficient color to do it, because he was discharged of that oath
by Pope Marinus. Guido in the mean time took part with Sergius,
notwithstanding that Formosus possessed the Sea, Sergius being by force expeld.
This whole Papacy therefore was spent in nothing but laying of plots, and
continual rapines, sometimes the one getting the upper hand, sometimes the
other, until Formosus, wearied with those molestations Sergius, who was
supported by Guido and his son Lambert, resolved with himself to bring
Arnulphus the king, duke of Bauier, son to Charlemaigne, and nephew to
Charles the Gross, out of Germany; who with his army entered by force into
the city of Rome, and was by Formosus anointed and crowned Emperor, and as
Sigonius reports, enforst the people of Rome to take this oath: I protest
before God and all the Saints, Sigon. de regno Ital. li. 6.
and swear by the holy Sacraments, so long as I live to be subject to the
power of the Emperor Arnulphus, and never to favor the part of Lambert, or
Engultrude his mother, and to do my best endeavor that they never obtain any
dignity, or oppress the city by any servitude. And by this means chased
Sergius out of Rome. But not long after, when he besieged Engultrude the mother
of Lambert, she a woman not equal in strength, betook her self to
subtilties, and secretly by one of his servants, whom she corrupted with money,
gave unto him a stupifying potion; which when he had taken, he was suddenly
overcome with sleep, and after three days awaking, when he neither
understood, nor could fitly express what he understood, and rather lowing like
an ox, than speaking like a man, leaving the war, he retired himself into
Lombardie. About the end of December died Formosus, after whom succeeded
Boniface the sixth, and fifteen days after Stephen the seventh succeeded him,
being advanced thereunto by the faction of Sergius, having taken heart by the
departure of Arnulphus. Then was it easy to discern with what spirit they
were ledd: for Formosus; whereupon he commanded his body to be dug out of
his sepulcher, and his carcass to be placed in the Popes chair, adorned with
his Priestlie garments, and there in the midst of a Synod assembled, himself
and his Acts to be condemned. The writers of that age affirm (a thing horrible
to be spoken) that this wicked man, ignorant of all good learning, Luitprand.
li. 1. cap. 8.
used this taunting speech to the poor dead corpse: When thou were Bishop of
Port, says he, why with a spirit of ambition did thou usurp the Roman
Catholic seat? And thereupon disrobing him of his vestments, he commanded
three of his fingers to be cut off, wherewith he was wont to bless the people,
and the body to be cast into Tiber; Hereupon Luitprand a Deacon of the Church
of Pauia, who then lived, was exceedingly moved with this execrable deed.
Platina in Formoso. Et ib. Onuphrius Leo Ostiensis l. 1. cap. 48.
Onuphrius calls into question the truth of this story; which is to overthrow
all antiquity, as in the case of Pope Jove. The author of the Annals of the
Abbie of Fulden, says thus, Next Boniface succeeded Stephen, in name
Apostolical, but in truth a most infamous man, who after a strange manner
caused Formosus, his predecessor, to be taken out of his grave, and assigning
an Aduocat to answer for him, deposed him, and commanded him to be cast out of
the place that was appointed for the burial of the Popes. And it is a Monk
that speaks it. Sigonius is of more credit, who describes all the
circumstances of this fact, and reports the John the tenth in these words: The
Synod celebrated by our predecessor Stephen the sixth, Sigon. de regno Ital. li.
6.
in which the carcass of Formosus the Pope is drawn out of the sepulcher, and
as it were brought to trial (a thing never heard of before) we utterly
abrogat, and by the sentence of the holy Ghost we forbid any such thing to be
done hereafter. He adds, That he denounced the coronation of Arnulphus to be
void, and that he anointed Lambert for Emperor in his place, because he took
his part. And Baronius himself acknowledges the same; only (as we do) he
attributes that to Stephen the seventh, that others do to Sergius: Baron. an.
897. art. 2.
This man, says he, being frantike, did not that which was lawful to do, but
what his own fury carried him unto: for it was not an error in faith, but a
violent tyranny An. 897.
These are his own words. In the mean time, in the year 897, Romanus
succeeded Stephen, who presently calling a Council, condemned the condemnation
of Formosus, and the Acts of Stephen against him. The like does Theodorus the
second, and John the ninth, or according to others, the tenth, who succeeded
one another. But this man more solemnly in a Synod of seventy four Bishops
which he held at Rauenna, where demanding every man's opinion severally, he
cancelled the Acts of Stephen and his Synod, pardoned the Bishops and Priests
that gave assistance therein, who excused themselves, That what they did, they
did by compulsion: forbidding that Sergius and his followers, who had dug
Formosus out of his grave, should be restored, and condemning both them and
Stephen himself, as violaters of sepulchers. He pronounced Formosus the lawful
Pope, although he were first chosen, says Onuphrius, without the Roman
Clergy: and those Bishops that Stephen deposed he restored, and declared the
coronation of Arnulphus the Emperor to be void, and ratified that of Lambert,
as being done by Stephen for the good of the Church. This he did in favor of
Lambert, whose power he feared both in Italy and in Rome: by means whereof
that law was renewed, That from thence forward the Pope should not be
consecrated but in the presence of the Ambassadors or Lieutenants of the
Emperor, contrary Adrian the third thought he had established. The Acts of
this Council are to be found among the Canons of the Church of Modene, says
Sigonius. This ordinance nevertheless was shortly after broken; for John being
dead, and Benedict the fourth chosen in his room, he was consecrated without
the authority of the Emperor, by the faction of the Tusculans: And these
things reach to the year 900. An. 900.


OPPOSITION.
The very impiety thereof had been sufficient to restrain this fatal
Progression, if the Christian Church had not been senseless, so as no other
Opposition Platina in Stephan. 6.
whereof we need no other author but Platina himself. But what think we did
the Christian world then say, when they saw one Pope dig another out of his
grave, degrade those Bishops which another had consecrated, the Acts which one
made by another disallowed; all ordinances, vocations, missions, and the whole
administration revoked Per sancti Spiritus iudicium edicimus, interdicimus,
etc. We say, and unsay, command, and forbid, by the sentence of the holy
Ghost? The Spirt of God then, if you believe them, must be contrary to it
self, and so must the truth. And nevertheless they stick not boldly to
affirm, D. 19. c. Enim vero. Luitprand. l. 1. c. 8.
That whatsoever the Church of Rome does appoint or ordain must be for ever
and irreuocably observed of all. Luitprand being greatly offended with the fact
of Formosus, ingeniously acknowledges the error of Stephen: Most holy
Father, says he, hereby you may know how wickedly he dealt (that is to say, to
abrogat all those ordinances that were made by Formosus) because they Jesus
Christ our Lord. Bellarmine goes about to salve the matter, saying, That he
degraded not those that were ordained by Formosus, by a formal decree, but
that only de facto, he made them to be reordered: A command, says he,
Bellarm. l. 4. de Romans Pont. c. 12.
that did not proceed of ignorance, but of hatred against Formosus. But yet we
find by their own Authors, that this was done by the authority of a Synod
celebrated at Rome, and by an express Decree. But if such tergiuersations may
serve turn, what wickedness is there that cannot be defended? This Heresy of
Stephen, yea of the Stephen in his Synod declared Formosus neither to be, nor
to have been Pope, who, I say, made himself the Head of the Church, being
deceived in his knowledge of the Head of the Church? let any man look into his
conscience, and his knowledge, whether he fell into a light Heresy, or no. But
here he will follow Sigebert for his Author, An. 902. Sigebertus in Chron.
That notwithstanding the contradiction of the greater part, Stephen the sixth
degraded those that had been ordained by Formosus. And is he not therefore so
much the more an Heretic, by how much the more obstinat he was to be ordered
by the counsel of his brethren? But Sigebert in the year 902 peremptorily
affirms, That all his ordinances were to be made void, and did other things
against him, horrible to be spoken: This then was a An. 903.
and in the year 903 speaking of the Synod held by Pope John at Rauenna, the
Archbishops of France being present, Before them (says he) was the Synod burnt
which Stephen had made for the condemnation of Formosus. This decree was
concluded in the next full Synod, and in the year 900 he affirmed, That by
this occasion this question had been for many years disputed in the Church,
not without great scandale, the one part judging the consecration of those that
Formosus had ordained to be nothing, the other by a more holy counsel judging
them to be of force. This was a question of law, not of fact; and consequently
the solution of Bellarmine altogether void.

Baron. to. 10. an. 897. art. 4. an. 900. art. 2, 3, 4.
Truly Baronius speaking of these times, is stricken with a kind of horror, and
calls them infelicissima and luctuocissima ecclesiae Romanae tempora, The most
unfortunate But he laid the fault upon the Tusculan princes, then powerful in
Rome, as if the other part had yielded Popes more holy, and as if both the one
and the other had not entered by theft, and consequently come in at the window,
and not at the door. When (says he) the Church of Rome suffered the Princes of
Tuscane to bear rule, whether by money, or by arms, over the people and
Clergy of Rome, they thrust into the Chair of Peter, the throne of Christ,
men monstrous and infamous in their lives, dissolute in their manners, and
wicked and villainous in all things; and then the Queen of Nations (so he
calls the Church of Rome) being robbed of the garments of her glory and joy,
sits in heaviness, mourning Let the Reader here note what help they give us
to argue against the perpetuity of their pretended succession, when by his
own confession he here spoke of ten Popes that did immediately succeed one
another: but he adds, that God would have it so, to give the world to
understand, that the Church as a Commonwealth depends not upon the wisdom or
virtue of those which governed, but from the efficacy of the promise of God,
which makes it firm and constant for ever. Why then should it seem strange,
that there should be any interruption in this personal succession? For has
he ever seen families continued by monsters? And when they happen in the
Church, as he acknowledges, is not the mercy of God to be acknowledged
therein, which even of stones raises seed Abraham, and beats down
Antichrists, sitting in the seat of Christ, with the breath of his mouth? Jbid.
art. 6.
Moreover Baronius acknowledges, that whilst Stephen dug up the carkas of
Formosus, the Church of Latran, the chief seat of the Pope, by the devil was
utterly overthrown to the ground, from the Altar to the gates, even that
(says he) in which Pope Stephen kept his residence. Which is an argument unto
us, that we are admonished by this destroying Angel, that we are hereafter to
seek here the rubbish of the Church. Neither let us forget, that Stephen for
his wickedness was strangled in prison, and nevertheless John the tenth, his
successor, calls him Stephen of happy memory, in the acts of the Council of
Rauenna, which (says Baronius) was done in reverence of his predecessor.
Baron. vol 10. an. 904. art. 4.
We may rather say, because all

But at this time Theophilact the Archbishop of the Bulgarians, the only man
in that age famous in Divinity, who expounding these words, Upon this rock I
will build my Church, Theophil. in Matthew. c. 16.
made no mention of the Pope of Rome, because (says he) Peter confessed him the
son of God, the Lord says, That that confession that he made should become
the foundation of the faithful; in such sort, that every man that would build
the house of faith, must necessarily put this confession for his foundation,
etc. Yea every one of us being made the house of God is the Church, insomuch,
that if we be built upon this confession of Christ, the gates of hell nor our
sins shall prevail against us. And to prove that he understood not this
privilege to belong to the Church of Rome, but to every Christian that is the
house of God, and the Church, upon these words, To thee I will give the keys
of heaven, etc. he says, Ioh. 20.
The keys that bind and lose, forgive and aggrauate our sins: For they that
like Peter are thought worthy Episcopal grace, have power to lose and retain
sins: for though it were only said to Peter, To thee I will give: yet that
power was once given to all the Apostles, when he said, Whose sins ye remit
shall be remitted: for that word (I will give) signifies a future time, that
is, after the resurrection. And therefore to show that he Peter than the rest
of the Apostles, he says upon the Epistle to the Galathians, Theophil. ad Gal.
c. 2.
Paul showed himself to be equal to Peter. Many the like places there are
in this Author, though he were one of those that came last, and of those (as we
have said elsewhere) whose writings some have taken care to corrupt, the better
to accommodat them to the controversies of the times.

37. PROGRESSION.


HEre we enter into an age which is renowned only for this, That in the state
of Italy there was nothing but confusion, in the Church darkness, and in the
Popes idleness, and a headlong licentious liberty to commit all sin: that
it was no marvel that Baronius began his History with these words, An iron
age barren of all goodness, and a leaden age abounding with all wickedness.
For as touching Lambert having been traitorously slain, as Berengarius (a
Prince commended for his great virtue) thought he had overcome all his
affairs, Benedict the third, provoked by the Marquess Albert, called Lewis
the third, the son of the Emperor Arnulph, against him, and crowned him at
Rome; but Berengarius surprised him upon the sudden at Verona, and having taken
him, plucked out his eyes, and settled himself in the Empire for many years:
notwithstanding his prosperous success was interrupted by the faction of the
Popes, assisted by the power of the Marquess Albert, then arbitrator at Rome.
The Hungarians on the other part, and the Sarasens without resistance troubled
all Italy. Neither were there wanting malcontents who called in strange
Princes, Rodulph K. of Burgoigne, Hugh K. of Arles, who as it were by turns
entering Italy with their powers, crowned themselves at Rome, but yet with
condition to ratify the pretended donations; and because they had need of the
Popes help, were content to remit much of their authority, and yet sped never
the better. And as touching the Church, it was easy to judge in so great a
perturbation of all things how pale the face of it was, especially in Italy,
where all this while there was not a man of fame that appeared, nor action that
had any show of care in it of the Church: in such sort, that they that have
writ the History, think they have sufficiently commended a Pope, when they
have reported him to have done nothing, so natural a thing was it for them to
have done evil. Benedict the fourth died, An. 904.
and contrary to all law (say they) Leo the fifth succeeded, who after forty
days was deposed by his chapleine Christopher, and nouo exemplo, Sigon. de
Reg. Jtal. li. 6. Platina in Benedict. 4. and Leo. 5.
by a new example, says Sigonius; malis artibus, by deceit and cunning, says
Platina, settled himself in his place: Sergius the third being now twice driven
from the Popedom, made friendship with the Marquess Albert, and so supplanted
him, and placed himself in his throne, and then at his own pleasure inueighed
against the memory of Formosus, and pronounced his Acts to be void; insomuch
that Bellarmine labored no less in the justifying of him, than of Stephen.
Then was there no more question either of the election of the Clergy, or of
the consent of the people. Here (says Platina) consider how much these have
degenerated An. 911.
Anastasius in the year 911 succeeded Sergius, An. 913.
and him Landus in the year 913, and him succeeded John the eleventh, the
Archbishop of Rauenna, commendable only in this, that they lived not long,
Platina in Christoph. 1. and sequ.
God (says Platina) taking them out of the world as so many monsters. But
Sigonius without malice speaks thus of John, That the Clergy and people being
assembled Luitprand. l. 2. c. 13.
nominated for a successor John the Archbishop of Rauenna. Luitprand who lived
in those times speaks somewhat louder, He obtained (says he) the Popedom by
such horrible wickedness, contra ius fasque, against all law both divine and
humane. Theodora an impudent harlot obtained Virago-like the Monarchy of the
City of Rome, who had two daughters, Marozia and Theodora, not only equal
unto her, but far surpassing her in their lascivious life, of one of these,
namely Marozia, Pope Sergius had in adultery John, who after the death of John
of Rauenna got (that is to say, the twelfth, of whom we shall speak hereafter)
and by the Marquess Albert her husband she had Alberick, who afterward usurped
the principality of Rome. Theodora surprised with the beauty of this John
(that is to say the eleventh) who then had some charge in the Church of
Rauenna, did not only entice, but forced him to lie with her. These things
whilst they were thus impudently carried, the Bishop of Bologne dying, this
John was chosen in his place: at the last Sergius dying, to the end she might
not be too far from her paramour (for Rauenna is distant from Rome two
hundred miles) she caused him to leave the Archbishopricke of Rauenna, and to
usurp, Luitprand. l. 2. c. 13.
proh nefas, the Popedom of Rome. This History in Luitprand is set down more
amply, and with words more scandalous, which I willingly spare to Frodoard.
Hist. Rhemens. l. 4. c. 19. Baron. vol. 10. an. 925. art. 9, 10, 11.
This is that John, who (as Frodoardus reports) to gratify Rodulph the King,
created a child of five years age Bishop of Rheims: whereupon Baronius thus
cries out, Thou see, gentle Reader, by the authority of what Pope this was
first brought into the Church of God (if he may be called a Pope) that is by
John the tenth, (whom Platina calls the eleventh) than whom there was no man
more wicked, whose entrance into the Chair of Peter was most infamous, and his
departure most execrable. Now Marozia her daughter having lost her husband the
Marquess Albert, not knowing how to live a private life, married her self to
Guido Duke of Tuscan, Albertus had: and because Pope John withstood it, she
persuaded her husband to take him out of the way; who afterward having caused
his brother to be slain in his sight, Luitprand. l. 3. c. 12.
cast John into prison, and smothered him with a pillow. Guido shortly after
died, and Marozia still greedy of government, made a motion of marriage with
Hugh King of Arles, assuring him the government of the City of Rome: who being
called from elsewhere into Italy, came and married her, and with speedy
journies coming to Rome; was admitted without any resistance. But he being
otherwise a wise Prince, it so fell out, that when Alberick by the counsel of
his mother, with less dexterity than was fitting, brought water unto him to
wash his Hugh; whom he assayling in the castle, drove him to such a strait,
that he was enforced to leap over the wall: Whereupon Alberick both renewes
the name of Consul in Rome, and made himself a Consul, changing the whole
order of the government; and in such sort alters the State, that from thence
forward for a long time the election of the Popes depended upon him and his: so
to Leo the sixth, the successor of John the eleventh, in the year 928, An. 928.
he substituted Stephen the seventh, but according to Onuphrius the eight: and
in the year 930, John the twelfth, An. 930.
the bastard son of Pope Sergius the third and of Marozia, Sigonius (not
unfitly) says, sedere iussus was commanded to take the Sea: and again in the
year 935 he constituted Leo the seventh, An. 935.
successor to John the twelfth. An. 938.
And whereas King Hugh in the year 938 had caused Stephen the eight to be
nominated in the place of Leo the seventh, the faction of Alberick by a civil
tumult wounded in such sort his good name, that being ashamed to show himself
publicly, he died with discontent: in whose place Martin the second, alias
Martin the third, succeeded: whose place four years after Agapete the second
held: who also about the year 956 dying, An. 956.
the Consul Alberick was of such power and authority, that he caused Octauian
his own son Platina, was John the thirteenth, according to Onuphrius the
twelfth. Here Baronius searches into the age of Octauian, Baron. vol. 10. an.
955. art. 2, 3, 4.
because the Emperor Otho coming into Italy, was wont to say, He is but a
child, and therefore may hereafter easily be changed by the example of good
men: When he had held the Seat eight years, his nativity being cast,
concluded, that notwithstanding he had been the eldest son of Alberick,
which he was not, yet he could not be above eighteen years of age. Judge now
Reader what Father of fathers he was, to govern (says he) the spiritual
regiment of all the Christian world, and so he pronounces him an untimely
birth, which the tyranny of Rome had brought forth, excelling After all this,
says Baronius, by common consent it was agreed, that he should be tolerated,
rather than by Schisms to trouble the Church of God: and note withal, that
not long after he prefers him before those that were solemnly chosen in a
full Council. But it is not amiss to hear what Luitprand, an eyewitness,
says of both the John's, Luitprand. l. 3. c. 12.
that it may the better appear how far the impudency of this Seat had
proceeded. To John therefore the twelfth, besides what I have already alleged
of him, and Marozia his mother, he has these verses, where she inuiteth Hugh
by the marriage of her to the Principality of Rome.

Quid veneris facibus compulsa Marozia saeuis,
Coniugis ecce tui spectas tu suauia fratris,
Nubere germanis satagens Herodia binis etc.
Reproaching his incest; and again, Aduenit optatus ceu bos tibi ductus ad aram
Rex Hugo etc.


Moreover, he brings in Alberick exhorting the Romans to shake off this
infamous Is the dignity of the City of Rome so besotted, as to be obedient to
the government of a strumpet? What thing more base, more abominable, than to
yield to the incest of a woman? For Theodora his mother had made John the
twelfth, her favorite, Pope: and as for John the thirteenth, he describes his
life, not with his own, but the words of the best of the people of Rome:
Witness Raineria, a widow of one of his soldiers, to whom he gave the
government of many Cities, the keeping of the Cross of gold, and the Cups of
S. Peter. And witness Stephana his love, who died in the delivery of that
child which she had lately conceived by him; and if all things should hold
their peace, the Palace of Lateran, sometimes the lodging of Saints, now a
common brothell-house, cannot conceal his good friend the sister of Stephana,
These heinous crimes were objected against him, whereof he was afterward
accused and convicted, as by little and little shall appear; Platina in Johan.
13. Sigon. lib. 7. de Reg. Jtal.
insomuch that Platina could not conceal, That from his youth he was polluted
with all manner of wickedness and uncleanness. Neither does Onuphrius
dissemble it: and as for Sigonius, His Popedom (says he) as the entrance was
shameful and villainous, so it had a sorrowful end, with the great offense of
the whole Church, and the author of Fasciculus temporum entering into this age,
cries out, Alas alas, o Lord God, how is the gold darkened, the good color
thereof changed! what scandales read we of in these times, even in the
Apostolic Seat? what contentions, emulations, sects, enuyings, ambitions,
intrusions, persecutions? O miserable times in which holy men languish and
decay, and truth it self is banished from amongst the sons of men etc. These
eight Popes successively following one the other, held their Seat but a small
time, I can report nothing of them that is notable, because I have found
nothing but matter of scandale in them, by reason of such a contention And so
of the rest. He affirms, Platinae in vita horum Pontificum.
that Sergius the third beheaded Formosus being dead, and adorned with
priestlie garments; but Platina speaks more mildly, saying, that he proceeded
against But yet to all these he leaves a mark of reproach, when he says of
Formosus, That he was raised to the Popedom rather by gifts than by virtue; of
Stephen the sixth, by money and corruption; of Roman the first, that he envied
the honors of all others, as they use to do that are polluted with all kind
of wickedness; of Theodore the second, that he followed the steps of his
seditious predecessors; of Christopher the first, that he cast Leo into prison,
which could not be done without great sedition, and the utter destruction of
many; of John the eleventh, that he was a man of war rather than religion:
and this he speaks perhaps (seeing as much as we see) more mildly than was
fitting. Of the rest in these times he spoke more generally, Consider I pray
(says he) how much these (says he) the Pontifical dignity first increased
without riches, among so many enemies, and obstinat persecutors of the name of
Christ, by learning and holiness of life, which are not attained but with
great labors and much virtue: shortly after, so soon as the Church of God
began to grow wanton with wealth, her worshippers being turned from austeritie
of life to wantonness, this license to This says he, describing the lives of
the Popes of this time, insomuch that we need no other witness. What then
shall we say, if Cardinal Baronius, notwithstanding his seatlet robe, has
been ashamed of this foul wickedness, when he knew not how to begin without
a Preface, wherein he confessed to the Reader, that he was now to see
abhominationem desolationis in Templo, Dan 9. Baron. an. 900. art. 1, 2, 3.
foretold by Daniel, and afterward by our Savior himself: What then should the
faithful do, but by the commandment of our Savior, ad montes fugiamus, and
let us depart from Babylon and her uncleanness, when again ^e acknowledged
that proh pudor and proh dolor (says he) like horrible monsters intruded into
this Seat, venerable to the Angels themselves? And how many evils (says he)
have proceeded from them, and strange accomplished tragedies? Whereby it is
come to pass, that the Church without spot or wrinckle has bin sprinkled with
or dares, infected with stench, polluted with villainies, darkened with
perpetual infamy. Of Sergius namely, and of Theodora his harlot, after he had
quoted the place of Luitprand, he says, Baron. to 10. an. 908. art. 5, 6, 7.
Have thou heard gentle Reader the lamentable state of this time, when Theodora
the elder, a noble harlot, obtained the Monarchy in the City of Rome; and by
this word they commonly understand the Church. But how came so infamous a woman
to so great dignity, says he? This harlot was a noble woman of Rome, and of a
great house, and of excellent beauty and sibi Monarchiam peperir, she obtained
this Monarchy. And note here the succession, This wicked woman by this art
obtained the dominion, and to continue it to her posterity prostituted her
daughters to the Popes, to the inuaders of the Apostolical Seat, and to the
Marquesses of Tuscan, by which means the Empire of these harlots so much
increased, that at their pleasure they removed those that were lawfully
created, and thrust into their places men polluted with all manner of
wickedness: and of this miserable estate of the Church, which God permitted
(says he) to be dishonored at the pleasure of wicked persons, let us say with
S. John, of the great where, her Empire spreads it self through the whole
world.

OPPOSITION.
Now if Luitprand, Deacon of the Church of Pauia, dare speak so freely as we
have heard before, it is not to be doubted but that others elsewhere do at the
least mutter something: For to see a curtisan, of all others in the world the
most infamous, to reign at Rome, and to reign over the Popes, and to create
Popes at her pleasure, what is it but to present unto themselves the mother of
fornications, as it were by an Epitome? And this was nevertheless in those
times when the marriage of Priests was condemned for an Heresy, insomuch that
against married Priests there could be found no law too severe, nor punishment
too painful. At this time also there was much contention about the real
presence of Christ in the

Italy now being wearied with these monsters, is forced at last to think of a
remedy, especially being elsewhere troubled and disquieted with the
oppressions of young Berengarius and his son, insupportable to men of all
conditions. But the kings of the race of Charlemaigne being extinct in
Germany, and the Germans choosing kings of their own nation, they had recourse
unto Otho, the son of king Henry, Luitprand. l. 6. c. 6, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11,
12, and vsque ad finem.
duke of Saxony, who then reigned there, greatly renowned for his virtue and
justice. And some say, That John himself, partly entreated by the chief Lords
of Italy, partly wearied by the Berengarians, sent Legates unto Otho, John a
Deacon, and Aso the Secretary, to entreat him to come and succor the Church;
it may be under this pretense, to demand justice against himself, as it
appeared afterward. But howsoever it was, they both made peace with Otho, and
as they promised him being come to Rome, the Empire; so he for his part
swears, with all the power he had to exalt the Church of Rome, and John, the
ruler thereof. Moreover, he promises, that he will never be actor or author in
any thing that may detract from that honor he has, and to restore whatsoever
shall fall into his hands that belongs to Saint Which being done, Otho came to
Rome in the year 961, being magnificently received of all, and there binds
himself by oath to the Pope, and the Pope to him; Otho restoring unto him,
according to his promise, whatsoever of his he had gotten into his power, and
shortly after returned to Pauia. There was in the oath that John made to the
Emperor, taken upon the corpse of S. Peter, Luitprand. l. 6. c. 6.
this clause, That he would never give assistance to Berengarius, and Adelbert
his son: nevertheless he no sooner saw Otho departed, but presently he sent
to Adelbert, and spares not to promise any thing unto him against the
Emperor; who That the devil hated not more his Creator, than John the Pope
the most sacred Emperor, albeit he delivered him from the hands of Adelbert his
enemy. Wherefore they paint out the said John in all his Luitprand: For they
say, There is not greater discord between the Wolf and the Lamb, than hatred
in him toward the Emperor, who the better to commit his wickedness without
punishment, had need of an Adelbert for his defendor. The Emperor, who stayed
all this while at Pauia, resolved to return again to Rome, purposing by the
way to chastise Berengarius. But John, who doubted of somewhat that might
sinisterly ensue, gave to understand by his Legates, That heretofore he had
been carried by the heat of youth, but he was now resolved to be wiser; and
propounds withal certain complaints, for which the Emperor yields to
make him satisfaction: yet all this will not content him, but still reserueth
matter of malice and mischief. And hereupon procured Adelbert to come, The
greater part of the noblest and chiefest Romans took by force the castle of S.
Paul, and thither inuit the Emperor, and gave him pledges. Whereupon the Pope
together with Adelbert incontinently fled from Rome. Then Otho being received
into the city, they promise him loyalty and faith, adding moreover, and
firmly swearing, That they would never choose any Pope, or ordain any without
the consent and election of the Emperor Otho, and the king his son. Finally,
within three days following, at the request of the Bishops and the people of
Rome, there assembled a great Synod in the Church of S. Peter, where the
Archbishops sat with the Emperor; that is to say, for Englefred Patriarch of
Aquilea, being then sick in Rodolphus a Deacon, Walbert of Milan, and Peter of
Rauenna: of Germany also and France, many Archbishops, and diverse Bishops: of
Italy, all the principal and chief Bishops, even to the number of thirty and
more, besides the Suffragans themselves of the Bishopric of Rome, and all the
Priests, Cardinals, and Deacons, and other officers of the Roman Church; and
also all the principal and chief persons in the city of Rome, which are all
severally named by Luitprand in his History: And therefore Lambert of
Schaffnaburg calls it The Great Synod. Lambertus Schaffnaburg. an. 963.
Luitprand. l. 6. c. 7.
In which the Emperor omitted not any thing that belonged to the form of law;
and a general silence being made, he began and asked before all the Fathers,
Why John avoided so great an assembly, whom it most concerned, and according
to voice did confess: That playing at dice, they say, he used to call upon the
name of Jupiter But for as much as worthy men are often inueyed against, and
through envy and malicious detractation falsely accused, the Emperor again
conjureth them, That they propound nothing against him that is not plainly to
be proved. To this the whole Synod cried out, Quasi vnus vir, as if but the
voice of one man; If this unworthy Pope John has not committed more
shameless, and more abominable acts than these that are here expressed by
Benedict the Deacon, we desire holy Saint Peter the Prince of Apostles, never
to absolve us from the snares of our sins, who by his word shuts the gates
of heaven against the unworthy, and opens them to the just and righteous,
but that we may be accursed and set Nevertheless the Synod requested the
Emperor, That letters might be sent unto him, to come to purge himself: which
were presently dispatched, both in the name of the Emperor and the
Archbishops; wherein briefly were expressed the crimes whereof he was accused.
Whereto he answered, directing his letters, Omnibus Episcopis, To all the
Bishops: We hear say, that ye mean to create another Pope; which if ye do,
I excommunicat ye by the omnipotent God, that ye have no power to ordain
any, nor to celebrat the Mass. In the mean time that this letter was in
reading, there arrived the Archbishop of Treuers, and other Bishops of
Lorraine, Liguria, and Aemilia, with whose advise and counsel both the
Emperor and the Synod returned him this answer: If he came not, nor had any
other say they, who betrayed and sold our Savior Jesus Christ, received of him,
with others, the power to bind and vnloosse, etc. and so long as he continued
honest among the Disciples, he was able to bind and vnloosse: but afterward,
when through the venom and corruption of covetousness he became an Homicide
to destroy life, whom could he more tie or untie but himself, whom most
wickedly he strangled with an halter? Surely by this it plainly appears,
that the pretended seat of Saint Peter is no impediment to be a Judas. The
Emperor, who all this while complained not of any injury offered by him
Peter, did nevertheless combine and arm himself with Adelbert against him;
entreating the Synod to consider thereof: whose sentence was, That a strange
Ulcer ought to be burnt with a strange searing iron; and it was fit to drive
away this monster of the Church, a scandal to the whole world, and some good
and virtuous man to be put in his place. This sentence was approved by the
Emperor, and all with one voice chose Leo the eighth in place, An. 963.
as they say, of this Apostat John; the Emperor allowing the same. These
things fell out in the year 963: but not long after, such things being set in
order as did most concern them, the Emperor Leo called another Synod at Rome:
in which it manifestly appearing to all, that there was no other cause of these
tumults, than the neglect of the law and institution ordained by Charles the
Great, and quite abrogated by Adrian the third, laboring more, Sigon. l. 7. de
reg. Ital.
says Sigonius, for the dignity, than the tranquillity of the Church; whereby
the Popes were chosen by unlawful suits and briberies: a law was made for the
restitution thereof, and that bridle which the Popes and Clergy of Rome had
studiously shaken of, D. 69. c. in Synod. 23.
they were enforst again to admit. We read in the Decrees of Gratian this
Canon, D. 63. repeated also by Sigonius in his History: According Sigon. l. 7.
de regno Ital. Fasciculus tempo.
who granted to Charles (the most victorious king of the French and Lombards)
the dignity of the Patritij, and the administration of the Apostolic See, and
the inuesting of Bishops; I likewise, Leo Bishop, and servant of the servants
of God, with all the Clergy and people of Rome, An. 964.
constitute and confirm, and by our Apostolical authority grant and give
unto the Lord Otho the first king of the Germans, and to his successors of the
kingdom of Italy for ever, the authority and power to elect and choose a
successor, and to ordain and appoint the Bishop of the Sovereign Apostolic
See: and furthermore, that the Archbishops and Bishops shall take their
inuestiture of him, but their consecration where they ought, except those whom
the Emperor has given or granted to the Popes and Archbishops: And that no
The sum of this Canon with Gratian is thus, The election of the Bishop of
Rome by right belongs to the Emperor. And Theodore of Nyem, who lived under
John the 23, affirms, That he had seen the Letters Patents at Florence, from
whence it was taken, reserved for the privilege of the Imperial dignity.
Krantzius l. 4. c. 10. Saxoniae.
And also Krantzius That this Council ought to be inuiolably observed, under
the pain of excommunication of the Universal Church. Insomuch that it was
necessary to put again in force the law of Charles the Great, to bridle the
monstrous lasciviousness of the Clergy: Which law nevertheless as they
obeyed it unwillingly, so upon every light occasion they were ready to abrogat
it; so impatient were they of all good discipline. For so soon as the Emperor
had dismissed his forces, they recall John; who assembled another Synod, deposes
Leo, cancelleth his Acts, condemns the Synod holden by him, forbids it to
be called a Synod, but Prostibulum fauens adultris, A stews in favor of
adulterers; Sigebert.
and as many as Leo had Ordered, he degraded; whom, An. 963.
to the end they might signify Leo, he commanded them always to have this
word in their mouths, My father had nothing, Luitprand. l. 6. c. 11.
and gave me nothing. At the last, upon a certain night, as Pope John lay with
another man's wife without the city of Rome, he was so stricken of the devil,
that within eight days following he died of the same wound. And here the
Author cries out, O eternal God, Fascicul. tempo.
how different are these from those of former time! O the bottomless depth of
the judgments of God, who can find them out! Some say, he was slain by the
husband of the said wife. And then the Romans, contrary to their oath, chose
one Benet, without the consent of Otho, or his son. Wherewith the Emperor
being much offended, besieged the city, and took it in despite of the
Romans, dispossessed Benet not only Leo the eigth. By which occasion it so came
to pass, that Leo to render some gratuitie to the Emperor, made a resignation
for ever, both to him and to his successors, Emperors and Kings of Italy, of
all the donations granted to the Church of Rome; whether by any manifest deed,
or any Imperial Patent, or in any other manner whatsoever, by Charles the
Great, Pepin his father, Aribert king of Lombards, or Justinian: taking as it
were to witness the books of the holy Evangelists, many relics, the holy
cross, the hose, and unseamed coat of our Lord, the body of holy Saint
Peter, with many profound oaths taken before him and his Cardinals, and by the
consent and authority of all the people of Rome, as well In this resignation
are specified severally all the Provinces, Isles, Cities, Towns, Castles,
which are recited in the donation of the Emperor Lewis, without any exception:
and also many others which were not there named. And all this, says he, take
and possess for the use of your Court and military affairs, to make war,
and to fight against the Painims, and against the rebels of the Roman Empire:
Adding besides, That if any will attempt to hinder the effect thereof, let him
know, That by the law Iulia he incurreth the punishment of high treason, and
purchases to himself the displeasure of Saint Peter, etc. At the last, after
a solemn Fiat, Fiat, all Archbishops, Bishops, Cardinals, Priests, and
Deacons, and all the principal Theodore of Nyem the Popes Secretary,
whatsoever Baronius cauilleth to the contrary. For whereas in this Charter
there were nominated four Bishops of Italy, which in the Synod the year
before were called by other names, that is to say, of Alba, Preneste,
Tiburtina, and Nerni; is it any wonder, if among so many Bishops that were at
this Synod, four should die within the space of a year, and in the middle of
so many confusions change their place? Fasciculus temporum in sexta aetate 964.
Fasciculus temporum seems to have seen both This Leo ordained, That no Pope
should be made without the consent of the Emperor, in malice toward the
Romans, who by force thrust in their own friends and kindred. Also he resigned
to Otho and his successors all the donations of the Church made by Justinian,
Charles, and others, to the end he might defend Italy from all inuaders
thereof. This he adds of his own opinion, That holiness was departed from
the Popes, and come to the Emperors, in those times. And these things reach to
the year 964. Neither is it to be omitted, That this John the thirteenth,
alias the twelfth, who has held us too long, and whom Platina calls
Sceleratissimum hominem, vel potius monstrum, A most wicked man, or rather a
monster, was, according to the saying of Onuphre, the first who changed his

An. 966.
Now according to this order, Leo the eigth being dead in the year 966, the
Romans sent Ason chief Secretary, and Martin Bishop of Sutrie, to Otho into
Germany, to consult upon the election of a successor; who presently dispatched
away Ogier Bishop of Spire, and Linson of Cremona, to Rome: in whose presence
the people and Clergy nominated John Bishop of Narnie, the son of one John a
Bishop, the which, according to Platina, was the foureteenth of this name,
according to Onuphrius, the thirteenth: But not without tumult of the Romans,
who impatiently bearing a strange yoke, cast him into prison, and enforced Otho
to return Supplimentum Reginon. anno 967. Sigon. l. 7. De regno Italiae. Otho
3. in Diplomate Donationis quod Asisij Seruatur.
But he, in favor of this John by him created, and to get the greater good
will in Italy, gave unto him, says Reginon, the city and territory of
Rauenna, and many other things taken away from the Bishops of Rome by
Berengarius. Sigonius adds, That he confirmed by a new Charter the old
donation of Pepin, Charles, and Lewis, but without author: For of this very
time we will use no other witness but himself; for writing to the year 973,
thus he says: Though Italy were possessed by a King, and he an Emperor, and by
the Pope, yet there was not in both of them the same authority; the Pope had
Rome and Rauenna, and the other territories, rather What thing then is more
plain than this, to give us to understand, That the authority of the Pope
consists only in matters spiritual? After John succeeded Benedict the sixth,
by the very same law of Leo the eigth, and authority of Otho. But Otho being
dead, and his son much troubled in the wars of Germany and France, the
Romans returned to their former natural conditions; and upon the death of
Benedict, strangled (as is said) by Cardinal Boniface, being encouraged by one
Cincius a citizen of Rome, they created Donus the second for successor,
Boniface the seventh, the murderer of Benedict, corruptis comitijs, as the
Author says, whom Benedict the seventh thrusts out of the seat, through the
favor of the Tusculan Earls. So much was this seat swayed by theft and
corruption. Wherefore Otho the second came into Italy, and used extraordinary
severity to repress these inconveniences; and yet there wants not those that
would persuade us, that they were Martyrs: Fascicul. tempo.
but the author of Fasciculus temporum makes a fit distinction of them: They
were slain, says he, as in the Primitive Church, but they were no Martyrs;
the punishment all one, but the cause different. Otho died, and not long after
Benedict, and Peter Bishop of Paula succeeded, who was, says Platina, John the
fifteenth; who being scarce warm in his seat, Boniface the John the sixteenth,
the son of a Priest; and this John the sixteenth left it to John the
seventeenth, that the saying of Platina may here be found true, That (to the
great good of the Christian Commonwealth) these monsters, while mutually they
banded one against another, they lived not long. Boniface the seventh is noted
by him, malarum artium, to attain to the Popedom by wicked means,
sacrilege, corruption, and tyranny: and also John the sixteenth to prodigal
to his kindred and friends of all things both divine and humane, without any
respect of the service of God, or the honor of the dignity of the Sea of
Rome: Which error, says Platina, he has so left by tradition to his
posterity, that it continues even to our time; insomuch that the Clergy of
this age desire not the Popedom for the service and worship of God, but that
they may satisfy the gluttony and avarice of their brethren, kindred, and
familiars. And so of the rest. At length one Crescentius a citizen of Rome,
Otho the third being far distant, dared to attempt the government of the
city, the people distasting a strange Empire: John, who loved better a Lord
far off, than near at hand, rather foreign than domestical, inuiteth Otho,
who was afterward the third, to come into Italy, and promised to crown him
Emperor: John dying before Otho arrived at Rome, Otho by his authority created
at Rauenna, Bruno Pope, of the house of Saxony, his kinsman, then in his
company, and sent him to be created at Rome. This was Gregory the fifth, who
likewise in the year 996 received him, An. 996.
and crowned him with Marie his wife in the city of Rome. But so soon as Otho
was returned into Germany, Crescentius made chief Consul, taking courage to
himself, expeld Gregory, as not chosen by the people, but by the only
authority of the Emperor, and created a certain Greek, Bishop of Plaisance;
with the consent both of the Clergy and people; no less rich, says Platina,
than learned, whose name has been concealed, because he was unlawfully
created. Whereupon Gregory flies to Otho, who from Germany returns with
his army Crescentius in the castle, takes this John the eighteenth, puts
out his eyes, and reestablisheth Gregory. This Gregory (says Martin, Platina
in Gregor. 5.
and after him Platine) who in favor of him established a law to continue for
ever, That it should only appertain to the Germans to choose the Prince, who
is called Caesar, and King of the Romans, but yet not held for Emperor, till
he were crowned and confirmed by the Bishop of Rome. But Onuphrius shows by
good arguments that they are deceived, attributing to Gregory the fifth that
which belongs to the tenth. Baron. an. 996. art. 71.
And Baronius after a long disputation comes to this, That the Electors of the
Empire create him not, but that the Emperors should be chosen by the Princes
of Germany, without any necessity to go to An. 998.
every man may judge, what their misery might be among these frequent
mutations of Popes, being never almost without murder, sedition, civil
wars, and foreign forces.

Baronius notwithstanding attesting and detesting all these disorders (the
cause whereof he could neither dissemble nor ouerslip the History) could not
endure that the Emperor in a solemn Synod of the Church (whereof Luitprand
describes all the circumstances) should bring matters to a better state; but
thought it more tolerable that the Church should stick in the depth of all
filthiness and gluttony, than to be drawn forth by the hands of a lawful
Prince. This Synod (says Otho the first, in the year 963, to depose this
execrable John the thirteenth, whom he terms a monster, was a false Synod,
Baron. an. 963. art. 31, 32.
if ever were any, wherein the Ecclesiastical law was never more wronged,
more Canons violated, nor pernicious traditions, and justice prostrate, trodden
under foot, and oppressed with greater shame. But how forsooth? Because (says
he) that they having once acknowledged him for Pope, be it right, be it wrong,
by freewill or by force (as he has said before that nothing was lawfully acted
in his election) they could assemble no Council against the Pope without his
consent. And hereupon he grows very testie and choleric; a Priest fit to
adore Antichrist in the Church, and carry his train after him. Now then after
he had apparently John the thirteenth, that is, they that were subrogated Popes
in a solemn manner, after such a monster, were all unlawful, especially Leo
the eight: neither do we greatly labor therein, for whether of them are to be
preferred, it matters not greatly; John, whom he terms a monster, is the
only lawful Pope.

But he could in no wise dissemble the cause; for that constitution of Leo in
favor of Otho and his successors, Did. 63.
which we have formerly alleged D. 63, vexed him even at the heart, whereof he
fretteth and fumeth against Gratian, These things (says he) he handled too
unadvisedly, this Synod was a counterfeit Synod, and this Leo the eight a false
adulterous Pope. And to speak a truth, where shall we find a true and a
lawful one? Besides, what necessity was it in him (says he) to pronounce him
King and Patricius, when John the twelfth had consecrated him Emperor? Verily,
because he did not think he could be well consecrated by such a monster.
Baron. an. 964. art. 23.
Was it not decreed in that worthy Council of Constance, that the execution
should be left to the politic Magistrate? but he should have rested himself
upon Gregory the thirteenth, who approved this Constitution in a reformed
decree by his silence, with notes added thereunto. But see what he elsewhere
says, as a thing very authentike to prove the right that the Emperors have by
the Popes permission to choose a successor, Baron. an. 996. art. 41.
To great Otho (says he) this right was first granted by the Bishop of Rome.
These are his own words, how then without shame dares he call it into doubt?

38. PROGRESSION.
Of the troubles that arose in France through the faction of Hugh, surnamed
Capet, and Charles Duke of Lorraine: with the treason and treacheries of
Arnulphus Canon of Laon.

HEre let us now recite what past in these times in our France, which upon the
declination of the race of Charles the Great was diversely vexed, until the
progeny of Capet, either through others negligence, or their own policy, had
gotten the upper hand; whereupon the kingdom of France, by the consent of
Hugh, surnamed Capet, whose posterity by the providence of God does yet
flourish. In the mean time Charles Duke of Lorraine entered into France to
dispute his right by force of arms, and first works with Arnulphus, Canon of
Laon, base son of King Lothaire, father of the last Lewis, by whose means he
possessed the City, and takes Adalbero Bishop thereof, and puts him into
prison, who soon after escaped and came to King Hugh, Gerbert in ep. ad
Othonem and ad Wilderodonem Episcop. Argentinensem. Synod. Rhemens. c. 26.
which was not done without slaughter and spoil, as appears by an Epistle of
Gerbert to the Emperor Otho, He took prisoner (says he) his own Bishop,
circumuented by fraud, and with him the City of Laon, after much bloodshed and
many outrages committed. And writing to the Synod at Rheims, He became (says
he) a famous Apostate, Nevertheless Hugh sought all means to draw him into
his faction, hoping to benefit himself thereby; and Adalbero Archbishop of
Rheims chauncing to die (appointing for his successor Gerbert, who was
afterward Pope Syluester the second) he made him Archbishop, taking of him an
authentike promise of fidelity, written with his hand, sworn with his mouth,
and subscribed of all the people and nobility of that diocese, Synod.
Rhemens. c. 25. Gerbert. in epistola ad Othonem and ad Wilderodonem Ep.
Argentinens.
Acceptis ab eo (says the Synod) terribilibus sacramentis, which the same
Gerbert witnesses. His intelligence nevertheless for all that continued with
Charles of Lorraine, so that six months after he marching with his army
before Rhemes, was received into the City through the treason Arnulph, who
nevertheless played his part by a Priest of his, named Adalgare, and the
better to hide his villainy, was carried prisoner to Laon, with other French
Lords that were then within the City. And of this second perjury says
Gerbert; He betrayed the City, he polluted the Sanctuary of God, ransackt
all, and caused the people to be carried away captive. And presently after
(says he) excommunicated his own proper thefts, and commanded the Bishops of
France to do the same. In the mean time so far forth did he persist in his
dissimulation, that for the space of eighteen months, being carefully
admonished by the Bishops of France to purge himself of so great a crime, at
length being forsaken of his chiefest consorts, was not ashamed to submit
himself to the Kings favor, and Charles. Hugh therefore as yet scarce seated
in the kingdom, thinking to deal mildly with him, repaireth to John the
sixteenth, and both by letters and embassages complains of the injuries done
unto him, and at the first was gently accepted. But the Synod says, Synod.
Rhemens. c. 27.
As the Legates of the County Herbert arrived, and had delivered their presents
unto him, this man, as Platina tells us (who prodigally bestowed upon his
kindred all things both divine and humane that belonged to the service of God)
altered his mind: insomuch that being wearied in waiting at the gates of his
palace the space of three days, they returned, not doing any thing; not only
not admitted, but Hugh, who in the mean time had taken in the Cities of Rheims
and Laon, and by the same mean got Arnulph into his power, caused a National
Council to be held at Rheims in the year 991: An. 991.
Wherein Arnulph by his own proper confession being found guilty, was in a
solemn manner deposed, and Gerbert, who was afterward Syluester the second,
put by the King in his place, who had the charge to put in writing the Acts of
this Council, which also are now read by us. The Pope then being inwardly
moved, not so much for the judgment of Arnulphus, as offended at the lawful
liberty of the French Fathers, excommunicated those that had subscribed to the
conclusion of this Council, and straightly forbad Gerbert his Archiepiscopall
function, in a Synod held at Gregory the fifth proceeded in the same course,
insomuch that Gerbert was constrained to forsake that part, and to live under
the protection of the Emperor Otho the third. But with what constancy
nevertheless the French Bishops did entertain the arrogancy of the Popes, it
is now time to consider.

OPPOSITION.
There assembled therefore in the year 991 at Rheims, under Hugh and Robert
his son, the most famous Bishops of all the Provinces, recited by name in
this Synod, Synod. Rhemens. c. 1, 2.
the Acts whereof were elegantly set down by Gerbert; who was afterward
Siluester the second. And first of all they appointed for President Siguin the
Archbishop of Sens, but the Custos and interpreter of all that was done,
Arnulph Bishop of Orleance, because amongst all the Bishops of France he was
most famous for his wisdom and eloquence. First therefore he proposes unto
them how much it concerned them, Synod. Rhemens. c. 2, 3.
truly and strictly to examine the fact of Arnulph Bishop of Rheims, his
offense being such as came within the compass of high treason; for one man's
cause we should be accused of perfidious infidelity, and men may justly say,
If the Bishops used just laws, and were faithful to their Kings, why punish
they not with their laws so impure and corrupt a man? Doubtless the reason is
this, They are willing to conceal the wickedness of others, that they
themselves might be bold to sin without punishment. Whereunto Siguin
Archbishop of Sens answered, That he would never endure that this pretended
offense of treason should be discussed, except a promise were made (if he
should be convicted) of pardon; for which he alleged the 31 Canon of the
Council of Toledo: whereunto the Bishops it is to be feared, that the secular
people would not from henceforward attend spiritual judgments, owing all
justice and obedience to their King. Secondly, there was produced the oath of
Arnulph to the Kings Hugh and Robert, in express words, using that imprecation
against himself which the Prophet did against the traitor Judas, Psalm. 109,
Fiant dies mei pauci, and Episcopatum meum accipiat alter etc. Let my days be
few, and let another take my Bishopric, or my Charge etc. beseeching withal
his brethren and sons (that is, his Diocesans) not to be backward in
approving the same under their hands and seals. Thirdly, the Priest Adalger
was sent for, by whom he played that traitorous part at Rheimes, who confessed
the whole fact, and declared Arnulph the captain and to put his hand to the
fire, and protesting that he was stricken with horror and fear of that curse
which was pronounced against Arnulph and his followers, which is there recited
in the selfsame words. And it is worthy the noting, that this was done, not
by the authority of S. Peter, or the Sea of Rome, but by the authority (say
they) and power given to the Apostles, and left unto us; and in like manner
that which was pronounced upon the fact of Laon, set down in the selfsame
style. Siguin asked, Whether Arnulph from thenceforward abstained from the
company of those that were excommunicated? to which he answered, That he did
quite contrary, accounting them worthy of the communion of the faithful.
Cap. 11.12, 13. and 14.
And hereupon were read the fourth Canon of the Synod Arnulph Bishop of
Orleans, the moderator of this business, requesteth, That it might be lawful
for any man to defend him, for his Clergy, for his Abbots; yea they are
commanded, under pain of the great Curse, with all fidelity and liberty to
speak in defense of his innocence; which in the name, and by the consent of
all the rest was pronounced by Siguin. Whereupon there came presently forth
John, a scholar of Auxerre, Romulfe Abbot of Sens, Abbo Rector of Florat, Cap.
17.18.19. and 20.
furnished with books, and confessing themselves to be urged thereunto by the
force of that curse that was laid upon them, if they should omit any thing
that might Stephen Archbishop of Mauricania to Damasus Bishop of Rome, and
another of Damasus to Stephen, whereby they prove, That the causes of Bishops
and other great affairs ought always to be referred to the Bishop of Rome.
They likewise alleged certain articles out of the Epistles Decretals, by us
formerly confuted, whereby they would seem to euict, That Arnulph above all
things ought to be restored, and that without the knowledge and consent of the
Pope nothing might be done in his business, who in all cases whatsoever was to
be judged by him and none other. The Synod answers and determines out of the
tenth Canon of the African Council, That if any Clerk shall neglect
Whereupon there were alleged many examples, namely, that of Hildeman Bishop
of Beauvais, Hebo Archbishop of Rheims, Crescon de Villarege, and others.
Letters were there read sent both from Kings and Bishops, Cap. 23.24.
whereby John the Pope had been advertised of the whole matter, and entreated
to pronounce sentence against this man, honored with so great a dignity by
King Hugh, and that freely, and yet convicted of such heinous offenses, and who
being called to the Palace refused to come, being invited by the Archbishops
and Bishops, answering that he owed them no such duty; and at the last was not
only entreated, but charged to do that which was fit to be concerning this
other Judas, to the end, that by his occasion the name of God might be no more
blasphemed, and he from hence forward might not pretend cause of ignorance: our
Bishops adding thereunto these words, To the end we may know and understand why
amongst all others we are to prefer your Apostleship, judging him
consequently to be, or not to be, the successor of Saint Peter, as he should
confirm or disallow their sentence, pronounced according to the Canons; which
they thought was by no means to be called in doubt. But all this
notwithstanding, he made little account of these letters, and a white horse
given by Cont Herbert prevailed more than their Legation, who for the better
dispatch of certain maledicta in reos, demanded ten crowns, which he ought
not to have done, if they were not just, for That he for whose cause he had
been taken, should order this business as it seemed good unto himself. It
was not therefore without cause, that the Council of Carthage, where were
assistants 227 Bishops, and among the rest Saint Augustine, ordained, for a
perpetual memory, What we are to hold concerning the power of the Bishop of
Rome: Which being all there read, they gathered from thence this conclusion,
That all business were to be determined in those places where they had their
beginning, and that there was no Appeal to be made to the Bishop of Rome. But
for as much as the cause of Arnulph Bishop of Rhemes was not in question,
whether it should be referred to Pope John or no, it seems good to Arnulph
Bishop of Orleance, who We honor, says he, most reverend Fathers, the Church
of Rome, for the memory of S. Peter; neither do we strive to withstand the
decrees of the Bishop of Rome, but reserving still the authority of the Nicene
Council, we have had that Church ever in highest veneration etc. But two
things there are which especially we must foresee, that is to say, Whether the
silence of the Bishop of Rome, or any new constitution of his, may be
preiuditious to the laws of the Canons, or the decrees of our Forefathers (he
being silent) must hold their peace: And if a new constitution, to what end is
it to make laws, when all things are directed according to the will and
arbitrament of one man? Doubtless you cannot but see, that if you admitted
either the And here he recites summarily, all the wickedness, disorders,
murders, slaughters, reuenges committed by him and his successors under the
reign of Otho. There succeeded at Rome, says he, in the Popedom, that
horrible monster Boniface, who had not his peer in all manner of sin and
wickedness, tainted with the blood of his predecessors, etc. Is it reason,
says he, that infinite numbers of the Priests of God, famous in the world for
their knowledge and godly conversation, should be subject to such monsters,
full of infamy, void of all knowledge, both divine and humane? What means
this most reverend Fathers? Or by what vice is it come to pass, that the head
of the Church of God, who has been mounted to so great a height, (Si, pro
quia, I say, If, where I should say Because) and puffed And here, gentle Reader,
content not thy self with that which Baronius answers, That they are not to
deny their obedience to such Popes, because our Lord and Savior, the eternal
wisdom, Baron. vol. 10. an. 992. art. 20.21.22.
refused not to obey a Carpenter, and his mother the virgin, for he was not
ashamed to abuse these examples in favor of those monsters; and to say a truth,
never did Baronius more plainly show his folly. Whither therefore, says
Arnulph, shall we go for counsel? The Gospel says, that our Savior sought
thrice for fruit in one fig tree, and because he found vix ostiarius efficitur,
they will hardly make a porter, with what face dare they teach that which they
never learned? And so examining all the Canons and Decrees alleged by the
defendants, he shows them, That nothing has bin done in prejudice of them,
setting before their eyes many examples of the same case of one Aegidius
Archbishop of Reimes, deposed in the city of Metz by the Bishops of France,
and Romulph was made his successor, because contrary to his faith given to king
Childebert, he had joined in friendship with Chilperie. And yet nevertheless,
says he, Gregory the Great, an earnest defender of the privileges of the
Roman Church, never spoke word for, or against these. The same he affirms of
Hebbo Archbishop of Reimes, deposed for treason by the BB. of France at
Thionuille, etc. What then, says he, if our passage to Rome should by the
swords of Barbarians be intercepted, or that Rome it self serving a Barbarian,
his covetousness and ambition moving him thereunto, in aliquod regnum
efferatur ( note efferatur) should be raised against any Realm, shall there be
in the mean time either no Councels, or shall the Bishops of the whole world,
to the hurt or overthrow of their own kings, seek for counsel, and And to
prove that the Churches were now in that state, that they needed not any more
to have recourse to Rome, To speak more plainly, says he, and to confess
openly the truth, After the fall of the Empire this city has undone the
Church of Alexandria, and lost that of Antioch, and to say nothing of Africa
and Asia, Europe it self is departed, discedit: For the Church of
Constantinople is retired, and the inward parts of Spain know not her
judgments. There is made therefore a departure, as the Apostle speaks, not
only of nations, By this his speech giving them plainly to understand, That
then Peter (whose memory they did honor) but of Antichrist himself.
Entreating them for a conclusion, That since Rome had been consulted by them,
but yet no form of judgment from thence had been pronounced, Cap. 29. and 30.
that they would ask counsel of the Canons, By how many Hereupon were read
the tenth and seventh Canons of the Council of Carthage, to which the
defendants of the party accused yielding themselves, the Bishop is sent for,
and commanded by the Synod to take his place: he presently either denying all,
or endeavoring to cover it, Arnulph Bishop of Orleans made him presently to
blush, conuicteth him with his own words, confronted him with his own
domestical servants, who were ready to go through fire and water to make good
their testimony. It was requested Siguin Bishop of Sens, Arnulph of Orleans,
Cap. 30. and 31.32.33.34.35.36.37.38.39.40.41.42.43.44.45.46.47.48.49.
Bruno of Langres, Godzman of Amiens, in whose absence many Canons were read
that concerned this question. In the end being pressed, after many
tergiuersations, partly by the force of such proofs as were brought against
him, partly by the prick of his own conscience, Arnulph of Reimes breaks
out into an open confession of his sins, with tears and gronings, confessing
much more than they knew, and acknowledging himself unworthy of his
Priesthood. Whereupon the Bishops of the Synod were sent for, that being his
own witness and his Cap. 49. and 50.
only there was a question of the form, for which they searched the ancient
Councels. And whilst diverse thought diversely thereof, some pitying him for his
race, some for his youth, and the Bishops themselves moved with the ruin of
their brother, and that scandal that hereby fell upon the Priestly dignity,
in came the Kings and Peers of France, who putting themselves into that holy
assembly, thanked the Bishops for their justice, and that zeal and care they
had showed in this their Council for the good and safety of their Princes,
and withal desired to be further satisfied touching the whole course of their
proceedings: which Arnulph Bishop of Orleans. And then the better to discharge
the Synod of envy and partiality, the party accused was brought in to
pronounce his own condemnation with his own mouth; which he did in express
words, requiring nevertheless Arnulph of Orleans, because shame stopped his
own mouth, to relate the whole matter at large: which having performed, he
asked him, Whether he would confess that which he had hitherto spoken of him:
which he affirming to be true, the Bishop of Orleans willed him to cast
himself down before his Lords and Kings, whom he had so hainously offended,
and confessing his fault, to beg his life at their hands: who being bent to
mercy, Let him live, say they, for the love of you, and remain under your
custody, fearing neither yrons nor bands, upon condition Whereupon that height
of honors that by degrees he had attained unto, by degrees he put off, and
resigning to the king that which he had received from him, and delivering the
ensigns of his Priestly dignity into the hands of the Bishops, he recited
with his own mouth the form of the deposition in the midst of this
assembly, according to the example of his predecessor Hebo; which was there
read word by word, and by all the Bishops that were present subscribed, all of
them saying unto him, Cap. 54.55.
according to thy profession and subscription cease from thine office. Which
being done, they discharged the Clergy and people from their oath they had
made unto him, that it might be free for every man to subject himself to the
authority of any other man. And here the Arnulph Bishop of Orleans; and
withal what they thought and judged of Rome, and the Bishop thereof. Sixthly,
Pope John hereupon waxes angry, and full of discontent, in so much that he
threateneth his excommunications against the Kings. But Hugh, least his
competitors should thereby take advantage, sends him the whole course of
proceeding in writing, and withal sends him letters to this effect. We know we
have done nothing against your Apostolic See, and if you vouchsafe not to give
credit to us that are absent, being present But John resolved rather to send
Legates. And in the mean time whilst these things were thus delayed, Gerbert
(afterward Pope Siluester the second) writ an Epistle to Siguin Archbishop of
Sens, who to the Pope seemed to favor Arnulph, the man accused, and now
condemned; Which Epistle was Gerbertus in Epist. ad Siguinum Senomens.
Your wisdom, says he, should have avoided the wily subtilties of crafty
men, and have hearkened to the voice of the Lord, which says, If they shall
say unto you, Here is Christ, and there is Christ, follow them not: It is said
that he is at Rome, who justifies that which you condemn, and condemns that
which you take to be just; and we say, that it is God and not man that
condemns those things that seem just, and to justify that which seems
evil, etc. God says, If thy brother have sinned against thee, go and reprove
him, etc. How then do these that emulate us say, That in the deposing of
Arnulph we were to expect the judgment of the Bishop of Rome? Can they teach
us, that the judgment of the Bishop of Rome is greater than the judgment of
God, when the first Bishop of Rome, and the Prince of the Apostles, tells us,
that we must rather obey But Pope John in the mean time hardly enduring these
things, appointed a Synod sometimes at Rome, sometimes at Aix, where our
Bishops (pretending that they were not bound to go forth of the realm) would
not be found: at the last at Mouson upon the borders of France, where only
Gerbert, whom Hugh had nominated Archbishop of Rheimes, appeared, and in the
presence of Leo Abbot of S. Boniface, the Popes Legate, many of the Bishops of
Germany and Italy assisting, he defended the cause of the Fathers of France,
in such sort, that the Legate durst not Gerbert to use his Episcopal function,
who not fearing to answer him to his face, told him, That it was not in the
power of any Bishop, Patriarch, or Pope, to remove from the communion any of
the faithful, who has not been convicted, or of his own accord confessed the
fact, or has not refused to come unto the Council, but of all these three was
none that might hinder him, since he had neither confessed, nor was convicted,
and had only amongst all the Bishops of France appeared at this Council. But
in the mean time Gerbert went into Germany to the Emperor Otho the third,
with whom he had been formerly brought up, who shortly after made him
Archbishop Arnulph was restored to his Bishopric; which it is likely Leo the
Popes Legate obtained, because John had confirmed the marriage of king Robert, as
appears in a letter that Gerbert sent to queen Adeleide. Gerbertus in Epist.
ad Adelaidam Reginam.
Add hereunto, That Gerbert would not hold the Bishopric upon such
conditions as were proposed unto him. But it seems by an Epistle of Hughes,
which is read among the Epistles of Gerbert, that this marriage was that of king
Robert with Bertha the sister of Rodolph king of Burgonie, which afterward was
dissolved by reason Gerbert could not bridle himself, but that he must needs
write an Apology of the Church of France in an Epistle to Wildered Bishop of
Strasbourge, wherein he proves out of the ancient Canons of the Church the
just proceedings of our Bishops, in these words: Gerbertus in Epist. ad
Wilderodonem Episc. Argentinensem.
The silence of the Pope, or his dissimulation, or his new constitutions, are
prejudicial to the laws established; but this is but a cavil of wicked men,
etc. Thou say, that Arnulph practicing seditions, treasons, captiuities, the
utter overthrow of his kings, the betraying of his country, contemning all
laws both divine and humane, is neither to be deprived of the communion, nor
by the power of his Prince to be cast out, without the command Orbis the world
is greater than a city; and if one Priest be not sufficient, then let great
Pope Leo come: The privilege (says he) of S. Peter holds not good, where a
man judges not according to the equity of S. Peter etc. To what end are
matters judged and determined, if matters to be judged are not thereby
informed? Those 318 Fathers of the Council of Nice, how made they eternal
laws, if it be in the power of one only man to abrogate them at his pleasure?
Apiarius the Priest is condemned by the Africans, and restored again to the
communion by the Romans: The Bishops of Afric writ to Pope Celestine, That
this was contrary to the Council of Nice: Our false accusers after the same
manner say, That Arnulph, a chief Bishop, ought not to be judged but by the
Sovereign Bishop of Rome. And Saint Augustine says of Cecilian the
Metropolitan Bishop This Gerbert in the mean while, a Monk of the Abbie of
Fleurack, not very happy (as he says) for his race, nor his plenty of
wealth, yet esteemed for his wisdom and capacity, of men of greatest worth
and nobility.

An. 1000.
And here we come to the thousand year: But least any man should think that
we, or such Authors as we have alleged, should speak of the Church of Rome
out of passion or discontent, it shall not be amiss to insert the judgment of
Cardinal Baronius himself, touching these times, who in the tenth tome of his
Annals has these words. Baron. Annal. to. 10. An. 912. art. 5.
What was then the face, says he, of the Roman Church? How foul was it, when
strumpets, no less powerful than unclean and impudent, bare rule at What
manner of Cardinals, Priests, Deacons, think you, were chosen by these
monsters, since there is nothing so natural, as for every thing to engender
his like? And who in the mean time can doubt, that they consented in all
things to those by whom they were chosen? who will not easily believe that they
followed their steps? and who knows not that they endeavored nothing more, but
that our Lord should still sleep, and never rise up to judgment, never

We must not forget that Baronius reprehendeth our Historiographer Glaber in
one point, wherein nevertheless he expresses to the life the belief of our
French Church. The Earl Foulke of Anjou having built a Church, went himself
to Rome with a great sum of money, which he delivered to John the
seventeenth, to the end he would send a Legate to consecrate the place:
Whereunto Foulk should command. But, says Glaber, the Prelates of France
hearing thereof, Glaber. Historiar. lib. 2. c. 4. Baron. to. 10. an. 996. art.
21. 22. 23. 24.
judged it to be sacrilegious presumption, proceeding from blind ambition, etc.
being a thing too indecent, that he that ruled the Sea Apostolic, should be
the first that did transgress the Apostolical and Canonical order, especially
being aunciently confirmed by many authorities, Multiplici authoritate, that
not any Bishop should presume to exercise any such power in another Diocese,
except it were at the request, or by the permission of him to whom it
appertained; yea not excepting the Bishop of Rome himself, whose Diocese they
held not to be the whole world. But thus he proceeds: An innumerable
multitude of people being gathered together, in a clear and Which strange
accident being spread abroad through the whole country, there was no man that
doubted, that the insolent boldness of this presumption had made vain the vow
of Foulk, and was a manifest warning to all that were present, and to come,
never to attempt the like. For though the Bishop of Rome for the dignity of
the Apostolic See, was had in greater reverence than all other in the world,
yet it was never permitted that he should transgress in any thing the order of
the Canonical government. For as every Bishop and spouse of the true Church
has some uniformity in his seat with the Image of our Savior, so generally
it becomes no man to

39. PROGRESSION.
Of Enchantments and the art of Nigromancie, practiced by the Popes to attain
the Popedom, and used by them for other wicked and unlawful purposes. How the
diuill deceived Syluester the second, touching the time and place of his death.
Of Benedict the ninth his sacrifices to the devil, who in the end strangled
him in the forest: and of

THe Age that follows mends but a little, and therefore a Carthusian notes,
That in the year 1000 we enter into a monstrous time, infamous for Magic
arts, and all manner of wickedness; his words are these, and not without
cause: There began about the year of our Lord 1000, an effeminat time,
Fascicul. Tempor. An. 1000.
wherein the Christian Faith began much to decline from her first virilitie, as
appears in the prophecy of S. Hildegard, etc. men betaking themselves to
sorceries, and enchantments; and the Priest was as the people. After John the
seventeenth succeeded Gregory the fifth, Otho the third, and chosen out of his
company at Rauenna; who being sent to Rome to be consecrated, the Emperor not
long after received the Crown from his hands. But he had no sooner turned his
face toward Germany, but that Crescens a Consul constrained him to leave the
city, and set up against him another Pope; in such sort that at the request of
Gregory, Otho was enforced to return to Rome, where he used much severity in
punishing the authors of that sedition. But shortly after Gregory being dead,
Otho (the Clergy and people being assembled together) chose for his successor
that Gerbert of whom we have spoken so much before, who in his youth was his
tutor, and was called Siluester the second. A man, as appears by many of his
Martinus in Chron. Galfridus in supplement. Sigiberti Malmesburiensis l. 2.
Hist. Angl. Anton. Archiep. tit. 16. part 2. sect. 18. Vincent. l. 24. c. 98.
Henric. Erford in Chron. Plat. in Siluestr. Johannes Stella ibid.
I should be ashamed to allege it, but that Martinus Polonus, Vincent of
Beauvois, Malmesburiensis, Anthony the Archbishop, Henry of Herford,
Carthusianus, Platina, Stella, and others, go before me, and the most part of
them Gerbert had learnt this art in a book which he stole from Seuille in
Spain, that he did homage to the diuill, and had in his closet a brazen head,
by which the devil gave him answers: With whom consulting about the time of
his continuance in that See, answer was given him, That he should not die
until he had celebrated Mass in Jerusalem; a voyage far from his thought
to have ever undertaken, and therefore he promised to himself a long life. But
falling sick of an ague at Rome, in the church of the holy Cross called
Jerusalem, whilst he was celebrating Mass in Lent, by a strange noise of
devils, he perceived his death was at hand, and began to see the doubtful
meaning of the Oracle. Whereupon being moved with the horror of his sins, he
discovered should be put into a chariot drawn with two horses, and there
buried where the horses of their own accord should draw him. Which desire of
his being performed, it fell out, that the horses carried him to the church of
S. Lateran, where the Cardinals buried him. And his sepulcher, say they, by the
noise and rattling of the bones, and the sweating of the sepulcher, did presage,
a long time after, the death of the Popes. This history nevertheless by some
in these days is called into doubt, and especially by Baronius, because there
is no mention made of any such matter by Glaber and Dithmarus, but quite
contrary he is commended by them for his almsdeeds and charity toward the
poor. But the Monk of Malmesburie That Siluester ended his life after a base
and villainous manner. Benno Card. in vita Hildebrandi.
And Cardinal Benno, another of that time, speaking of him, has these words:
Gerbert, shortly after the year of our Lord 1000, ascending from the
bottomless pit, by the permission of God, possessed the Sea four years, who
changing his name, was called Siluester the second; and by those selfsame
means which he had deceived others (which was the answers of the devils) he
likewise deceived himself, being surprised by the just judgments of God with
a sudden death. And afterward he proceeds in the history as before. Benno
adds, That he had for his disciples Theophilact Laurence, who sacrificed unto
devils, and that betwixt them and diverse others, after his death, there was
much contention by the selfsame arts, who should attain to the Popedom, and
that his successors a long time after made it their profession; which hereafter
we shall speak of more particularly. Baronius, though in horror of the
miserable end of Siluester he call it into doubt, yet he gives but a hard
judgment of him, to the end he might both begin and end that Age with the
public abomination of that See. Before his Popedom he painteth him out to be
a courtier among courtiers, with which profession he began, that by Baron. an.
991. art. 6. 7. and 992. art. 3.
he might excel all others. But being come to his Popedom, he affirms that
of him which he would have us believe of all the rest, That he was no way
transubstantiated by his chair: But to say the truth, says he, An. 999. art.
2.
he was very unworthy of that See, but such indignities the church of Rome
was constrained to endure, because the Roman Bishops were elected by secular
Princes. In the mean time he would not see, that better were not chosen by the
elections and factions of the Clergy. Sergius, successor to Siluester, made
this Epitaph, wherein he acknowledges him to have bin created by Otho the
third.


Obtulit hoc Caesar tertius Otho sibi.
After a year he ruled Rome with changed name,
Otho the third, then Caesar, gave the same.
And whereas Sigonius affirms, Othone 3. Diploma Donationis quod Assisij
seruatur in Archiuis Ecclesiae Romanae.
That Otho the third at his request renewed the Donations which are said to be
of Pepin, Charles, Lewis, to the Church of Rome; as he alleges no Author, so
it is easily refelled by the testimony of Otho himself: For in that donation,
whose letters patents are kept in the Popes register Siluester his master, as
before we have noted; by which donation he excludes all the rest, and withal
the palea of Constantine he rejects, and acknowledges not that of Charles
and Lewis, and makes as little account of that of Caluus himself. Add
hereunto, that not without the dishonor of the Sea, this donation is said to
be gotten by Siluester by the service of the devil. John Sicco, a Roman,
succeeded Siluester in the year 1003, according to Platina the nineteenth, who
continued only five months, and yet in that short time it is said that he
brought to pass, that the election of the Roman Popes should belong only to
the Roman Clergy, without the consent of the people, whereby the authority of
the Cardinals was greatly increased; alleging The people are to be led, not to
be followed. Bacontorpius in Prologo in 4. sent. q. 10.
An order nevertheless ill observed a long time after. Stella likewise
attributes unto him the Feast of all Souls, first invented by Odilon Abbot of
Clugnie, the observation whereof John afterward imposed upon all. John the
twentieth, called Fasanus, succeeded him, and presently Sergius the fourth;
neither of them praise worthy in any thing. Afterward followed Benedict the
eigth, John the one and twentieth, Benedict the ninth, Siluester the third,
Gregory the sixth, which bring us to the year 1045, An. 1045.
and were all of one stamp, created by the factions of the Earls of Tuscane,
and if we may believe their own writers, all infamous for the art Magic.
Cardinal Benno speaking of Hildebrand, who was Gregory the seventh, says,
Cardin. Benno in vita Hildibrandi.
That he had he says, That he sacrificed to devils in woods and mountains,
and by the art Magic won unto him the love of women: The books that were
found in his house, after he had ended his wicked life in a bad manner,
witness the same. He was always assisted by Laurence the Prince of
Inchanters, who gloried much amongst the Bishops, Cardinals, and Senators, that
he had such a disciple. In the end, says he, he was strangled by the devil in
the forests, his Archpriest banished, and Laurence enforced to run away. In all
other things he was so ignorant, that he had a Colleague consecrated with him
Onuphrius himself calls him a man of nothing; Martinus in Chron. Platina in
Benedict. 8. Petrus Damianus in libro qui inscribitur Gratissimus.
and yet nevertheless by certain intermissions of times he reigned ten
years and somewhat more. Many Authors report, and among the rest Petrus
Damianus the Cardinal, who lived near about those times, That Benedict after
his death appeared to a certain Hermit near to a mill, in a most horrible
shape, being in body, head, and tail, like to an Ass; and being asked why he
so appeared; he answered, Because I lived in the Popedom like a beast, without
reason, without law, and without God. This Damian nevertheless being a great
champion of the Popes, as shall be showed in his due place. Herman. contractus
in Chron. Waltramus de inuestitura. Glaber Hist. l. 5. Platina in. Siluest. 3.
and alijs.
The Cardinal Benno says also of Siluester the third, That the Church of God
by his occasion was strangely torn and troubled with civil wars, But
Waltramus being guilty of his own insufficiency, and perceiving the Emperor
coming to Rome, resigned the Popedom to the Archbishop of S. John Port
Latin, for 1500. pounds of gold. And Glaber says he was chosen Pope being a
child of twelve years of age; but Baronius says, of ten years. Platina
therefore thus speaks of them all: The Popedom was then come to that pass,
that he that excelled all others in bounty, and ambition, I say not sanctity
of life and learning, was only able to obtain that dignity, the best sort of
men being oppressed and rejected. I would to God, says he, this had not been
the custom of the world in our times, but these are but small matters in
respect of those we shall see, if God prevent it not. Of Siluester he expressly
says, he entered not by the gate, but by the posterne, like a thief And yet
these were the men that managed the affairs of the Church, and therein did
bear rule at their own pleasure, even to the uttermost bounds of the earth;
yea they disposed of kingdoms and Empires according to their own lusts, that
that Prophecy might be fulfilled, That they should make drunken the kings of
the earth with the wine of their cup. And therefore Benedict the ninth
(according to Glaber) was not afraid to make this Decree, Glaber. l. 1. in fine.
That no man should be said or held for Emperor, but whom the Pope should
choose, and for his honesty and sufficiency should think fit for the
Commonweal, and to whom he had committed the Imperial Ensign, that is, says
the same Author, a golden globe or apple, which he caused to be made of
purpose, enriched with many precious Jewels, with a cross fastened on the top
thereof. The Empire Conrade, he offered it by his Legates to Peter king of
Hungary, with a Diadem whereon was this inscription: Petra dedit Romam Petro,
tibi Papa Coronam.
The Rock gave Rome to Peter, the Pope to thee the Crown.


For such Princes as were farthest from them were fittest for their purpose,
but yet ever with that condition that they should confirm their donations. But
let us now see what the Church thought of these confusions.

OPPOSITION.
All this we have learnt from none other but Monks, for they were the only
writers in these times, and therefore their testimony must needs be beyond all
exception, being taken as it were out of their own bosom. Glaber therefore
the Monk of Clugnie, An. 1047.
and writer of these times, in his history dedicated to Odibo the Abbot,
brings in the Emperor Henry the second speaking to the Archbishops and
Bishpos assembled together, Glaber Hist. li. 6. c. 5.
in these words: All Ecclesiastical degrees from the Pope to the Porter, are
oppressed with the price of their own damnation, and in all according to the
word of our Savior, spiritual theft is very cruel. The Author adds, And
this iniquity was not only sprung up among the Bishops of France, but was
far worse in Italy; for all Ecclesiastical offices were at that time as
vendible as other wares in a market place. The Bishops astonished and
confounded herewith, had no other refuge but to his mercy. He for their
comfort gave them this answer; Glaber. li. 5. c. 4.
Go your ways, says he, and what you have unlawfully received, endeavor to
use lawfully; and so he made a law for the repressing of such sales. Of the Sea
in particular he says, The Sea of Rome, which is held by right to be the
universal Church of the whole world, had for the space of five and twenty
years been miserably sick of this aforesaid pestilent disease; for there was
chosen to that See an infant of twelve years of age, against all law and
equity, whom gold and silver had more commended, than age or sanctity In
another place the aforesaid Glaber says, At that time the whole government
both of the secular power, Glaber. li. 4. c. 5.
and Ecclesiastical religion, consisted in the person of a child: For the
sins of the people that saying of Solomon was then verified; Woe be to the
earth: For the universal Pope of Rome, who was then chosen by the Romans, was
the nephew of two that were his predecessors, Benedict and John, a child of ten
years of age, and that by the help of a great sum of money: who being often
rejected, and dishonestly received again, ruled with no power. And as we have
partly touched before, the rest of the Prelates of the Church in those times,
preferred gold and silver before merit. Out and alas, of these the Scripture
speaks plainly, or rather He speaks likewise of Siluester the third. He
tells us in another place, That the avarice of Rome was grown to such a
height, that it contended with ambition; in such sort that about the year 1024
certain Legates being come from the Sea of Constantinople to Rome, An. 1024.
with wonderful rich presents as well of the Emperor Basilius as the
Patriarchs, to entreat that by the consent of the Pope the Church of
Constantinople might be taken for the universal Church of the East, as the
Roman of the West; there wanted but little but that John the one and twentieth
had yielded thereunto, And the Greeks, says the Author, Glaber. li. 4 c 1.
with a dagger of gold had broken a wall of iron: For he adds, That though
avarice for a time might be called the Queen But the business being come to
the cares of diverse who opposed themselves against it, the Greeks departed not
doing any thing. William, an Englishman, and Monk of Malmesburie, sets before
our eyes how bad the state of all things was at Rome in these times, speaking
thereof as of a public robbery: What shall I say, says he, of that city
that was heretofore the habitation of sanctity? Willielm. Malmesb. l. 2. de
Gestis Regum Anglor.
It is now the place where thieves and robbers walk in open market place, a
wicked and a crafty generation. If any man come to Rome, even with the danger
of his life, to visit the which could not be remedied with Excommunications,
the Cardinals themselves withstanding him the whole time of his abode in that
See. Fasciculus Temporum.
Rolwinck in his Fasciculus Temporum speaks of the plurality of benefices
which in those times grew to be very common, and so continued afterward: Of
the lamentable ambition and simonie of the Prelates, notwithstanding there were
found many writings of the Fathers, that bewrayed But he compares the state of
the Church in these times to those of Hieroboam, when he set up the golden
calves Many holy men, says he, did commonly affirm, that the same was to be
feared in the Ecclesiastical State, and now we see it performed in many parts
of the world. The Clergy, who should possess nothing but that which in reason
was competent for them, nor intermeddle with the affairs of the Temporaltie,
will take upon them to possess and to govern all things; and therefore as S.
Bernard says, such as observe no order hasten thither where dwells eternal
horror, etc. Good Reader take heed thou follow not this dangerous custom,
neither excuse thy self with the Popes dispensation, but follow the counsel
of those that are in the heavens above with God, least with the golden calves
thou burn in hell fire. An. 1046.
In the mean time, in the year 1046, the Emperor Henry the second, takes
his journey into Italy, partly to take possession of the Empire, partly
Benedict, Siluester, and Gregory, the one troubling and contending with the
other, and within the walls of Rome making barricadoes one against the other,
Siluester at S. Maria major, Benedict at the palace of S. Lateran, and Gregory
at S. Peter's: whereupon these verses were sent by a Hermit to Henry. Otho
Frisingens. l. 6. c. 31. Gregor. Hemburg. in admonitione de vsurpat Paparum
Roman.


Imperator Henrice, Omnipotentis vice.
Vnica Sunamitis, Nupsit tribus maritis,
Dissolve connubium, Et triforme dubium.
An. 1461. Herman. contract. and Carthusian. and Sigibert in Chron. Platina in
Gregor. 6. and Siluest. 3.
Great Emperor Henry, who in Gods stead must be,
The Church, who is but one, is married to three:
Dissolve thou the knot, and the doubt trebled will be.
Platina calls them three wicked monsters, and in his history of Siluester the
third says, We are like to see worse matters than all these, if God prevent
them not, since the good, being oppressed, he only rises to promotion that
excels in bounty and ambition, not in learning and sanctity of life. They use
not, says he, in these days to enter by the door, but the window, like
thieves and robbers: and of diverse others in this Age he affirms as much. Now
by this only disorder how many other may we imagine? Gregory the sixth being
convicted for obtaining the Popedom with money, by consent of them all was
deposed; and in like sort were the other two rejected, being deposed, says
Martine, Canonica and imperiali censura, by a Canonical and Imperial censure.
And the Romans being altogether ignorant whom upon the sudden they might
nominat to be Pope, the Emperor proposed unto them Suitger Bishop of
Bamberge, one of his own followers, and a man for his honesty and learning
well spoken of, whom he Clement the second. Sigon. l. 8. de regno Ital.
Martinus in Chron.
The Church, says Sigonius, having been now sick for the space almost of two
hundred years, the disease grew so desperate that it required violent remedies,
yea sword and fire, medicines that belong to diseases incurable. Whereupon,
says Martin, per vim substituit, he gave them a successor by force, the Romans
promising unto him, and swearing, That they would never choose Pope without his
consent. Leo Ostiens. c. 80
Leo the Cardinal of Ostia speaking in his Chronicle of these disorders, more
briefly says, Pope Benedict having held the Sea at Rome twelve years, was
deposed by the Romans, and John Bishop of Sabins, who was called Siluester,
substituted in his place, non tamen gratis, but yet not freely. But three
months after, this Benedict with the aid of the Tusculans his kinsfolk, drove
away Siluester, says he, the son of Conrade, his nefandis auditis, hearing
of these execrable things in the Apostolic See, inspired from heaven in the
year 1047 coming into Italy, went to Rome, desirous to purge the Apostolic
See of these spots: Whereupon he stayed at Sutri, where deliberating upon this
great and necessary business, statuit, he appointed there a general Council
to be called of all Bishops. There being therefore therefore, we see, agrees
not in opinion with Baronius, who says, That it is not lawful for an Emperor
to intermeddle with the affairs of the Sea of Rome; for he says quite
contrary, That he came inspired by God to that end, yea and he adds withal,
That he procured unto him a successor: And because these things were done with
so prosperous and good success, Sigon. l. 8. de regno Italiae.
the This selfsame year, in hope, or rather under some show of a reformation
of the Church, a Synod was held, where first a question was made concerning
simonie, which sin was then grown to such a height, says Sigonius (the Popes
either winking at it, or no way hindering the course thereof) that it was a
usual thing for Bishops to sell Orders to Clergy men, and consequently for
Clergy men to put their function to sale to the Laity: and therefore a
question was made, Whether such as were initiated by a Simoniacall Bishop
should hold their Orders. It was decreed, That if a Clerk when he was initiated
knew the Bishop of whom he took Orders to be Simoniacall, he otherwise he must
take his Orders again. And to pacify those tumults that were risen amongst
them by reason of the bad observation of that law which made the nomination of
the Pope, without the authority of the Emperor, of no force, it was decreed
again, Petrus Damianus in lib Gratissimus. Platina and Onuphr. in Clement. 2.
That all ancient honors should be restored to the Emperor Henry, and he
should still continue a Patritius, and dispose of the Church of Rome at his
pleasure; and that it should never hereafter be lawful to create a Pope of
Rome without his authority. The Author is Petrus Daemianus Bishop of Ostia. By
this means Henry seemed to have restored all things to their ancient order;
who nevertheless was hardly returned into Germany, but the Disciples Benedict
the ninth, Gerardus Brazutus, and Hildebrand, poisoned Clement, so that he had
not continued in all above six months, but they thrust Benedict into the
seat. But yet nevertheless the Emperor taking still hold of his privilege,
ordained for Pope Poppo Bishop of Brixen, who was afterward called Damasus the
second; who likewise, not without the industry of the same men, continued in
the Sea but three and twenty days: in place of whom he named again by the
same right Brunus Bishop of Toul, who was called Leo the ninth: For the Romans,
as it is likely, being wearied with those factions that arose about the
election of the Popes for the space of two hundred years, wherein the most
factious commonly prevailed, perceived that had not the Emperors interposed
their authority Benno notes, That Gerardus Brazutus, a familiar friend of
Benedict the ninth, by his sly and subtle familiarity, in the space of
thirteen years killed six Popes of Rome, that is, Clement, Damasus, Leo,
Victor, Stephen, by poison, Benedict the tenth by fraud and violence.

Baron. vol. 11. an. 1002. art. 5. 6.
Here what will Baronius say, and what judgment will he give of all these
times? Truly having in the whole precedent volume proclaimed for execrable
monsters all those Popes that had held the Sea for a hundred years before, at
the last he pronounces sentence against the race of the Emperors Othoes: That
in the person of Otho the third, by the just judgment of God, that race ended,
being Crescentius, because (like Osias) they durst to put their hands to the
Arc, though it were to uphold it; and to add their authority, though it were
with good zeal, to remove those monsters, and to place others in their seats.
Are monsters then by the Canon law in Baronius country suffered to live? or
must we stay and attend till they of their own accord remove and displace
themselves? Emperors, yea and Christian Kings, are they not bound, as
sometimes Ezechias, Josias, and others were, to repair the Temple of God, and
to reform the Church? And to betray the Church of Christ unto Antichrist, to
leave it as a prey to the enemy, needed there any other thing? In this interim
therefore, which contains about fifty years, were there in his own
judgment John, whom he calls the twentieth, the brother of that execrable
Benedict, whom for his wickedness he places in the bottom of Purgatory:
Idem vol. eodem an. 1024. art. 3. and 4.
Unworthy as he was, says he, he unworthily and tyrannically occupied the
place, and by ill means ascended unto it. And again, The secular power, that
is to say, the Marquesses of Tuscane, Glaber. l. 4. c. 1. 2. 3. Ideman. 1027.
art. 13. and 14. and an. 1032. art. 2. 3.
has brought forth monsters unto us. This monster nevertheless by his own
testimony, put S. Romwald into the Canon of Saints, pronounced S. Martial an
Apostle, and that by an express decree, in favor of those of Limoges.
Benedict the ninth succeeded this John. But what says Baronius? The Earl
Albericke had of his family two Popes, who were brothers, Benedict and John,
and hardly he Baronius himself, proved a tyran, and the shame and monster of
the Church. For to omit other things, what could be more monstrous, than an
infant of ten years of age to be the universal Pope, and Father of Fathers?
And yet if any man speak against it he is angry, and grows furious, yea he
makes profit of this shame, Baron. an. 1031.
and glories therein; and by this intrusion which he confesses he defends his
right. You see (says he) how great the authority of the Petrus Damianus
Bishop of Ostia, and one of the Popes chief champions, describes him unto us:
O wickedness, O prodigious monster (says he) is Peter himself enforced to
pay for the forestalments of Simon Magus out of his own store, who was known
with an everlasting curse to condemn Simon with And again in his verses, What
pity is it that the Apostolic See, sometimes the glory of the world, should
now, out and alas, be made the shop of Simon? Thy hammers beat the anuill, and
thy money is the money of hell: And yet this Benedict sat in the chair about
twelve years, so that the greatest age he arrived unto was but two and twenty
years. Now these people that boast so much of their successions and vocations,
with what face can they defend the missions of this man? Neither were those of
Siluester the third any better, who by the faction of Ptolomie a Consul of
Rome, interrupted the Sea of John; of whom says Baronius, Baron. an. 1044 art.
2.
This man was Bishop of the Sabines, who also, malis artibus, by bad means,
that is, by money, made himself way to the Papacy; which without wrong done
unto his Authors he Hermannus a Chronicler of those times, and Leo Bishop of
Ostia, had witnessed before, That the Romans being wearied with the wickedness
of Benedict, expelled him, and substituted, though not without money, Siluester
in his place. And that some few months after Benedict with the help of his
kindred and friends, recovered it again: who that he might with more liberty
betake himself to his own pleasures, he substituted John the Archpriest,
Herman. in Chron. Leo l. 2. c. 80. Otho Frisingensis supra.
who was accounted almost the more religious (he would have said, the more
hypocrite.) And of all three Otho Frisingensis recounteth before unto us the
pitiful estate that Rome was then in, I my self, says he, have heard it in
the city from the Romans themselves. To conclude, Baronius calls those three
false Popes, tricipitem Bestiam, a Beast Where is then that See against which
the gates of hell cannot prevail? Now Cerberus himself (as that which the
Poet speaks of) is choked with a ball of pitch. And where is that euer-running
spring of the spirit of God, or in whom did it now reside? This ball of pitch,
says he, a certain good man and a zealous, called Gratian, made for them;
Baron. an. 1045 and 1044.
and see how he did it: He went to the aforesaid men, and persuaded them with
money to forsake the Sea, and to Benedict he left the revenues of England,
because he seemed to be a man of greatest power and authority. The Romans in
recompense thereof, as to the purchaser of their freedom, made him Pope, who
was Gregory the sixth. I ask now, Whether this transaction may be borne with
amongst the Canonists? or whether Henry the Emperor, and the consent of the
Romans, expelled his See, and the Bishop of Bamberge, who was Clement the
second, installed in his place, chosen from amongst strangers, because, alas
therefore, there were none capable thereof at Rome. But Baronius is much
grieved with these words, Leo Ostiens. l. 2. c. 80.
who calls this election a detestable presumption of the Emperor Henry; and
does vehemently endeavor to prove, that therefore the Popedom of Clement could
not be lawful. But in all this time, when will he find us any Pope, and how
will he fill up that gulf of pretended succession which they so Benedict the
ninth, who yet continuing even after the death of Clement, thrust himself
thrice into the chair. We must not forget (that you may understand that the
liberty of the Churches was not yet wholly taken away) that Henry the King of
Germany, in the year 1006, held a Synod at Frankford, whereof Dithmar thus
speaks: Dithmar. l. 6.
The general Council is appointed at Frankford by the King, and was visited
by all those that are on this side the Alps. Which was done to make Bamberge a
Bishopric, and being done, Eberard was nominated Bishop by the Emperor, and
consecrated by Willegisus the President of the Synod, and all this without the
knowledge or consent of Rome. Henry his son likewise called another Council
An. 1047.
wherein he sharply repressed all simoniacal persons. Glaber says, Glaber. l.
5. c. 5.
Coadunare fecit, He assembled as well the Archbishops as the Bishops etc. And
for a conclusion, after he had pronounced a curse against all those that had
committed simonie, he protests and says, As God has given me of his mere
mercy the Crown, so will I freely give that which belongs to his religion.
Here is no mention made of Rome. But Baronius wittily, after his manner, says,
That he thinks that Clement the second was at this Synod, though without any
Author: for, says he, the Emperor ought in duty to give his helping hand
unto him by this his Edict, which he likewise performed in fact. But suppose
that Pope Clement were present thereat, and in all these proceedings not
remembered, does it not hurt his Baron. vol. 11. an. 1012. ex script. Anto.
August. art. 16. Glaber. l. 3. c. 8.
in which thus spoke the Fathers: We, say they, are met together at Leon, and
by the commandment of King Alphonsus the fifth we have made these Decrees,
which are entitled, The Decrees of the King Alphonsus and Geloira the Queen.
And in France, in the year 1017, a Council was called by King Robert touching
the cause of Heresy, notwithstanding that he by the testimony of all the
writers of those times, was commended for his piety and devotion.

40. PROGRESSION.


THe thirty years that follow under diverse Popes, using rather the
magistracy Hildebrand, who especially swayed in those times, gave occasion
unto them to usurp again that which the Emperor Henry the second had taken
from them, by restoring that ancient law which was made in a solemn Synod
betwixt Hadrian the first and Charles the Great, and was in force under the
government of his whole race, and afterward confirmed under the Othoes, and
other Kings of Germany. This Hildebrand was by nation a Tuscan, by profession
a Monk of Clugnie: He obtained that dignity by bad means, as Cardinal Benno
and the Roman Archpriest do witness. The minority of Henry the third,
Henry the second, being a child of five years of age, and brought up under
the tuition of Agnis his mother (as the minority of Princes produce many times
weak counselors) was a great occasion why Hildebrand abusing his youth, did
dare to enterprise so much: But the devil especially by his messengers thrust
himself into the business, whilst they, that they might the more easily
obtain that they desired, abused the people under the name of two pretended
Heresies: the one was Simonie, the sale for silver, or other thing equiuolent
thereunto, of Ecclesiastical charges, though at that time there was nothing at
Rome more common, where the Popedom it self was set to sale to whomsoever
would give most, where the Popes sold all Ecclesiastical dignities, and
themselves Nicholas, who being a Deacon in the Primitive Church was therefore
reprehended, because under a color of continency he forsook Epiphanius. But
of that sin there were none more guilty than the Roman Clergy, the Popes
themselves of the precedent world frequenting common brothel-houses at Rome, as
we have seen. But they wresting it otherwise, will have us to understand and
include under the name of Nicholaits, those Bishops and Priests, who according
to the law of God, and rule of the Apostles, and custom of the Primative
Church, and Decrees of the first general Nicene Council, and diverse others,
do allow of lawful marriage, and live with those women whom they have married
in the face of the Church. Both the one and the other was the invention of
Hildebrand, or rather of his master,

As touching the first, Leo the ninth being chosen Pope by Henry the second
(others call him the third) and being then in Germany adorned with his purple
robe, it happened that taking his way through France he passed by Clugnie, where
he saw Hildebrand, who told him, That it was unlawful to enter violently into
the government of the Church by the hand of a lay man: But if he would follow
his counsel, he would show him a way how the liberty of the Church should be
Leo yields to his advice, and Hildebrand betakes himself to the journey with
him, and caused him again to be chosen by the Clergy and the people. Some
add, that he set before his eyes Damasus the second, Otho Frisi^g. l. 6. c. 2^.
who by the just judgment of God lived but a few days; but he opened not unto
him the mystery, that is, That he had found the way to shorten his life: which
Benno before gave us to understand. Leo dies in the year 1054, An. 1054.
Sigon. de Regno Ital. l. 8.
and the Romans partly fearing the Emperor, and partly (says Sigonius) not
finding any man amongst them worthy the succession, sent Hildebrand unto him,
to entreat him in the name Guebhardus the Bishop of Eichstat, who was Victor
the second, who by an art familiar in those days was poisoned by his Subdeacon
in his Challice: And so this man left all things in their former state and
condition. An. 1056.
But about the year 1056 Henry the second died, leaving Henry the third his
son, about the age of five years, and under the tuition of his mother Agnis:
and in the year 1057 Victor the second died at his return from Germany,
whereupon the Romans assembled themselves to choose a successor, and as it were
by force consecrated the Cardinal Frederick the son of the duke of Loraine,
and presently by a Legate signified all they had done to Agnis, who was not
hardly entreated to approve their choice: Stephen the ninth, according to
Baronius the tenth, who as he prepared himself to go to Henry the third, to
be invested (which they called simonie) departed this life, and presently there
succeeded him by the faction of the Tusculan Earls, partly by buying voices,
partly by threatening open violence, John Bishop of Velitre, Sigon. de Regno
Ital.
their kinsman, being altogether ignorant, as Authors report, of all manner of
good learning, and constrained Petrus Damianus Bishop of Ostia, notwithstanding
his protestations to consecrat him, and afterward offer him to the people,
corrupted with gifts, to be adored. This was Benedict the tenth. Now consider
how much they abused their pretended liberty, and by what law they accused the
Emperors of simonie, whereas contrarily they made choice of the Hildebrand,
That if the Sea should be void, to choose no man in his absence; he shortly
after sets up an Antipope, Gerardus Burgundus, Bishop of Florence, who was
Nicholas the second: to whom Benedict the tenth, rather moved with shame than
conscience, gave place. But he took assistant unto him Hildebrand, by whose
help he might be eased in his greatest affairs. And therefore by his counsel
a Synod was held at Lateran, under pretense to prevent those precedent
inconveniences, but indeed it was to supplant the Emperors: For in that Synod
it was ordained, D. 23. C. In nomine.
That the Pope dying, first the Cardinal Bishops should diligently inquire and
consider of the election of a successor, then join unto them But there was
added for a fashion, Having ever a due respect to the honor and reverence of
our beloved son Henry, who at this present is held for King, and hoped
hereafter by Gods permission to be Emperor, as we have granted unto him and to
his successors, who from this Apostolic See have obtained that right. Whereas
before the approbation of the Pope was in the Emperor, and it was necessary,
under pain of high treason, to attend his command and consent, before he were
consecrated, and he in the mean time to be accursed and declared Antichrist,
that by any other means shall be placed in that throne. After John the ninth,
but with ill success) the authority of the Cardinals began to increase, in so
much that Petrus Damianus of these times began to say: The Cardinals
principally do both choose the Bishop of Rome, and in some prerogatives they
are not only above the law of all Bishops, but of the Patriarchs and Primats
too. These are the eyes of that only stone, the candles of that only
candlestick. Were there therefore before no eyes, no candles in the Church?
Again Nicholas the second, Leo Ostiens. l. 3. c. 25.
that he might extend the signification of the word Simonie in despite of
Henry the third, made a law, That no man could accept of a Church, or An. 1056.
Whereas that which is said to be freely given, does properly exclude Simonie,
and makes no difference betwixt the Lay and the Clergy. This Nicholas did also
increase under the minority of Henry, by another occasion: Robert and Richard
Guischar, who were come from Normandy to follow the wars in Calabria against
the Sarasins, had there set footing with happy success; Robert called
himself Duke of Apulia and Calabria; Richard held Capua, and ouerranne the
country even to the gates of the city of Rome: both the one and the other
were excommunicated by the Sea of Rome. But Nicholas called in his
excommunication, upon condition they should hold their seigniories in fee farm
of the Church of Rome, Petri^ Damian. Lib. qui inscribitur Gomerrhaeus cui
praefixa Epist. Leonis 9. Baron. an. 1049. Art. 10. and seq.
that Petrus Damianus enforced to betake himself to an Hermitage, writ a book,
entitled Gomorrhaeus, in which he deciphers all the kinds thereof, wherein they
did riot and sensually pass their time. And he dedicated the book to Leo the 9
whose help he imploreth against this great and grievous sin. Wicked And
hereupon by this admonition of Damianus, Leo made some laws, and ordained some
punishments for this sin. But presently after it appeared that he lost the
grace and favor of Leo: And afterward Alexander the second obtaining the
Popedom, gets this book from the author thereof, under color to lend it to
the Abbot of Saint Savior, but in deed to suppress it, making the reason
thereof to be, his ouer-plaine dealing in Damianus in an Epistle to Hildebrand
and Stephen, Cardinals, eagrely complains, and yet not without a manifest
flout; And indeed, says he, is this a token of Priestly clenlinesse, or rather
an argument of papal purity? But as touching doctrine, In the time of Victor
the second about the year 1055 was brought in the redemption of Penitentiaries,
under pretense that sins multiplying, An. 1055.
men were not able to endure a penance for so many years deferred; And
besides, sometimes men may dye, before the penance be accomplished. Wherefore
in favor of the rich it was ordained, that either for money, possessions, or
any thing else equivalent thereunto, Baron. an. 1055. Art. 9. and seq.
according to the number of the years appointed and agreed upon. And of this it
was that Damianus says, Thou art not ignorant that when we take lands and
possessions of Penitenciaries, according to the proportion of the gift, we
release them in the quantity of their penance. Which he himself did to the
Archbishop of Millan in his legation: whereupon says Baronius, He shows that
the goods of the church shall increase by these ransomes, which in time shall
grow to a custom. Petrus Damiar. in Epist. ad fratres. Baron. an. 1056 Art. 6.
and 7.
But it pleased him that the poorer sort should redeem those years with
corporal afflictions, a certain number of Psalms sung in the Church, fasts
with bread and water, fillips, whips, and the like: whereupon says the
selfsame Damian, Tria scorparum millia; three thousand lashes with a whip or a
holy-bush, with And so he calculates it, that twenty Psalters sung with
discipline should serve for the penance of a hundred years. Petrus Damianus in
Epist. ad Defiderium Cassinatem.
So far at the last did this corruption of doctrine proceed, that Petrus
Damianus prescribed to the Monks that lived under his obedience in the same
Hermitage, that every day with their Canonical hours, they should say the
service of the virgin Marie. And says Baronius, As he was the author hereof in
his monastery, so it is manifest that from the same sourse it sprang, that in
all the West churches not only the Monks, but Clergy, and Lay men and women,
by the admonition of Pope Urban did every day their taskes. And he
acknowledges to be of the same age and invention, the custom of whipping
themselves, in imitation of Dominicus Loricatus, The

Alexander the second succeeded Nicholas the second, who taking advantage of
the minority of Henry (for he was then about eleven years of age) was chosen
either by the decree of Nicholas, Leo Ostiens. L. 3. ca. 20.
or the bold counsel of Hildebrand. Which Agnis the mother of Henry
understanding to be done without her command, called a Council at Basil,
where by the consent of most of the Bishops of Italy Cadalous Bishop of Parma
was created Pope, who was called Honorius the second. Now was Italy divided in
two parts by these two Popes, who raised their Henry himself sent Hanno
Archbishop of Collen, who in the same Sinod reproched Alexander the second, and
told him that he had no power to enter into the chair without the commandment
of the Emperor, and therefore he was either to leave it again, or to give a
reason of that he had done. But Hildebrand answers him, the interpreter (for
the most part) of the Popes in those days, that Alexander was suddenly
consecrated without the authority of Henry, to avoid some imminent tumults;
And that the church of Rome his spiritual mother, took more care of his
right, than his mother Agnis, who was tied unto him by blood only. So that they
renounced not what they had done; but with this art, that they might attain
their purpose, did they think Matilda, who took part with Alexander. There it
was granted at the instance of Hanno, that he should purge himself by oath,
that he had not obtained the Popedom with money: by which means he was
confirmed by all, and the decree against simoniacal persons is renewed in the
same sense that it was before: and presently he sends Petrus Damianus his Legate
into Germany to signify to Henry the third and not without some threats,
that if he would not be persuaded by council, he must necessarily add his
Ecclesiastical censures; and so presently he cites him to Rome, there to give
account of the whole matter, Alexander at Cassin dispossessed one of a Devil;
going to Aquin did help one that was lame, by giving him the water to drink
wherewith he washed his hands after the sacrifice. And to what end were these
miracles? what law do they confirm, or what gospel? or do they not rather
serve only to uphold their ambition? friuilous therefore they are Alexander
being dead, An. 1072.
the Roman Clergy commanded Hildebrand to succeed, having already under
three or four Popes been thoroughly acquainted with the Papal subtilties, and
himself therein a very good scholar; and we may say more than a Pope, since
Damianus calls him Dominum Papae, the Master of the Pope, and is not ashamed to
say; Papam rite colo, sed te prostratus adoro,
Tu facis hunc Dominum, te facit ipse Deum.

Thou make him a Lord, he thee a god, or more.


In so much that though he were Pope, yet he depended upon him and his
counsel: but he being nourished in pride, left nothing undone that might
enlarge his territories. And thus with a false pretense of simonie they
increased their power.

Neither were the definements of the Popes less furthered in these times,
under the color of the Nicholaits. The Church of Milan did then in Italy hold
the second place, being made more eminent by the suppression of Rauenna.
Stephen the ninth being Pope, Arialdus a Decuman Clerk, An. 1059.
who agreed not well with Wydo his Archbishop, conspired against him, with
Landolfus the governor of the people: and this he does under a pretense of
deposing married Priests, in execution of the Papal Decree, many times
reiterated, as we have said before; and for his better help herein he has
recourse to Stephen. Wydo held a Council at Fontanet, near to Nouaria, where
by the consent of all the Suffragan Bishops, it was ordained, That the Clergy
men of what Order soever, might lawfully marie wives; and in the city the
matter was decided with much controversy, the common people taking part with
Landolfe, the Nobility with the Archbishop. An. 1059.
Landolfe therefore in the year 1059 sends Arialdus to Nicholas the second, to
signify unto him the obstinacy of the Church of Milan, and to entreat that
there might be Judges appointed to determine of this pretended Petrus Damianus
the Cardinal of Ostia, with all the power and authority he could give him;
who took for his assistant in this his legation, Anselmus Bishop of Lucques,
who was afterward Alexander the second: and so they came to Milan. There what
was done by Damian we cannot better learn than of himself, who particularly
sets down the whole progression of his legation. He had no sooner delivered
his charge touching the deposing of married Priests, as heretics, but presently
the people began to be moved, saying, That the Pope had no authority over the
Church of Milan, and that they would not dishonourably lose that liberty which
their ancestors had gotten, and they had hitherto maintained, Petrus Damianus
had placed the Bishop of Milan on his left hand, and Ambrose of Lucques, his
assistant, on his right. The tumult nevertheless being pacified, beginning his
Sermon with the Supremacy of the Church of Rome, and the absolute power
thereof, he told them, That all other Churches were ordained of men, but the
Church of Rome only had her foundation from God himself: and therefore from
her all other, but especially the Church of Milan, had taken their first
beginning and rudiments of discipline, to which likewise and to the Bishop
thereof it was necessary to be subject, because Paul, if he should have said,
That those famous Churches which he founded from Jerusalem to Sclauonia, had
taken their beginning from man, and not from God. As for the Church of Milan,
he said, That Nazarius a renowned Martyr had received S. Peter's Baptism, Petri
Baptisma, of Linus his successor, and afterward with Celsin was martyred at
Milan, Sicut Scripturae testantur, As the Scriptures bear witness: And that
the holy Martyrs Protasius and Geruasius, whose bodies they did there worship,
had been the Disciples of S. Peter, as Ambrose Nazarius baptized by Linus,
since Cardinal Baronius himself in his Martyrologie says, Card. Bar. in
Martyrolog. Iunij 19. p. 341.
That he is enforced to believe that Nazarius and Celsus suffered under the
Emperor Marcus Aurelius and Lucius Verus, two hundred years after, which the
Legendaries do likewise make good: Jacob. de Veragine Geruasio and Prothasio.
and do also tell us that Geruasius and Protasius being twins, were the
sons of S. Vital and S. Valerie, remaining then at Ambrun near to S.
Nazarius, and therefore both living at one time, far from the reign of Nero.
Ambrose? especially that S. Nazarius received Peter's Baptism? Where does he
find in the Scripture a Baptism of Peter? Is there any other than of Christ?
Can it be spoken without blasphemy, 1. Cor. 1.11.12.13.
since Paul himself says, Is Paul crucified for you, or are you baptized into
the name of Paul? shall we doubt that he would likewise have said, in the name
of Peter? who so sharply reprehended those that said, I am Paul's, I am
Apolloes, I am Peter's. This good Apostle of Rome likewise adds, That Ambrose
seeing he could not overcome the Heresy of the Nicholaits (who ever at that
time heard of any such Heresy?) craved help of Pope Siricius, who fot the
suppressing thereof, sent a Priest, a Deacon, and Subdeacon, that they by his
example in the like Damianus says, The chiefest thing is to know of what power
the privilege of the Church of Rome is. But the matter stayed not there: For
he was no sooner returned to Rome, but the Clergy presently Erlembaldus Cotta
being chosen governor of the people by the death of Landulph, who by the
instigation of Arialdus renew the sedition, and sends again to Damianus; but
he being much moved therewith, spares not Ambrose himself: This, says he, is
no new thing in the Church of Milan, which has always had men of diverse
opinions, begun at the first by Auxentius, and Ambrosius. It is true that
Auxentius was an Arrian, but what fault has Ambrose committed, that he should
be accused of that fault, whom lately he proposed unto us, as a patron of his
negotiations? To this pass it is come, that Erlembaldus himself went to
Alexander, being at Lucques in the year 1065, about this business, An. 1065.
of whom he obtained a Decree against the Clergy, which being brought to
Milan, the Arialdus and Erlembaldus ordered the matter, that having framed
their faction to sedition, the Archbishop could not withstand them. The year
following 1066, An. 1066.
the other part became so strong, that Arialdus was constrained to betake
himself to flight; but being taken, as the author of all these evils, he
endured a miserable and shameful punishment: by whose example Erlembaldus being
terrified, thought it the best way for him to be quiet. But in the year 1067,
An. 1067.
by reason of the absence of the Bishop, Erlembaldus having gotten more
strength, compels the citizens to swear, and spares neither Priest nor
Archbishop, in so much that the Bishop being returned to pacify this sedition,
he feared not to lay violent hands Hildebrand, That no Bishop should be
accounted true and lawful, without the command of the Pope, notwithstanding
he were declared to be such by the Clergy, the people, and the King. For the
strengthening of which Decree he binds both the people and Clergy of Milan,
with an oath. At which the Archbishop Wydo being astonished, as being now old
and desirous of rest, gave over his Archbishopricke, and sent his ensigns of
honor into Germany to Henry the third. All these things were proposed unto
the people, and easily devoured with the sauce of Simonie and Nicholaisme,
which whosoever should contradict, was presently with Dathan and Abiron, Judas
and Caiphas, damned to the pit of Mainardus Bishop of Syluacandida, and John
the Priest and Cardinal, the Popes Legates and Commissaries in this business.
The Emperor therefore in the year 1068 bestowed that dignity upon Godfrey
Chastillon a Milanois, An. 1068.
and of a noble house, whom the Pope presently interdicted, and Erlembaldus his
partaker made him to fly the city. But the Pope after the death of Wydo gave
it to Atho a clerk of Milan, brought in and received by Erlembald, not without
the great grief of the people, who now saw this dignity to be carried and
disposed according to the will and pleasure of the Romans. And from hence
arises a new controversy with the Emperor Henry the third: for from these
fained Heresies, as once from that difference that fell out touching Images,
the Popes reaped

But to proceed in the Progression, we must not forget that there were in these
times diverse Kings that made themselves tributaries to the Romish Babylon, that
that from time to time might be fulfilled, which was foretold in the Apocalypse,
Of Kings that should fall down and worship the Whore, and be made drunken with
her cup.

Cassimire therefore King of Poland in the year 1045 made his kingdom
feodatarie and tributarie to the Pope, that miserable monster Benedict the
ninth, and bound all his subjects to pay every year a poll halfepenie, in so
much that neither Sueno King of Denmark in the year 1069, Epist. Alexand. 22.
ad Suenonem Regem Daniae.
being summoned by Alexander the second, who demanded it of him, as a thing
long since promised by his predecessors, and therefore exacted it now as a due:
which by the same right, in the year 1068, Eiusdem ad Guilielm. Regem Angliae.
he extorted from William King of England, whom he would persuade, That from
the time that the name of Christ was first known in England, the kingdom had
been Sub manu and tutela Petri, Under the hand and protection of Peter; that
is, the Popes of Rome; whereas there were many Christian Kings in Britain
before Rome had heard of a Popedom. And this exaction went under the name of
Peter pence. And as for Gregory the seventh, or Hildebrand, he was Richard
Prince of Capua to take, Gregor. 7. in Epist. post 21. and l. 1. and l. 8. post
Epist. 10.
is very notable: I Richard, by the grace of God and Saint Peter, Prince of
Capua (by what divinity does he couple the creature and the Creator together?)
from this hour and ever hereafter, will be faithful to the holy Church of
Rome, and to the Apostolic See, and to thee a helper, to hold, obtain, and
defend the royalties of Saint Peter, and his possessions, with a true faith,
against all men: and I will give my best assistance that thou may securely
and honorably hold the Popedom of Rome, and the dominions of S. Peter: (These
clauses, according to his own interpretation, go far) And I will neither
seek to invade or obtain thy principalities, nor presume to rob, or wast
them, without the leave and license of thee, and thy successors that to the
honor of S. Peter What other words could he use to a captain of thieves? But
to King Henry, when I shall be admonished by thee, or thy successors, I will
swear allegiance, reserving still my fidelity to the holy Church of Rome.
These things fell out about the year 1073. And the same oath took Robert for
Apulia and Calabria, doing his homage. Gregor. l. 2. Epist. 71.
And if we may believe the Epistle of Gregory the seventh, in the year 1073,
there came to Rome in pilgrimage the son of Demetrius king of Russia, whom he
invested into his kingdom in the name of S. Peter, Undoubtedly affirming, that
this his petition should be ratified and confirmed by the consent of his
father, if he should possess his kingdom by the gift of the Sea of Rome: Thus
abusing, as it appears by the style, the sottish devotion of this young man.
In like Bernard besotted, who gave for the remission of his sins the earldome
of Prouence. As for the donation of the Countess Mathilda, we shall speak
thereof in his due place. But it is worthy the consideration from what ground
it should arise, that he writes to Philip K. of France, daring to promise him
remission of his sins, if he would take part with him: We will, An. 1080.
says he, and in the name of the Apostle we command, that thou hinder not in
any sort that election which the people and Clergy of the Church of Rheimes
are to make, whereby it may be thought less canonical; but if any man shall
go about by any endeavor whatsoever to hinder it, thou shall give thy best
help to withstand him. Go forward therefore, that we may not be thought in
vain to have spared the sins of thy youth, and (that is, Hildebrand, who
makes himself Peter's successor) in whose power is thy kingdom and thy soul,
who can bind and loosse thee in heaven and in earth, by which thy diligence and
execution of justice thou may deserve his eternal grace and favor. Here I
may ask who discernes not the voice of the devil tempting our Savior in the
Gospel? But the Aphorisms, which they call the Popes Dictats, published by
him about the year 1076, lay him open to the view of every man, That the
Church of Rome has no other foundation but from God. Why then allege they
Peter? That the and therefore he alone has right, according to S. Gregory the
Great, to be either the forerunner of Antichrist, or Antichrist himself. That
he alone may depose and restore Bishops; what then shall we say of so many
Bishops that in the Church for so many years and ages, in so many countries,
have been lawfully, by good and worthy laws, without any respect of him, nay
in despite of him, placed and displaced? That his Legate, though otherwise
inferior in degree, must take place above all other Bishops in Councels, and
may denounce the sentence of deposition against them. The reverend general
Councels therefore, in which diverse Bishops have been Presidents, and taken
the upper place, and pronounced sentence in the presence of his Legates, yea and
many times That the Pope may depose such as are absent. And this, says
Baronius, is to cut off occasions and excuses from our adversaries, yea the
Emperor himself, who being absent he had excommunicated; why then do they so
much wonder that he should use the same law against him? That we must not
remain in the same house with such as he has excommunicated. What is this but
like the Pagan high Priests to interdict fire and water? Greg. l. 2. Epist. 37.
But how happy is it for Christendom, that few believe it? To conclude, That
it is lawful for him only, according to the necessity of the time, to make
new laws, to ordain colonies, of a religious house to make an Abbie, and
contrarily to divide a rich Bishopric, and to unite the poorer. That he only
may use the Imperial ensigns. That all Princes are to kiss the he had almost
said that which the Apostle speaks of our Savior, A name above every name,
Phil. 2.9. Acts 12.4.
the only name under heaven whereby we must be saved. Now, gentle Reader, what

But before we come to the chief Oppositions, we are to note some particular
things not to be contemned. Leo the ninth, says the Abbot of Vrsperg, being at
Menze, and the Archbishop himself celebrating Mass, An. 1052.
it fell out that a certain Deacon called Hunibert, read a lesson that made
not for the Pope. Leo being admonished hereof by one of his friends, commanded
him twice or thrice to be silent, who nevertheless proceeded. The lesson
being ended, he called him before him, and presently degraded him: Wherewith
the Archbishop being offended, and much moved, protested, That neither he nor
any man else should end the Abbas Vrsperg. in Chronico.
in this thing we are to consider the Prelates authority, and the Popes
humility, whilst the one contended to defend the dignity of his office, the
other, though his dignity were greater, yet thought it fit to yield to a
Metropolitan in his own Diocese. Baron. an. 1052. art. 16.17. Idem an. 1053.
art. 53. and se-
But Baronius grows into choler against the Abbot, and censures him; and in
like manner against Petrus Damianus, though very jealous of that See, because
he did not allow that the Pope should intermeddle with matter of arms, and
likewise because he durst to say, That an Emperor was to do that which became
an Emperor, and a Pope Petrus Damianus in Epist. ad Firmin.
For, says Damianus in his Epistle to Firminus, as the son of God himself
overcame all the obstacles of this furious world, not by a reuengefull and
strict examination, but by an invincible majesty of undaunted patience: so he
teaches us rather willingly to bear the furious rage of this world, than to
raise arms, and to answer wrongs with wrongs, especially since between a
Kingdom and a Priesthood their proper offices are distinguished; a King must
use the arms of this world, a Priest gird himself with the spiritual sword,
which is the word of God, etc. And to this purpose he alleges many places of
Scripture, with other reasons and examples; yea he extends this law even to
the Pope, and particularly to Leo himself: If any man shall object against this
I have said, says he, that Pope Leo does often trouble himself What then
says Baronius? Baron. an. 1053. art. 14.15.16. and sequent.
Damianus are contrary to those of the Catholic Church, which condemn those
of Heresy who attribute not both swords to the Pope; and so of a worthy
Cardinal, because he diued into this mystery, he makes him an Heretic: but
by what judges? Gregory the ninth, and Boniface the eigth, who were long after
him, than whom there was never more insolent tyrans, who in their own proper
causes, and the heat of their fury, vomited out their Decrees against the
Emperors. He that knows but the principles of Logic, will here presently
object Principij petitionem. He adds again, That the use of the Church
approves this doctrine. What will he say if we reply, Not the use, but the
abuse, the corruption? And here he alleges certain places of S. Gregory,
exciting Leo fight, but was only present at the wars, and when they came to
join battle he withdrew himself out of the field, where with safety he
might attend the event: and so of this his Monarch he makes a Trumpeter, or an
inciter unto war. Here let the Reader note this man's impudency, who feared
not to accuse Damian of the heresy of Tertullian, who dissuaded Christians
from war; or rather of Julian the Apostata, who commanded Christians,
according to the Gospel, to suffer all manner of wrong and violence, without
resistance. Baronius, for the Prince of Priests to make wars, or to be a
Leader in the field. But the state of the Court of Rome we may no where better
learn than out of Damianus, who in horror of the abominations thereof, of a
Cardinal became an Hermit, and being drawn from thence upon some pretense of
service to be done to the Pope, he seems to be brought into hell again, and
expostulats this great wrong done unto him with the Pope and Hildebrand.
Hildebrand, though he took part with Alexander against Honorius: But it may
be, says he, that this flattering tyran, who with a Neronian piety condoles
my estate, strokes me when he buffets me, handles me gently with the talants of
an Eagle; that is to say, the Pope, that he might retain him at Rome, and get
him thither again, will complainingly break out into these speeches, Behold
how he seeks a lurking corner, and under color of penance forsakes Rome; he
goes about to gain idleness by his disobedience, and whilst others run into
the field to fight, he seeks to hide himself in the darkness of a degenerat
ignoble shadow, etc. And he protests to his holy Devil (for so he calls the
Pope) that he will ever be ready upon all occasions to assist him against
Honorius, upon condition that he may return again to his hermitage. Petrus
Damianus in Epist. ad Alexand. and Hildeb.
which he expresses in all kind of actions and speeches unworthy Churchmen:
From which grievous enormities, says he, if we strive either for shame or
fear to free our selves, presently we are judged to be rude and uncivil,
descended from the tygres of Hircania: but I stay my pen. And speaking of their
excess and superfluity, There are every day kingly feasts, daily
preparations, nuptial banquets, whilst the poor abroad dye for hunger, etc.
And that which is worse than all the rest, and more than diabolical, is, that
having spent their revenues at the war, they lay their hands upon the tithes,
and make them temporal too. It is such, says he, that the Spirituality is
discerned from the Temporaltie, by the shauing of their beards only, not the
sanctity of their actions; neither do they meditate upon the sacred
Scriptures, but upon the civil laws, and controversies of temporal Courts.
The tribunal seats of Judges, and the Courts of Princes, are not sufficient to
receive the Monks and Friars. The cloisters are empty, the Gospel is shut
up, and nothing more common in the mouths of Ecclesiastical persons, than
temporal all laws, etc. And with the selfsame mind he writes to the
Cardinals, preparing themselves to the Council, That they come not thither, as
he has often seen it, to sell their voices, thereby the better to help their
luxury; which he there describes to be princely, exceeding that of
Sardanapalus; as if the threshing time after Harvest were at hand. This he
speaks of that part of the Church that held with Alexander the second, and
which he himself defended; which I thought good to tell you, that no man might
object, that he spoke of the faction of Honorius the second, whom he accounted
schismatikes. Wherefore being invited by Alexander, and violently incited by
Hildebrand to be present at the Council at Mantua, against Honorius, by whose
good name they hoped to weaken the contrary faction, he falls to foul terms
with them: The Epistle is entitled Patri and filio, To the father and the
son, the Pope and the Archdeacon, wherein wounding Hildebrand, or rather the
Pope through his sides, An. 1064.
I humbly says he, my holy Devil, that he would be pleased not to be so
cruel unto me, and that his venerable pride would not wear and weary me with
so long stripes, but that he would become more mild unto his servant; my
shoulders beaten black and blew, fail me, and my back is furrowed with
stripes, etc. And therefore, says the Wise man, the stroke of the rod makes
marks in the flesh, but the stroke of the tongue breaks the bones: But I
repress my spirit, and put my finger upon my mouth, and seek for mercy
thought it be late. But let us now come to the Opposition.

OPPOSITION.
The minority of Henry the third was a great help to the Popes proceedings,
notwithstanding that Agnis the Regent, and the Princes whose counsel she used
Nicholas the second was to be thought of, about which there arose a civil
war at Rome, the voices being divided betwixt Alexander and Honorius; The
Romans in the midst of these tumults sent Ambassadors to the Emperor, lying
then at Ausbourge; and among others, that man that had consecrated Alexander,
who requested his help against this usurpation: Auentinus L. 5. Annal. Baiorum
ex antiquioribus.
Alexander (say they) troubles all; against the laws of our ancestors, and
without your consent, he usurps the holy priesthood; bought the Popedom of
the Normans, holds it by force; he is a wolf, and a thief, not a Pastor, a
tyran not a Pope: Behold here I am that enforced by the Normans, God I take to
witness, The Emperor therefore taking knowledge thereof, sends Bocon the
Bishop of Halberstat to enquire into the truth hereof; who so long as the
controversy continued, maintained Alexander in his place. But Honorius hardly
enduring that, enters with his power into Rome; The Lombards defend Alexander,
the Normans Honorius, and Rome is divided, the towns and other strong places
of the city parted betwixt the Popes. But Godfrey of Lorraine, who commanded
for the Emperor in Italy, interposed himself; by whose authority the Popes
lay aside their arms, and every Citizen betakes himself to his own home: But
presently calling them both before him, You are, says he, the Shepherds that
Wherefore both of them consenting thereunto the business is referred to the
Synod at Mantua, but yet so as Alexander being consecrated, and possessed of
the Temple of Lateran, retained still the name and title. But both of them
being impatient of delays (the Emperor being employed in the wars of
Hungary, by means whereof he could make no great speed, to order and pacify
these matters) each Hanno the Archbishop of Collen, and Wenceslaus of Altaich,
with diverse other Bishops and Princes to Mantua; where Alexander yielding
himself to the law, Honorius on the other side signified to Hanno, That it
became not the master to be taught by his disciples, and that he would not come
but as the Vicar of Christ, and President of that Council. Hanno, president of
the Synod, and representing the person of the Emperor, answered him by the
advice of the Council, That he must obey the sentence of the Church, and the
masters of that Council, and submit himself to the divine Oracle. Whereupon
Alexander, being lawfully heard, and, because there wanted An. 1066.
But so soon as Hildebrand without the knowledge of the Emperor had got the
Popedom, he who in the elections of his predecessors had been often the
author to choose them without the consent of the Emperors, not fearing to do
any thing, resolved with himself to prevail in this business, after another
manner than others had done. Which, forasmuch as Henry the third was now more
grown in years, as it was an occasion of great tumults Offered hard measure
to the sacred Canons, but let us know how; Apologia Cleri Leodiensi. an. 1066.
He did it not as Gregory the first who would not intermeddle with the death
of the Lombards, nor as all the Popes after him, who by the example of Gregory
the first, used the spiritual sword only, until Gregory the last, that is
Hildebrand, who was the first (and by his example encouraged others to do the
like) that armed himself against the Emperor. Until this man came, says a
grave writer, the Popes were chosen by the Clergy, the Nobility, the people,
the Senate, the Emperor ratifying their choice, who had power to call them, and
other Bishops to Councels, and was acknowledged by them (according to that
which the holy Fathers, he likewise adds, began those perilous times, which
Christ and Peter, and Paul had so long before foretold; Then were those
fables of Siluester and Constantine, no less sottishly, than impudently
devised, and diverse others which it becomes not Christian modesty to relate;
then did counterfeit religion put on the shape of piety; Then began robberies,
the sale of holy things, and divine Philosophy to be polluted, corrupted and
violated, 450 years retained in despite of the world, and the Emperors, in
such a manner that they brought the infernal spirits beneath, and gods above
into servitude, making all subject to their yoke, and terrifying the whole
world with their thunderbolts.

Quo bruta tellus, and vaga flumina,
Quo Stix, and inuisi horrida Taenari
Seeds, Atlanteusque finis
Concutitur, mutant ima summis.
As far as earth, as Sea extends,
As Stix or horrid Taenaris,
Yea where the hill Atlanteus ends,
His fearful power carried is.
And all this this Author delivers, notwithstanding he were by profession a
Roman, being willing perhaps to have said more, if it had been lawful, for he
concludes with these words; The Roman Emperor is now no more than a bare name
without a body, without form, notwithstanding the fruit be known by the
tree, and no As if he would have alluded to that place of the Apostle speaking
of Antichrist: And now ye know what withholdeth (the Roman Empire) that he
might be revealed in his time. What manner of man this Hildebrand was, we shall
see in his due place.

But yet at the first he bewrayes not his boldness, but when the Emperor
Henry sent the Earl Heberard to Rome, to admonish the Romans of their
offense, and threatening withal, that except they did satisfy him he would
pronounce the election void; he humbly answered, That he was enforced to
undertake the Popedom Henry; and if he should oppose himself against them,
to make him an Heretic. The one of them took from him all authority at
Milan, if any were left, the other should daily diminish that power which he
retained in Germany by the right of Inuestiture. The sum of them was this,
It shall not be lawful for a Clergy man to But it is worth the noting, that
the Countess Mathilda was present at this Council, a woman no less infamous
for her unchaste life, than her pride. Erlembald governor of Milan put the
first Decree in execution, continuing his rage against the Clergy; and upon
the day called Coena Domini, the Supper of the Lord, he forbad Godfrey, whom
the Emperor had made Bishop, to consecrate the oil, An. 1075.
and provided other. The year following 1075 he did the like, he himself
ministering the oil in the Paschall ceremonies; but all the Priests refused to
receive it at his hands, except Luitprand only, Curat of S. Paul. Whereupon
the people being much offended, forsook the city, protesting that they would
obey Erlembald and his Luitprand. Godfrey in the mean time not being accepted
by the Pope, stood still excommunicated, not without the great indignation of
Henry, who nevertheless, to accommodat himself a little unto him, named in
his place Theobald Castillon, who was kindly received by those of Milan. And
from this only act let every man judge how unwillingly this yoke of single
life was received in Italy. Gregory urges the same in Germany, writes to
the Princes and their wives, That they should not frequent the Masses of married
Priests, That they should execute his Decree, and account those for
excommunicat persons that obeyed it not: declaring unto that they were neither
Priests, nor might sacrifice. Whereupon the common people grew insolent against
them, and trampled the Host consecrated by them, under their feet, though it
were at that very time when the opinion of the real presence began to spread
abroad. From this occasion, says Auentinus, many false Prophets did arise, who
with fables and miracles (examples they call them) turned the people of Christ
from the truth, interpreting the Scriptures so, as that they might serve their
own turns, whilst in the mean time, under the honest name of chastity,
whoredom, incest, adultery, were every where freely committed. But yet in the
mean time, notwithstanding a Latere of Pope Gregory, they could not persuade
the Bishops to yield their consent to this Decree, or to depose those Priests
that were married, defending themselves by the authority of the Scriptures, the
ancient Councels, and the Primitive Church; adding thereunto the commandment
of God, and humane necessity, directly oppugning the Popes Decree. From hence
there arose new matter of malice against Henry, because he did not his best
endeavor to countenance the Bulls of Gregory: But another thing there was that
troubled him more, which was the right of inuestiture, which Gregory called
simonie, for which Alexander the second had already threatened Gregory would
willingly have got into his own purse. For let no man think he did it out of
zeal to discharge the Clergy of that burden, because the history witnesses
that there was none of his predecessors that made a more public sale of Church
livings and dignities than he did. He gives him therefore to understand, That
under pain of excommunication he must abstain from inuestitures, and
presently excommunicated Otho Bishop of Ratisbone, Otho of Constance, Bernard
of Lozanna, and the Earls Eberardus and Vlricus, his counselors, Alexander.
But yet nevertheless they demand a general assembly in Germany, in which
they were to inquire of Simoniacall Bishops and Abbots, amongst whom they shut
them especially out of the Church that were known to be ordained by Henry,
and first of all the Bishop of Bamberge. An. 1075.
And in the year 1075 the Emperor having appointed a meeting of the Bishops
and Princes at Goslaer, to deliberat of this business, in the name of the Pope
they let him understand, That the second week in Lent he must make his
personal appearance at Rome, to answer Malmesb. l. 3. de Gestis Regum Anglor.
And this is that which William of Malmesburie said, speaking of Gregory: That
which precedent Popes spoke as it were between their teeth, this pronounces
with open mouth, excommunicating the elect, who had received their inuestiture
into the Churches from the hands of a lay man, by the ring and the staff.
Which the Clergy of Lieg do likewise affirm in their Apology in the year
1106: Hildebrand and only has offered violence to the sacred Canons, etc.
deriding that zeal which he pretended. The Princes therefore and people of
Saxony, being for some pretended griefs moved against the Emperor, and
obiecting against him for the better strengthening of their cause, his
youthful lascivious life, craved Gregory, who presently sets spurs to those
that were forward enough of themselves to rebel, promising to be the first day
with them in Germany, and to free them from the power of the Emperor. But yet
for as much as this was an enterprise of weight and difficulty, he joined
himself in league with a more strict band than before, with the Countess
Mathilda, whose possessions and wealth were then great in Italy; and also with
the Normans, then lords of Apulia and Calabria, which he performed so much the
easier, because the diminution of the power of Henry made much for the
increase of both their goods. But indeed the Pope had another purpose, that
once having gotten authority, he might thrust out both Mathilda, to whose
dominions he challenged a right, Leo Ostiens. l. 3. c. 48.
And therefore, says Leo of Ostia, The Countess Mathilda fearing the army of
Henry the Emperor, devoutly offered to Pope Gregory, and the holy Church of
Rome, the Provinces of Liguria, Tiguria, and Tuscia: Which was the first ground
from whence sprung the seed of hatred and discord betwixt the Pope and the
Emperor. Whereupon the Pope took occasion to excommunicat the Emperor, for
usurping the rights of the Church. But he adds in his Epistle, That he
commanded Mathilda, upon remission of her sins, to make war with the
Emperor: wherein it shall be necessary to note the divinity of this good
man. Henry in the mean time omitting no opportunity to procure peace, Clerus
Leodiens. in Apolog. an. 1106.

Auentinus l. 5. Annalium Baior.


sent Orators to Gregory to justify himself against Auentine, The Emperors
messengers who came to confute those crimes that were objected by the Saxons,
and to withstand their attempts, he cast into prison, tormented them with cold,
and hunger and thirst, and being lead up and down through the city, drove
them out of Rome; because, says he, he ought to have come in his own person.
Henry therefore (his patience being so much moved that he could bear no
longer) commanded a meeting at Worms, to which there came many Bishops out of
Italy, and out of France, and Germany all, except those of Saxony, yea and
from Rome it self came Cardinal Hugo Blancus with letters from the Cardinals,
and principal of the people of Rome, wherein they accused Hildebrand of
ambition and perjury, Lambert. Schaffnab. de rebus Germ. Sigon. de Regno Ital.
l. 9. Author vitae Henrici 4.
complaining that he had done many There, upon mature deliberation, a sentence
is pronounced against Hildebrand. Hildebrand, who calls himself Gregory, is
the first that without our consent, against the will of the Roman Emperor,
established by God himself, against the customs of the Elders, against the
laws, has by his ambition long since invaded the Popedom. He will do
whatsoever pleases him, whether by right or by wrong. He is an Apostat Monk,
who by his new opinions adulterateth the sacred divinity, the Scriptures by
his false and forced interpretations he accommodates to his own affairs and
purposes, he breaks the peace and concord of the College, he mingleth things
sacred with profane, divine with humane, and polluteth both the one and the
other, he lends an ear, and gives credit to Insenatulo muliercularum, In a
Councell-house of women he discourses of the holy mysteries of religion, the
law of God wherewith he has bound himself, he loosseth: as the Decij and
worshippers of false gods were wont to do, he usurps both the Empire and
the And so both those pretended heresies of Simonie and Nicholaisme with one
consent they overthrew, and this very Decree not only the Bishops of Germany
and France, but of Italy it self, in a Synod holden Hildebrand, that he
should give over the Popedom, and betake himself to a private life, and also
to the Clergy and people of Rome, that according to the Law of their
ancestors they should choose another, but yet so as that they should lay no
violent hands upon the person of Hildebrand, but leave him to the justice of
God. Amongst all these Bishops there was not any that contradicted the decree
but Albert of Wirthsbourg, and Herman of Metz, who likewise were soon
persuaded by the admonitions and reasons of William of Vtrecht to be of the
same opinion, and to subscribe with the rest. Gregory so soon as he
understood hereof, is nothing at all Mathilda, distributeth it amongst the
people, with the poor men's money paid his soldiers wages, flattereth the
people of Rome setting before their eyes their ancient renown, and gives them
hope of liberty, and so calls a Council at Rome; where in a full assembly,
in the name of the Synod of Worms, one Rowland a Prelat of Parma, upon the
sudden stands up, and without any duty done unto him speaks unto him in
these words. Our most Christian Emperor, and the reverend Bishops of Italy,
Germany, and France command thee to resign that charge, which thou have
usurped by subtilty, money and favor; For it is not lawful for thee, against
their wills, and the authority of the Emperor, and decree of the Church of
Christ, to And presently turning himself toward the assembly; Most holy
brethren (says he) choose according to your own Law a Pastor, which choice of
yours, the sacred Consul Tribune and your Prince according to the manner of
your ancestors will authorize: For this Hildebrand is neither Pastor, nor
Father, nor Pope, but a thief, a wolf, a robber, and a tyran. Whereupon they
rushed upon him, and he wanted not much of being ouerborne by the people. In
the Letters which he delivered there were these words: Because thine entry
began with so many periuries, and the Church of God by the abuse of thy
novelties has been endaungered in this so great a tempest, and have
dishonored thy whole life by thy infamous conversation, as we have promised
unto thee no obedience, so will we never perform any to thee. Gregory Henry
(as much as in him lay) of the kingdom of Germany and Italy, discharged the
Princes of their oath of allegiance; excommunicateth Sigefrid Archbishop of
Mence, and the Bishops of Vtrecht and Bamberge; threatening to proceed in like
manner against the rest if they came not to Rome to purge themselves. In which
decree (let the Reader note the cunning) he speaks to Peter as to his
revenger; Hear me (says he) O Peter Prince of the Apostles, thou and thy
brother S. Paul can best witness for me besides others, that I was drawn
against my will to the government of thy holy Church, and therefore I
persuade my self, that it pleases thee that I should rule the people of
Christ committed by God, especially to thy charge etc. and super tuam Petram,
and upon thy rock the son of God has built his Church etc. These selfsame
words has Sigonius, and not upon this rock. And some denying that the King
could be subject to the Popes curse or excommunications, Think you (says he)
that God when thrice together he committed the charge of his Church to S. Peter
saying, feed my sheep, that he excepted Kings? And so what he would he
obtained. Hildebrand being by the Bishops of Italy, Germany, and France
deposed in a Council at Worms, and Henry excommunicated and deprived his
kingdom by Hildebrand and the Clergy at Rome, they both endeavor to
strengthen their own part. But, forasmuch as such Kingdoms as are long time
governed under a minority, are seldom or never without factions, there arose
presently against Henry many Princes of Germany: to whom Hildebrand alleged
that Pope Zachary had deposed Childerick king of France, only for his
negligence, and placed Pepin in his Throne; Why then should it not be lawful
for him to do the like, against whomsoever should rebel against S. Peter? And
they on the other side under his patronage are content to comfort, and to
flatter their consciences Hugh Duke of Alsatia, who was grown far in debt,
Rodulphus Duke of Sueuia, the Emperors brother in law, fed with the hope of the
Empire, Bertholdus Duke of Zaringia his son in law, Welfo Duke of Bauaria,
the Bishops of Mence, Mets, and Worms, and certain Abbots, either stricken
with a fear of the excommunication, or for some special causes bound to these
Princes; who with one consent revolt from the Emperor, join their counsels
and forces to the Saxon rebels, and fill all Germany with robbery, sword and
fire. Insomuch that the Historiographers of those times want words to express
the horror and abomination of that disordered confusion, which by all good men
was imputed to Gregory, who cry out against this unworthy in their sermons
curse Gregory, wish all ill to Hildebrand, publish him to be Antechrist: under
a show of piety (say they) he exercises his furies, with honest words he
makes show of seeking the public good, under the title of Christ, he plays
the part of Antechrist, in Babylon he sits in the Temple of God, and extolleth
himself above all that is worshipped, as if he were God: he glories that he
cannot err, and for the greater increase of his glory, he takes upon him to
make an Emperor at his pleasure: he absolues men not of their sins, but the
Law of Christ Jesus and his Sacraments, he weakneth the peace and piety of our
Religion, stirs up wars and seditions: He gives himself to whoredom,
murder, perjury, treacheries, rapines, burnings: And the better to hide his
ambition, he does not only find out new fables, corrupt the Annals, Here let
every man imagine what opinion all Christendom had of this pretended Apostle.

They in the mean time in Germany that took part with Gregory, gave him to
understand, That these his violent proceedings had got him many enemies;
whereupon, hiding the cruelty of his mind, he writ a more moderat Epistle to
those that took part with the Emperor; the sum whereof was, That if he
would become a new man, he should find, that what he had hitherto done, he had
done Henry therefore, being now brought into great danger of the loss of his
kingdom, to the end he might take away the cause of all these evils, accepts
of the condition, and is content to undergo any manner of submission, so he
may pacify the anger of Gregory, and reconcile himself unto him. Departing
therefore from Spire, with a small train came to Bezanson, passed the Alps,
and so came down into Lombardie. And notwithstanding all the Bishops and
Prelates that took part with him, upon just suspicion did give him warning of
that he did, in the mean time nevertheless seeking their own grace with the
Pope; yet he proceeds in his purpose, to appease the Gregory, and came near
to Canuse, where the Pope was with the Countess Mathilda, who, as the Authors
of those times affirm, did seldom part from his side. There he earnestly
entreats Mathilda, Azo Marquess of Este, and the Abbot of Clugni, and some
others whom he knew to be in the grace and favor of Gregory, to be
intercessors for him, That first he might be absolved, and received into the
Church, and so into the grace of Gregory. To which their earnest supplications
Gregory at the last answers, If he repent from the bottom of his heart, let
him deliver unto me in token thereof, his Crown, and other ensigns of his
kingdom, and confess himself, after this his great contumacie, unworthy the
name and honor of a King. To which they replying, that it was too heavy a
sentence; Let him come says he, and purge that sin which he has committed
against the Apostolic See, by obeying the Decrees thereof. And having obtained
thus much at his hands, they thought they had brought the matter to a good
pass. This wretched man Henry therefore came, as he was commanded, near
unto him, and being received within the second wall (for the city had three)
all his company left without, and disrobing himself of his princely attire,
bare footed, in the coldest time of Winter, and fasting until the evening, he
expected his answer of Gregory. William of Malmesburie adds, That he came
barefooted with a pair of sizzers and a scourge in his hands; to signify,
that he was there ready to be polled and whipped. There he gave him leave to
attend his answer within that second wall until the evening, Henry at a day
and place appointed by Gregory, should appear in a common assembly of the
German Princes, and there answering to such crimes as should be objected by the
Pope, should stand to his judgment. In the mean time he should lay aside all
the ornaments belonging to his princely dignity, nor intermeddle with
matteers of State: he should remove from him the Bishop of Bamberge, Vlrick of
Cosheim, and the rest, whose counsel he had formerly followed, and absolve all
those that had Henry all this while think but that he had made a good market.
But he had no sooner trampled this Prince under his feet, but, according to the
proportion of his humility, his pride increased, and the more submisse the
Emperor became, the more perfidious was he. He dispatched therefore to his
associats in Germany, especially the Saxons, Bernard a Cardinal of Rome, and
the Abbot of Marselles, to let them to understand, That he would not have them
to rest themselves upon that which he had concluded with Henry; For though he
were reconciled to the court of heaven, yet not to his kingdom. His
confederats therefore joining with his Legates, An. 1077.
Rodolph Duke of Sueuia and Burgondie, and brother in law to Henry, King, upon
condition, That he should renounce all right to the creation of the Pope, and
inuestiture of the Bishops, and declare his children to be no successors of his
by right of inheritance: for that he had ever in his mind. And shortly after he
sent unto him in sign of his confirmation, the Imperial Crown, with this
inscription: Petra dedit Petro, Petrus Diadema Rodolpho.

This change nevertheless was so odious, that Sigefridus Bishop of Mence
annoynting him, the citizens rose in arms against them, as traitors to their
country, Rodolph and his followers were compelled to save themselves by flight
in the night time, and to retire themselves into Saxony.

In the mean time Henry, partly instigated by this great dishonor the Pope
had done unto him, and partly by those his followers, whom to purchase his own
grace he had left as a prey to the Pope, resolves with himself to shake off
this yoke, calls his friends about him, and by all the means he could
reconciled himself to his c^^^^^^s, and by the indignity of the fact stirs
up all that had good minds, and co^^^gious hearts, to indignation, and so
shortly after brings his army into the field, ^^^ets Rodolph, gives him
battle, puts him to flight, and with a great Bernard Archbishop of Magdeburg,
the author of the civil war, the great Duke of Saxony, and Herman his
uncle: Sigefride the Bishop of Mence, who consecrated Rodolph, and Warnerus of
Me^, being dragged to the gallows by the soldiers, were fre^d from their
(...) Henry, not suffering any man in so just a war to be slain, the
battle being ended. From thence forward, Rodolph not know^ (...) to renew his
forces upon the sudden, Henry is not idle in using his (...) welcome this
news was to Gregory let the Reader judge, who (...) ^ing the Crown to
Rodolph used these words: In our name (of Saint Peter and Saint Paul) I give to
all those that shall keep faith and loyalty to Rodolph And with this
assurance he expressed his law in harder terms: If any hereafter shall
receive a Bishopric, or an Abbotship, or other Ecclesiastical dignity, of
any lay man, let him not be numbered among the Bishops or Abbots, neither let
any do obedience unto them, as to a Bishop or Abbot, and let him be
interdicted the grace of Saint Peter, and entry into his house. And if any
Emperor, King, Duke, Marquess, Earl, or other secular power, or person, shall
bestow any Bishopric, At the humble entreaty therefore of Rodolph he
excommunicateth Henry again, under pretense, That against his oath he had
taken into his hands the ornaments or marks of the Empire: All those that
follow Rodolph he freeth from hell, and places in heaven, and whatsoever may
make for the strengthening of their wars, as fire and sword, and the like, he
assures unto them: but all that take part with Henry, and refuse to fall from
him, and to join with his enemy, he accurseth to hell and damnation, etc. But
all this, says Auentinus, to most of the Bishops, and all learned and honest
simple people, except those that were of the conspiracy, seemed a new
doctrine, and the most dangerous heresy that ever troubled the Christian
Church. On the other side there assembled together An. 1080.
at Brixen in Bauaria, and condemn Hildebrand again of ambition, heresy,
impiety, sacrilege: Because, say they, he is a false Monk, a Magitian, a
Diuiner, an expounder of dreams and prodigious wonders, having an ill opinion
of Christian religion; he has bought the Popedom, against the order of his
ancestors, and the wills of all good men, and in despite of us, and as the
Lord of the whole earth endeuoreth to keep it, etc. He is a sworn enemy to
the Commonwealth, Empire, and Emperor, who has oftentimes offered peace to
him and his followers: He lies in wait for the bodies and souls of men:
Divine and humane laws he peruerteth: For truth he teaches lies, allows for
good, perjury, falsehood, homicide, yea and commends them, and gives
encouragement thereunto: According reciting this Decree, adds, He was a
manifest Negromancer, possessed with a Pythonicall spirit: which is worth the
noting, because of that which shall hereafter be spoken of his (...)* But being
famous in the art of Divination, the better to give heart to (...) the Saxons,
Sigebert, Histor. Saxon.
that he knew by reuel^^^^^, That the false King must this year dye, whom he
interpreted to be Henry: which (...) it prove not to be true, says he, and
that this my prophecy have not effect before the ^^^st aforesaid, account not
me for Pope. Rodolph trusting to this Oracle, makes war the second time, and
the third, and ever (...) happy success; and the fourth time, resolving to
try the utmost, he is not only overthrown, but his right hand, by which he
had plighted his faith to the Emperor, being cut off, he (...) his life.
Gregory presently thinks of a successor like unto him; and thereof (...)
writes to the Bishop of Passaw, and the Abbot of Hirtzaugen, his faithful
friends, That they should with mature deliberation provide that there should be
no Prince chosen that was An. 1081.
or less true than he that was lately dead; and withal sends the form of an
oath, as follows, which they should enforce him to take.

From this hour, and ever after, Gregor. li. 5. Epist. 3.
I will be faithful in all true loyalty to Saint Peter the Apostle, and his
Vicar Saint Gregory, who now lives and sits in his chair; and whatsoever he
shall command me under these words, Per veram obedientiam, By true obedience,
I will faithfully, as becomes a Christian, observe. As touching the ordination
of the Churches, and the lands and revenues which either Constantine the
Emperor, or Charles, gave to Saint Peter, and all the Churches and lands that
have been at any time offered or granted by any men or women to the Apostolic
See, and are, or shall be in my power, I will (that is, Gregory) I will plight
my faith with my hands, to be a faithful soldier of S. Peter and his for
ever. But Henry in the mean time gave him no leave to do what pleased him:
for having by his victories and prosperous success appeased the tumults of
Germany, he takes his journey with his army into Italy. And this was the
last act of Hildebrands tragedy. Henry therefore, who in the Synod held at
Brixen had caused Gilbert of Corrigia, Archbishop of Rauenna, to be named Pope,
who was called Clement the third, was absolved by him, and so passed the Alps,
and removing all An. 1082.
in the beginning of the Spring, he sets forward in the same steps as before,
An. 1083.
and assailes the Vatican; and in the year 1083, after a long siege he took
the city, and entering into the Capitol, there fortified himself. William of
Malmesburie, and others, that writ the history of Godfrey of Bulloine, say,
That he was the first who with a ladder scaled the city, and entered into Rome;
for which service the Emperor granted unto him the inuestiture of the Duchy
of Lorain. Crescentius, otherwise called the castle S. Angelo, into which
Gregory, with some of his dearest friends, was fled. These wearied by Henry,
resolved with themselves to offer twenty hostages, and to take day upon
certain conditions to deliver the city. But Gregory unwilling to fall into
his hands whom he had so much offended, made choice rather to hazard the
bringing of Robert with his Normans to Rome, though it were a course full of
danger. This Robert therefore being at an appointed time let in by the gate
Flaminia, by some of Gregory's friends, took the Pope out of the castle, and
carried him to Cassin, Sigebert. in Chron. Math. Paris in Histor. Angl.
and from thence to Salerne. Whereupon Henry returned into the city, by whose
authority Gregory was again condemned, and Clement confirmed, who Bertha his
wife. But Henry returning into Germany, to appease some tumults that were
newly risen, Gregory making benefit of the occasion, though he were absent,
stirs up his followers at Rome to rebellion; but in the month of May being
suddenly taken with a disease, An. 1085.
he died in the year 1085: but yet not without advice given to the Cardinals,
to choose either Desiderius Abbot of Cassin, or, if he refused it, Hugh Bishop
of Lions, or Otho of Ostia, that it might be said, That the ambitious
enterprises of Gregory outliued himself. But Sigebert Abbot of Gembloux, a
writer of those times, says in express words, That he called one of the
twelve Cardinals, whom he loved above the rest, and confessed himself unto
him, That by the suggestirn of

It is now of some importance to know what manner of man this Hildebrand was,
because the judgment of him throughout all Christendom was diverse, Lambert of
Schaffnabourg Abbot of Hirtzaw, a grave writer, speaking of the Countess
Mathilda, his good friend, says, That she, her husband Goselon, Duke of
Loraine, yet living, pretended a kind of widowhood, far from her husband, she
refusing to follow her husband to Lorain, out of her native country, and he
employed about the affairs that belonged to his dukedom, took no care for
the space of three or four years to visit his Marquisat in Italy; after
whose death she seldom or never parted from the Popes side, following him with
a strange affection. And for as much as a great part of Italy obeyed her, and
she abounded above all other Princes with whatsoever men most esteemed of,
whenever the Pope had Others add, That she having married Azo Marquess of
Este, the Pope impatient therewith, the year following dissolved the
matrimony, Sigon. l. 9. de regno Italiae.
under a pretense of kindred in the fourth degree of consanguinitie. Whereby
that suspicion of adultery that was before, did more appear to be a manifest
truth: and deservedly too, nothing in those days being Mathilda too? There is
therefore one that speaks yet more freely: Tractatus de unit. Eccl.
conseruanda.
By this their frequent and familiar conversation he engendered a cruel
suspicion of dishonestie, whilst he observed not more carefully that divine
precept of Pope Lucius, That a Bishop ought not at any time to be without the
company of two Priests, and three Deacons, as witnesses of his conversation.
Which he should so much the more carefully have observed, by how much the more
severely he proceeded against lawful matrimony. In this all Authors consent,
That Mathilda ruled both Pope and Popedom, and by her the goods of the Church
were administered. Whereupon, says Benno, Benno Cardin. in vita Hildeb.
Rome has seen and heard how he lives, with what persons day and night he
conuerseth, how he has removed the Cardinals from him, who should be witnesses
of his life and doctrine. Neither was Sigonius ashamed to write, Sigon. l. 9.
de regno Ital. Annals Godefrid. Monachi.
That he appointed a place in Councels to Mathilda. Doubtless the Monk
Godfrey says plainly, That being circumuented by the Pope, she gave unto S.
Peter, without the knowledge of the Magistrates and rulers, the Marquisat of
Ancona.

But as touching his public life and government, Gerochus his follower,
Gerochus in vita Hildebrand.
who writ the history of his life, describes him to be very obstinat and
proud in his own conceit. The Romans, says he, usurp a divine honor, they
will give no reason of their actions, neither can they endure it should be said
unto them, Why do thou this? and they Sic volo, sic iubeo, sit pro ratione
voluntas.
So I will, so I command,
For reason my will shall stand.


And that indeed was his humor, according to the description of all writers.
Sigebert, who writ of those times, says, That by his example, and by reason of
his new decrees, many things were done in the Church against all laws divine
and humane, and there arose in the Church by this occasion Pseudomagistri,
false Doctors, who by their profane Hereby we may easily gather what opinion
he had of him. Another says, He received for accusation of the King the
writings of his enemies, and thereupon excommunicated him. Histor. Saxonica in
literis Henrici ad Hildebrand. Benno Cardin. in vita Hildebrand.
And with what fury he was carried appears by that his Apothegme, I will
either die, or take from thee thy life, and kingdom. But Cardinal Benno
notes the manifest judgment of God; As (says he) he rose from his chair to
excommunicate the Emperor, then newly made of strong timber, by the sudden
hand of God it was strangely torn into diverse pieces, to give all men to
understand how many and horrible schisms, by that dangerous excommunication
and presumption, he that sat in that chair should sow, both against the
Church of Christ, and the Sea of S. Peter, how cruelly he should dissipate the
chair of Christ, trampling the laws of the Church under his feet, and bearing
rule with power and austeritie. And another says, From hence there arose a
more than civil war, without respect of God or man: the Divine and humane
laws were corrupted, without which, neither the Church of God, nor
commonwealth could stand, and the public and Catholic faith is violated. And
if you ask them Henry to Gregory, Apologia Henrici.
that he omitted nothing that might mollify the heart of Gregory, and
regaine his grace and favor, insomuch that at the last, for a testimony of
his reconciliation, he received the Sacrament of the body and blood of Christ
Jesus, at the hands of the Pope, sits at table with him, and so is sent back
in peace; But the author adds, That peace which Judas dissembled, not which
Christ left: Insomuch that Leo Bishop of Ostia, Leo Ostiens. li. 3. Chron.
Cassinen. c. 48.
who then flourished, says, The business being brought to an end, the Pope by
the counsel of Mathilda, sent one of his over the mountains with the crown of
the Empire, to Rodolph persuading him to rebel against the Emperor. And the
letters whereby he incited him, are yet to be read in the History of Historia
Saxonica, Apologia Henrici.
yea, some repeat his own words: Trouble not your selves (says he,) I restore
him unto you more faulty than before, for the person of the King shall be more
contemptible in his kingdom, if satisfying he lay aside the ensigns of his
kingdom; and if without permission he resume his regal ornaments, I shall have
the iuster cause to excommunicate him. But of both the kings this is his
judgment: Henry born and brought up in the kingdom, by the ordinance of God
succeeded his progenitors in the kingdom etc. But Rodolph (says he) was
obedient to the Pope, who had discharged him of his faith and allegiance, and
assured him that bearing arms against Henry, he could be no way condemned of
perjury and disloialtie, because being excommunicated he could be no longer
King, it being the duty of all the faithful in the Church, to persecute and
kill all those, (says the Author) never heard of before, there being no other
sword permitted in the Church, Helmold. in Historia Sclauoru^. c. 28. 29. 30.
than that of the spirit, which is the word of God. But the judgment of God
acknowledged by Rodolph himself, gives better satisfaction, who being near
his end, used this speech to some of his familiar friends, You see here my
right hand wounded: with this right hand, I swear to my Lord Henry, that I
would never hurt him or hinder his glory; but the command of the Pope and
request of the Bishops have brought me to this, that laying aside all respect
of mine oath, I should usurp an honor The same author adds that the Saxons
gathering heart again, chose one Herman surnamed Cluffloch king, who had
conquered Henry in the field, Who by the just judgment of God, entering
victoriously into a City, the Gate fell off the hinges, and killed him and
diverse others: Whereupon the Saxons seeing their purposes frustrated, they gave
over the creating of a new King, or to bear arms any more against Henry,
manifestly perceiving that the kingdom was reserved unto him by the What now
remains, but that we add the confession of Gregory himself, alleged
before by Sigebert and confirmed by Matthew Paris? That by the instigation of
the Devil, he had stirred up wrath and revenge against mankind. I willingly
here omit the contradictorie writing of this age, with the replications and
duplications of those that took part with Gregory to maintain his
excommunication; who say, that a Pope excommunicated Chilperick King of France
for his idleness, and unprofitable government only, and established Pepin in
his place; That Kings are not less subject to the key of Rome, then the rest
of his subjects, for they are all sheep; That whom God has made a ruler over
things Celestial, he has made him much more over Henry, on the other side
replied that Chilperick was deposed by the common consent of the States of the
Realm, and not by the Pope, that it is the office of a Pastor to feed, not to
kill, to instruct not to destroy; that the examples that were alleged by them,
were either false, or impertinent; That Henry refused not to do any thing,
nay had performed whatsoever belonged to his place; That Gregory on the other
side carried himself as an actor, not as a Judge; That God only rules Kings
and Kingdoms, and those subjects that God has given them, no man can absolve
of Gregory to be Antechrist, who taking upon him the name of Christ, did
utterly overthrow the Law of Christ, and his doctrine. But this is nothing,
among the rest they strongly maintained, that the Catholic Church is not with
him that destroys the Church, and that the title of Catholic belongs not to
him or his followers, who speak and hold against the holy Scriptures, against
the Gospel of the son of God; But rather according to S. John he and his
society are Antichrists, qui Iesum soluunt, betray Christ, offer him violence,
whilst they violently wrest the Scriptures. And it is well noted of a learned
Historiographer of our time, Vignier in Hist. Ecclesiast.
that in this whole controversy, Constantine, or the renunciation of Lewis. A
manifest proof unto us, that there was no such thing as yet found out.

But there is none that better lays open unto us the mysteries of the
iniquity of Hildebrand, then Cardinal Benno the Roman Archpriest. As
touching his Magic, all writers display him to be skillfull in this art, as
likewise that truly diabolical Oracle wherewith he deceived Rodolph, and was
himself deceived by the devil: for which quality also he was condemned in
many Synods, by innumerable Bishops of France, Germany, Italy, in the
Councels of Worms, Pauia, Brixen, and Rome, where in the sentence it self, in
very significant words, he Benno, who penetrated into the hidden secrets of
Gregory, sets down all circumstances, That he had learnt Magic of
Theophilact, who was Pope Benedict the ninth, of Laurence his companion, and of
John the Archpriest of S. John Port Latin, afterward Gregory the sixth, who by
his commerse with devils, and the singing and flying of birds, told of those
things that were done in far countries, of the event of wars, and the death
of Princes: That he, whilst they lived, yea even in the Popedom, was the
chief instrument and companion of all their wickedness, yea Gregory the
sixth, not only of his money, but his perfidious treachery: That he enforced
Pope Nicholas, by fearing him with strange apprehensions of death, and
presenting before him horrible visions, to make him Archdeacon: That none of
the Cardinals subscribed to his election, all forsaking him, but he was created
by the open force of the soldiers: That coming one day from Alba to Rome, he
had forgot a certain book of Negromancie, without which he seldom or never
went, which he in his journey remembering at the entrance of Portlateran, he
hastily called unto him two of his familiar friends, and faithful ministers of
his wickedness, and commanded them with all speed to fetch that book unto
him, and withal terribly threatened them, not to presume to open the book
Benno Cardin. in vita Hildeb.
etc. And these are the very words of Benno, That it was a common thing with
him, to shake sparkles of fire out of his sleeue; and with these and the like
miracles to blind the eyes of the simple, as if they were signs of sanctity:
That he sent two Cardinals, Alto and Cuno, to S. Anastasia, to perform a fast
of three days, every one every day to sing a Psalter and Masses, Berengarius;
which nevertheless came not to pass: That he consulted the Sacrament it
self, as it had beeene an Oracle, against the Emperor; and the Cardinals
withstanding him, cast it into the fire: That he had laid a trap for the
Emperor in the Church of S. Mary's in Mount Auentine, and observing the place
wherein he commonly stood or kneeled, he commanded a great stone to be laid
upon the beams of the Church over his head, that being let fall upon his head
whilst he was praying, might dash out his brains: But the stone with the
weight thereof bare down with it the instrument of this villainy, who by the
just judgment of God was bruised to pieces Liberius, who was an Arrian, he
ordained a Feast, and committed many outrages besides, against all law and
equity, murders, oppressions, violences, which it would be too long to relate.
For which cause, says he, the blood of the Church cries out against I could
wish the Reader would read the book.

But here we must answer to the objections of Bellarmine, who strives to
affirm that this book is not to be believed: First, because it is likely to
be suborned by some Lutheran or other. R. If he had said, of some malicious
person, it might have been borne with; but I refer it to the judgment of
any Reader that can discern the style, weigh the circumstances, consider of
the phrase, and I think there is none to be found that will take it to be
suborned. Secondly, some man perhaps, faith he, in Gregory the seventh, would
take upon him to describe unto us the Idea of a most wicked Pope. R. Why then
has he marked eight or nine Popes with the same coal, and as many Cardinals?
Neither is Benno the only author of these Benno, says he, was a Cardinal
created by the Antipope, Clement the third, and therefore no friend of
Gregory's: and Onuphrius, says he, placed him among the Cardinals of Clement.
R. How easy a matter it is to lie, where there is no man to contradict? But
Benno, who could not foresee Bellarmines fiction, named himself among the
Cardinals that were created before Hildebrand: Leo, says he, the Archpriest of
the Cardinals, and Benno, and Hugobaldus, and John, Onuphr. de Pontisicibus
maximis Alexand. 2. and Clement. 3.
and Peter Cardinals ordained before his time, Natro, Innocent, and Leo,
consecrated by himself. And Onuphrius himself among the present Cardinals,
promoted by Alexander the second, the predecessor of Gregory, names Benno a
German a Prelat This is that Benno no doubt, who in the title of his book is
described by these names; for he that by Onuphrius is placed under Clement,
has no other but the title of a Priest. And so the testimony of Benno stands
yet good. In the mean time it is to be noted, That this Magitia^, that is,
this disciple or feudatarie of the devils, is the very same that thundered so
loud, that spit his fire and flame against the lawful marriage of
Ecclesiastical persons, and who for this very matter filled both Church and
commonwealth with fire and ruin; which puts us in mind of that which the
Apostle spoke to Timothy, That in the later times some shall depart from the
faith, 1. Tim. 4.5. c. 2.3.
and shall give heed to spirits of error, and doctrines of devils, which speak
lies through hypocrisy, and And from hence he confesses before that he raised
this doctrine. Add hereunto, That it was about the middle of these times that
the disputation grew hot about the carnal presence of Christ's body in the
Sacrament, under the Popes Victor and Nicholas the second, Hildebrand being the
brand that kindled it, who made Berengarius subscribe unto it, That all the
faithful in the Sacrament do really tear with their teeth the body of
Christ; which Thesis nevertheless in these days is with them accounted
heretical. And to say the truth, they really tear the body of Christ, who by
their ambition do miserably tear in pieces the Church of Christ.

Baronius endeavors to defend Gregory in all things, Baron. an. 1073 art. 16.
yea following the other extreme, he strives to make him a Saint: He begins
with his nativity, He was, says he, borne at Soane in Tuscane, the son of a
Carpenter. And hereby he thinks he has gotten much, because, says he, our
Savior taking our flesh upon him, by reason of Joseph his father was called
the son of a Carpenter: But which is more, from his infancy he wrought
miracles; For being a child, and playing at the feet of his father, who was
hewing of timber, with the chips that flew from it, before he knew letter in
the book, he formed certain characters, that being joined together, expressed
that Dauidicall Oracle, Psalm. 72. Dominabitur a mari vsque mare, Psalm. 72.
His Dominion shall be from sea to sea; which the princely Prophet did once
speak of our Gregory, as it was foretold, should leap into Christ's place,
invade the throne of God himself? From what spirit did this wicked blasphemy
proceed, and consequently what was this miracle but that of Pytho, which the
whole remainder of his life made good? Secondly he cries out against Cardinal
Benno, calling him schismatike, and a man in no sort to be believed, etc. But
we have showed Bellarmine out of Onuphrius, that he deceiues himself in this
point: neither can a Cardinal be called a schismatike, when for so long a time
together these Popes contended one against the other, neither of them both
approved by Baronius. To conclude, is Benno alone? Does not Sigebert, a writer
of these times, so many other recited by Auentine, so An. 1074.
Do they not give the same testimony of his violences, poysonings,
Negromancies? Thirdly he endeavors to excuse the love of Gregory and
Mathilda: But how does he it? By contradicting all history. He thinks he has
proved, that this Mathilda married to Azo Marquess of Este, which marriage
Gregory did undo, is not the same that is here spoken of; which we will give
him leave to dispute with his own fellows and friends: But so long as he does
acknowledge, that this Mathilda, of whom we speak, was first married to Godfrey
le Bossu Duke of Loraine: that presently by the authority of Gregory they
made a divorce, with the great offense of her husband: that this divorce, says
he, was not Yet, says he, this divorce was lawful, because so great and so
holy a Father did it, and by his authority permitted it. Does not he give us
reason to believe what the history told us before? And to say the truth, with
what face could this holy man familiarly converse with Mathilda far from her
husband, from whom by his authority she was diuerted, seduced, taken? How
seemly a thing was it for her to follow him, in every place to accompany
him, for him to sit with her in Council, in Consistory, in Senate? Did this
become the modesty of a virgin, if so he will have her, or if one that had
been married, the gravity of a matron? Baronius, after the death of Gregory,
this virgin married Welpho, a young man, the son of the Duke of Bauaria. Will
any man now upon the faith of Baronius warrant her chastity, nay her
virginity? or admit of his excuse, That it was done for the good of the
Church, Baron an. 1085 art. 14.
by the command of Urban the second? At the last it pleases him to cover all
this turpitude with fables, That the garments of Gregory, after his death,
wrought miracles, as Paul's Semicinctia did in the Acts of the Apostles; which
selfsame power and virtue was in the apparel of Gregory: And to prove this
true he alleges Legend of S. Anselme Lucensis. Yuo Epist. 58.65.
But in this clear light, in this Sunshine wherein we live, where is the
shame? And for as much as he compares him in this with S. Paul, 2. Thessal. 2.
let him hear what Paul says: The coming, says he, of the man of sin, and
son of perdition (that is Antichrist, of whom he foretold before) is by the
working of Satan with all power and signs, and lying wonders: Which words of
S. Paul are they not accomplished?

41. PROGRESSION.
Of the factions that arose in the Popedom by the death of Gregory the
seventh. Of the rebellion of Conrade against the Emperor Henry his father. Of
the divisions, and strange opinions that grew among the people through the
schism between Clement the third and Urban the second.

Gregory, if we believe some Authors, neither does Baronius himself deny it,
Desiderius the Abbot of Mount-Cassin failed not to give those Cardinals to
understand that took part with him. And as he was the first of the three that
Gregory had commended, so all men's eyes were especially cast upon him; who,
whether it were out of a consideration of the greatness of the charge, or to
the end he might be the more earnestly entreated, twice or thrice refused it,
yea and disrobed himself of his Pontifical ornaments, and retired himself to
his Monastery at Cassin, even then when it was thought that he had yielded to
the persuasion of his friends. Sigonius gives a little touch: Sigon. l. 9. de
regno Ital.
Eight days after speaks more plainly: Mathilda and the Normans create him,
that is to say, in hatred of Clement, who nevertheless held the seat at Rome,
and was called Victor the third. But as soon as Hugh Bishop of Lions, one of
the three that Gregory had commended, thought that Desiderius had in good
earnest accepted of the Popedom, he presently banded himself against him, and
in a Synod held at Beneuent he excommunicated him, and with him Richard of
Marselles. But Desiderius lived little above a year after: Gullielm. Malmes b.
l. 4.
and if we may believe William in the Chalice saying his first Mass. In that
short time nevertheless that he lived, he had published new excommunications
against Clement and Henry, and under the selfsame pretense that Gregory did.
He retired himself to his Abbie at Cassin, for the better recovery of his
health, and there, upon his deathbed, according to the tradition of Gregory,
he recommended unto those that were his assistants, Otho Bishop of Ostia, Leo
Ostiens. l. 3. c. 72.
who had been brought up at Clugni, for his successor: in so much that taking
him by the hand, he peremptorily said unto them, Take him and place him in the
Roman seat, and until you have done it hold my place. Benno calls him
Pedissequum, the Page or Lackey of Hildebrand. The Bishops therefore that took
part with him in the year 1088, An. 1088.
meet at John Bishop of Portua, and for the Lay Benedict governor of the
city. A new kind of proceeding it was, because Clement held the place in the
city: neither was there here any mention at all of expecting the Emperors
consent herein. There without any other solemnity they nominated Otho Pope,
called Urban the second, who was no sooner entered into Rome, but he was driven
out again by Clements faction. Hereupon, says Leo of Ostia, if we will judge
of the validity of this election, we must say, That he was chosen by the
statutes of Gregory. Leo Ostiens. l. 3. c. 72.
But William of Malmesburie more freely: To that part that seemed to be the
more just, the army of Herfeldens. Theol. in tractatu de vnitate Eccles.
conseruand. an. 1090. Sigon l. 9. de regno Jtaliae.
who forgetting her sex, not unlike to the ancient Amazons, led her army into
the field, and by her voice Urban obtained the Apostolic throne. But another
says more plainly: Using the help and succor of most wicked people, with
whom the Law of God and man had no place. Sigonius confesses, that Mathilda
(who called her self the daughter of Peter) took upon her the protection of
Urban, and that Urban was the cause that she married Welfo Duke of Bauaria, to
the end he might strengthen himself by him, against the Emperor in Germany:
Not so much (says Bertholdus) for incontinencie, Bertholdus Constant.
Presbyter in Chron.
as for obedience to the Pope, that she might be so much the more able to give
aid and succor to the Church of Rome against the Schismatikes: and therefore
he presently adds, that he wholly sequestered and kept himself being more
greedy of the principality than the woman. Are these then the lawful ends of
marriage?

Neither is it here to be omitted, that there were certain lots drawn at Rome
to know who should be successor to Gregory the 7 (which was then a thing
usual at Rome) and it was found that one Otho should succeed him: Fragmentum
Monastici Cadomens. an. 1084.
whereupon Otho Bishop of Baieux, and brother to William the Conqueror, King of
England, though he were Earl of Kent, and Lieutenant general of his Realm,
conceived a hope of obtaining the Popedom; whereupon he sent to Rome great
presents, and there built great, and goodly houses, and left nothing undone
with the Senators, that either gifts, or his other best endeavors could work.
But having William understanding in Normandy of this expedition, took shipping
for England, and meeting him in the Isle of Weight, there arrested him, and for
many offenses he had committed in the carriage of his matters of State, cast
him into Prison. The other Otho therefore, Urban the second, obtained the
chair; and his first exploit was in a Synod holden at Melfe to excommunicat
Clement and Henry, and all those that received either orders of the one, or
inuestiture of the other, and to be brief, all those that in any respect had
any commerce with them. Moreover, he confirmed Roger Guischard of the race of
the Normans, Duke of Apulia and Calabria, the better to retain his friendship
and fidelity toward him. But Henry passing into Italy in the year 1091 got
into his possession, and wasted the greatest part of those Countries that
belonged to Mathilda: but for some important causes being enforced to return
into Germany, he left his eldest son Conrade in Italy, whom he had
destinated to be his successor; him Mathilda won partly by flattery, partly
by terrifying him that he should never possess the Empire, if he had not the
grace and favor of the Pope, and so promising an assurance thereof upon his
submission to the Pope, made him to rebel against his own father; And to make
this band of amity more firm, married him to the daughter of Roger King of
Sicilia. Dodechin. an. 1093.
Sigonius, after Dodechin, says that Conrade was enforced thereunto, because
(his father commanding him) he would not abuse Adelheida, by which means he
would have defamed her, and so conceyuing hatred against his son forsook
him. Auentin. l. 5.
But Auentine has no such matter, but quite contrary, says he: There are
certain crimes objected against Henry, whose names are unknown to all
Frenchmen and Germans, and are no where to be found but amongst those, that
have red the lives of the Emperors according to the description of Suetonius.
Neither does Sigonius himself believe it, since he says that the rebellion of
Conrade, was both godly and necessary, as serving much to the settling of the
Popes affairs. Neither does he dissemble that he fled to Mathilda, Roger King
of Sicilia, her self perhaps being taken with his love; according to that
which his father Henry spoke in an assembly at Cologne: Auentin. l. 5.
My son being entangled with the allurements of a woman, endeavors to
deprive me both of my dignity and life. Urban in the mean time absolues him
of all duty and obedience toward his father, and upon condition that he do
him homage, he promises him all help and assistance to obtain the Empire. It
was therefore a matter of no great difficulty for him, staying some years in
Italy, to win unto him such as were friends to the Empire, and to settle his
affairs there. Henry had created Arnulph Archbishop of Milan, Berthold, in
Chron.
and according to the custom invested him by the ring and the staff. But for
as much as the Bishops Urban in favor of Conrade went to Milan, and there
took him out of the Monastery, made him Governor of his Church, and adorned
him with the Pall, but yet upon condition (for nothing came freely) that the
Church of Milan should be subject to the Church of Rome, which hitherto had
never acknowledged him. There was also at that time an occasion offered of the
recovery of the Holy Land, by means of one Peter an Hermit Picard: Urban, who
cold not stay at Rome, took this occasion to pass the Alps, Partly, says
William of Malmesburie, to solicit the Churches on the other side the
mountains to reverence him, partly (and this was the counsel of Boemond) that
all Europe being busied about the expedition into Asia, in so great a tumult,
the forces of all Provinces being dispersed, Urban might make himself master
of Rome, and Boemond invade Sclauonia and Macedon, which countries, and all
besides that lie from Dyrrachium to Thessalonica, his father Guischard had
usurped, against Alexius Emperor of Constantinople; upon which title Boemond
challenged them to be his by right of inheritance. But for as much as he knew
that there were none more willing to undertake this enterprise than the French
men, to the end that by their example he might put courage into others, he
calls a general Council of the whole West at Cleremont in Auernia: there, in
the year 1095, An. 1095.
in his own person, he laid open his purposed enterprise to the whole
assembly; the conclusion of his speech was this: We release all faithful
Christians that shall bear arms whereupon many of all sorts of people took
to them the cross, the badge or ensign of the army. But in the mean time,
under this pretended zeal he forgets not to set forward his own affairs: for
in stead of pacifying all quarrels at home, that he might the better proceed in
this high enterprise abroad, he continues his old grudge and malicious
exploits against Henry, even to his death, An. 1099.
which was in the year 1099, An. 1100.
Sigon l. 9. de regno Jtaliae.
whom his son Conrade succeeded in the year 1100, for this expressly
commended by Sigonius, That he never departed from the counsels of Mathilda
and Urban.

Clement the third held the seat at Rome, whereby any man may judge how
diversely men's consciences were distracted, when he saw their Councels one
contradicting the other, Clement undoing that at Rome that Urban had done at
Placentia, one pronouncing the others Bishops heretics, the other condemning
those Bishops that were his followers, and sealing their condemnation with his
own hand, both of them casting each others acts into the fire. And one there
was who affirmed, that he saw Hildebrand and his followers burning in hell, and
another, that he saw some of Clements Cardinals there too. Matters thus
standing, they both called a Council, Urban at Clermont, Clement at Rome,
where the one excommunicated, cursed, degraded the other, made void each others
Urban shows sufficiently, that he troubled his head but a little for the
recovery of Jerusalem; for the principal articles were these: Let the
Catholic Church be chaste in belief, the interpretation follows, free from
all servitude: that no Bishops, Abbots, or Clergy men, shall receive any
Ecclesiastical dignity from the hands of a Prince, or lay, or secular
persons: That whosoever shall Others add, That faith given to heretics binds
not. As for Henry the Emperor, and Philip king of France, and whosoever
should call them Kings, he put them all in the number of heretics. And there
is a Canon alleged by him out of Gratian, 15. Q. 6. l. Iuratos.
that differs not much: Such as are sworn soldiers to the Earl Hugh, let
them not serve him so long as he stands excommunicated. And speaking to the
Bishop of Gap, he says, If they pretend oaths, let them be admonished, that
they must rather obey God than man: which Saint Peter in the Acts spoke to
another sense. At his return into Italy, finding himself more firmly settled
in Rome, in An. 1097.
but yet strengthened with a notable reason, Guill. Malm. l. 4 Edinerus in vita
Arnulini Archiepiscop. Symeon. Dunelmens. l. 2. Chron.
That it was too abominable that those hands that by the sign create their
Creator, should be bound as handmaids to serve those that every day and hour
pollute themselves with uncleanness. Thus abusing the world with a show of
reverence due to the holy Eucharist, because then Transubstantiation began to
take footing. To conclude, we read that in these times he made a show upon this
occasion, of his authority in France and England; in France, in that Geffrey
Bishop of Chartres was not only deposed by him, for his many and grievous
offenses, but Iuon Abbot of S. Quintin put into his place, of whom he made
choice, being a man famous in those days, that by his commendations he might
the better Anselmus, an Italian, the disciple of Lanfrane, being chosen
Archbishop of Canterbury by the consent of King William the second, to take
his confirmation of him: which being once admitted by the Primat of England,
was an example for all the rest to do the like.

OPPOSITION.
But it is now time to consider what the state of the Christian world was,
especially in the time of these schisms, which for the space of sixteen
years filled it

Germany was the Theater of this tragedy, wherein it much grieved all sorts
of people, that such controversies as should be decided by Scriptures, were
with a strange disorder of all things determined by civil wars. And
therefore in the year 1088, at the entrance of Pope Urban, An. 1088.
the Bishops and Princes on both parts assembled in Council at Garstunghen, to
find some course for peace to be proposed to Urban, before he were touched with
the affections of his predecessors, which he seemed nevertheless to succeed by
right of inheritance. There Conrade Bishop of Vtrecht laid open unto them how
necessary a thing peace was, and how detestable Tiberius, Nero, and the most
wicked monsters that are, how much more then good and lawful Princes?
Ambitious therefore and proud are they, who with a brazen face abuse the words
of our Savior, Whatsoever thou loossest upon earth shall be loossed in heaven,
and adulterating them by their interpretations, enforce them to serve their
own appetites; and like children, and such as are unskillful in all things,
endeavor to deceive us, as if, says he, we were ignorant, that it is a
familiar and common thing with the holy Prophets figuratively, sometimes
simply, according to the diversity of the effects. Doubtless that which
Christ Jesus spoke more obscurely in one place, he expresses plainly in S.
John, and most plainly in S. Matthew, S. Mark, and S. Luke: Peace be unto you,
says he: Auent. l. 5.
As my Father has sent me, so I send you: Receive ye the holy Ghost: Whose
sins ye remit shall be remitted, and whose sins ye retain shall be
retained. And to the end he might sow concord, and show himself to be the
only true shepherd, he says to one, If thou love me feed my sheep, that is,
go into the whole world and preach the Gospel to all creatures: And again,
All power is given me both in heaven and in earth, go therefore and teach all
nations. This good Bishop had not yet learnt, that these places were to be
restrained to one Pope, to Peter only, excluding all the rest both Apostles
and Bishops, or that they were more to be applied unto him than the rest: And
therefore he adds; For these causes Hildebrand is fallen headlong into
ambition, since he usurps the power of the immortal God, whose messenger he
is: such are the customs, the times, the men. The Supreme and Sovereign
Majesty had ill provided for humane which no man comes into the world; but
it is his happiness that the greatest are not At the last he concludes: No
man may proceed or pronounce sentence against a man that is deprived, until he
be restored to his former estate: See the book and read the law; and so he
delivered it to Wesilus Archbishop of Mence. Guebhard Bishop of Saltzbourge,
being for his age, eloquence, and learning, chosen Prolocutor, by the Bishops
that took part with Hildebrand, was mute, and answered not a word. From that
time forward many of the Bishops and Princes of Saxony abjure the sect of
Hildebrand (that name they retained in the time of Urban) and repenting
themselves of what they had done, came to the Emperor: Only fourteen
persist obstinat therein, who being assigned to appear the month following at
Mence, at their day of appearance came not. There the rest of the Bishops of
Germany being present, with the Legates of the Bishops of France and Italy, by
the common consent of all, the sect of Hildebrand is judged to be contrary to
Christian piety. Otho (called Urban) An. 1090. Waltram. in Epist. ad Ludouic.
Comitem.
It was at this time that Waltram Bishop of Magdeburge writ an Epistle to the
Earl Lodowick, whom he calls a glorious Prince; wherein he proves out of the
Scriptures, that obedience is due to lawful Kings and Princes: to the end he
might arm him against the imposters of that age, who to women and the vulgar
sort of people preached contrary doctrines: setting likewise Rodolph,
Hildebrand, the Marquess Egbert, and diverse other Princes, who bare arms for
the Pope against the Emperor. Sigebert, in Chron.
At which time likewise Sigebert speaking of Urban, chosen against Clement, and
of those things that followed thereupon: From hence, says he, grew scandalls
in the Church, and divisions in the State, the one disagreeing from the other,
the Kingdom from the Priesthood, one excommunicating another, the one
contemning the excommunications of the other, either out of a preiudicat
opinion of the cause, or the person, and whilst the one abuses the authority
of excommunicating against the other, by doing it rather Others speak more
confidently: Then did there arise false Prophets, Apostles, Priests, who
deceived the people with a false religion, doing great signs and wonders (and
of some he makes instance) who began to sit in the Temple of God, and to be
extolled above all that is worshipped: and whilst they go about to establish
their own power, they extinguish all charity and Christian simplicity, etc.
As if the decree of the immortal God kept not always one course, That no
perjured persons shall inherit the kingdom of heaven. The most part of the
best sort of men, such as were just, and honest, and ingenuous, and simple,
have left in writing, That at that time they foresaw the Empire of Antichrist
to be beginning, and those things to come to pass that our Savior Christ
Jesus had long before foretold. Sigebert and Auentine, after diverse others, do
note, Auent. l. 5.
That the prodigious wonders that were observed in those times, did astonish
the minds of most men: The heavens, says he, seen many times to burn, the
Sun and Moon to lose their light, the stars Sigebert. in Chron. Auent. l.
5.
pitched pauillions and armies in the air encountering one another, and
innumerable the like, whereby the people were confirmed in their opininion: But
especially when they saw the son to conspire against the state and life of
his father, Conrade against Henry, who had appointed him to be his successor,
An. 1095.
and that by the persuasion, compulsion, and approbation of Pope Urban,
instigated, or rather bewitched, by the cunning of Mathilda; his father in the
mean time leaving nothing undone that might regaine him to his duty and
obedience: who prevailing nothing by his just and gentle exhortations, was
enforced in the Councels and solemn assemblies of the Empire, to beg vengeance
from heaven and William of Malmesburie opened before unto us; That by that
means Urban might recover his authority at Rome, or rather divert the minds
of men employed about remote affairs, from those more necessary businesses
that touched them more nearly at home: That whilst they bended all their
endeavors abroad to persecute the Infidels, they might neglect Antichrist freely
wasting all at home in the Church. Neither wanted he in that impure and dark
world a bait whereby to win and allure the simple people to that war, which was
an absolute absolution from all their sins, without any penance. What greater
encitement could there to massacre them at their own pleasures, to the great
scandal of Christian Godfrey of Buloin that was the first who by assault
entered Jerusalem, was the selfsame who before under the command of the
Emperor Henry was the first that scaled the walls of Rome. Let no man doubt,
that there wanted in those times wise men, Auentine believing those that writ
before him, says that it was a report spread amongst the common people, Auent.
li. 5.
that this voice was heard from heaven, Deus vult, God will have it so;
whereupon all sorts of people from all parts ran to those wars, some from
their Kingdoms, some from their Cities, their Castles, their flocks, their
Temples, their families, their wives, their children, their fields, their
plonghes, and into Asia past by flocks, Captains, Governors, Tetrarches,
Bishops, Monks, who under a show of Religion, Berthold. in Chron.
committed all manner of wickedness. They carried a Goose (says he) before
them, saying it was the holy, An. 1096.
Ghost and that Charles the great was come again into the world. As for the
Jews, wheresoever they met them, they slew them, except they did presently
Sigon. de regno Jtaliae li. 9.
A voyage whereof Sigonius himself in the midst of his panegyrique could not
temper himself, but that he gave his judgment in these words: Urban (says he)
applied his mind to the recovery of Jerusalem, which had been a long time
held by the Sarasens; an enterprise not so famous for the increase of piety,
Gulielm. Malmelsburiens. li. 4.
as renowned for the glory thereof in future times. Which expedition to the end
he might color with some devotion, he ordained, that no Clergy, or Lay man
should eat flesh from Shrouetide to Easter. Thus does superstition always
increase

The controversy touching the inuestiture of Bishops, pretended by the Popes
to the prejudice of Kings and Emperors, did still continue, though not without
some difficulty and resistance, Waltramus de inuestituris Episcoporum.
especially in Germany. Waltram therefore Bishop of Naumburg, writ in his time
of this matter against the Pope; his reasons were, That Hadrian in a full
Council was of opinion with Charles the great, and his successors that it
belonged to them to inuest Bishops, yea and to confirm the Bishop of Rome,
except some certain Bishops of Italy, who by an ancient grant from the
Kings were to be consecrated by the Pope; In which grant he comprehends the
Abbeys, and other regal dignities: That Gregory the great Theodorick,
Theodobert and Brunichild to inuest without simonie, and that himself was not
consecrated but by the consent of Mauritius the Emperor: That Pope Leo and his
successors observed the same towads Otho and his, and that under pain of
excommunication; And therefore it is very strange that Gregory the seventh
should go about to alter it, and that under absolution: That the Popes are to
take good heed, that God do not unbind in heaven, what they bind upon earth;
which many times comes to pass by the glory of precedencie which sets men's
spirits on fire, when The judgments of Rome are not to be revoked; why then
do they revoke those of their ancestors, that made for the Emperors? why do
they scandal the little flock of Christ? why under the shadow of Religion
do they gather even with open hands all unto themselves, since that our
Savior says, Give unto Caesar, those things that are Caesar's etc? That in
Spain, Scotland, England, Hungary, the Kings used this right, purely and
entirely: In France a long time before Hadrian the consecrated Kings, and
governors of the Palace invested the Bishops, that is to say, Dagobert,
Sigebert, Theodoricus, Hildericus, Pepinus, Theodebertus, by whom Remaclus,
Amandus, Odemarus, and other holy Prelates, were inthronised and settled in
their seats, without respect of the manner of their inuestiture, whether it were
done by word, or by the staff and the ring yet it was no matter. But, we must
know that that homage that is done unto the king under the name royalty, is
before the consecration; And that from the time of S. Peter to Siluester it was
not so, both because the Emperors were heathens, and the Churches poor, but
afterward being enriched by kings, and endowed by other good men, they made
new laws, especially having gotten into their possession Lands, and great
revenues, yea became Lords of Towns and Cities, into which places they might
withdraw themselves, against the enemy: That it fell out very happily that
the Emperors Trithemius in lib. de scriptorib. Ecclesiast.
And in the selfsame sense writ Venericus Bishop of Verseil in Italy,
dedicating his book to the Pope himself, which he entitled, Of the discord
of the Kingdom and Priesthood. It was at this time also that we have the
Apology of Sigebert Abbot of Gembloux, for the Emperor Henry, mentioned by
Auentine in his fifth book.

In France, Urban having ordained Yuo Abbot of S. Quintine, An. 1072.
bishop of Chartres by the deposition of Iefferay, writ unto Richard Archbishop
of Sens to consecrat Richard as we learn by the letter of Urban himself
refused to do it; upon which his refusal Urban himself was enforced to
consecrat him, commanding Richard to yield his helping hand to Yuo in the
government of the Church ( reserving still his obedience to his Church: Yuo
Carmitens. Epist. 12.8.
but Richard nevertheless would not obey him, but writ (says Yuo) sharp
letters, and such as were derogatorie to the Majesty of the Apostolic See.
Whereupon Yuo warns him that the Scriptures pronounce him an heretic because
he agrees not with the Church of Rome. I appeal unto his own conscience, out
of what piece of Scripture he proves that. But he likewise acknowledges
ingeniously, that by the hand of Urban he had bin raised from the dunghill, and
therefore he held himself obliged in duty to advance his honor Cum Petro
pugnare, and cum Petro regnare, To fight with Peter and to reign with Peter,
that is (as the Popes courtiers say) to follow the Popes fortunes through what
dangers so ever. But here the Archbishop stayed not, for he assembled at
Estampes the Bishops his Suffragans, namely of Paris, Meaux, and Troy to
deliberat hereupon, wherein he shows that this ordination was against the
Majesty royal, which Yuo had greatly offended in receiving it, all of them
concluding to restore Iefferay into his place, and to depose Yuo; whereupon he
appealed to Rome, to which appellation they refused to obey; for which cause he
complains to Urban, imployeth his help, That he would be pleased to Philip
the first sent to the Pope for a dispensation to marie his concubine Bertrade,
and so withdrew his hand, and commanded Yuo to be established in his
Bishopric. Thus it oftentimes falls out, that the private vices of Princes
do greatly prejudice their public dignities. In these Epistles in the mean
time it is worth the noting, That Yuo does not always agree in doctrine with
Urban. For whereas diverse Bishops had condemned the inuestitures of lay persons
for heresy, because by this means the great Prelates got unto themselves the
right An. 1099.
Yuo nevertheless having gotten the Bishopric, and being out of their reach,
maintained against Hugh the Popes Legate the Primat of Lions and others, Yuo
Carnutens. Epist. 235.238.239.
That it was no heresy, since there was nothing here that concerned faith,
which had nothing common with Orders. This was Yuo, who otherwise held with
Urban, and did omit no occasion whereby he might serve him, and did carefully
advertise him to assist Manasses with his authority, for his confirmation in
the Bishopric of Rheimes, Idem Epist. 48.
Because, says he, it is necessary that the Church of Rome should have one in
that See that should be a true and trusty servant unto him. He armeth him
likewise in such a sort with his counsels, against those obstacles that may any
way hinder the course of his Legates or Decrees in France, that I think of my
self, that there is no man on this side the mountains that has suffered
greater wrongs, endured more contumelies for the maintenance of your commands
and that fidelity that is due unto you. Yea Richard the Archbishop of Sens
being dead, and Daribert canonically nominated to his place, Yuo being
prohibited by Hugh Primat of Lions, and Legate to Urban, to consecrate him
Bishop, because he had not performed unto him his due obedience, Yuo deals
sharply with the Legate by letters, giving him to understand, That he would not
obey him to the prejudice of the ancient Canons, and the venerable authority
of his forefathers: he therefore bitterly reproves him. But Baronius, who had
hitherto approved him, begins now to chide him, because he had not spoken of
inuestitures Baron. an. 1099 art. 8.
That which remains, says he, in this Epistle of Yuo, is more harsh, as
speaking too abiectly of the ancient inuestitures, yea of many things he
speaks with contempt; which if they were not corrected in other Epistles of
the same Author, would call into question that his glorious reputation which he
has gotten by defending the Apostolic See, and the Catholic verity. So much
does reason and affection disagree even in great personages.

An. 1093.
In England Anselme, by nation an Italian, being chosen Archbishop of
Canterbury by the consent of King William the second, craves leave of him to
go to Rome, to receive his Pall of Pope Urban: wherewith the King being
greatly offended, answered, That no Archbishop or Bishop in his realm was
subject to Anselme therefore was accused of high treason, all the Bishops
consenting thereunto, except Gondoulfe Bishop of Rochester. Urban hereupon sent
Gualter Bishop of Alba into England, to bring him the Pall, and to reconcile
him to King William. But Anselme being still desirous to go to Rome, King
William answered him in plain terms, That if he would promise, and bind
himself by an oath upon the book, neither to go, nor to appeal to Rome for
any affairs whatsoever, he should then well and peaceably enjoy against the
inuestiture of Layman: Mathias Paris in Guilielmo 2.
and so he continued at Lions so long as William lived. Let us add hereunto in
these times, the report of the Monk of Malmesburie touching the Romans: The
Romans, sometimes Lords of the world, Malmes. l. 5.
a people that go in long gowns, are now of all others the most ignorant, An.
1097.
selling justice for gold, and the Canons rule for silver.

We must not forget, that it was at this very time that Pope Urban granted to
Roger Earl of Calabria and Sicilia, those letters patents so much disputed by
Baronius against the King of Spain, Baron. an. 1097 art. 20. 21. and sequent.
who now possesses the kingdom both of the one and the other Sicile, where in
consideration of his good and loyal services done unto the Church of Rome, and
against the Sarasens, he made him the son of the universal Church, and by a
special privilege he grants unto him, and to his son Simon, or any other
his lawful heir, that they should never have during their lives within their
dominions, without their own will and allowance, any Legate of the Church of
Rome: By the special grace and favor of this privilege giving all to
understand, how burdensome and dangerous the presence of a Legate was: In so
much that what was to be done by a Legate, his meaning was should be executed by
the said Roger and his son, Legati vice, instead of a Legate: And if there shall
be called any Thus this good and zealous man overthrew the whole order of his
Church to content Roger, who knew well enough to use the occasion to the best
advantage of his own affairs.

42. PROGRESSION.
Of the entrance of Paschal the second into the Popedom. Of the conspiracies
procured by the Pope against the Emperor, with the rebellion of his son
Henry.

THe Agewe are now entering into has his Progression, whether we respect the
authority, or wickedness of the Popes, which together made way one to the
other: But by how much the more they discover themselves, by so much the more
witnesses do they exhibit unto us, who saw this Mystery of Iniquity either
openly, or at least through a cloud. Urban the second being dead in the year
1099, An. 1099.
Rainerius a Thuscan succeeded him, who was Paschal the second, a disciple of
Hildebrand, Urban for this only cause, That he was a likely man to walk in
his steps. The principal matter then in hand, was the inuestiture of the
Bishops and Abbots, which they took from the Princes, and got to themselves,
affirming that it had been usurped by the Princes, as we have seen before:
that it was a wickedness and an heresy: and that they might pretend some show
of religion therein, they couple it in all their proceedings with that faction
of the Nicholites, prosecuting with the selfsame rigor the single life of
Churchmen notwithstanding the general clamor of the whole Clergy against it,
and that cry of their sins and abominable wickedness that ascended up unto
heaven. This Rainerius therefore would not take upon him the Popedom, before
the people had Platina in Paschali. 2.
S. Peter has chosen Rainerius an excellent man to be Pope. Afterward putting
on his scarlet robe, and his mitre on his head, being accompanied with the
people and Clergy, he mounted upon a white Palfrey richly furnished, and so
was brought to Lateran, where resting himself a while in a throne prepared for
that purpose, he was girt with a girdle on which there hung 7 keys, and seven
seals, to give all men to understand that he according to the seuenfold grace
of the spirit of God, had power in all Churches over which he bare rule, to
open and shut, to seal and unseal: He likewise visited (carrying his
pontifical Scepter in his hand) all those places into which the Popes only
might come: At the last he went to S. Peter's Church to be consecrated, in which
he was anointed, Clement the third in the mean time persisted in his purpose,
against whom Paschal first bent his forces, insomuch that he compelled him to
depart Rome; which that he might the more easily perform, he fed the Emperor
with a hope of peace, and invited him to a general Council at Lateran,
whereunto he willingly harkened, being now wearied with his civil and
domestical molestations. The Prince persuading himself that Paschal was
desirous of peace, and much alienated from war, or rather because he said
he desired peace, he striued to be as forward therein as himself. But he had
no sooner obtained his purpose, but he renews in the Synod, the
excommunication against Henry, raises new factions in Germany, and because
he went not in his own person to Palestina, he stirs up new hatreds against
him; for he who in regard of the place he held should have been the first, and
by his example have encouraged others, left the place empty that he might do
every thing according to his own lust: To be brief, following the steps of
his predecessors, he stirs up Henry the son against his father, who had
made him copartner in the Empire, being persuaded, as before, that he should
never live peaceably without the grace and favor of the Pope; and that he was
not to prefer his duty toward his father, being guilty of heresy, before
that which he did owe unto the Pope. Auentin. l. 2.
And what this heresy was we have seen before. And therefore, says Auentine;
(amongst others he names Welfo Duke of Bauaria and husband to Mathilda,) and
Albert his Secretary, and a Chaplain of his, that if his father should die an
enemy to the Popes of Rome, and in disgrace with the Pope, the Empire would be
taken by some other; and so under a pretense of piety he rebelleth against his
own father. And as touching the accusation against him, That he did not his
best indeauor for this holy expedition, he told us a little before, that he
had sent into Asia, with a purpose to follow himself, the greatest part of his
men of war, that remained in Germany after three and twenty Godfrey of
Bullion, with his two brethren Baldwinus and Eustachius, and Robert Earl of
Flaunders; out of Bauaria the Duke Welfo, Otho and Eckardus Princes of Scheurn,
and diverse others; whereby it appeared, that this was only a pretense of the
Pope. The father in the mean time gathered courage, gives his son battle,
and conquers him; but looking more narrowly into the height of this
conspiracy, and finding that it could not be represt, but with the ruin of
the commonwealth, he is content to seek means of peace, and a parley Paschal,
the Bishops of Alba and Constance, with fifty other Bishops, who in this
Council armed with force and treason, do again excommunicat Henry, and for
the better strengthening of this Decree, they degrade him, and put his son
into his place. The circumstances Krantzius and Helmoldus, Helmold. l. 1. cap.
32. Krantzius l. 5. ca. 20. in Saxon.
which let not the Reader think tedious to read. The Bishops (says he) of
Mence, Cologne, and Worms were commanded to go unto him, and to bring from
him, howsoever unwilling, the Imperial Ensigns, the Cross, Scepter, Halberd,
Kingdom, sword, and Crown: but the Emperor enquiring the cause thereof, they
answer him, That he committed Symonie, in conferring of Bishoprics and
Abbeys: To whom the Emperor replied, Tell me ye Bishops of Mence and Cologne,
by the name of the eternal God what I have received from you: they answered
Nothing; Glory to God on high, says the Emperor, that in this point we are
found faithful; doubtless your great dignities might have brought great gain
into our Chamber, if we had sought after it; my Lord of Worms knows, and
(says he) and the election of the Princes gave them unto me: God is able to
preserve them unto me, and to withhold your hands from this your enterprise,
although we want our forces to defend us, not doubting of any such violence:
But yet let the fear of God bridle you, since piety cannot; and if neither of
them will, behold here am I unable to withstand your force. Hereupon the
Bishops paused a while, but at the last (says Krantzius) is the narration of
our Annals. And Sigonius describes this matter almost in the same words.
Sigon. l. 9. de regno Italia.
By which narration it plainly appears that this poor Emperor was not
deposed Henrician heresy, or of Guibert, alias Clement 3, the Guibertine; by
which account all Princes were in those days heretics. But so farforth did
the cruelty of Paschal extend, Krantz Saxon. l. 5. cap. 21. Henric. Herford.
cap. 68.
that he caused all that were invested by Henry to be dug out of their
graves six years after their death: but he demanding penance of the Legates is
proudly rejected, until he did humbly submit himself to Paschal. But Paschal
(every thing thus falling out according to his own mind) by an honorable
embassage is entreated to come into Germany, whilst the Emperor being
deprived of his Othbert Bishop of that place, and Henry Duke of Lorraine. And
from thence he dispatched Orators to all Christian Princes, especially Philip
the first, King of France, to lay open unto them this miserable tragedy. But
his son pursues him even to that place, notwithstanding those protestations
he made, that he only fought some little place of rest, where he might end his
life: And at the last by his endeavors he brought it to pass, that he got him
again by force into his power; where his estate was such at the last, that he
entreated the Bishop of Spire, Mary's, which he had founded; which was cruelly
denied him: And so a few days after being overcome with grief, he dyed. And
that it might appear that the impiety of his son had not altogether
extinguished his love, and piety toward him, he sends unto him for his last
present, and testimony of his fatherly love, his Seale-ring and his sword;
who nevertheless in favor of the Pope, Auent. l. 5. Annaliu^ Boior. Helmold.
l. 1. cap. 33.
and to express his obedience toward him, kept his father for five years
together unburied in a solitary Chapel of the house. Here says Helmoldus
the Historiographer: He was very good to those Churches, which he found to be
faithful unto him, but as for Gregory and others, who junior reigned for his
father, and there was peace between the Kingdom and the Priesthood, but yet
not long. For neither did he prosper, being all his life time ensnared, as his
father was by the Apostolic See: And he was a Priest that here speaks. This
Henry according to most writers was called the fourth; we following Onuphrius
and Sigonius make him the third. All this happened from the year 1099 to 1106.
An. 1106.
But let us not forget an Epistle of this Paschal writ to the Archbishop of
Polonia at the entrance of this age, An. 1102.
about the allegation of Councels, Pascha l. Epist. ad Archiep. Poloniae.
As if, says he, any Councels may give Laws to the Church of Rome: To what
end then are Councels held? But contrarily (says he) all Councels by the
authority of the But where can they show one syllable?

OPPOSITION.
Platina in Paschau^ 2.
Prodigious spectacles in the air, the earth and the sea still continued,
observed by all the writers of these times; Neither was Paschal moved with
these (says Platina) because he believed them to be wrought by nature, nay he
could not endure Abbadon described unto us in the Apocalypse. And this no doubt
moved the Bishop of Florence, in the year 1106, publicly to preach, Acta
vitae Paschalis.
that Antichrist was borne; which Paschal understanding of, and being much
grieved therewith, took the pains to go in person to Florence, and there
held a Council to stop the mouth of this Bishop, being content nevertheless,
fearing to stir in the matter to desist from this bold enterprise, that is to
say, Sigon. l. 9. de regno Jtal.
least the matter should more apparently break out.

The Emperor Henry, as we have seen, retired himself to Liege, Sabellici
Aenneade 9. Platina in Paschali 2.
which Paschal could not endure: wherefore under a show of congratuling Robert
Earl of Flanders, being happily returned from Jerusalem to his Country, he
writ this unto him, It is the part of a loyal and lawful soldier, to pursue
the enemies of his King by all possible means: We give thee therefore thanks
for executing our command in the Diocese of Cambray, and we command thee to
do the like upon the excommunicated people of Liege, who falsely term
themselves Clerks, etc. And not only in those parts, but every where else,
when thou can, with thy whole power, to persecute. Henry, Hereby making this
his revenge equal, both in right and merit, with that famous expedition to the
holy Land. But what do the Bishops, Canons, and Clergy of the Diocese of
Liege? There is the second volume of the Councels, both the Epistle of Paschal
to them, and their answer to him. Epist. Leodiens. Cleri in 2. vol.
Concilior. Edition. Coloniens. apud Quiritel. page 809.
I cry (says the Church of Liege) with sighs and astonishment, as the Prophet
Esaias speaks, who exaggerating the burden of the desert Sea, cries out, As
the Whirle-windes in the South use to pass from the wilderness, so shall it
come from the horrible Land, a grievous vision was showed 1. Petr. 5.
The Church that is at Babylon, elected together with you, saluteth you.
Hitherto I interpreted it, that Peter would therefore by Babylon decipher Rome,
because at that time Rome was confounded with all Idolatry, and all manner of
wickedness: But now my grief enterpreteth it unto me, that Peter by a
prophetical spirit foresaw the confusion of that dissension And so they insert
the Epistle. What is he whose reins, reading these letters, are not filled
with sorrow, not for the horror of the danger, but the horrible novelty of
the thing, That a mother should write such lamentable Letters against her
daughters, yea though they had offended? In that judgment of Solomon is
expressed the greatness of a mothers love, because Solomon giving sentence, that
the infant (for which they contended) should be divided Esaias 21.
than be slain with the sword. The Prophet Esaias says, speaking of Babylon,
The might of my pleasures is turned into fear unto me: But (I say) Rome my
beloved mother is turned into fear unto me: For what is more fearful, nay
what more miserable? David saw once the Angel of God standing with his sword
drawn over Jerusalem: we, the daughters of the Church of Rome, see the Pope
of Rome, who is the Angel of the Lord, (for the place he supplieth) with his
sword drawn over the Church. David prayed that his people might not be slain:
But our Angel delivers the sword to Robert and prays him to kill us. From
whence has our Angel this sword? There is but one sword of the spirit, which
is the word of God etc. There is another sword of the spirit, (that is the
Pope) which he has delivered to Robert against us? Ezechiel 21.
Perhaps he has recourse to the Prophet Ezechiel, that taking a third sword
out of his hand, he might go to the right hand and to the left killing both
the righteous and the wicked etc. This is the sword of occision with which
Ezechiel makes me astonished: for what heart faints not to think, that he that
is anointed to give life, should be girt with this third sword to kill us etc?
And if it be lawful to speak it (with reverence of the Apostolical dignity)
he seems to us to have been a sleep, yea all his Counselors slept with
him, when he hired at his charge a destroyer of the Church And here are
alleged many examples out of the Scriptures. See here the works of just
malice, that this father ordayneth for his sons to come to the heavenly
Jerusalem, by impugning the Church of God. We give thanks to thy wisdom
(says the Church) for that thou have Esaias 10.
that the Lord says by the mouth of his Phrophet Esaias, Woe unto them that
decree wicked Decrees, and write grievous things to keep back the poor from
judgment etc. That there should be such desolation of the Church, such
oppression of the poor, and widows, such cruelty, such rapine, and which is
worse, such effusion of blood without respect of good and evil, and all this,
and worse than all this done by the command of the Pope, who would believe it
if his own mouth had not spoken it? We remain 2. Tim. 4.
should make war against the Church of God etc. For Apostolic men improoue,
rebuke, exhort offenders with all long suffering and doctrine etc. And Christ
says, Math. 8.15.
If thy brother trespass against thee, go and tell him his fault between
thee and him etc. And here they allege the example of S. Gregory toward the
Bishop of Salonne reprehending the Emperor Maximus, for that he used force
against Priscillian and his fellows. He (say they) that condemned Itachius
their accuser for the Johan. 7. Genes. 18.
neither had God condemned the Sodomites except he had first come down to see
whether they had done altogether according to that cry which came up unto him.
Seeing therefore he has heard nothing of us, neither has been solicited by
the Bishop or Archbishop against us, who would ever believe that he would
excommunicate us? etc. But perhaps you will say that therefore he does it,
because we favor our Bishop who takes part with the Emperor. This is the
beginning of our sorrow, and that which may make the cause of the wicked to
blush, because Satan being let loose and walking through the earth, has now
divided the Kingdom and the Priesthood: Forasmuch therefore as the Devil came
unto us, Apocal. 20.
having great (as it is in the 20 of the Revelation.) we pray to our father
which is in heaven, for this especially, that he lead us not into this
temptation, but that he deliver us from the evil thereof etc. But who can
reprehend a Bishop for keeping his faith and loyalty to his Prince? And yet
they that tear in sunder the Kingdom and Priesthood with new schisms, and
new traditions promise to absolve those from the sin of perjury that break
their faith to their King etc. Hereby let all men judge who of the two
deserves punishment, he that gives unto Caesar, according to the decree of
God himself those things that belong unto Caesar, or he that dishonoreth his
King and takes that name of God in vain, by which he plighted his faith to the
King. See here the reason why we are excommunicated; and why we are called
false Clerks, who living Canonically deserve by (alluding to the word (...),
Clerks) that is to say, he has no portion in his inheritance, who will
exclude us out of his inheritance (where then does he place Paschal?) It is an
injury which out of his wicked heart he vomiteth against us, as old witches
use to do. S. Peter teaches us not to rule as Lords in Clero, over Gods
heritage, 1. Peter 5.3. Galla. 4.19.
but that we may be examples to the flock: And S. Paul, My little children of
whom I travel in birth again in in the Lord. These should be examples for
Paschal to imitate, or rather admonishers, and not impious raylers and
slaunderers. The curse of excommunication, our Lord Paschal hasteneth upon us;
but above all we fear that which the spirit of God by the mouth of the
Psalmist has said, Cursed are all they that decline from his commandments:
That And here they produce many places out of Ambrose and Augustine. Now
behold, says the Church of Liege, why we are held for excommunicats, even
because we hold and to our uttermost a Latere, who run through the world to
fill their purses, we wholly reject them, according to those Councels of
Africa, held in the times of Zozimus, Caelestnius, and Boniface: For, that we
may know them by their fruits, there proceeds from their Legations no
correction of manners, or amendment of life, but the slaughters of men, and
the spoil of the Church of God. Forasmuch therefore as we stick to the
ancient rule, and are not carried with every wind of doctrine, we are called
excommunicats, Apocalip. 12.12
having great wrath, whom the powerful hand of God will put to flight etc.
Alluding to that place in the Apocalips of the church persecuted by Satan. The
authority of the Romans will free us from excommunication: Pope Hildebrand who
was the Author of this new Schism, and the first that raised the Priestlie
lance against the Princely Diadem, did first excommunicat those that
indiscreetly favored Henry; but condemning himself of intemperancie, he
excepted those out of that excommunication, that by a necessary and lawful
subjection, and no desire to do ill, took part with the He still proceeds
in the examination of this Epistle to Robert. Persecute Robert the head of the
heretics, and his maintayners, thou can offer no sacrifice more acceptable
unto God etc. When Alaricus King of the Goths went to take Rome, being
admonished by one of the servants of God, to desist from so wicked an
enterprise, I go not willingly (says he) to Rome, but a certain man does
daily urge me to destroy it. By this example does the Pope urge his Esquire to
wast and ouerrunne the whole kingdom, which cannot be done without slaughter
and blood, and the ruin of the Church of God. Alaricus was more mild, who
having And these examples he relates more at large. Which of the Popes of Rome
has by his Decrees given authority that a Bishop should use the sword of
war against offenders? Gregor. l. 7. Regist. c. 1.
Gregory (the first Pope of that name) tells us what all the Popes before
him did think hereof, and all that succeeded him should think, writing to
Sabian the Deacon etc. All contented with this example, from Gregory the first
used the spiritual sword alone, unto the last Gregory, who was the first that
armed himself (and by his example others) with the sword of war against the
Emperor etc. You say with Gregory, howsoever the Shepherd bind, let the
flock fear the band of the shepherd, that is, his censure. Gregor. Homil. 26.
And we say with Gregogorie, And this he amplifieth with many places of
Scriptures. And this, says he, we command thee, and thy soldiers to do, in
remission of your sins etc. Here I know not what I should say, or whether to
turn my self: For if I should turn over the whole volume of the old and new
Testament, and all the ancient expositers that writ thereupon, I should never
find any example of this Apostolic command. Only Pope Hildebrand has offered
violence to the sacred Canons, whom we read, commanded the Marquess Mathilda
in remission of her sins to make war against Henry the Emperor. And so
having discoursed out of the Scriptures, and some places of Gregory, of the
true manner and means of the remission of sins, and showing to a sinner his
This manner of binding and loossing thou have heretofore held and taught us, O
my mother the Church of Rome: From whence then comes this new authority, by
which there is offered to offenders without confession or repentance an
immunitie from all sins past, and a dispensation for sins to come; what a
window of wickedness do thou hereby set open to men? The Lord deliver thee
o mother from all evil; Let Jesus be the door unto thee, let him be the
Porter, that no man enter into thee, but to whom be shall open; He deliver thee
I say and thy Bishop from those who (as the Prophet Michah speaks) seduce the
people of God, This was the letter of the church and Clergy of Liege to Pope
Paschal the second, fortified with the testimonies of the holy Scriptures, and
authorities of the Fathers. Neither need we doubt that such in those times, was
the voice of the greatest part of the Churches of Christendom, who
consequently acknowledged Satan to be let loose, wasting the Church of God, in
the person of Antichrist sitting in his Throne: which the Emperor Henry
instructed by his Prelates, spoke plainly in his Epistle to the Christian
Princes, exhorting them to have regard to their posterity, the royal
Majesty, Auent. l. 5.
and the salvation of all Christian people; because (says he) the Pope under
the honest title of Christ goes about to oppress the public liberty of all
Christian These and the like letters (says Auentine) are to be found in many
ancient Libraries, written to the kings of France, Denmark, England, and to
other Kings and Princes of Christendom, who nevertheless became not the more
strange unto him, but being rather sorry for this his condition, detested the
author.

An. 1104.
It was at this time that Yuo Bishop of Chartres writ a letter to Richard Bishop
of Alba, the Popes Legate, who would censure his Clegie of simonie, whom he You
Epist. 133.
If the Deane (says he) and Chapter, or other officers, do exact any thing of
those that are made Canons, my self forbidding it, and persecuting the fault,
they defend themselves by the custom of the Church of Rome, wherein they say
the Chamberlaines, and other officers of the Palace do exact much of such
Bishops and Abbots as are consecrated, which they cover under the name of
oblations or benedictions; for there, they say, neither pen nor paper will be
had without money: and with this collop they stop my mouth, not having any
other word to answer them, but that of the Gospel, Do that which they say
(that is to say the Pharisees) and not that which they do. If therefore I
Moreover, the same man being much molested by the Clergy at Rome, makes a
grievous complaint unto Paschal against the Appeals to Rome, which are the
cause of much disorder and rebellions in the Clergy against their superiors,
whom (abusing that liberty) they slander at Rome: Epist. 75.
he nevertheless not long before in the cause of Godfrey appealed to Rome,
whose place by the authority of the Pope he supplied; out of the selfsame
humor as above, acknowledging reason and justice when it made for their own
purposes.

43. PROGRESSION.
Of the turbulent estate of the Church and Commonwealth, through the factious
pride of Pope Paschal.

NOw to follow again the course of our History. Auentine concealeth not
ratiunculas, some small reasons (as he calls the^) why these Popes since
Hildebrand vel potentissimum Imperatorem, any Emperor how mighty soever: That
all power had been given of God to Christ, and from Christ unto S. Peter, and
to the Bishops of Rome his successors, unto whom by Religion of oath, all
Christians were bound perpetually to obey; and to other Princes only a limited
time, and under condition so long as it should please them: That therefore it
was lawful for the Pope, if the Emperor disobeyed him, who represented Christ
on earth, to excommunicate and depose him no less than any other Christian;
insomuch as he reigns but by precarie right, and holds the Empire in homage
of him: That in case he should rebel, he might root him out of the
Commonwealth, as a Tyran, by any means whatsoever: And the people, bewitched
by Hildebrand with such reasons, as they are subject to let themselves be
carried away with every wind of doctrine, France, Italy and Germany were
pierced to the heart for the space of three and thirty years. Namely Paschal
following from point to point this instruction, who seeing his enemy dead,
reenforced the rigor of his Decrees, and will not receive to absolution the
inhabitants of Liege, till they had taken him out of the Sepulcre where they
had laid him: when Henry also his son demanded permission of him to give
him burial, he flatly refused him, saying, that the authority of holy
Scriptures, and of divine miracles, and of the Martyrs received up into heaven
repugned thereunto. This writes Peter the Deacon l. 4. ca. 38. And Auentine
notes expressly, that till that time the Bishops He notes further, that till
then in Germany Ecclesiastical persons, Bishops, Priests, Abbots, Monks etc.
had not any care of their worldly goods, but employing themselves in the
service of God, and at their study, referred the managing of those affairs to
some neighbor Lord, ordained of the Emperor, who administered unto them
provision of meat, apparel, and other necessaries for life, and distributed
also to the poor; and this they called Vogt, Patron or Curator, which the
Roman Laws call governor or Steward: But from promising to give every year
to the Pope nummum aureum, quem Bizantium vocant diplomata, a piece of gold,
which the Bulls call a Bizantium; nothing being more easy to Paschal, than in
giving away another right, to take nevertheless tribute of it. And hereupon
for the space of sixteen years, all things divine and humane were in
confusion, until in the end he had attained his purposes. In Italy also his
power increased by two occasion: The one was the death of the Marquess
Mathilda in the year 1115: An. 1115. Platina in Paschal. Vrspergensis in
Chronico.
who in the time of Hildebrand had made donation of Lumbardie and of Tuscan to
S. Peter: which ministered new matter of contention between Henry and him;
because he pretended to be her Blondus and Platina make the limit thereof to
extend from the River of Pissia, and S. Quirico in the Country of Siena, unto
Ceperan betwixt the Apennine and the Sea, adding thereunto Ferrara. Auentine
says here, that Eneas Siluius, which is Pius the second, says that Mathilda
bequeathed by Testament to the Bishop of of Rome, that which is called
Patrimonium Petri, the Patrimony of S. Peter; And then was heard a voice from
heaven, as I have learned of most grave Divines, Venenu^ melle litum foemina
propinasse Christianis, that a woman had given Christians poison to drink,
tempered with honey. The other occasion was the diminution of the
Archbishopricke of Rauenna, Platina ibidem.
which (as the Histories of those times say) had oftentimes, Sigon. de regno
Jtaliae. l. 10.
Let us add yet a third, That Arnulfe Patriarch of Jerusalem, being accused
by his Clergy, was deposed in another Synod held in Syria by the Bishop of
Orange by authority from the Pope; who nevertheless being come in person to
Rome, Larga muneruus profusione, by his many gifts, Guliel. Tyrius l. 11. c.
26. and li. 9. ca. 17. and l. 11. cap. 14. and 15.16.
says William of Tire, pleased again Paschal, and by him was absolved and
reestablished in his seat: A thing never before seen, that one of the ancient
Patriarchs should be judged by the Bishop of Rome. But this was because they
that Dabert, Bishop of Pisa Patriarch of Jerusalem, says William of Tire, is
created in an assembly of Princes, by the common consent of the people, and
presently after installed in the Throne. There was no speech of sending to
Rome. The only extremity he found himself in, being injured by the King,
whose dissolute life he would not wink at, made him take this course against
Ebremarus, whom he moved thereunto. And as for this Arnulfe, who by his gifts,
had (says the author) circumuented the Religion of the holy See, it is he,
who (as he says elsewhere) had when he was but Archdeacon, set the whole
Church in confusion: Inuita Diuinitate, vti credimus, Gibelino substitutus,
(says he in another place) of the Patriarch Gibeline in despite of the
Divinity, as we believe. And such a one was it behoofefull he should be for to
fit Paschals liking.

But let us come again to the principal quarrel of inuestitures, for that it
is the Theme of this age. Paschal by setting the son against the father, had
so ruinated the credit of the Empire in Italy, shaken even in Germany it
self, that he thenceforth thought any thing lawful for him. And
Historiographers do particularly observe, that under this confusion the Cities
of Italy had taken a new form, and usurped liberty, the Pope favoring the
same, who had rather their forces should be divided, than united together under
the authority of the Empire. Paschal then being invited to be present at
Augsbourg for ordering of affairs, being in good hope of this son, whom he
had authorized against his father, An. 1106
resolved in the year 1106 to go thither: But by the way he held that Synod
of Guastalla, a Town of the Countess Mathilda, where were present the
Ambassadors of Henry the fourth; he fore-judgeth the said affairs,
confirming all the rigours of Hildebrand, Urban, and his own; provides
absolutely for the Bishoprics of Germany, Gebhard to Trent, Conrade to
Salzbourge, and others; to the Ecclesiastical Colleges he gives immunities;
on all Churchmen imposes a certain tribute, Auent. l. 6.
and reenforceth his faction: To such, says Auentine, These are the Authors
words. This was hard news to the Emperor, who expected better for his
services, thinking at least before he had passed further, he would have
conferred with him about it. Which the Pope understanding An. 1107.
came to Clugni, and from thence to Troyes in Campania, where he thought to
hold a Synod more favorably for his pretenses; Philip the first then reigning
in France, in trouble for his Concubine Bertrade, and withal troubled by the
Princes, Barons and Prelates of his kingdom, borne out (namely) by the king of
England, and therefore not in good estate to dispute himself for his
privileges. This was the renewing of a quarrel between the Pope and the
Emperor, wherein Henry the fourth clearly showed, that what he had done (by
the Popes instigation) against his father, had not been for zeal of Religion,
but rage of ambition, seeing he now contended for the same right being come to
the crown, as in Krantzius in Saxonia lib. 5. cap. 30.
Krantzius though well affectioned to the Pope, has these words, Henry stays
some time for Paschal at Augsbourg: who being hereupon warned by some about
him, that the German Nation would not easily receive his Decree, and that the
great heart of this young King was not yet wholly Dominico iugo habilis, apt to
receive the Lords yoke (that is to say, the Popes) he turned through Burgondie
toward France with the Legates of Spain, pronouncing with a sigh, that the
door was not yet opened unto him, into the Regions of Germany. Thus abused he
the words of S. Paul, as if the preaching of the Gospel of Christ, and the
inuestitures by the Pope had been one, and the same thing. Note that from
Hildebrand Popes have observed, the more to bind Archbishoppes to their Paschal
desirours to hold that rigor to Raph elect Archbishop of Canterbury, to make
him fetch it at Rome, his trusty friend Yuo Bishop of Chartres persuaded him,
Yuo Epist. 252.
if he would not see new troubles in the Church of England, to dispense him
from it, especially seeing that it was no matter of faith, and that our Savior
had dispensed of the Law of the Saboath, preferring mercy before rigor of
justice. With such flatteries must these monsters be applauded: So that he sent
it him by a Legate of his, Nephew of the late Archbishop Anselme.

OPPOSITION.
Now Paschal, in the year 1107, comes to Troyes to hold a Council: An. 1107.
And in the same time Henry draws nere Maince to oppose himself against it.
Paschal confirms his Decree; Henry by his Ambassadors makes his
declarations to the contrary; Paschal proceeds, and in despite of Henry
excommunicateth the Patriarch of Aquilia, and the Bishops of Liege and Cambray,
deposes the Bishops of Mind and Halberstat, suspendeth the Bishops of
Cologne, of Maince and of Constance, for being present at the Synod of Maince.
And which Auentine, Auent. l. 6. Kyantzius l. 5. Sax. ca. 30.31. Jem in
Metropoli l. 5. 6. 33.
He takes away from the Emperor all knowledge of the election of Popes, and
takes, and ordains to be taken of Bishops an oath, not to depend of any but
only of the Pope. On the contrary Henry contesteth, That it appertains not
to French Bishops to be liberal of that which is another man's: That he holds
his Empire of God almighty: That he knows well how, according to the Laws of
God, Abbas Vispergens. in Chronico.
and the most ancient ordinance of the Fathers, in the time of Charlemaine, to
provide that the Commonwealth suffer no damage; namely an ordinance that
excommunicateth Paschal and his, if they depart from it etc. That Popes have
none other drift, than to usurp the Christian Empire, and will never rest,
till they have put all power under their yoke: That in them is perceived the
same rage, as was in them that persecuted Jesus Christ: That by These reasons
were published as well in that Council, as esewhere by Patents; the same
concluding thus, That although by right and arms he might retain the ancient
custom, observed for so many years, by so many holy Fathers, concerning the
election of Popes, and inuestiture of Prelates, yet he would not trouble
himself in it, provided that the Bishops and other Churchmen, which the Pope
hindered from taking inuestiture of him, should put again into his hands the
And thereupon great difficulties arising, the matter was put off by Paschal to
be ended within a year in a Synod at Rome, Krantz. in Metropoli. l. 5. c. 33.
between him and Henry, the thing remaining (as we gather out of Auentine)
respectively in the state: But Krantzius dissembleth not, that Paschal remained
resolute, that none, between this and then, should take Ecclesiastical
inuestiture from the hand of a Lay person. An. 1110.
And so was his practice. In the year 1110, Henry passes into Italy with a
mighty army, with intention to agree with Paschal, to take of him the Crown,
and in his journey to make the Cities and Provinces to acknowledge him, being
assisted with a great number of men, learned Paschal perceived him coming, he
assured himself by a new oath of the Romans against him; holding in a readiness
the forces of the Princes of Apulia and Calabria, and also of the Countess
Mathilda, and prepares to make al things difficult unto him. In the mean time
Henry marches forward, many places by the way yielding obedience unto him; so
that to avoid further inconvenience, an agreement was passed at Sutri between
deputies on both sides, as says Otho Bishop of Frisengen and Leo Bishop of
Ostia, That Henry should release to Paschal the inuestiture of Bishops, and
that Paschal should resign unto Henry their Royalties, namely, Dukedomes,
Marquiships, Earledomes, Prouost-ships, customs and other rights a thing says
Krantzius which he had not yet treated of with the Prelates of Germany, and
which was very hard for him to warrant. In the mean time hostages were given
on both sides, whereupon Henry marched to Rome: But, the same Authors say,
when Paschal pressed him by oath to renounce the inuestitures, and that he
refused to do it, except he caused his Royalties to be restored him, which
Paschal would not, holding himself strong enough, Otho Frisengen. l. 7. c. 14.
Sigon. l. 10.
by the good order he thought he had taken in the City, Henry by the advice
of the Archbishops, that assisted him, committed him to prison, declaring unto
him that he was not come thither, to hold the Crown of the Empire by any
Charles and Lewis, and after a bloody sedition thereupon happening in the
city, led him away into his army. Histories say, that this was done with the
applaud of all the Bishops of Germany, that were there, saving of Conrade of
Saltzsbourg (who indeed had been created by him) a thing easy enough to be
believed, Petrus Dia. in Chron. Cass. l. 4. cap. 37.38.39.40.41. and seq.
considering how lightly he would have assured himself of the inuestitures,
with the loss of their Lordships and Royalties. The end was for this time,
that Paschal was delivered, and the siege raised from before Rome, on condition
that he should never excommunicat the Emperor, nor his people; and should give
him a privilege in writing under excommunication, whereby it Henry to inuest
Bishops and Abbots freely chosen by most voices, without Simonie, with the ring
and the staff, Sigon. de regno Jtal. l. 10.
and command the Archbishop to consecrate him: Contrariwise forbidding, That
any should consecrate them that had been chosen by the Clergy and people,
unless they had been first invested by the Emperor. These conditions were
solemnly sworn unto by Paschal, and all the Cardinals, Bishops, Priests, and
Deacons, that assisted him; and moreover, the day that he crowned him, in
confirmation of this agreement, he gave him the Communion in these words: Lord
Emperor Henry, we give thee the body of our Lord, borne of the virgin
Marie, crucified for us, as the Catholic Church holds, in confirmation of a
true peace and concord between me and thee, Amen. Sigonius, report the same in
other words, that in giving him part of the Host, he said unto him, As this
part of the quickening body is separated, so let him be divided from the
kingdom of Christ our Lord, that shall attempt to violate this agreement:
Which is worth the noting, in respect of the faithfulness he used afterward.
And this oath and privilege was dated in the yearr 1111, An. 1111.
in the month of February. In this confidence Henry returns into Germany,
where being arrived, he made his father be solemnly buried at Spire, with the
consent of the Pope, by means of the agreement abouesaid; which till then he
had refused him, as forbidden by the holy Scriptures. But in the year 1112
Paschal, An. 1112. Sigebertus and Abbas Vrspergenssin Chron.
whether returning to his natural disposition, or that he was moved thereunto
by Bruno Bishop That he approved and rejected all things that Gregory and
Urban had decreed and reproved; thereby ratifying all that had been by them
done against Henry the father, and reuoking all that himself had done with
Henry the son: and with terms most express, and so absolute, as we read
in the Abbot of Vrsperge, That which they have praised, held, confirmed,
condemned, refused, Abbas Vrsperg. Malm. l. 5. c. 40. Petrus Dia. in Chron.
Cassin. l. 4. c. 47.
forbidden, in all, and through all, therein will I persevere for ever: whence
he plainly showed what a strange taste he had taken in this business. Which
done, this privilege is made void in full Council, and declared priuilegium
contra Spiritum sanctum, contrary to the holy Ghost. Henry is
excommunicated, and not in Italy only, but in France also, by Guydo Archbishop
of Vienna. And thereupon not long after arose new commotions in Germany; the
Archbishop of Mence rebelling against the Emperor, he is constrained to put
him into prison, and many others. Also, says Auentine, the Emperor of Greece
Calo-ioannes, son of Alexius, Auent. l. 6.
being awakened at the report of this tumult, sent to exhort Paschal and the
Romans, to return to the ancient and lawful Empire, in detestation of those
barbarous Germans. Paschal Perplacet, We desire it, we restore the Diadem to
the ancient Prince of Romans: let us see once more ancient Rome joined to the
new, the East to the West, Paschall cruelly declaiming against the Henry's,
father and son. In so much that Peter Leo, John of Gaieta, Hugh Abbot of
Clugni, and others, desirous of peace, protested against him, and brake off
this treaty, as proiected against all laws divine and humane: And
notwithstanding Paschal and his partakers are obstinatly bent against Henry,
who upon these novelties returns with the Queen and all his household into
Italy, in the year 1115: An. 1115.
and then began Paschal again to renew his practices: And to this effect
holds a solemn Council at Lateran, the Bishops man, and consequently but
dust and ashes, and for that he saw himself in the power of Henry, he had
granted him this privilege; but thereof he confessed himself unto them, and
prayed them to ask pardon of God for him: That he detested this privilege as
heresy, and prayed them likewise to pronounce as much, which they did. And
thereupon some Bishops inferred, If that writing contained heresy, that he was
then an heretic that wrote it, namely Paschal himself. And John of Gaieta had
much ado to stop their mouths, and could not salve up the matter, but in
giving the lie to the company, That the writing was in truth evil, but not
for all that heretical. Paschal himself, after silence was made, appeased
them only in contradicting, My brethren, this Church had never any heresy.
Wherefore then does he set all Christendom in combustion for an opinion that
is not heresy? And yet the Decree is confirmed in this tenor against Henry,
who being not able to mitigat it, continues his journey, and makes the Pope
(hearing of it) withdraw himself into Apulia. Henry being arrived at Rome,
that he might not hold his Crown of him, makes himself to be crowned the
second time, by Maurice Bishop of Bracare. An. 1118.
And a while after, in the beginning of the year 1118, Paschal died, upon the
Emperors return from Rome. This is the sum of that which passed upon the
question of Inuestitures of Germany, and other Provinces depending upon the
Empire.

An. 1108.
In France also Paschal, in the year 1108, had made an attempt upon our
privileges, taking advantage of the controversies between Philip the first
and the Clergy of his kingdom, touching his concubine Bertrade: For Manasses
Archbishop of Rheimes being deceased about the time of the Council of Troyes,
where the Pope was President in his own person, he would confer the
Archbishopricke of Rheimes on Richard Archdeacon of Verdune, as well to draw
him from the Emperors side, as to establish his affairs in France, according
to the counsel that Yuo of Chartres gave to Urban his predecessor, in one of
his Epistles; To have some one at his devotion in a Prelatship of such
consequence. Yuo Carnutens. Epist. 117.
Which Richard having refused, because that at the same time the Emperor made
him Rodolph with full authority, who without repairing to Lewis the Gross,
who then succeeded to the Crown, put himself in possession of the
Bishopric. But the said Lewis, though greatly busied at his entrance,
Richard. de Vassenburg. in Chron.
by the rising of the Barons of the Realm against him, would in no wise
approve of him, but on the contrary made himself to be crowned at Orleans, by
Giselbert Archbishop of Sens, notwithstanding the complaints that Rodolph made
of the wrong done to his Bishopric; and provided and invested Archbishop of
Rheimes one Geruais chosen from among his domestical servants, by reason
whereof the city was tossed with many troubles, and for receiving Geruais was
interdicted and excommunicated. This we learn of Yuo Bishop of Chartres,
Paschal: We have, says he, opportunely and importunatly requested the King of
France, to reestablish Rodolph in the Metropolitan Church of Rheimes, receiving
him into favor, and that he should put out Geruais usurper of the same: Thus
he spoke the Popes language: He has in the end condescended to our prayers,
and permitted that we should bring him safely to his Court, which should be
holden on Christmas day at Orleans, there to treat with him, and with the
Princes of the Realm, of the affairs of Rheimes: But by reason of the
contradiction of the Court, notwithstanding our requests and intercessions
multiplied, we have not been able Yuo Carnutens. Epist. 206.
per manum and sacramentum, By hand and oath, such as to the Kings his
predecessors from all times the Archbishops of Rheimes, and other Bishops of
the Realm of France have done, how religious and holy soever they were, etc.
We therefore entreat thee, even with bended knees, that in regard of charity
and peace, your fatherly moderation would hold for venial, that which the
eternal law (that is to say, the law of God) makes not unlawful, but the
only prohibition of those that do preside (that is, the Popes) with an
intention of gaining liberty. Idem Epist. 238. and 239.
And this agrees with that which he defended afterward against John Bishop of
Lions, That in this inuestiture there was nothing that concerned heresy: and
with that which he writ to Hugh the Popes Legates in France, in his 65 Epistle,
complaining For as much as it has not any force of a Sacrament, whether
admitted, or omitted, we see not how it can any way be hurtful to faith or
religion; especially when we read, that kings were wont to be entreated by the
Popes, to grant Bishoprics to those that were canonically chosen, and that
the Popes deferred the consecration of those which had not as yet been
admitted by the kings: And that kings intended not the gift of any spiritual
thing, but yielded at the request of the petitioners, temporal things only,
to those that were elected, which the Churches obtained from the bounty of
kings. For proof whereof he alleges S. Augustine upon S. John in his first
treatise. So likewise writing to Paschal himself, who endeavored to alienat
those of Tournay from the Bishopric We your faithful sons humbly beseech,
Yuo Epist. 138.
and advise you to suffer the Churches of France to continue in the same state
wherein they have been for almost these four hundred years, least by this
occasion that schism grow strong in France, which has already taken root in
Germany, against the Apostolic See, etc. For your Holiness cannot but know,
that when the Kingdom and the Priesthood agree together, the world is well
governed, and the Church flourishes and fructifieth; but when they are at
discord one against the other, not only small things do not prosper, but the
greatest that are do miserably vanish and pass away. And the self same
judgment of Paschal gave Sigebert Abbot of Gemblous in Brabant, Sigebert. in
Chron. an. 1111.
a man of that singular commendation, that Platina doubts not to place him in
the same rank with S. Bernard, and King Henry, says he, went to Rome, to
appease the discord betwixt the Kingdom and the Priesthood, begun by Pope
Gregory the seventh, who was called Hildebrand, and renewed by his successors,
Victor and Urban, and especially by Paschal, who was a scandal to the whole
world. The king would use the authority, customs, and privileges of the
Emperors, who since Charles the Great for three hundred years and upward,
governed the Romans under sixty three Popes, lawfully conferring Bishoprics
and Abbeys, by the ring and the staff. Against this authority of the Elders,
the Popes ordained by a Synodall censure, That Bishoprics, or any other
Ecclesiastical inuestiture, could not, nor ought to be given by the ring and
the staff, by any lay man. And whosoever did so receive any such inuestiture,
Moreover, Trithemius says, Trithemius de Scriptoribus Ecclesiasticis.
that he made an Apology for the Emperor against Gregory the seventh, and
another against the Epistle of Paschal, in which he showed, That the Popes had
no superiority over the Emperors, That it is heresy to absolve the subjects
of their oath and allegiance to their Prince. And he notes besides, in the
time of Paschal, many extraordinary prodigious wonders, which all the
Chroniclers of those times do likewise observe.

In England Paschal proceeded in the execution of his Decree, which Anselme
with no good success had begun. And when Henry the first maintained in the
year 1103, his inuestitures against Paschal, protesting, That he would rather
hazard Paschal: Neither will I, says Paschal, for the redemption of mine own
head, suffer him freely to obtain them. But yet by the mediation of Anselme,
he mercifully dispensed with those Prelates who had received their inuestiture
of Henry. Math. Paris in Henry.
But Matthew Paris expounds this mercy: This merciful Chair, says he, which
is never wanting to those that bring with them either white or red,
reestablished those Bishops and Abbots that were suspended, to their ancient
dignities, and received them with joy. Anselme thought that this office he had
done unto the king would have bin well accepted of, and he the better welcome
into England: But the king understanding, that neither Paschal nor Anselme
abated any thing of their purpose therein, he joined the Archbishopricke to his
own demaines, and confiscated Anselme, An. 1107.
whom nevertheless in the year 1107 he reestablished: And in a Council held
at London it was agreed, That from thenceforward no Bishop or Abbot should be
invested by the King, with the ring and the staff; the Archbishop likewise
agreeing thereunto, and that for their homage done unto the King they should
not be deprived of their charges. The letters of Paschal to Henry are worth
the noting: That by occasion of this inuestiture he had made himself the
door: Epist. Paschalis ad Henric. Regem Anglorum data Beneuenti.
That they who entered not by him, forsook God, who is the true door, and were
thieves and robbers: applying that unto himself which our Savior spoke of
himself, and was to be communicated to no other, putting himself thereby into
his place: This, says he, is to handle the Church as a handmaid, not This
repugneth the Canons of the Apostles, and the Synod of Antioch. And yet was
there ever word spoken hereof? By which allegations nevertheless he abused the
ignorant and simple people.

45. PROGRESSION.
Of the strange pride of Calixtus the second, and of his barbarous cruelty
toward Gregory the eighth. Of the degrading of married Priests, and of that
which happened to Cardinal John of Creme, the Popes Legate, coming into
England, to put down the marriage

John of Gaieta succeeded Paschal, called Galasius the second, being created
without the knowledge of Henry, who remained at Pauia, but understanding
hereof, went directly to Rome; wherewith Galasius being amazed, fled by sea to
Tarrachina, and there caused himself to be consecrated by the Bishops of his
own faction, at the same time that Henry caused Mauritius Burdinus to be
consecrated at Rome, who crowned him the second time, and was called Gregory
the eighth. Whereupon Galasius excommunicated them both, being vpheld and
defended by the Princes of Apulia. He restored to Gualterus Archbishop of
Rauenna, the jurisdiction An. 1119.
and to go into France, where in the year 1119 he held a Council at Vienna,
but died soon after at Clugni: in whose place the Cardinals that were there
present, with the help of the Clerks and Laity of Rome, chose Guido Bishop
of Vienna, the brother of Stephen Duke of Burgondie, uncle to Baldwin Earl of
Flanders, and a near kinsman of Henry's, who was called Calixtus D. 12. c. Non
Decet.
which otherwise would be very feeble and subject to ruin. But let the Reader
note, touching their pretended succession, what this election might be without
Rome, in a monastery, made by the followers and train of a Pope newly dead,
and a few others, although the Romans afterward gave their consent thereunto,
Having, says Auentine, Auent. l. 6.
corrupted the Romans with money he bestowed upon them, which he had borrowed
and begged of his friends. In the mean time Cunon Bishop of Prenest, the Legate
of Galasius, continued his practices in Germany, withdrawing, under the shadow
of excommunication, the Princes from the service of Henry, and to this end
holding diverse Councels at Cologne, An. 1122.
the Emperor wearied with so many molestations, and seeing no other end but
the ruin of the State, granted to Calixtus whatsoever he would. The form of
whose agreement, written by Vrsperge, is as follows: I Henry, Abbas
Vispergens^in Chron. Krantz. Saxon. l. 6. c. 41.42.43. Sigon. de regno Italiae
l. 10.
by the grace of God Emperor Augustus of the Romans, for the love of God, and
the holy Church of Rome, and our Lord Pope Calixtus, and for the sovereign
good of my soul, I leave to God, and to his holy Apostles Saint Peter and
Saint Paul, and to the holy Catholic Church, all inuestiture by the ring and
the staff, and I grant election and consecration to be made in all Churches.
See Calixtus in like sort: I Calixtus, etc. grant that the election of the
Bishops and Abbots of the kingdom of Germany be done in thy presence without
simonie and violence, etc. but let him that is chosen receive his inuestiture
of thee by the Scepter, except in all things which are known to belong to the
Church of Rome, and do all things which by right belongs unto thee. But in
token of this insolence, the Legates of Calixtus would that these letters should
be published with a loud voice, in the open fields near the Rhene, where were
assembled people from all parts. But Calixtus, when they were brought to him,
caused them to be hanged in the church of Lateran, to the end that all men
might behold them. But Otho of Frisingens says, Otho Frising. l. 7. c. 16.
That the Romans boasted that this agreement was Henry, and not for his
successors, by which covenant, says he, the Church under Calixtus the second,
in magnum montem creuisse, increased to a great height: Whereupon this was
written of him at Rome; Ecce Calixtus, honor patriae, decus Imperiale,
Burdinum nequam damnat, pacemque reformat.
Behold Calixt, our countries honor, worth Imperial,
That wicked Burdine punishes, and peace reformes with all.


Gregory the Antipope, under the favor of certain Earls, was maintained at
Sutri: But Calixtus returning out of France, to win his favor they delivered
him into his hands. And here the notable insolency of Calixtus is recited by
the Abbot Suggerus, Abbas Suggerus in vita Ludouici Crassi.
in the life of Lewis the Gross: They put, says he, this Antipope, or rather
Antichrist, overthwart the back of an ill favored Camel, clothed with raw
and bloody Goats skins; and the better to revenge the ignominy of the
Church of God, they carried him through the midst of the city, Calixtus
condemning him to perpetual prison in the mountains of Campania: and to
preserve the memory of so great a revenge, they painted him in the chamber of
the Palace, trodden under the feet of Calixtus. This Gregory nevertheless D.
12. c. 1.
but no fault was imputed to them, when Calixtus was not ashamed to write to
all the Bishops, It is not lawful in the least point to wander from the rules
of the Apostolic church (that is, the Roman) for as the son of God came to
do the will of his father, so fulfill you the will of your mother, whose head
is the Church of Rome. The Reader may note in this comparison, not so much the
absurdity as the blasphemy; when nevertheless this Canon did still continue
reformed in a Decree by Gregory the thirteenth, and strengthened by a lie:
For, whereas the old Decree said simply, Calixtus Papa omnibus Episcopis, that
he might make this Gregorian Canon more ancient by a thousand years, says,
Calixtus Papa primus, and adds, in the first Epistle to Bishop Benedict, that
it Calixtus the first; which if we mark either the sense or manner of style,
we shall find to savor of no antiquity: and the like besides was supposed by
diverse others, and all the learned among them, even before these controversies
were. Furthermore, that it is likely that this Benedict was he that is
mentioned in the first creation of Cardinals made by Calixtus in the year
1120, An. 1120.
as we read in Onuphrius. With the like credit they attribute the Decree of
single life to Calixtus the first, which this second Calixtus ended, An. 1119.
being President of the Council at Rheimes in the year 1119, That all married
Priests should be degraded. But let the Reader judge with what spirit these
good Bishops were led, that in the same Council they pronounced Charles the
Great, Fasciculus Temporum Ann. 1119. Matthaeus Paris in Henric. 1. Rogerus de
Houend. and Huntington. in Hen. Ranulph. in Polychro. l. 7. c. 7.
written by the Archbishop Turpin, even and by the judgment of Baronius
fabulous and ridiculous. In England likewise, in a Synodholden at Westminster,
the Cardinal John of Creme, his Legate, caused to be published, after diverse
disputations, Summum scelus esse, To be a great wickedness to arise from the
side of a harlot (for so they called the lawful wives of Priests) to go to
create the body of Christ: He notwithstanding having the same day made and
consecrated the body of Christ, was the night following surprised in the
company of an harlot, as many Authors of that time do affirm, and for the
most part Monks: A thing so manifest as could not be denied; whereby he
changed that great honor he had gotten, into the greatest dishonor and
reproach, and by the just judgment And so the stain of Discipline does always
accompany the corruption of doctrine. Matt. Westmonasteriens. in Chron. Baron.
to. 12. an. 1125. art. 2. and sequent.
Baronius would call this history into doubt, because Matthew of Westminster
adds, that this good Cardinal had for his excuse, That he was no Priest, but
a corrector of Priests, who nevertheless, says he, was a Priest. But he did
not see that it was spoken in that sense wherein Abbots denied to be Monks,
because they were the governors and masters of Monks, that is to say, they
were not Monks only. And what he adds besides is all frivolous.

An. 1124.
Now about the later end of the year 1124, Lambert Bishop of Ostia succeeded
Calixtus, who through his diligence had brought the Emperor Henry under the
yoke of bondage, and was called Honorius the second: and not long after died
Henry without heir, which caused division in the Empire, one part holding for
Lotharius Duke of Saxony, the other for Conradus Duke of Sucuia; who murdered
each other with mutual wounds, An. 1125.
whilst in the mean time Honorius and his successors lost no time. Honorius
purposing to invade the Normans in Apulia, the only obstacles in Italy of his
greatness, Romwal. Episc. Salernitan. in Chron.
stirred up all the nobility to arms against them, Pardoning all their sins
that should die in this expedition for him, and remission for the one half
only that should live. So used he his Indulgences to the destruction of
Christians. An. 1127.
And yet nevertheless finding the matter full of danger, Roger, yielding unto
him the title of Duke of Apulia and Calabria, upon condition he should hold
them of the Sea of Rome. And not long after in the year 1130 he died. Neither
would I willingly omit, Guilielm. Tit. l. 3. c. 23. and 25. An. 1130.
that at the same time William an Englishman was created Archbishop of Tire in
an assembly of the King, and Patriarch, and the Peers of the realm, and
soon after consecrated by the Patriarch of Jerusalem (for hitherto there was
no speech to attend the Bulls of Rome) This William, to the end he might get the
more authority to himself, goes to Rome to obtain the Pall, which Honorius
was very ready to give unto him. But it is expressly noted by the Author, that
he made this voyage, Inuito and renitente suo consecratore, Against the will
and liking And so through the wicked ambition of the Prelates, he got power and
authority in the East countries. Nevertheless Stephen the successor of
Waremond, was chosen not long after by the Clergy and people, without the
help of Rome.

OPPOSITION.
But among the enterprises of these Popes there were not wanting those who
barked at the thief undermining the wall of the Church. Hildebert Bishop of
Man's, famous in that Age, in a certain Epistle speaking of the Court of Rome,
says, Their proper function is, Infer calumnias, defer personas, afferre
minas, auferre To slander, to backbite people, to threaten, to carry away
other men's goods: Their praise is to seek business, theft in peace, among
weapons flight, victory in banquets: Employ them in your causes and they delay
them, employ them not and they hinder them: If you solicit them they scorn
you, if you enrich them they forget you: They buy process, they sell
intercessions, they depute arbitrators, they dictate judgments, and when they
are pronounced they reuerse them, etc. They deny unto Clergy men their due
reverence, to the Nobility their original honor, to superiors their place,
to equals their familiar meetings, and to all, justice: They love not any kind
of men, of what order, or of what age soever: In the Palace they are Scythians,
in chambers Vipers, in feasts Scullions, in exactions Harpies, in discourses
Statutes, in questions Beasts, in their treatises In another, after that he was
made Archbishop of Tours, he complains to Honorius the second, Hildebert. in
Epist. ad Honor. 2.
That all things were brought by Appeal to Rome, which we, says he, on this
side the moutaines have not yet heard, much will dangerously increase, when the
chief Prelat shall not dare to speak against these superfluous And in like
manner he concludes with the ancient Canons, and rules of the Church; If this
should any longer be tolerated, no Bishop could discharge himself of that
duty, which is imposed upon him in the Gospel: To conclude describing the
City of Rome in verse, he ends in these words, Vrbs faelix si vel Dominis vrbs
illa careret,
Vel Dominis esset turpe carere fide.


O happy City if it had no masters, or if these masters (the Popes) were
ashamed to have no faith. Honorius Bishop of Augusta, or rather the Abbot, as
some say, a worthy Author, speaking of the Church of Rome, says, Turn thee
to the Citizens of Babylon and see what they are, and through what streets they
wander etc. See, come hither to the top of the hill, that thou may decerne
all the buildings of this damned City. Behold the Princes and Judges thereof
(that is to say, the Cardinals and Archbishoppes etc.) Behold, and thou shall
see, the seat of the beast placed in them: they always think upon that which
is evil, ever occupied in the works of iniquity, they only do not these
villainies themselves, but they teach others to do them: They sell holy
things, This person notwithstanding is recommended for her great piety and
learning in this age.

In Germany flourished Robert Abbot of Duits, one of the chiefest Divines of
these times, who was not of their opinion that attribute to the Pastors of the
Church though in what degree soever any temporal Dominion: Notwithstanding he
is famous among all Historiographers both for sanctity of life, Rupert.
Tuitiensis in Johan. l. 2. cap. 2.
and also for his miracles; Upon this rock (says he) who is Christ, is the
Church builded, he says not upon Peter, and by changing the name, Peter has
his denomination of Petra the rock, whereby we are given to understand that
all they that are builded upon that Every one of them then are in this regard
no less the rock than Peter himself, as touching the function: Jdem l. 11.
in Johan. c. 13.
The Ministers of Christ knew their Apostleship to be no domination, but an
humble service, the perfection whereof consists in laying down their lives
for their brethren. Therefore he says in another place, Jdem l. 8. in Math.
The rod of the disciples of Christ is the rod of the pastoral office,
watching diligently over the cure of souls; That rod of Dominion is not
permitted to the Ministers of the Gospel of Peace, but rather forbidden them
etc. And in the end he says, Jdem l. 9. c. 11. in eundem.
that to a spiritual man it is not lawful for him to draw the sword, or to
exercise public authority. He therefore who lived under these troubles in
Germany, what might he think of Hirsauge, written by Trithemius, Trithem. in
Chron. Hirsaug.
that under Honorius the second, God by the mouth of a certain holy man,
called Arnulph, did speak with great vehemency: This man was of great
devotion, and a great Preacher, who by the word of God reproved the
loossenesse, avarice, and pride of the Clergy, and propounded to all the
poverty of Christ, and his Apostles, and to imitate their integrity and
sanctity of life: who was praised and esteemed of the Roman Nobility as the
true disciple of Christ, but held in no small hatred by the Cardinals and
Clergy, who took him in the night, and privily murdered him. He afterward
adds: That this his Martyredome was revealed unto him by God, being in the
wilderness, when by the Angel he he said, Verily I fear not to undergo
death for the truth, but I tell you in the word of our Lord, that the
omnipotent God will not Platina in Honor. 2. Sabell Ennead. 9. l. 4.
Platina says that he was followed by many of the Roman Nobility, as a
Prophet, and the true disciple of Christ. But Sabellicus says, This wicked
deed that was committed by the Clergy defamed their whole order, yet it was
the fault but of a few, for their licentious life was grown to that height,
that they could not endure wholesome admonitions. And Honorius truly took it
grievously, says he, but presently adds caeterum questione abstinuit, but
the restrefrayneth to speak of. By this the Reader may judge what his anger
was.

Let us here speak of that which is written touching Nordbertus, An. 1125.
who came to Honorius in the year 1125, for the confirmation of the order of
Premonstre instituted Barnard writing to Gaufrid Bishop of Chartres says,
Barnard Epist. 56. ad Gaufr. Carnotens.
Whereas not many days since I saw his face, and from his heavenly pipe, that
is to say his mouth, I heard many thing, yet this I never heard, that he should
go into Jerusalem. But when I did inquire what he thought of Antichrist, he
protested he knew most certain that he should be revealed in this present
generation. And hereupon it appears that this question was then very
frequent. But, says he, as I entreated him to declare unto me from whence he
had this certainetie, as I gave ear to his answer, I thought I might not
believe him; nevertheless he affirmed that he should not die, before he saw the
general persecution of the Church: which truly he saw not long after, if he
observed it, against Vrspergen. Abbas an. 1119.
The Abbot of Vrsperge tells us of this Norbertus, That he was at the
Council of Collen under Calixtus in the year 1119, where he was accused of
all that were there touching many things, whereof he wisely excused himself:
whereupon it is written of him, That the hands of all these were against him,
and he against them all. Upon what occasion he shows not.

46. PROGRESSION.
Of the factions in the Popedom between Innocent the second and Anaclet the
second: and how Innocent requited the Emperor Lotharius in defending him
against Anaclet. Of the military enterprise of Innocent against Roger Duke of
Apulia and Calabria, and the success thereof.

BY the death of Honorius arose a great schism in the Church of Rome, the one
part having chosen Gregory the son of Guido, who was named Innocent the
second; the other Peter the son of Peter Leo, who was first consecrated, and
called Anaclet the second, both citizens of Rome, but Anaclet of the more
honorable family; so that Innocent after he was consecrated by the Bishop of
Ostia, was constrained for his safety to fly into the towers of the
Frangepanes, riuals of Piter Leo, and at length to leave the city. Anaclet in
the mean time being possessed of the Vatican, and finding therein crowns, cups,
crosses, and crucifixes of gold, silver, and other rich ornaments, caused them
to be molten, and made into money, to content those that were of his faction
and followers. And it is likely the other would have done no less, if he had
had power and means according, as the election of the Popes at these times
were carried. Innocent therefore embarked himself with his Cardinals, and came
to Pisa, and there excommunicated Anaclet: and Lewis the Gross, declaring unto
him the equity of his cause, to be protected by him. This was the occasion of
the Council of Estampes, where our Bishops disputing with those of the Popes,
S. Bernard held for Innocent, who at the same time was invited by Legates to
take his refuge in France. For having S. Bernard on his side was a great help
unto him. And our Frenchmen were willing to bind the Pope unto them, who for a
good turn received, might afterward requite them in Italy. There was also by
chance at the same time in France, Vincent. l. 27. c. 6. Bernard. vita l. 2. c.
1. Suggerus Abbas in vita Ludouici Grossi.
Henry the first, King of England, whom Bernard persuadeth in the behalf of
Innocent, against the opinion of all his Bishops; through whose persuasion he
went to Chartres to meet him. Then both the Popes endeavored Anaclet thundered
his Excommunications at Rome, against Innocent and his partakers: Innocent at
Clermont and Rheimes did the like against him and his followers. And moreover,
in Italy the Princes of the Normans defended the faction of Anaclet (for he
had bound Roger with a new benefit, Leo Hostiens. seu Petrus Diaconus l. 4. c.
99.
in giving him the title of a King) and Anselme also, Archbishop of Milan, with
all the Bishops of Lombardie his Suffragans. And as on the one side S. Bernard
defended Innocent, so Anaclet was authorized by Sinaretus Abbot of Mont Cassin,
and all those of his Order, who were of great authority, especially in Italy,
Innocent therefore in the year 1132, An. 1132.
endeavored to procure an enteruiew and conference between him and the
Emperor Lotharius, at Liege: where, according to the example of Charles and
Otho the Great, he requested him to take upon him the protection of the Church:
A thing which he willingly yielded unto, but upon condition, That the inuesting
of Bishops, which the Church of Rome had taken away from his predecessor
Henry, should be restored unto him: At which word, Vita Bernardi l. 2. c. 1.
says the Author of the life of S. Bernard, the Romans were amazed, and waxed
very pale, thinking they had incountred greater danger at Liege, than they had
avoided at Rome; until S. Bernard, whom he had always near unto him, caused
Lotharius to change his opinion, telling because it was a thing that could not
be done without much slaughter and blood. Wherefore Lotharius was therewith
content, Vrspergens. in Lothario.
so that he would promise him to crown him Emperor so soon as he should be
reestablished in the Sea at Rome. Then Lotharius came into Italy in the year
1133, An. 1133.
and finding Innocent at Pisa, carried him along to Rome. But Anaclet and his
followers, when they could continue no longer masters of the city, fled into
the towers, leaving the city to the will and pleasure of Lotharius; so that
Innocent being received of the citizens, he crowned Lotharius in the Lateran,
whom he could not do in the Vatican, according to the usual manner, being
possessed by the followers of Anaclet. But behold Innocent requited this benefit
of the Emperor: Krantzius in Metro. l. 6. c. 35.
He caused to be painted upon the wall the solemnity of his entrance and
coronation, that is to say, Innocent sitting in a Pontifical chair, and
Lotharius upon his knees receiving the Crown of the Empire of him: And with
these verses: Rex venit ante fores iurans prius vrbis honores,
Post homo fit Papae, sumit quo dante Coronam.
The King before his gates does come, which swears first to the town,
Whom both the Pope his servant makes, and after, him does crown.


Lotharius was become the Popes man, that is to say, his vassal and feudarie;
so far off was he from restoring unto him the inuestitures, and that he
received the Crown of him in gift. They of Gennes were more gently used, not
so much in respect of their thankfulness, as in despite of Anselme Archbishop
of Milan, who took part with Anaclet: he gave them an Archbishop, and exempted
them from the obedience of that of Milan. Lotharius in the mean time, whether
the pride of Innocent had discontented him, or the state of his affairs called
him back, returned into Germany: whose absence so soon as the faction of
Anaclet understood, descended the towers, and violently set upon the part of
Innocent, in so much that he was constrained to leave Rome, and fly to Pisa.
Bernard writ to the Pisanians in favor of Innocent: Bernardi Epist. 30.
Pisa is taken in stead of Rome, and of all the cities in the world is chosen
the principal of the Apostolic See. Why then should it seem strange unto
them, if we refuse the Pri^^cie to Rome? But note what he further adds, This
has not fallen unto thee by chance, or through the counsel of man, but by
divine providence, and the special favor of God, who loves those that put
their trust and confidence in him, who said to Innocent his anointed, Take thy
habitation at Pisa, and I will bless it, and will dwell there, because I have
chosen it. Innocent therefore held a Council in the year 1134, An. 1134.
but for the reformation of the Church (though it were very famous) there was
not a word spoken, only Anaclet was excommunicated, and Innocent confirmed.
And at Bernard, Lotharius returned again into Italy with a more puissant
army than before, to bring Anaclet, or rather Roger Prince of Sicilia, into
order, who only stuck firmly unto him: Henry then Duke of Bauaria, An. 1137.
Lotharius son in law, in the year 1137, being General of this expedition,
laid first siege to Mont Cassin, held by the Abbot Rainold, who summoned him to
forsake Anaclet, and deliver the monastery to Lotharius. And drawing near in
person with his army to Amalfa, commanded him to come unto him, assuring him
under his faith to reconcile him to Innocent, and that he should confirm all
his privileges unto him. But Innocent carrying a malicious mind, commanded
Rainold, that before he entered into the army, he should come with his Monks
bare Rainold being suddenly troubled herewith, calls the Emperor his
protector and revenger; and entering the camp by the commandment of
Lotharius, pitched his tent near to the Emperors, protesting to go
wheresoever he would appoint him. And hereupon began a new envy of Innocent
toward Lotharius, who being accompanied with Peregrinus Patriarch of Aquilia,
and many Archbishops, Bishops, and Abbots, notwithstanding took notice of this
cause, and the Counselors of both parts being commanded to be called, heard
the Pope by his Legates, and Rainold and the Monks by their Aduocats, who
complained unto him, That if they had erred, or done amiss in any thing, that
Innocent was the cause thereof, who had Innocent alleging after many reasons
and circumstances, the fullness of his absolute power and authority, Lotharius
declares what he had done for him, and his memorable labors for the Church of
Rome, that if he would not receive the Monks at his request into favor, he
would no more be subject unto it, Chron. Cass. l. 4. c. 29.
or defend it, and that there should be a difference between him and the Pope;
at which saying all the whole army gave a showt. And so they were absolved,
Anaclet and his faction being accursed; but yet there remained still a malicious
mind in Innocent, thinking himself not sufficiently revenged for the injury
offered him by Lotharius. Peter the Deacon, who recites this history at
large, observes many notable circumstances; Jdem l. 4. c. 109. 10, 11, 12, 13,
14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
for the Emperor through certain troubles and interruptions Innocent,
received not only the Monks, the Commissioners appointed by Rainold, but also
commanded them to be lodged near his tent, albeit they were excommunicated by
the Pope. Also this Excommunication the Emperor calls into question, and
wills Innocent to nominat those whom he would make the Advocates of his
cause, that he might decide the difference, the parties being heard: So Gerard
Cardinal of the holy Cross appeared in the behalf of the Pope, and Peter
the Deacon for the Abbot; who as the Emperor had caused Gerard to sit directly
against him, and Peter at his feet, Gerard affirmed, That an excommunicated
person ought not to sit at the feet of a child of the Church. The Emperor
neglecting the Excommunication, commanded Peter Gerard said unto him, The
Catholic Church you and your predecessors have made rulers of the whole world.
He answered, We have received the Crown from the Apostolic seat, not the
dominion and sovereignty, but the mark thereof: whereof Innocent makes an
instance, that the Monks should take an oath of faith and loyalty toward him,
but be free from all oath toward the Emperor, or privileges of the Empire.
The Emperor desiring Innocent to observe the Imperial laws, which he could
not by any means avoid, he very furiously answered him, That he would
rather cast off the Papal Mantle, and Innocent grew into such choler, that he
seemed as if he would depose all those that were at this judgment; in so much
that to assuage his anger the Emperor was content to send certain of his
followers to persuade him. About this time Salerne yielded to the government
of Lotharius; whereupon grew a new contention between the Pope and the
Emperor, for the right thereof: for they creeping as it were into his bosom,
and seeking to be protected and defended by Lotharius, did the more inwardly
fret him even to the An. 1137. Abbas Vrsperg. de Lotharia. Petrus Diaconus in
Chron. Cassin. l. c. 21. and sequent. and Sigon ex eodem regno Ital. l. 10.
as it was a question to inuest Ranulph Duke of Apulia into the place of Roger,
being a favorer of Anaclet, and that the Pope and Emperor together were to
give him the Ensign and Standerd of a Duke; it was no marvel if Lotharius
wearied with so many troubles, was resolved being come to Rome, to return into
Lombardie: in whose absence Roger lost no time, recovering by the far
distance of Lotharius, that which he lost by his presence. In the mean time
died Lotharius, in the year 1137, near to Trident, as he past into Germany;
a Prince commended by all histories, for his great piety, justice, and virtue,
and of such patience and moderation, as he could without any passion support
the hereditarie insolency of this Pope.

Conradus the second, duke of Sueuia, who before had contested with him for the
Empire, through whose oppositions Henry Duke of Bauier, Lotharius son in
law, could not so readily order the affairs of Italy. At this time Anaclet
died, S. Bernard being at Rome, through whose authority the Sea remained
peaceable to Innocent. And now to consolidat the former wounds, Otho
Frisingens. l. 7. c. 23. Abbas Vrsperg. an. 1139.
he held a Council at Lateran in the year 1139, where assembled all nations
of the West, near to a thousand Bishops and Abbots: and in this mighty
multitude notwithstanding, we read of nothing that was there propounded, or
decided, touching the reformation of the Church, either in doctrine or
discipline, though it was manifestly most corrupt, both before and at this
present; which many Innocent, and condemn the favorers of Anaclet, unless
they would perform the penance they were appointed; to weaken the ordinances
made by him, or by those whom he had ordained. And here let the Reader judge
what scruples they left in the consciences of so many and diverse nations, when
both Anaclet and the ordinances made by him almost for the space of eight
years, were far the better. Roger, remaining Duke of Apulia, and Calabria,
and naming himself King of Sicilia, these good Fathers resolved also to
suppress and bring into order. Innocent therefore having prepared an army of
the Romans, he in his own person intended to lead them against him, yet had
he the same success as Leo the ninth: for Roger retiring himself to the
castle of Gallutz, he very sharply besieged it; but William the son of
Roger Prince of Tarent, coming with a valiant company of soldiers, put the
Popes army to flight, took him with all his Cardinals, and carried him to
Naples: But he was set at liberty not long after upon two conditions, that is,
To absolve Roger of the Excommunication, and to declare him King of Sicilia,
Duke of Apulia, and Calabria, and Prince of Capua, and a liege man of the
Church, which Anaclet before had done. And in this manner the Popes naturally
regard not any but themselves, thinking all others, how great soever, to be
borne to do them service: In the mean time Ranulph and Robert were robbed of
their right, whom Lotharius and An. 1143.
and their Clergy, in the year 1143 earnestly studied to recover their
liberty, and restore the ancient customs of the Clergy, whom when he could
neither repress by fear of excommunication, nor by taking away the liberty
of Suffrages in the election of the Popes, and bring it only to the Cardinals
(a notable augmentation of their greatness and honor) being spent and
overcome with grief and sorrow, ended his life. But because this motion had
his progressions, it were fit we should further discourse thereon: neither is
it in the mean time to be forgotten, that we make it appear, how by diverse
degrees Innocent in the year 1131 holding a Council at Rheimes, An. 1131.
a certain Monk speaking in favor of him, thus began: Great and weighty is
the charge that is imposed upon me, that is, to teach the Doctors, to instruct
the Fathers, seeing it is written, Ask the Fathers and they will show thee:
But this Moses (Innocent that was present) commands me, whose hands are
heavy, who is to be obeyed not only of me, but of every one, and is here
greater than Moses. To Moses was committed the people of Israel, but to him
the Universal Church: Behold, he is here of greater power than any Angel; for
to whom of the Angels did God ever say, Whatsoever thou bindest upon earth,
etc. alluding to that which the Lord said of himself. And he has more here
than Solomon (he follows I say according to his office, not according to
merit: Except God there is none like unto him (mark like) either in heaven or
in earth: This is that Peter who cast himself into the sea, when the other
Disciples sailed unto Jesus. Every one of you (Bishops) is content with his
bark, that is, his Archbishopricke, his Abbie, his Priorie; but this man has
authority in all Archbishoprickes, Abbeys, Priories, etc. He says Misit se.
And truly he casts, he puts, nay he intrudes; sent of himself, not of God,
without mission, without commission. This Sermon in the mean time to deceive
the world, Baron. an. 1131. art. 4. vol. 12.
is inserted into the works of Saint Bernard; but Baronius himself denies
Bernard to be the author thereof. Furthermore, this Innocent was the first who
ordained, That the Pope should celebrate the Mass sitting. If this then were to
be Innocent succeeded to the Archbishopricke of Tire, William the author of the
holy war, who according to the imitation of his predecessors, after he had
been consecrated by the Patriarch of Jerusalem, went to Rome to receive the
Pall. He himself says that the Patriarch hindered him by all the means he
could, and that Innocent (abusing the necessity of the East) handled him
hardly by his letters. Moreover, Radulph Patriarch of Antioch compared his
Church to the Roman, as being no less, nay rather the seat of Peter than Rome,
and took the Pall of himself. This Innocent being favored by the king of
Jerusalem, who hated Radulph, sending a Legate into Roger king of Sicilia, who
lay in wait for him, he took him, and cast him into prison, and afterward sent
him back again into Palestina, to be censured by Alberick the Legate of
Innocent, Cardinal of Ostia, the king being known to be his professed enemy.
To conclude, he, appearing not at the Synod where the Legate was President, was
deposed for his disobedience.


These two Popes in the mean time mutually pronounced each other Antichrist,
by authority of famous Synods of the Bishops and Abbots of each side: and in
that one thing they very well agreed. All the Bishops of England (as we have
seen) refused no less Innocent than Anaclet. The like difficulty had
Innocent found in France, had it not been for the favor of S. Bernard, when
Gerard Bishop of Angolesme took part against him. Hildebert also Archbishop of
Tours, a man then of great authority in the Church, stood a long time
doubtful; whom S. Bernard having first admonished, that the most part had
already acknowledged And herein, father, your sentence, though late, is
expected as rain upon the fleece: We blame not slownesse that sauoureth of
gravity, for it abolisheth the note of lightness, etc. yet I say, as one well
known to the Bishops, Bernardus Epist. 124.
Ne quid nimis, I speak as a familiar, be not more wise than is needful. I am
ashamed, I confess, that the old Serpent with a new audaciousnesse, seems to
have left unadvised and ignorant women for to tempt the strength of your
breast, and to shake such a pillar of the Church. And note that he calls him
Magnum Sacerdotem and excelsum in verbo gloriae, Great Priest and high in the
word of glory.

But within Rome it self from the time that Innocent was established, he
wanted not adversaries. The Clergy of Rome as we have seen, having murdered
Arnulph Arnulph notwithstanding of Bresse (some call him the Bishop) being
nothing terrified thereby, presumed to do the like, and even in the midst of
his glory and authority, when he held that famous Council at Lateran,
wherein were present near a thousand Bishops and Abbots. And this man the
Authors of those times, and for the most part Monks, call an Heretic; but
they accuse him of no other heresy, but for that he mightily inueyed against
the insolency of the Sea of Rome: This man, say they, Ligurinus de gestis
Fred. 1. l. 3
having been brought up in learning in France, takes upon him a religious
habit, and returning into Italy, preaches against Bishops and their
royalties, and that they ought to leave them unto Princes, contenting
themselves with such things as are necessary Otho Frisingen. de gestis Fred. c.
27. and 28. Jdem hist. l.* c. 27. Onuphr. in Jnno. 2. Sigon. de regno Jtal. l.
11.
that three years after the people of Rome invaded the Capitol, resolving to
recover again their ancient liberty, and leave to the Pope only the care of
Ecclesiastical matters. To this purpose they writ to the Emperor Conrade,
That what they did was for him and the glory of the Empire, and to restore
unto him that which the Popes usurped, and had taken from him: That to the same
end they had plucked down the fortresses, and rased them Imperium teneat, Romae
sedeat, regat orbem
Princeps terrarum, ceu fecit Iustinianus:
Caesaris accipiat Caesar, quae sunt sua Praesul,
Vt Christus iussit Petro soluente tributum.
He holds our Empire, sits at Rome, and rules over all,
Like Monarch of the world, as once Justinian was said:
What Caesar's is let Caesar have, the Bishops his withal;
Christ so commanded Peter, when the tribute should be paid.


But when they heard, that Conrade being crossed in Germany could not intend the
affairs of Italy, they delayed no time, set to their own hands,
reestablished the Senate, and provided both for peace and war. Innocent in the
mean time tries all means, spares neither threats nor gifts,
excommunicateth all the people, and excludes them from the election of the
Popes, wherein they had till then a principal part: but at length being
brought into fear of losing the government This contention (says the Author)
beginning with Innocent, Otho Frisingen.
was of that moment, that it dured under all the Popes to Celestine the third
(that is, about forty five years.) Wido Castellanus, a citizen of Rome, called
Celestine the third, succeeded Innocent, being created according to the
ordinance of Innocent, by the Cardinals only, adding this advantage to the
Cardinals, in stead of the loss they otherwise sustained. By the same law not
long after Lucius succeeds Celestine, under whom the Romans not content with
the Senate only which they had established, chose a Patricius to be their head,
to whom they gave all the tributes and rights both of the city and country,
taking them away from the Popes, and allowing them for the maintenance of their
dignity Jordan son of Peter Leo, a man mighty in the city both for his
ancient nobility, and favor of the people. Lucius then having raised an
army, besieged the Senators, whom the Patricius Jordan presently set upon, and
drove both him and his from the Capitol. Viterbiensis says, Gotofrid. Viterb.
an. 1145. part 17. Chron. an. 1145.
That in this broile Lucius received such a blow with a stone, that to his
dying day, which was in March 1145, he was not able to sit upon his Pontifical
throne. Eugenius the third, who succeeded Lucius, in the seven years that he
continued could not prevail against them. But in the mean time as he thought
to suppress them, Arnold returns out of Germany, and by his Sermons
stirs up the courage of the Romans. Therefore, whether seeming as it
Bernard, returned to Rome, but soon after was constrained to depart again,
and from thence under show of renewing the war of the Holy Land, passes
into France, persuading himself, that by feeling the hurt of his absence they
would become more tractable. But they being nothing grieved at it, he returned
into Italy, and died in the year 1153 at Tiuoli: as if the drift of the
Romans had been to show, that they could be without a Pope; and of Eugenius,
that he could be without Rome. And yet in these days on the contrary, we
hear of nothing more than the Pope sitting Peter eternally appointed at Rome.
And this is that which then passed in Italy.

In France, notwithstanding the good offices that Innocent had there received,
he let not to attempt against the liberties of the French Church, neither
wanted he there such as resisted him: For the Archbishopricke of Bourges being
vacant by the death of Alberick, the Pope without attending the presentation of
young king Lewis, by full power ordained Archbishop one Peter the son of
Emerick his Chancellor. The history says, that the king thereat was so much
moved, That in the presence of many, Propositis public sacrosanctis reliquijs,
Matthew Paris in Stephan.
He publicly swear upon the holy relics, That this Archbishop, so long as
he lived, should not enter into the city of Bourges. Whereupon Innocent
proceeded to excommunicat the king, so that into whatsoever city or town he
entered, divine service was presently suspended. And this dured for the space of
three years. Here again in the mean time comes S. Bernard, and because
there was a great contention between the king and him, for that Rodulph Earl
of Vermandois having put away his wife, had with his priuitie married Petronilla
the Queen, his wives sister, he adds one quarrel to another: and
notwithstanding that solemn oath of the king, which he called Herodianum
iuramentum, the oath of Herod, not to be performed Peter; S. Bernard truly
being noted by many, to have been too liberal in giving those things that
were ours to the Popes: which was either because he feared their unbridled
obstinacy, the cause of so many troubles before, or for that our Princes
sometimes abused their power, in giving Ecclesiastical things at their
pleasures. Here follows that which himself speaks in his Epistle to the
four Roman Bishops, after he had warned them of the danger of schisms:
Bernard. Epist. 219.
Which is worse (says he) humane affairs are come to that evil pass, that
neither the guilty will humble themselves, nor the Judges have pity: We say
to the wicked, Do not wickedly, and to transgressors, Lift not up your horn,
and they hear us not, because it is a house heardened. We entreat them, whose
part Scarcely is the wound of the Church healed up, when behold it festereth
and is opened again. And thus oftentimes the most obstinat is favored at the
cost of the more tractable. Yet it appears plainly out of many places, that
he was not content neither with the Church of Rome, nor with Innocent himself.
In the Epistle 178, writing to the same Innocent, he says, Bernard. Epist. 178.
It is the voice of all the faithful among us, that exercise their charge over
people with a faithful care, That justice is perished in the Church, that the
keys of the Church are come to nothing, the authority of Bishops wholly
debased, whilst none of the Bishops has power in his hand to revenge the Yet
more boldly in the 176 Epistle going before, written by an Archbishop of Treues
to the Pope, wherein the style of Bernard evidently appears, for he is not
afraid to threaten him, that the Church was able to consist without Rome: Know
(says he) that our Church on this side the mountains, Idem Epist. 1^^.
as well in our realm as in the realm of France, is strong in faith,
peaceable in unity, devout in your obedience, ready to serve. The loss of
Beneuent, nor of Capua, nor of Rome it self, will in no sort astonish us, God
so judging it, knowing that the state of the Church is not to be esteemed

In the matter of divorce of Rodulph Earl of Vermandois, dispensed with by
Innocent, he writes to him thus: Bernard. Ep^^. 216. ad Inno^^
God had conjoined Earl Rodulph and his wife by the Ministers of the Church,
and the Church by God, who has given such power unto men; how has the chamber
(namely of the Pope) separated that which God has joined together? in which
fact it is manifestly forescene, that these works of darkness are done in
darkness. In that same also which he wrote to the Cardinal of Hostia, he
describes unto him in the person of Cardinal Jordan, the actions and
behauiours of the Popes Legates: Your Legates (says he) have trauersed from
nation to nation, Epist. 299.
and from people to people, leaving filthy and horrible traces of their steps
eueriewhere, from (alluding to the journey of Saint Paul, who had filled all
with the Gospel from Jerusalem to Illiricum:) It is reported that he
committed in all places dishonest things, carried away the spoils of the
Churches, promoted, where he might, formosulos pueros, fair boys to
Ecclesiastical honors, and would have done it where he could not. Many have
redeemed themselves, that he might not come unto them: Of them that he could
not come to, he exacted and extorted by his deputies: In schools, in Courts, in
highwayes, he made himself a mocking stock to the world. Seculars and
religious persons all spoke evil of him; the poor, Monks, and Clerks But for
the Popes in general, It seems, says he, oh good Jesus, that all
Christendom has conspired against thee, Apud Hagonem in postilla super Johann.
and they are the chiefest in persecuting thee that seem to hold primacie in
the Church, and to have principality; according as it is written, He that did
eat my bread magnified upon me supplantation, made it a bravery to supplant
me; transferring to the Pope that which the Apostle expounded of Judas, from
one son of perdition to another. In the Sermon of the conversion of Saint
Paul, Jdem in sermon de Conuersione B. Paul^.
speaking to the people, Ah, ah, Lord God, they are the first in persecuting
thee, which seem to love Primacie and bear chief sway in the Church: They
have possessed the fort of Sion, they have seized upon the strong places, and
afterward libere and freely and with full power, have set the whole city on
fire. Miserable is their conversation, and miserable the subversion of thy
people; and would to God they did hurt in this part alone, etc. The last of
their thought is the salvation of souls: Can there be any greater persecution
to the Savior of souls? Others do also wickedly against Christ, and there
are many Antichrists in our times: yet by good right he esteems more cruel
and more grievous the persecution that he suffers of his own Ministers, etc.
These things Christ sees, and is silent; these things the Savior suffers,
and dissembleth; and therefore it is necessary also that we dissemble them,
and in the mean time be silent, chiefly of our Prelates and Masters of
Churches. Neither let them think here to escape, by saying, That this is meant
of schismatic Popes: he Thy friends (said he before) and thy neighbors
have drawn near and set themselves against thee. It seems that the whole
world of Christian people have conspired against thee, from the least even to
the greatest, from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head is not any
soundness: Iniquity has proceeded from the Elders and Judges, from thy
Vicars, which seem to govern thy people (note thy Vicars. Vita Bernard. l. 2.
c. 8.
) In his Sermons upon the Canticles, which the Author of his life witnesses to
have been written after the death of Anaclet, when Innocent was established at
Rome, after he had spoken of the diverse temptations of the Church; by
persecution, which the Martyrs have overcome; by heresy, Bernard, in Cantic.
sermon. 33.
which the Doctors have convinced, Behold, says he, our times, through Gods
(namely in show) and all are Could he more significantly express unto us this
disease, spread over all the body of the Church, this running canker feeding
upon all the substance thereof? But he proceeds further: They are the ministers
of Christ, and serve Antichrist: They go honored with the goods of the Lord,
and give no honor unto the Lord; thence is, as you daily see, meretricius
nitor, that whorish glittering, that apparel of stage players, that royal
furniture, gold on bridles, sadles and spurs: and spurs do shine more than
Altars etc. It is for these, they will be heads of Churches, Deanes,
Archdeacons, Bishops, and Archbishops: For all these are not given to desert,
but to that work which walks in darkness (in hypocrisy:) long ago this was
foretold, and now is come the time of the accomplishment. Job. 40.
the simple and humble which are in the Church. There rested but the name, and
here it presently follows; Ipse e^im est Antichristus, For this is very
Antichrist, who will vant himself not only to be the day, but the midday;
will exalt himself against all that is called God, 2. These. 2.
or that is worshipped, whom the Lord Jesus shall slay with the Spirit of his
mouth, and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming, as he that is the
true and eternal midday, the Bridgroome and Advocate of the Church. For to
whom may this last clause be referred, but to the Pope, distributer of all the
dignities abouesaid, head of all that Whence think thou abounds unto them
that great abundance, Jn Cantic. sermon. 77.
glittering of apparel, etc. but from the goods of the Spouse? Hence it is
that she is left poor and needy, and naked, with a face to be pitied,
unhandsome, undressed, blood-les: For this, is not at this day to adorn the
Spouse but to despoile her, this is not to keep her but to lose her, not to
defend but to abandon her, not to institute but to prostitute her; this is not
to feed the flock, but to kill and devour it, etc. Wherefore let us leave
th^se, which find not the Spouse, but which sell her, etc. All would be
successors, but few imitatours, etc. It suffices not our watchmen that they
keep us not, unless also they lose us. Out of which we may think, what
opinion he henceforth had of them. In his Bernard. in Psalm. 91. Sermon. 6. and 7.
The offices themselves (says he) of Ecclesiastical dignity, have passed
into filthy gain and into the business of darkness, neither seek they in
these the salvation of souls, but the superfluity of riches. For this are
they shorn; for this they frequent Churches, celebrate Masses, sing Psalms,
etc. They impudently strive, in these days, for Bishoprics, Archdeaconries,
Abbotships, and other dignities, that they might wast the revenues of Churches
in such vain and superfluous uses. It remains that the man of sin be
revealed, the son of perdition, Poor Bernard stayed for him at the door,
who had already entered the house. Baronius anno 1130. art. 6.
And thus much be spoken to Baronius, who affirms that S. Bernard inueighed
only against schimaticall Popes. Writing to Pope Eugenius, nere upon the year
1151, who had been his disciple, and had not obeyed his admonitions, Benard.
Epist. 137.
being entered into the Popedom: Who will let me see, before I die, the Church
as in the days of old, when the Apostles did cast forth their nets, not to
take silver or gold, but to take souls? O how I desire to see thee inherit the
voice of him, whose seat thou have obtained! Thy money perish with thee. In his
books of consideration, Ad Eugen. de consideratione lib. 1.
what does he omit for his amendment? Tell me, I pray thee (says he) when art
thou ever free? vbi tuus, where thine own? Every where is tumult, every
where the yoke of thy servitude presses thee: reply not unto me in the
Apostles voice, who says, When I was free from all, I made myself a servant
of all: That is very far from thee, Was it in this seuritude that he served
men, in the getting of filthy gain? Was it in this, that from all parts of
the world did flock unto him the ambitious, the covetous, such as exercise
Simonie, sacrilegious persons, whoremongers and incestuous, and such other
monsters of men, that by his Apostolic authority, they might either obtain
or retain Ecclesiastical honors? This man then has made thee a servant, to
whom Christ was Then for to bring him back to the ancient bounds, Lib. 2.
he says: Thy high dignity need not flatter thee, thy care is the greater.
And if then we would think rightly of our selves, we shall judge that a
ministry is imposed upon us, not a domination given. Think thy self as some
one of the Prophets: Is not that enough for thee, yea too much, etc. If thou be
wise, thou will be contented with the measure that God has measured unto thee:
For (to wit, Jeremy) to be in authority, not for to command, but to do as
the time requires. Learn, that have need of a weeding hook, not a Scepter,
for to do the work of a Prophet, etc. It was said to the Apostles, thy
predecessors, The harvest is great, but the laborers are few. Take to thee the
paternall inheritance; for if thou be a son, thou art an heir: That thou
may prove thy self heir, watch on this care, and be not idle, least it be
said unto thee, Why stand thou here all day idle? much less to be found
loosse in delights, 1. Peter 5.3.
or wallowing in pompes. The will of the Testator, assigns unto thee none of
these etc. Do thou think, that he has given thee domination? hear him: Not
as though ye were Lords, says he, in clero, over Gods heritage, but as made
ensamples to And this speech he extends very long. How far different from
the Divinity of Hildebrand, who would unite to his Mytre, the temporal
Monarchy of all the world? For Appeals: How Lib. 3.
How long do thou slumber? How long does thy consideration sleep, at this
great abuse and confusion of Appeals? How many have we known to have
appealed, that by the help thereof they might be suffered to continue the
greater wickedness. Against all Law and right, against all custom and order
they are made. There is no discretion had of place, of time, of the person, nor
of the cause. And this matter he discourses at large, Lib. 4.
showing the inconveniences thereof, and illustrateth it by many examples,
which it suffices us only here by the way to point at. There were Pastors
before thee, who gave themselves wholly to the feeding of their sheep etc.
Their only gain, pomp and pleasure, to prepare and render them up to God a
perfect people. Where is now, I pray you, this custom? There is another,
unlike unto it, come in place thereof; affections are much changed, and would
to God it were not into worse: Yet care, anxietie, emulation and ponsiuenesse
do continue; but translated not changed. I hear you witness, that you spare
not your substance, no more than before: But the difference is in the diverse
employing of it. Great abuse few have respect to the mouth of the Lawgiuer, but
all to the hands: Yet not without cause, they do all the business of the
Pope. Can you show me one of all that great City, that has received thee for
Pope without money, or without hope of having some for it. And here let the
Reader see (that we be not tedious unto him) the description he makes there of
the Romans and especially of the Clergy, in all kind of wickedness far worse
than others. In the midst of all this, says he, Thou Pastor marchest all
laid And hence he enlarges himself, seriously to show unto him, of what
weight and moment is the charge that he pretends, how largely the same is
extended, and that if he will well discharge his duty, he has a greater
burden upon him than can ever be well home. Therefore it better stood with
wisdom, that he should renounce all other affairs, and namely Eugenius,
sticks in the mud, being so mightily adjured by Bernard, and leaves the true
inheritance of Saint Peter for that of Constantine, of feeding sheep for to
devour the world, what judgment hereupon might Saint Bernard make, or what
might he leave for us to make? but even this, that this is the second beast,
that has taken (as S. John had prophesied) the place of the first, and under
the name of the seat of S. Peter, has invaded the throne of Constantine, has
changed his sheepe-hooke into his Scepter, under pretext of the man of sin
were revealed to build up his ruins, and which now shows it self revived
and renewed. For in many of his Epistles he leaves unto us traces, whereby it
appears, that Eugenius was not bettered by his admonitions. Whence he
oftentimes said, Ego liberaui animam meam, I have delivered my soul and
discharged my conscience etc. But in one Epistle he tells us, Bernard. Epist.
125.
that the Beast mentioned in the Revelation, to whom is given a mouth speaking
blasphemies, and to make war with the Saints, occupies the Chair of S. Peter,
as a Lion prepared for the prey. If they will needs have it, that he speaks
of an Antipope; yet, does it not remain firm out of this very place, that
it is Peter, and that S. Bernard has so believed and thought? How far is this
from the Doctors of these days, which suppose he is to be exepcted out of
Babylon? Neither is it hereto be omitted, that when by the diligence of good S.
Bernard, our French Church had held a famous Council at Poitiers, to reduce
into a better life by authority thereof, one Gilbert Porretan Bishop of that
place, holding an ill opinion concerning the Trinity, and there had conceived
in a certain writing, what ought to be held and believed concerning that
point, the consistory of Cardinals being greatly moved thereat, came thus to
reproach the same to Pope Eugenius: Otho Frisingen. de gestis Frederic. 1. l. 1.
c. 57.
What has that thy Abbot done, and with him the French Church? with what At
length Eugenius was brought by them to that pass, that he earnestly resolved
without delay to punish so great a rebellion and novelty. Insomuch, that S.
Bernard is constrained to go to Rome, with great submission, to purge himself:
And the Symbol of the French Church, though it were good and approved of all
good men, was accounted Otho of Frisinghe notes, that S. Bernard disputing
with that Gilbert, had uttered some words that might displease the Cardinals,
whereupon Gilbert had said, Et hoc scribatur, let this also be written, S.
Bernard replied, Yea, and with an iron style and nail of Adamant: And this
perhaps did sting them.

Petrus venerabilis Abbas Cluniacens. 16. Epist. 47.
Peter Abbot of Clugni, who lived in these times, could never satisfy himself
with praising Pope Eugenius, especially in his seven and fortieth Epistle of
the Bernard, in which nevertheless he ingeniously says: But some man may
say, the Church has no sword, Christ has taken it away, when he said to
Peter, Put up thy sword into the scaberd; whosoever smites with the sword shall
perish with the sword. Verum est, inquam, verum est, It is true, I say it is
true: The Church has not the sword of a King, but the rod of a Pastor, of
which the Apostle says, What will ye, shall I come unto you with the rod, or
in the spirit of meekness? And what say I, she has a rod, yea, she has a
sword also, according to the same: Take unto you the helmet of salvation, and
the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God, etc. And yet by that which
follows it is apparent, that against some which had troubled him he would not
have refused the help of another sword. I let pass the Satyrs of Bernard a
Monk Peter his venerable Abbot, wherein he wonderfully disciphereth the Pope
and the Court of Rome: not to weary the Reader, I will quote only some few
verses to this purpose, although the rest be of the same nature.

O mala secula, venditur insula pontificalis,
Infula venditur, haud reprehenditur emptio talis;
Venditur annulus: Hinc lucra Romulus auget and vrget.
Est modo mortua, Roma superflua, quando resurget?
Si tibi det sua, non repleat tua guttura Craesus
Marca vel aureus a modo non Deus est tibi Jesus.
O wicked times, wherein the Crown and See is sold,
And yet the merchandise thereof is uncontrolled:
The Ring is also sold: But Romulus does gain.
Superfluous Rome now dies, when shall it rise again?
Not Craesus could suffice, if Rome should give he his,
Nor any gold, for now no God or Christ there is.
Also Peter Deacon, continuer of the Chronicle of Mont Cassin, shows, Chron.
Cassinens. Petri Diac. l. 4. c. 116. and 117.
that when the Emperor of Greece had sent his ambassadors to Lotharius, when
he Innocent in the war against the Monks of Mont Cassin, there was among
others a Greek Philosopher, who disputed against him ( Peter Deacon) that Pope
Innocent was excommunicated: his words are these, In the Western climat we see
that prophecy fulfilled, As the people is so shall the Priest he: Whilst
Bishops go out to war, as your Pope Innocent does: He distributeth money,
presteth soldiers for the wars, and is clothed in purple. No doubt but he
alleged other reasons which he tells not.

But besides them, that in the midst of the Roman Church we have heard thunder
it out so loud against Popes, and the Court of Rome, and their actions, there
are found some in these times which openly fell away from it, assailing their
doctrine Peter Bruis in the year 1126, and after him his disciple Henry about
the year 1147, the first being a Priest, and the other a Monk, who first in
the Diocesses of Arles, of Ambrum, and of Gap, then after throughout all
Auuergne, Languedoc, and Guienne, preached against Transubstantiation, the
sacrifice of the Mass, Masses, Suffrages and Oblations for the dead,
Purgatory, worshipping of Images, invocation of Saints, single life of
Priests, Pilgrimages, superfluous holidays, consecrations of water, oil,
Frankincense, and other Romish trash: but especially they inueyed against the
pride and excess of Popes, Princes of Sodom, and the Church of Rome they
termed Babylon the mother of fornication and confusion. Which we learn from
that venerable Peter, Petrus Abbas Cluniacen. l. 1. Epist. 1. and 2.
Abbot of Clugni, in some of his Epistles, where he takes upon him to confute
them. And it is great pity that their books are with so great diligence
abolished, that we are constrained to use the writings of our adversaries, for
to pick out their doctrine; whose testimony, by reason of their hatred and
calumny, may justly be suspected. For it is imputed unto them, That they
believed only the four Evangelists, and rejected all the other books of the
Bible. And here Peter truly skirmisheth with his own shadow, seeing that they
verily affirm, following the ancient Fathers, That the rule of religion is to
be sought But because I am not yet fully assured that they think and preach
so, I will defer my answer until I have undoubted certainty of that they
say. Also, I ought not easily give assent to that deceiving monster, rumor, or
common report, etc. I will not blame you of things uncertain. So Saint Bernard
more credulous than reason required, reproves them, That like the Maniches
they condemned the use of matrimony, and of flesh, and denied also baptism to
infants: But especially against Henry he obiecteth, the keeping of a
concubine, and playing at dice. In like manner Tertullian, That monstrous
opinions and crimes were imputed to the first Christians. Bernard. in Cantic.
sermon. 66.
Yet Bernard in the mean time says, They are sheep in habit, Foxes in craft,
Wolves in cruelty. These are they that would seem good, and yet are not,
wicked, and yet would not seem so. It must needs be then, that their outward
conversation was good. It is also confessed, that their disciples went
cheerfully to the fire, and constantly suffered all extremities for the
doctrine of their faith. Can that agree with a dissolute life and doctrine? And
they were in the mean time followed with such a multitude, Epist. 240. and
241. and in vita Bernard. l. 2. c. 5.
that the Temples, says Bernard, remained without people, the people without
Priests, Priests without their due reverence, and Christians without Christ,
the Churches (to wit, the Romish) were reputed Sinagogues. The argument brought
against them, was as in these days: Have our Fathers then so long a time
erred? are Yet were they defended by notable persons, both of the Clergy and
Laity, and by some also of the Bishops and nobles of the realm, namely by
Hildefonsus Earl of S. Giles, under whose protection they preached in his
countries: The people of Toulouse also, where Peter preached the word of God
the space of twenty years, with great commendation, and in the end was
burned. Henry also his disciple, some few years after, being betrayed to
Albericus Cardinal of Ostia, was carried bound to in chains into Italy, and
never afterward seen: notwithstanding the persecution was hot all that time
against the poor people, without any difference of age or sex.

Now as we have noted, that the corruption of doctrine ever accompanied the
Peter Abayllard, a man of most subtle wit, who brought in again the opinions
of Pelagius, and others following, who destroyed, as we have elsewhere showed,
the free justification in the faith of Christ Jesus, that is to say, took the
Christian Church by the throat: against whom Saint Benard writes diverse
treatises, and maintains the aunceint truth, taught by S. Augustine, S.
Hierome, Prosper, and Fulgentius, in the Church, sweepeth away by the same
means many filthy doctrines, which the Semi-Pelagians, Faustus, Cassianus,
and others, had brought in, easily getting foundation of their Bernard being
once dead, the schole of Abayllard continued in the Schole-men, who have so
followed his method, that he by right may be acenowledged their father. It
little wanted then, but that the tares choked the good corn, when with them
little or no mention is made of justifying by faith, the fortress of salvation
is thenceforth placed in dead works; as if Christian doctrine, that most
profound secret, hidden before all time, and revealed in his time, were nothing
but a certain moral discipline. In the same time also Gratian compiled his
Decrees, not more fortunatly than Justinian his Pandectes, out of the Canons
and ancient Decrees, which he in many places applies to the abuses of the
time, and especially to the Roman

Auentine, an Author most studious of antiquity, teaches us, Auent. l. 6.
that before Gratian the Canon law was far otherwise; For, says he, as it is
perfect and whole in our Libraries, it contains two parts, the first the Acts
of universal Counsels, which are manifestly received; the other of the
Constitutions, Epistles, and Rescripts of Popes, as every thing was done, the
causes, assistants, witnesses, with the circiumstances of places and times.
Would to God he had not taken so much pains. And in the mean time Pope
Eugenius approves it, and commands it to be read in all Universities,
because without doubt he reduced the whole Church under the Popes yoke, little
Bernard gave him in his books of Considerations. The same method has Peter
Lumbard (this Gratians brother) in his four books of Sentences, collected out
of the places of ancient Fathers, compiled into a certain order, which he
oftentimes makes to serve by changing, leaving out, or adding some word to the
corrupt divinity of his time: so that from thenceforth only Gratian is
consulted with, and only Lumbard is read in schools. In these two consists all
Christian law and divinity. No man hence cares for seeking to the fountain
in the holy Scriptures of the old and new Testament, in the monuments of the
Fathers, or Acts of ancient Councels, to look more nearly into the matter,
is counted heresy. Auentine to this purpose says: Auent. Annal. Baior. l. 6.
I have Which notwithstanding, as well as himself, are most famous among them
of the Church of Rome.

47. PROGRESSION.
Of the humility of the Emperor Frederick, and the pride and insolency of
Pope Adrian the fourth. The Pope stirs up the subjects of William

TO the Emperor Conrade succeeded in the year 1152 Frederick his nephew, An.
1152.
in the Empire of Germany; a Prince, by the testimony of all writers,
qualified with many virtues: And in the year 1153 dies Eugenius, An. 1153.
whom Anastasius succeeds, created (as abouesaid) by the Cardinals alone; who
continued but one year nevertheless, peaceable at Lateron, because he let the
Romans do what they listed. Then behold Adrian the fourth, an English man
borne, enters into the Popedom, who could not be consecrated at Lateran,
unless first the people chased away Arnold, who (as we have said) preached at
Rome against the superfluous Frederick in the mean time sets forward to be
crowned in Italy, who in his way invested Anselme of Hauelburge with the
Bishopric of Rauenna, then vacant by the death of Moses, being chosen by the
voice of the Clergy and of the people, and moreover makes him Exarch: whence
he took the title of Servant of servants, Archbishop and Exarch of Rauenna.
Sigon. de regno Jtal. l. 12.
This set Adrian already into an ague, who nevertheless met him at Viterbe;
where Frederick stepping to him, held his stirrup for him, to light from his
horse, and conducted him into his tent. There the Bishop of Bamberge speaking
That all the Church was come from the end of the world for to bring him this
Prince, and that seeing prostrat at his feet he had rendered him due honor, he
besought him to do what lay in him to set the Imperial Crown upon his head.
Sigonius says here, that he paused a while, seeming as it were to conceal
from us the insolency of this Pope (which we read in Helmold, Helmold, in
Histor, Sclauorum c. 81.
an Author not to be suspected) because he was rightly ashamed of it. The
answer then of Adrian was this; Brother, these are but words that thou tellest
us, thou say thy Prince has given due reverence to Saint Peter, but Saint
Peter has rather been thereby dishonored; Instead of holding our right stirrup
he has held the left. This being told again by the Interpreter to the King,
he humbly answers, Tell him, that it says he, whence this custom has taken
footing, from good will, or of duty? if from good will, the Pope has no
cause to complain, that I have failed in a service which is but arbitrarie,
and not of right: but if you say, that of duty from the first institution
this reverence is due to the Prince of Apostles, what imports it between the
right and left stirrup, so that humility be observed, and that the Prince
prostrat himself at the Popes feet? Helmold, l. 1. c. 73.
Thus (says the History) was this point long and eagrely disputed, sine
osculo pacis, without the kiss of peace. Let the Reader note here the charity
of this Bishop, to reject an Emperor only for having held the left stirrup
for the right, and an Emperor endued with such virtues, as the Author fails
not to say, That his wisdom and courage was greater than of all the
inhabitants of the earth. And he adds, The principal Lords, which were as
the pillars of the realm, were afraid to return without doing something, and
won the Kings heart with many persuasions, to entreat the Pope to come again
into the camp; and coming again he received him integrato officio, with
entire duty, that is, he held his right stirrup. Otho Frising. de gestis
Frederici l. 2. c. 20.
But whilst they all rejoiced at it, thinking all matters well, Adrian says
unto them, There remains yet one thing for your Prince to do, he must
conquer And very hardly obtained they of him, to defer this conquest till
after his coronation. The Acts of the Vatican produced by Baronius, Baron. an.
1155 art. 8. and seque^t.
do only say, That Frederick refused to hold the stirrup, and in the end was
brought to do it, stregulam, say they, fortiter tenuit, that otherwise Adrian
would not receive his kiss. Yet this is the Adrian that said, To covet the
Popedom is not to succeed S. Peter in feeding the sheep, but Romulus in
committing paricides, because a man cannot attain thereto without shedding the
blood of his brethren; and now he is Anton. ex Ioh. Sarisbur. and Halinando
Part. 2. Tit. 17. c. 1. 9.
Now Frederick at the last having recovered his good favor, Arnold was
apprehended in Tuscan by the servants of Adrian, and delivered unto him, and
was condemned under pretense of heresy, and burned alive, and his ashes cast
into the river Tiber. But when Frederick returned into Germany, either because
of the hot season of the Canicular days, which the Germans could not well
endure, or for the cold satisfaction he had received from Adrian, or some other
affairs calling him back thither, Adrian in his absence made so good use of
his opportunity, that William Duke of Calabria, and King of Sicilia, who had
undertaken the inuestitures of Bishops in his lands, by the rebellion that he
stirred up of the Lords his subjects against him, is constrained Frederick upon
the first occasion offered. A Bishop of London then was taken by robbers in
Germany, and it seemed unto Adrian that Frederick stirred not in it as he
ought, who in the mean time was at Bezanson in Bourgondie, whither he was come
to marie Beatrice the Earls daughter. He sends to him his Legates, the
Cardinal Rowland, and Bernard, with his letters of complaint, or rather of
reproach, for that he ill remembered, says he, Radcuicus Canonic. Frising. l.
1. c. 10. Sigon. de regno Jtal. l. 12.
Quanto studio Imperialis Coronae insigne tibi contulerimus, With what
affection we have given him the Imperial Crown, and beneficia, and the good
turns, or rather benefits. Thus says mildly Sigonius. But Radeuicus, Quantam
tibi dignitatis plenitudinem and honoris contulit matter tua Romana Ecclesia,
What ample dignity the Church of Rome has bestowed upon thee, and that thou
have received from her hand, maiora beneficia, the greatest benefits that might
be. Clauses which properly offended the Princes: as if the Pope should have
said, That the Emperor held the Empire by homage of him, and that the Empire
were his fee. And so much the more, says Radeuicus, did they hold themselves
to the strict interpretation of his words, because they knew that the Romans
rashly affirmed, That the Empire of the city, and the realm of Italy, had
not been possessed till then by our Kings, but of the donation of Popes. Which
they were not content says he, that there was written over a certain picture
of the Emperor Lotharius, which was set up at the Palace of Lateran: Rex venit
ante fores iurans prius vrbis honores,
Post homo fit Papae, sumit quo dante Coronam.
The King before his gates does come, which swears first to the town,
Whom both the Pope his servant makes, and after, him does crown.
That after he had taken his oath he was made the Popes servant, and received
the Crown in gift of him. When Frederick was told of this picture, being then
about Rome, he complained thereof to Adrian, who promised him to cause both the
writing and picture to be taken away, least so vain a thing should give
matter of strife and discord between two the greatest persons in the world.
And indeed that such was the meaning of Adrian appears by his own letters to
Arnulph Archbishop of Mence, Frederick of Cologne, and Hillin of Treuers, in
these words: Auent. l. 6.
The Roman Empire was translated from the Greeks to the Germans, so as that
their King was not called Emperor till after he was crowned by the Pope.
Before the consecration he is King, after he is Emperor. Whence has he then
the Empire but from us? From the election of his Princes he has Thus you see
the enterprise Adrian; it remains for us to show what Frederick does
thereupon, without forgetting by the way, that this is that Adrian, who writing
to Henry King of England, Adrian. Epist. ad Regem Angliae Henr. apud Matthew.
Westmonaster.
was not ashamed to say, That Ireland, and all islands on which Christ the
Sun of righteousness has shone, by right appertain to Saint Peter, and to
the Church of Rome: Therefore that he should honorably receive him thither,
without prejudice of the said rights, and namely pay him a penie pention by the
year for every household.

OPPOSITION.
Krantz. l. 6. c. 35
So soon as Frederick had seen that picture of Lotharius doing homage, he
suddenly turned away his sight, and fretted at it without speaking a word; for
there was Innocent Therefore all the Princes of the Empire which assisted him,
were greatly offended hereat; and as some of them complained of so insolent a
Legation, one of the Popes Legates, Quasi gladium igni addens, as it were adding
the sword to fire, replied, for to take away all ambiguitie, Of whom then does
the Emperor hold the Empire, if not of my Lord the Pope? At which words Otho
Count Palatine set his hand to his sword, and would have slain him, had not
the Emperor withheld him, who also without any other answer sent away the
Legates in safety to Rome, by the nearest way, for fear least they should go
up Frederick writes to all the States of the Empire, complaining of this
insolency; and sent them a copy of the letters, observing unto them the
clauses abouesaid, Flowing, says he, from the Mammon of Iniquity, that
puffs him up with a heap of pride, of hautinesse, of arrogancy, and of
execrable loftiness (elatione) of heart: notwithstanding that he held the
Empire by the election of the Princes, and from God alone: That the Apostle S.
Peter himself had instructed the world in these words, Fear God, honor the
King: So that whosoever shall say he holds the Imperial Crown by the
benefit of the Pope, is contrary to divine institution, to the doctrine of S.
Peter, and convicted of lying. To this he added moreover, That he was resolute,
as he had begun, to warrant the liberty of the to wit, from the Pope, as from
a Pharaoh, exhorting them to lend him their helping hands. And it is not to be
forgotten, that he found about the Legates many blankes signed and sealed, to be
filled at their discretion, for to sow their venime of iniquity through the
Churches of Germany, to despoyle the Altars, carry away the vessels of the
house of God, cruces excoriare, to slay or fleece the crosses, that is to say,
to pluck off the gold and silver that covered them, which was the cause that
he made them take the nearest way, that he might c^^ off such practices. The
Legates being come to the Pope, who besides was in contention Frederick had
misconstrued the good meaning of his letters, and namely these words, Insigne
beneficium tibi contulimus, Radeuicus l. 1. c. 15. and 16.
We have given thee this notable benefit of the Crown: And much harder were
the words in his letters. He requested them to pacify his mind, and to induce
him to make such satisfaction of the speeches to his Legates, as that all men
might be edified thereby: So doing they should do a good service to Saint
Peter. But the Bishops and Prelates of Germany being upon this Legation
assembled together, do answer him, That all the Commonwealth of the Empire was
moved at the clauses contained in his letters: that the ears of the Emperor
could not patiently hear them, nor of the Radeuicus l. 1. c. 16.
That in consequence of his letters they had admonished the Emperor, From
whom, thanks be to God, say they, we have received such an answer as became a
Catholic Prince. Note here his words as follows: There are two things, says
he, whereby our Empire ought to be governed, the holy laws of Emperors, and
the good custom of our Fathers and predecessors. These bounds of the Church we
neither will nor can transgress, neither admit any thing that departs from
them. We willingly yield to the Pope his due reverence, but we hold the free
Crown of our Empire only from God and his divine bounty. The first voice of
election we acknowledge is from the Archbishop of Mentz, and ex abundanti est a
malo, is superfluous, and from that wicked one, etc. We have not, neither will
we by Edict stop the entrance and passage of Italy from them that go to Rome,
be it for voyage, or other reasonable causes, having the testimony of their
Bishops and Prelates; but we have an intention to remedy the abuses wherewith
all the Churches of our realm are grieved, and almost all cloisterall
disciplines dead and buried. In time past God exalted the Church by the Empire,
now the Church (not by God, as we believe) ruinateth the Empire. They began by
a picture, from that they came to writing, and now writing endeavors to pass
into authority: We will not endure it, we will not suffer it, In these terms
represented they to Adrian the resolution of Frederick, concluding with a
supplication, That he would mitigat the former writings by other more mild, for
to appease the magnanimity of the Emperor. And in the mean time the Emperor
sent into Italy Otho of Witelsbach Palatine, and Renold Earl of Assell, his
Chauncellor, great personages, for to keep all men in obedience, Sigon. de
regno Jtal. l. 12.
and to receive the oath of the Lords, Bishops, and Comminalties; the form
whereof was this, I promise that from henceforth I will be faithful to
Frederick the Emperor of the Romans, my Lord, Radeuicus l. 1. c. 18.19.
I will execute all his commandments that he shall command me by himself,
or by letter, or his ambassador, to do justice, etc. So that Adrian seeing
the commission of these forerunners of the Emperor prosperously to go
forward, and perceiving him about to pass into Italy with an army, he sent
unto him two Legates, Henry and Iacinth, Cardinals, with letters; wherein he
corrects his plea: Which Legates (says the Author) reverently with an humble
countenance, Radeuicus de gestis Frederic. l 1. c. 11.
and a modest voice, began their Legation in these words: Praesul Sanctae
Romanae Ecclesiae, the Bishop of the holy Church of Rome, and most devout
Father of your Excellency in Christ, saluteth you, as his most dear and
special son of Saint Peter: Our venerable brethren, vrbis and orbis, of the
city of Rome and of the world. How different is this style from that we read
before in his letters to the Archbishops of Mentz, Cologne, and Treuers. Then
they presented their letters which Frederick gave to Otho Bishop of Frisingen
to interpret, the tenor whereof we may read in Radeuicus, full of submission,
satisfaction, and reverence. The particular clauses are: By occasion of the
word Beneficium thy heart (as I am informed) has been moved, which truly
ought not to move the heart of an inferior, nor yet of so great a man: For
although the word Beneficium be taken by some in another signification, yet it
should then have been taken as we meant it, and in the sense it has from his
original; for it is composed of bonum and factum, and beneficium, non feudum,
not a fee, but bonum factum, a good action, in which sense it is found in all
the body of holy Scripture, where it is read, That we are governed and
nourished, ex beneficio Dei, by the benefits of God, non tanquam ex feudo, not
as by a fee, but by his blessing. And so your magnificence knows, that we
have so honorably set the sign of Imperial dignity on your head, that all
men may judge it to be, vt bonum factum, as a good deed, or a good action. And
thus corrected he not only his former letters, but also the inscription of the
picture of Innocent the second, Post homo fit Papae, He was made the Popes
vassal. He proceeds: Some have also turned these words to another sense,
Contulimus tibi insigne Imperialis Coronae, We have given thee the sign of
Imperial dignity ( he had said more harshly, plenitudinem that is to say, the
whole dignity) but without cause, and of set purpose, because they love not
the peace of the Kingdom and of the Church; for by this word contulimus, we
understand nothing but imposuimus, we have set it upon thy head. Radeuicus l.
1. c. 13.
And thereby he renounced also the rest of the verse of Innocent, Sumit quo
dante Coronam, That the Emperor received the Crown in gift from the Pope. And
by this mild interpretation of Grammar Frederick was appeased, who moreover
declared unto the Legates, and gave them in writing certain articles, in
default of which a seed of discord would continue betwixt them; to which they
promised the Pope should satisfy, being in no manner willing to derogat from
his royal dignity. So for this time he yielded them peace. And note here with
Baron. an. 1158. art. 6.
Adrian ( says Baronius) did it in wisdom, for to give place to wrath,
interpreting also this word beneficium for to avoid discord, and not in good
earnest; An. 1158.
for these things could not long subsist. This was in the year 1158. And
nevertheless Frederick passed the Alps for to appease the rebellions of
Lombardie, and to refresh his army, not long after he led it into the Popes
lands, whereby arises again a new quarrel. It was an ancient custom, says
Otho Bishop of Frisingen, Otho Frisingens. l. 2. c. 13.
since the time that the Roman Empire was derived to the Frenchmen, until this
present, that so often as the Kings had a purpose to enter into Italy, they
sent some of their servants before, being men of understanding, who visiting
every city and town, demanded Fodrum: whence it came to pass, that at the
Princes coming the cities, towns, and castles, which either altogether
refused to pay the same, or did not wholly pay it, were oftentimes rased even
with the ground, for an example to posterity. Another justice also follows
from ancient custom, that the Prince entering into Italy, all dignities and
magistracies ceased, and all matters were ordered ad ipsius nutum, according to
the laws and judgment of the Lawyers. Radeuicus l. 2. c. 15.
When Frederick therefore by his officers thought to use these rights, namely
in Fodro colligendo, Adrian began, through the instigation of some, to be
grievously offended, saying, That he had received evil for good, and that the
Emperor At this, Frederic was again greatly moved, and the rather, for that a
little before, he had refused, at his request, to confirm Wydo son of the
Earl of Blandrara, in the place of Anselme Archbishop of Rauenna, being by the
people and Clergy chosen thereunto, under pretense that he was subdeacon of
the Church of Rome, who could not be translated, to any other Church without
his command; Adrian in many other things, and of greater importance, dispensed
withal as it pleased him: wherefore nevertheless resolved to try him in
this, yet once more, by sending the Bishop of Verde with very honorable
letters, is again refused. He therefore then commands his Secretary, That
thenceforth in the Letters that he wrote to the Pope, Radeuicus l. 2. cap. 18.
Nomen suum praeferrens Romani Episcopi subsecundet, he should set his name
first and the Popes afterward, and should speak to him only in the singular
number. Adding that either the Pope ought to write unto him after the custom
of his Predecessors, or else not think it strange, if he followed in his
letters the ancient manner of Princes. Adrian was not pleased at this, and
therefore admonished him, that this was not to give due reverence to S. Peter,
redemaunding of him an account of his Royalties and other rights abouesayd.
Frederic answered, that he had followed the ancient custom, and agreeable to
reason, that Bishops should render unto Caesar the things belonging unto
Caesar: Sigon. de regno Jtal. l. 12. Radeuicus l. 2. cap. 18.
For his Cardinals, he had shut the gates of Cities against them, because they
came, non ad praedicandum, sed ad praedandum, not to preach, but to make
spoil. And to increase this mischief, in the mean time the Letters of Adrian
are intercepted, written to them of Milan, and some other Cities, whereby he
stirred them up to rebellion against Frederic: Radeuicus l. 2. cap. 30.
And thereupon also Frederic sent his Ambassadors to Rome to the Senate and
people. Then Adrian growing very impatient, sent four Cardinals to Frederic
at Bononia, who post lene principium, after a gentle Fodrum of the Demaines of
the Church, except in the time when he comes to receive the Crown: That the
Bishops of Italy should give him oath of fidelity, but not of homage: That
his Ambassadors should not be lodged in the Palaces of Bishops: That he should
restore the possessions of the Church of Rome, and the tributes of Ferrara, of
Massa, Figaruola, of all the Land of the Countess Mathilda, and from
Aquapendente to Rome, of the Duchy of Spoletum, and of the Islands of Sardinia
and Corsica. And when the Emperor constantly offered to do them justice in
these things, if they would do him justice in other matters; which the Pope
refusing to satisfy, Concordiae verbum, says Radeuicus, diu desideratum,
peccatis nostris exigentibus, euacuatum est, The word of concord so long
desired, for our sins was made void. Notwithstanding Frederic to omit no
duty of his side, answers by letters the Articles of Adrian in these words:
I Quid tibi and Regi, What have thou to do with the King? Let him not think
it strange, if consequently the Emperor say unto them, Quid tibi and
possessioni, What need have thou of the possession? I am content, that my
Ambassadors be not received into the Palaces of Bishops, provided that the
said Palaces stand on their own ground, and not on ours: Otherwise, if they
stand on our ground, seeing every building solo cedat pertayneth to the ground
whereon it stands, they be our Palaces. It is therefore an injury, to forbid
our Ambassadors from the Royal Palaces. Whereas he says, the Emperor is not
to send Ambassadors to Rome, seeing all the Maiestrates there, are of S.
Peter, with all the Royalties: This thing I confess is great At length it was
propounded that sixth Cardinals on the Popes side, and six Bishops on the
Emperors side should be chosen arbitrators in the matter, Radeuicus l. 2. cap.
31.
to decide the same: But (says he) of the Romans part this Council is said to
be void, alleging that the Pope was not subject to the judgment of any. And
when Frederic, upon this refusal was earnest by his Ambassadors, that he
would refer himself to the judgment of a general Council, he answered, I
ought to call, not to be called; I am to judge, not to be judged; an answer
which was very much Nauclerus, Nauclerus Gener. 30 vol. 2.
the recipocrall Epistles of Adrian and Frederic: That of Adrian began thus:
The Law of God, as it promises long life to them that honor their Parents, so
it pronounces sentence of death, against such as curse them. And the voice of
truth teaches us, that whosoever exalts himself shall be humbled. And
thereupon he reproves him, that he had set his name, first, against the
Loyalty sworn to S. Peter; That he required homage of Bishops, who are Gods,
and all sons of the most high, and presumed to put their sacred hands, within
his profane hands, imputing unto him arrogancy and infidelity. To this
Frederic answered, using this salutation: Adriano Ecclesiae Catholicae
Pontifici, omnibus illis adhaerere, quae And whereas Adrian had said, The
divine Law pronounces sentence of death etc. Frederic likewise begins, The
Law of justice renders unto every man, that which belongs unto him etc.
Then he proceeds, I pray you, had Siluester in Constantines time any
Royalties? But by the grant of his piety, liberty and peace is restored to
the Church and whatsoever your Popedom has of Royalty, that is from the
bounty of Princes etc. Turn over the Annals, and you shall find it to be so.
He reproved him of infidelity, in that he had taken oath and received the
homage of Bishops, whom he called Gods, and sons of the most Whereunto
Frederic answers, Why may we not exact homage and royal oaths, from them
which of God by adoption hold our Royalties, seeing that he which is our
Author and your, receiving nothing from any earthly King, but bestowing all
good things to all men, did yet pay tribute to Caesar for himself, and for
Peter, giving you example to do the like, and he teaches you so, saying,
Learn of me, for I am meek and humble of heart. Lastly, having repeated
again the foresaid clauses, he concludes: For we cannot answer reports, Sigon
de regno Jtal. l. 12.
when we see the detestable beast of pride, crept to the seat of S. Peter. And
these two Epistles are written by Nauclerus, taken out of the Library of
Hirsauge. And upon this died Adrian at Anania, in September 1159: of Tire
says, he was taken with the Squinancie: Joha^nes Stella in Pontificib.
Willihelm. Tyr. l. 18. cap. 26. Abbas Vrsperg. an. 1156.
But the Abot of Vrsperg says, that having newly excommunicated the Emperor
Frederic, he went walking to a fountain, where taking some water, a fly got
into his mouth and strangled him, the Physicians being not able to help him.
Baronius is herewith offended; yet is he the Author he most uses against the
Emperors, in favor of the Popes.

Now to this is to be referred the conference of John of Sarisburie Bishop of
Chartres, with Pope Adrian, which he himself has left us in writing: Johannes
Sarisburiensis in Policro. l. 6. c. 24.
I remember, says he, I went into Apulia to visit Pope Adrian the fourth, who
admitted me into great familiarity; and I remained with him at Beneuent about
three months. When therefore And surely he sufficiently also declared thereby
his own opinion, when he said as I But Adrian puts him upon the rack: And
thou, says he, what is thine opinion? I am in a strait every way (said I) for
I fear I shall incur the blame of lying and flattery, if I alone do
contradict the people, and if otherwise I fear to be accused of high treason,
and be thought to deserve the gibbet, for opening my mouth against heaven: Yet
seeing that Guido Clemens Priest, Cardinal of S. Potenciana, witnesteth unto
the people, I presume not in any sort to contradict him; for he says, that in
the Church of Rome there is a certain root duplicitatis of doubleness, which
is contrary to the simplicity of a Dove, which is so much commended to
Christians: A nourishing also of all covetousness, which is the head and root
of all evils. And this he publicly protested, not in a corner, but to the
Cardinals his brethren sitting in Consistory, before Eugenius, And here he
names unto him Bernard of Redon, Cardinal Deacon, and the Bishop of Prenest;
without doubt, that he might prepare a way to that which he had to say. Because
therefore that you instantly urge and command me, and that it is not lawful
to lie unto the holy Ghost, I confess what you command must be done, and yet
all are not to imitate you in all works; for he which dissenteth from the true
doctrine is either an heretic or a schismatike: but through Gods mercy there
be some which imitate not the works of all of us, etc. But I fear least in
continuing to enquire of me what you will, you hear of an imprudent friend
that which you would not. What is this For he had said a little before, That
God took away godly men from Rome, because being corrupt, it was found with
God unworthy of such men. But thou will preserve the City to the Church by
thy gifts; did Siluester obtain it by gifts? In inuio Pater es, non in via,
Father thou art out of the way, and not in the way: It is to be preserved by
the same gifts whereby it says he, laugheth at it, and congratulateth my
liberty. But what says the Pope to this? surely he tells him that fable of
Aesop, of the members of one that sometime mutined against the stomach, for it
received all and did nothing; and when they had determined to send no more any
thing into it, after some few days the whole body pined away: thereupon
concluding, that even so would it be with all Christendom, if from all parts
they sent not riches to Obiurgatorium Cleri, Idem l. 7. c. 17.18.19.
wherein he grievously reprehended the whole Clergy; and likewise in many
places of his Polycraticon more stoutly: and in another place says, One hoping
in the multitude of his riches (enters into the Church) Simon leading him by
the hand ( that is to say Magus) and finds not there any to say unto him, Thy
money perish with thee. Another fears to come near S. Peter with gifts, and
nevertheless privily, as Jdem l. 8. c. 17.
alluding to the words of the Apostle, Lex non posita est iusto, They are free
from justice, and are led with that spirit, that they have no need to be under
the law, etc. Openly mocking them, You would wonder that Simon were come again
to deceive the credulous and simple. In another place, Who would believe that
the Fathers of the Church, the Prouincias concutiant vt excutiant, By their
concussions ruinat Provinces, empty other men's purses to fill their own,
preach poverty in words, and by crimes hunt after riches; condemn the
traffic of spiritual goods, but to the end men may contract with none but
with them, having no other end, but to be feared of all, and loved of none:
preaching peace, that they may raise contentions, seeming humble to dissemble
their own pride, beating down other men's covetousness to feed their own
avarice, inioyning liberality, and persist themselves in niggardnesse: and to
knit up all in a word, putting their portion with all sorts of wicked people,
and applying themselves to wickedness, in solidum, wholly, that they may seem
a Council of vanity, the wicked Synagogue Ecclesia malignantium, the Church
of the envious and evil doers, in whose hands are iniquities, and their right
hand filled with gifts. Of the head of this Synagogue what may then be thought?
We must not here forget the matters of the East, that Pope Adrian for to
oblige unto him the Templers, having exempted them from the jurisdiction of the
Patriarch, which the Author calls Perniciosam libertatem, a pernicious
liberty, the Patriarch, with his principal Bishops, being near an hundred
years old, is constrained to come to Rome to make his complaints unto him;
whom the Pope deluded long with many fained delays, till at length consumed
with grief and great charges he is forced to give over his cause. William the
Archbishop of Tire says plainly, Guiliel. Tyrius l. 18. c. 6.7.8.
The Templers Moreover, Of so great a troop of Cardinals there were scarcely
found two or three, who following Christ would favor his minister the
Patriarch in his cause, all the other hunting after rewards, have followed the
ways of Balaam, as sons of Bosor. Soon after died the poor Patriarch, to
whom succeeded Almaricus, who received the Pall from Rome, but by means of
great bounty and liberality. Thus spoke they of the corruption of Rome.

48. PROGRESSION.
Of the factions in the Popedom, and the diverse molestations procured by
Rowland, called afterward Alexander the third. Of the strange pride and
insolency of the said Alexander, and how he insulted over the Emperor
Frederick doing him all the honor he could. How this Alexander was the first
Pope that took upon him the canonizing of Saints.

ADrian was no sooner dead but this fire began to kindle more and more. The
Cardinals being divided fell to sedition, and the one part of them chose
Octauian Victor the fourth, the other Rowland Cardinal of S. Mark, whom they
named Alexander the third. This Rowland was one of the two Legates whom Adrian
had sent to Frederick into Germany with his sharp and thundering letters,
which caused their welcome to be the worse, and thereby nourished, as it
seemed, some inward hatred in him toward Frederick. These two therefore used
their best endeavors to justify and fortify their own causes, from whence
arose those two famous factions in Italy, of the Guelfes and Gibellines.
Rowland alleged for himself, That he was chosen by the voices of twenty three
Cardinals: Octauian albeit had he but five, was the first that wore the scarlet
Robe, and sat in S. Peter's chair, with the consent and approbation Rowland not
daring to contend with Octauian, in the City, being a Citizen of Rome,
retired himself to Tarracina, and there was the first that was consecrated,
and then condemned all those to the pit of hell that should consecrat Octauian:
Radeuicus l. 2. ca. 43. and seq.
Nevertheless he within few days following was consecrated by his own
company, and requited him with the like execrations; But with the help of
Otho County Palatine he invaded Campania, and the Patrimony of S. Peter: Both
in the mean time abiding without Rome, because the Senate of Rome held
authority in the City, a thing not compatible with the Papacy. So Alexander
the third held his residence at Anaigne, Victor the fourth at Sienna; both the
one and the other had need of the Emperors Alexander who had offended him, had
the less hope to be supported by him: This is that which we have understood by
their Letters, related by Radeuicus to the Patriarchs, Archbishops, and
Bishops etc. of which Letters those of Alexander are more sharp, Radeuicus l.
2. cap. 51.52.53.54.55.
wherein speaking of Victor, these words are to be noted: He prefiguring the
time of Antichrist, is exalted so high above himself, that he sits in the
Temple of God, as if he were God, and many have beheld with their own eyes the
abomination of desolation in the holy place, not without great effusion of
tears. And it is not to be doubted but that Victor says the like of
Alexander, so that the adverse part of either, judges the other Antichrist, by
which name they excommunicat one another with burning lights, and condemn the
contrary part of each other to the pit of hell, with the Devil their Author.
These are their very words. Frederic gave them to understand that he would not
meddle in this controversy, either with the one or with the other, thinking it
fitter to be referred to the judgment and censure of the Church. Therefore
according to the example of the ancient Emperors he assembled a Council at
Pauia by his authority in the year 1160. An. 1160.
And to summon them both he sent two reverent and prudent men Daniel Bishop of
Prague, and Herman Bishop of Verde: whereby it should appear, he would not do
any prejudice either to the one, or to the other; and thither also inuiteth the
Archbishops, Bishops, and Priests, not only of the Empire, but of France,
England, Radeuicus l. 2. cap. 55.56.
Hungary, Denmark, with protestation of all security and safe conduct for
their persons, and sinceere justice in the conduct of these affairs; Having
truly understood (says he) of the Decrees of the Popes, and Statutes of the
Church, That a Schism arising in the Church of Rome through the dissension of
two Popes, it is our duty to call both parties, and according to equity and
justice to decide the controversy. The day therefore being come, he ordained
fasting and public prayers, for the good success of this Council: then
declared he first unto them, That albeit the convocation of Councels rightly
appertayned unto him, For so (says he) have Constantine, and Theodosius, and
also Justinian, besides those of later time, Charles the great and Otho
Emperors done; Nevertheless the authority of defining and deciding this
great Radeuicus l. 2. cap. 64.65.
For since it pleased God to ordain them Priests, in those things that
belonged unto God, It is not (says he) our parts to judge of you, to whom God
has given power to judge of us, Only we exhort you (says he) that you so
carry your selves in this business, as you will answer the matter at the
judgment seat of God. This done he retired himself from the Council leaving
the examination thereof to the Church and Ecclesiastical persons, that is to
say, to fifty Archbishops and Bishops, and Abbots without number, besides
Ambassadors from diverse Provinces, who promised So the Bishops and all the
Clergy continued in the canuasing of this cause the space of seven days: at
length the lot fell to Octanian called Victor the fourth; the Council or
rather the Court giving their sentence for him, and condemned Roxland, called
Alexander the third, who being lawfully summoned, proudly refused to appear.
Blondus and Sigonius say, his reason was, That he that ought to judge all men,
ought not to be judged of any man. But Radeuicus in his narration seriously
admonishes the Reader, that in the inquisition of the verity of this act, a
man respect not his words, but the writings that came to his own hands, which
are inserted into this work, and will not seem tedious to the Reader.

Peter of Rome to Frederick. Jdem l. 2. c. 66.
wherein after they had bewailed the corruption of Rome as the Prophets before
deplored the state of Jerusalem, in these words; For the sins of the
Prophets, and the iniquity of the Priests, they have wandered like blindmen in
the streets, for the face of the Lord was turned from them; They declare that
in the time of Adrian one Boson, whom they call the first borne of Satan,
possessed the sorts and holds of S. Peter, by corrupting the guard, who were
inforst by oath to give their faith unto him: But Rowland seeing the lawful
election to fall upon Octauian, without any contradiction ascended the same
fort, and there lurked with his associats in a hollow vault of Neroes, I say
the same vault whereinto the Roman Nero fled Radeuic. l. 2. c.
66.67.68.69.70.71.72.73.74.75.76.
And here let the Reader note a piece of strange divinity, that from a mantle
cast upon the shoulders of a man, whether by right or by wrong, by freewill or
by force, an argument should be drawn of a lawful or unlawful election,
especially his that is accounted the chief Bishop of the Christian Church.
They come afterward to the act of the Council, which being plainly and simply
propounded by the Author, by all circumstances justifies the election of
Victor, and weakeneth and disableth that of Alexander; But yet it is
continually a question, An immantatus Rolandus nec ne? which is perpetually
denied by all. Then was made a catalogue of all those Victor, and Rowland
himself said to his partakers, De me non facietis ridiculum, ^bi est Papa, ite
ad eum and obedite, Make not me your laughing-stocke, the Pope is there, go to
him, and obey him. The Council therefore being led by these and the like
proofs pronounced sentence, which was likewise ratified by the Emperor being
presented unto him. The Presidents of the Council writ into diverse parts of
the world, that for these causes aforesaid they had chosen Victor and abandoned
Rowland, whom they had cursed with book and candle to the Devil himself,
because in the life of Adrian he would have made a confederacy, that none but
of the number of the confederats should be chosen Pope; and these Synodall
letters were signed by P^regrinus Patriarch of Aquileia, with his suffragans,
Arnaldus Artenicus of Bre^e, Hellinus of Treuers, Renaldus of Collen, Wickman
of Magdeburge for Germany, with their followers; For France the Archbishops of
Bizanson, Arles, Lion, Vienna, with their suffragans; The Ambassadors of the
Kings of England, Hungary, Denmark, grounding themselves upon the commands
and letters of their Lords, and an infinite number of Bishops, Abbots, and
Prelates of Italy and Lords of the Empire, as well within as without Italy, did
likewise subscribe thereunto: And the Ambassadors that were sent from the
Council to work a quiet approbation of what was done in that Council, was
the Bishop of Collen into France, of Verdune into Spain, of Prague into
Hungary. Which to this end be it spoken, that it might plainly appear how
justly Frederick carried himself in that Council, against the practices that
were afterward made in diverse parts by Alexander. The Abbot of Vrsperge made a
short abridgement of all this business: There is law enough, says he, that
the election of Rowland being disproued, Octauian should be judged the right
and lawful Bishop of Rome, etc. And Rome continued in confusion through
conspiracies, that that might be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet,
They that rise up against me shall be confounded; and again, My servant shall
be replenished with joy, etc. Alexander had no sooner understood these things,
but he was the more eagre and forward to excommunicat Victor and Frederick; but
first he sent to Milan the Cardinal of Anaigne, who excommunicated all those
cities that favored Frederick, and joined in a An. 1162.
being the bolder because Lewis the younger, and Henry the second, King of
England, were yet wavering, and doubtfully affected the one toward the other,
and that those of the Order of the Cistertienses, who then bare great sway in
France, would be ready to take his part: He arrived at Montpellier about
Easter, where he was received in the Kings name by Theobald Abbot of S.
German, near Paris; from whence departing within some few days, he held a
Council at Claramont in Auergne, where he cursed and excommunicated Victor and
Frederick, and all that took their part. Frederick in the mean Lewis to meet
him near Ararim, to confer touching the peace of the Church: But the
mischief was, that Frederick arriving about the evening at the day appointed,
Lewis was already departed: whereupon these Princes grew afterward so jealous
and suspicious of each other, Helmold. Histor. Solauorum l. 1. c. 91.
as they never afterward agreed upon any point. Whereby it came to pass, that
Frederick having in vain attempted to renew this parley between them, few
days following Alexander the third was entertained at Tossack upon Loyre by
the Kings of France and England: An. 1163.
from whence he went to Tours in the year 1163, and there celebrated a Synod
to the same end; the rest was only to make a show of things, save only an Act
against the Waldenses, whereof we shall speak in An. 1164.
And at the end of the year 1164 Victor happening to dye, the Cardinals
presently created in his place Guido of Cremona, Cardinal of S. Caliste, who
was called Paschal the third, An. 1165. Anent. l. 6.
approved afterward in the year 1165 by a Council held at Wiertsborge.
Auentinus notes a memorable Decre which was then made, That from thenceforth
not any Pope should be created but after the ancient manner, with the consent
of the Emperor, nor should be otherwise styled but Nuntius duntaxat Christi,
The messenger only of Christ, and the successor of S. Peter, and to be no more
a rival of the Imperial power: In observation whereof all took their oaths
not otherwise ever to admit of any, though the Emperor should dye: and
whosoever should refuse to do it, to be deprived of their offices. Alexander
making benefit Frederick being gone into Germany, was resolved to pass into
Italy, and so much the rather, because he understood the cities began to be
weary of the government of the Germans, especially the Romans being bewitched
by the persuasions of the Cardinal John his Legate, desired his return.
Whereupon his affairs began to strengthen, albeit Frederick to intercept his
proceedings, sent Renaldus Archbishop of Collen, and Christianus of Mence, into
Italy, whilst he prepared an army to come himself in person.

Frederick arriving in Lombardie, all the cities thereof mutually condescended
to complain of the injuries offered unto them by the Almane Governors, and
made humble petition to be released from their servitude and oppression. But he
easily smelling the subtlety of Alexander, resolved to march with his army
directly unto him, and in the mean time deferred his answer. These on the
other side, who gained nothing by attending the event, concluded a league for
the common liberty, in such sort that few cities there were that remained
under his obedience. Frederick in the mean time hasted with his army toward
Rome, to establish Paschal in the throne; so that Alexander through the help
and aid of the King of Sicilies galleys was constrained for his safety to fly
to Gaieta. But the heat of the Frederick was constrained to leave Paschal with
a strong garrison in Rome, and retired himself into Lombardie; where he
understood at his return, that the league of the cities were increased both in
number, and strengthened with new oaths, yet adding this clause for fashion
sake, With exception of his service: in so much that the Venetians themselves,
flourishing in Italy both in reputation and wealth, were willing to join with
them, and all at once gave courage to the Milanois to revolt. All this happened
through that tickling desire of liberty, which the cities had tasted, by the
absence or far distance of the Emperor, being all reduced into the form of
Commonwealthes. Frederick therefore seeing his army greatly An. 1168.
and thereby gave by his absence a fit occasion to Alexander for his advantage,
to whom in the mean time Emanuel Emperor of Greece offered to unite the
Greek Church to the Latin, if he would yield into his hands the Empire of
the West; but it was far from his meaning to establish the one or the other,
but rather to destroy them both. In the mean time died Paschal, to whom
succeeded John a Hungarian, called Calixtus the third, whom the Romans both
chose, and undertook the protection of him against Alexander. Now whilst
these things thus happened, and Frederick being returned about his affairs
into Germany, Alexander upon this change propounded to the Romans, That if he
might be received into the city, he would be contented Fredericks favorers.
An. 1175.
But in the year 1175 Frederick being returned into Lombardie, at his first
arrival set upon Alexander, where in the heat of the siege, Henry Duke of
Saxony faining himself to be touched with scruple of conscience, for the
Popes Excommunications, departed shamefully from him, and carried away with him
the greatest part of the Germans, for which crime he was afterward accused in
Germany. The confederats by this diminution of their power gathered courage,
and gave him battle at Lignane, where after long and doubtful fight they got
the victory: and of this unhappy chance ensued other

Then Frederick sent an embassage to Alexander being at Anaigne, the chief
whereof was Christianus Archbishop of Mence, by whom a perpetual peace was
concluded between them, and with William king of Sicilia for the space of
fifteen years, and with the cities of Lombardie for six years, upon condition
that he should acknowledge Alexander the Catholic Pope, and Calixtus the
third to live a contented life in an Abbie, and the Cardinals created by him to
return to their pristinat state: The Acts of whose agreement and treaty, are
extant in the writers of these times. An. 1177. Naucler. 2. vol. Generat. 40.
Jacob. Bergom. in supplem. Chronic. ad ann. 1160. Petrus Justinian. l. 2. rerum
Venetarum Papirius Masso l. 5. de Episcopis vrbis. Asorius Iesuita in Jastitut.
moral. part 2 l. 5. c. 43. Hieronim. Bardus in victoria nouali. Sabel. l. 7.
Decad 1 de rebus venetis. Chronic. Codex Cardinal. Bessarionis. Asseruatus in
Bibliotheca Veneta Pluteo 17. citatus ab Hieron. Bard. in Victoria nauali p.
140. and 141. apud Baron. an. 1176. art. 2. and 5. Baron. an. 1177. art. 86.
But because this peace would not seem firm enough, unless Sigonius, they
drawing near to the Palace of S. Mark, Frederick came to meet Alexander, and
taking him upon the right hand, leads him in, and after divine service
followed him out, where Alexander mounting his palfrey, the Emperor holding
his stirrup, did him all the honor and reverence he could: But for shame he
durst not tell the rest; For the Emperor being prostrat before him, Alexander
putting his foot upon his neeke, said, It is written, Thou shall walk upon the
Aspe, and the Basilick, and shall tread upon the Lion and the Dragon. Frederic
answered, Not to thee, but to Peter, whose successors I obey. The Pope replied,
pressing Et mihi and Petro, Both to me and Peter. This pride, being in the
sight of all the people, nevertheless was patiently endured by Frederick,
partly fearing worser things, through the great privileges that Alexander had
bestowed upon this Commonwealth, namely, The marying of the Sea every year
with a ring, etc. and partly at the instance of his son Henry, who
exceedingly desired the kingdom of Italy: Some add, That his son Otho
being taken by the Venetian galleys, was set at liberty upon this condition.
Baronius in the mean time endeavors to make this history doubtful,
although he relates it at large by his own confession, out of that famous
Chronicle that is kept in the Library at Venice; and his reason is (let the
Reader judge whether it be otherwise) that Gregory the seventh, in receiving
Henry the fourth to do penance, and we shall easily give credit hereunto. But
it is most certain, and the Venetian history affirms it, and the Jesuits
themselves do triumph therein; so far are they, with Baronius, from blushing
at it. Now the Romans in regard of this submission, by their ambassadors inuit
him to Rome, which he accepted, upon condition that the Senators chosen by them
should take upon them an oath of fidelity to the Church of Rome, before they
entered into that office. An. 1178. An. 1180.
And so in the year 1178 he came into the city, and That if the Cardinals
could not agree in the election of the Pope, the Pope might be chosen by two
of the parts, and whosoever being chosen by the third part should carry
himself as Pope, should be deprived of the Communion; and so he declares the
ordinances made by Victor the fourth, Paschal and Calixtus the third (arch
heretics) to be of no force. And judge the Reader into what scruple of
conscience he brought; by these vain and idle ordinances, the best and
greatest part of Europe. But he died not long after, having more valiantly
overcome, Sigon. de regno Ital. l. 14.
than moderatly handled his enmity with Frederick, as Sigonius says; seeming
no doubt under these mild words to conceal that shameful and horrible act
which he was not willing to express.

Neither were this fit to be omitted, being both an argument, and an
augmentation of the Papal authority, That this Alexander was the author of
that law, whereby the canonizing of Saints should be only in the power of the
Bishop of Rome; Extra de reliquijs sanctorum venerat. c. 1.
It is not lawful (says he) that any should be worshipped for a Saint without
license from the Pope; By which law he challenged to himself the authority of
the ancient Bishops of the Panims, who placed whom they pleased in the number
of the gods; and to give the greater luster, he began with S. Bernard, who was
famous for his sanctity, then followed Thomas of Canterbury, whom he
pronounced Casorius Monach. in Dialog. l. 8. c. 69.
Another law he also made that none should wear the Archbishops pall unless
he had taken an oath of fidelity to the Pope. Farthermore he called to this
Synod all the Churches of the west, but those which either for the distance of
the places, or through other impediment could not appear, were punished by the
purse, which redeemed the fault of their absence, which was (says
Neubrigensis) more dishonestly exacted, than paid. Gulielm. Neubrig. l. 3. c.
2.
We must likewise remember that he was Vicar unto him that says in the
Gospel, I for he granted to Alfonsus the first, Duke of Portugal, the title
and dignity of a King, Baro. An. 1179. art. 16. and 17.
upon condition he should do him homage, and pay him yearly a reuenew of two
marks of gold, which by a letter from Innocent the third to King Sancius
evidently appears, finding himself grieved, that since that time his
successors had neglected the payment thereof, giving him to understand that he
had taken order with his Legate Ramerius to leuy the same by Ecclesiastical
authority.

OPPOSITION.
This is an opposition worthy the noting against the Papal tyrrannie, when so
Auentinus expressly tells us, Auent. l. 6.
that the greater part neutrum Pontificem recipiebant, would receive neither of
the Popes, using that saying of the Apostle, all things are yours, be it Paul,
be it Apollo, be it Peter, one faith, one God, and one Father of us all; and
the words of Christ, there is but one master, and ye are all brethren; And
furthermore he adds that Gerochus Bishop of de Antichristo. This Gerochus was
afterward Bishop of Halberstat, deposed, as Sigonius says, through the treaty
of a peace with Alexander, Sigon. de regno Jtaliae l. 14.
and Vlrich instituted into his place.

In England in the year 1164 Henry the second assembled all the principal of
his Clergy at Clarendon to confirm auitas consuetudenes, An. 1164.
the customs of his ancesters, to the end they should serve as a bar
between the usurping enterprises of the Clergy, and the Kings Justices, and
the customs are comprehended in 16 Chapters, recited by Matthew Paris; the most
important are as follows; Matthew Paris in Henrico. 2.
That the Churches which hold in fee of the King, be not granted in
perpetuity without of the King in Capite, and have their possessions of the
King, should answer to the Justices after the same manner as the Lords and
Barons of the realm. The vacation of a Church happening, the King sending for
the principal persons thereof commands them to make choice of a successor
in his Chapel with his consent, and the Council of the realm, in whose
presence the man chosen shall do homage, and loyalty to as to his liege Lord
of his life, his body, and of his worldly preferment, except his order; and
that before he be consecrated: and to this are sworn, all Archbishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Priors, Earls, Barons, and the Nobility of the realm viua
voce, in the word of truth to observe toward the King, and his successors for
ever. Thomas Becket Archbishop of Canterbury who was the first that had taken
this oath, within few days after, being corrupted by Alexander the third (who
in a Council held at Tours placed him upon his right hand) requested his
absolution, whom Alexander soon discharged both of the oath, and the sin. But
this is to be noted, that the thing that urged him most, was, That they of the
Clergy that were taken in publico Flagitio, in public wickedness, by the
Kings officers, Thomas did here exclaim, that this was to be punished twice
for one and the same thing, that is to say, degraded by the Bishop, and
punished by secular authority. Now good Reader, he that dies for such a
cause, is he a Saint or a Martyr? For what wickedness will not a man justify,
if only degrading may discharge the punishment? Now Thomas, having wrought with all the Bishops of England his suffragans to renounce their allegiance, without
the kings knowledge passed the sea Alexander into France, who from time to time
delaied his answer unto him, fearing to offend the King, his affairs then
hanging but in a wavering and doubtful manner; but as the author says
pensans periculosa tempora, weighing the dangerous times, granted to the
Archbishop of York by a Bull the office of Legate; Insomuch that Thomas
displeased with these delays, writing to the Archbishop of Mence, Epist.
Thomae Cantuariens. ad Archiepisc. Moguntin.
thus complains, Matrem Romam factam esse meritricem, and pro mercede
prostitutam, Our mother Rome is become a harlot, and prostituted to whosoever
will give most. From this we may gather what the other Bishops of England
might say, when Thomas, his pretended Martyr, had spoken in this sort. Now of
this Henry the second, whom Thomas had wilfully made his adversary, Peter of
Gualterus Bishop of Palerme, has left us this worthy testimony. No man
(says he) is more wise and subtle in counsel, in speech more vehement, more
careless in dangers, nor more constant and resolute in adversity etc. having
always in his hands either a bow, a sword, or a iauelin, except sitting in
counsel, or busy at his book; for whenever he had any respite from his
important and weighty affairs, spent his time in private study and reading,
or in arguing with learned men; his daily life is as if it were a Schole of
learning in dissoluing continually difficult questions. None more mild than he
in speech, more temper at in eating, more moderat in drinking, more bountiful
in gifts, more liberal in alms etc. Our King is peaceable, victorious in
war, glorious in peace etc. For the death of this Thomas, who procured his
wrath through so many mischiefs and injuries, I tell you (says he) in the
word of our Lord, and by the faith and order of a Deacon, that in my
conscience, he was no Notwithstanding these Legates made benefit, as the manner
is, of the rebellion of Henry his son, through certain words that he had
uttered in some choler, whereby the authors of his death were emboldened to
attempt the life of the said Thomas, who enforced him to purchase his
absolution with the hurt of his kingdom, abolishing those customs that were
brought in against the liberties of the Church, and approving all appellations
to the sea of Rome, and Matthew Paris discoursing of this History, Math. Paris
in Henr. 2.
gives us to understand by certain circumstances, that it was the pride of
Alexander, or at least his Legates: The King and the Archbishop (says he) being
come to Freteuall to be reconciled, they twice descended their horses, and as
often mounted again, and both these times the King held the raines of the
Bishops bridle. What duty would the Pope have looked for, when so much was
done to his Legate? Again, though the King always protested, that he never
commanded nor willed, nor by any devise sought the death of Thomas,
nevertheless because through some of his own words, not advisedly spoken,
these murderers had taken occasion thereby to kill him, this proud beast
inforst him, asking his absolution, to submit his naked skin to the punishment
of which the King, miserably bewitched by those Romish sorceries, submits
himself unto. The saying of one Gratian the Popes Legate, is worth the noting
in this cause, to the King of England, who had said somewhat unto him in
threatening manner, Sir (says he) threaten us not; we fear no threatenings, for
we belong to that Court that uses to command both Emperors and Kings: And
Baronius has set down this excellent Apothegme, in great letters. Baron. an.
1169. art. 11.
By the pride of the servant we may judge the modesty of the Master.

Doubtless the wisest of this world judge otherwise of the power and
authority of the Pope. Otho Bishop of Frisinghen says, Otho Frisingens. in
prologo. l. 4. Chron.
Two persons are constituted in the to Saint Peter, who then possessed the chair
at Rome, but to Nero, a most impious and But he goes about to defend the Pope
by some poor and weak reasons, but in the end concludes, I confess I know
no other refage but this, that we have known holy men, both of Apostolic
faith and merit, as Syluester, Gregory, Vlric, Boniface, Lampert, Gothard, and
diverse others that have had these things; but for my self to speak my own
opinion, I doubt whether this exalting of the Church in these days, be more
acceptable to God, than the humility of former times. Verily it seems that
state was the better, this the happier. Nevertheless I agree with with the
Church of Rome etc. That is to say, to be rather temporally happy with the
one, than spiritually happy with the Apostles and the holy Fathers; and
shortly after That all scruple, says he, of that controversy, being resolved
by his authority and example, is again secretly signified by that which was
said to S. Peter, Duc in altum, lanch into the deep, and cast your nets to
take fish, Luke 5. yea it is so secret, that for the space of 500 of the first
and best years, none of the ancient Doctors could perceive this mystery.
Jdem. l. 3. Chron. 1.3.
But the same author speaks more openly in another place; After the donation
of Constantine, the Church of Rome affirms that all Realms of the West
belonged to it by the gift of Constantine; this he refuteth himself, In token
whereof it doubted not to exact tribute even to this present of all those
except the two Kingdome^ of the French, that is to say, the Gauls and the
Germans, which he would gladly

But in our France, at the very same time, they that were called Waldenses or
Albienses, earnestly set against the Church of Rome, condemning all the
traditions thereof, rejecting the ceremonies, and declaring it in express
words to be that Babylon in the Apocalypse, the mother of fornications, and the
Pope very Antichrist, the man of sin, foretold by the holy Scriptures. These
people maintained the purity, verity, and simplicity of the Christian
Religion in all the Countries, both on the mountains and valleys of Daulphine,
Prouence, Languedoc, and Guyan, where the corruptions, and papal inventions
could not so easily penetrat: no otherwise than as we see the Tongues,
customs, and habits of Waldo had been as it were hatched up in one day,
exceeds all belief, all reason. Contrariwise, he that would retire himself
from the world seriously to contemplate his own salvation, it is likely he
rather learned it of them, and afterward taught at Lion, where for the renown
of the city, they that were his followers, or affected his doctrine, were
called Waldenses, as they who preached in the city of Peter Bruitzius and
Henry his disciple publicly teaching at Toulouse, were called Tholousians;
and so likewise were they called at the Council of Lateran held under
Alexander the third. Of this antiquity (to the end we need not doubt thereof)
the adversaries themselves avouch the truth; amongst whom Friar Rainerius, who
writ about the year of our Lord 1250, Among all the sects that are (says he)
or ever will be, none can be more pernicious to the Church of God than that of
Lions, An. 1250. Frater Rainerius de Waldensibus.
for three causes, the first, because it has continued a longer time than any;
some say that it has been ever that is to say, inasmuch as integrity ever
went before corruption, and the same maintained by them, as it is said of the
true Church in the Apocalypse, that it was preserved even in the desert: The
second because it is more general, for there is not almost any Country where
into this sect has not crept; whereas in the mean time they ask us, where
our Church then was: The Third, because all the other procure horror by their
blasphemies against God, this of the Lionists has a great appearance of piety,
in as much as they live uprightly before men, and put their trust in God in all
things, and observe all the Articles of the Creed, only they blaspheme the
Church of Rome, and hold it in contempt, and therein they are easily believed
by the people. To the end that all Baronius following the report of certain
Monks is not afraid to recite, Baron. an. 1178. vol. 12. art. 17.21.
that they have fained the^ to be sometimes Arrians, and sometimes Manichees,
but wrongfully as he himself acknowledges; although Rainerius was more
impatient in his whole discourse against them, Iacobus of Riberia in his
collections of Toulouse, has these words: Jacob. de Riberia in Collectaneis de
vrbe Tholosae.
The Waldenses or Lagdunenses have continued a long time, the first place they
lived in, was in Narbone in France, and in the diocese of Albie, Rhodes,
Cahors, and Again; And at the same time there was of little or no estimation
such as were called Priests, Bishops, and Ministers of the Church; For being
very simple and ignorant almost of all things, it was very casie for them
through the excellency of their What greater testimony could a man expect
from an adversary? As touching their doctrine, we cannot better learn what it
was, than by their own confession, presented Rainerius notes, among the
causes of their heresies, That men and women, little and great, day and night
cease not to learn, Rainerius de Waldensibus.
and to teach. I have heard from the mouth of a credible person, that a
certain heretic, whom I knew, that he might divert him from our faith, and
pervert him to his own, did swim says he, a Country Clown recite Job word
by word, and diverse others that perfectly could deliver all the new Testament.
Then he distinguishes their errors into three parts, against the Church of
Rome, against the doctrine of the Sacraments, and of Saints, and against the
honest customs and rites of the said Church; Of the Church of Rome (says he)
they teach that it is not the Church of Christ, but the Church of the
malignant, which fell from Christ ever Syluester, when the poison of temporal
dominion entered into it; that it is that whore described in the Apocalypse; that
the Pope is the head of all errors, his Prelates Scribes, his Monks Pharisees,
and all turned from the Doctrine of the Gospel to follow their traditions: As
touching the Sacraments, they disallow the administration of them in an
unknown tongue, the Godfathers understanding not what they answer or promise
in the Baptism; as also the exorcismes, and the sign of the cross, and
others the like; They hold the Mass as nothing, and that the Apostles never
knew what it meant, and as little did they know their Canon, holding themselves
to the words of the institution of Christ, delivered in a vulgar tongue; That
the is not done in the hand of the Priest consecrating, but in the mouth of him
that worthily receives it: And all this, because they admit nothing into their
Church, but what is written in the Bible; no decrees, no epistles decretals,
not the Legends of Saints, nor Traditions of the Church; and condemn also the
invocation, and praying to Saints, and whatsoever is comprehended under the
name of honest customs, the feasts of candles, the adoration of the Cross
upon Good friday, the consecration of Palms, of Ashes, of the Chrisme, of
fire, of the Agnus dei, of salt and water, of certain vestments and They deny
also Purgatory, saying there is only but two ways, the one heaven for the
elect, the other hell for the damned; they condemn Masses, and oblations for
the dead, besides anniuersaries, and other suffrages for the soul. These are
the points that may be gathered out of that Author, who bestowed much time
afterward in refuting them, and mingled by the way many false accusations,
Aeneas Syluius in historia Bohemica ca. 35.
from which they were afterward freed by Aeneas Syluius, called Pope Pius the
second, whose doctrine he comprehended in these few words: That the Bishop of
Rome is equal to other Bishops, neither is there any difference between them,
one Priest being not greater in dignity than another, but in holiness of life:
That the souls departing the body, pass either to pain, or to joy eternal:
That there in no fire (they mean a crime) ought not to be admitted either into
any secular, or ecclesiastical dignity: That the confirmation by the Chrisme,
and extreme unction, are no Sacraments of the Church: That auricular confession
is but a frivolous and vain thing, and it is sufficient for every man if he
confess his sins privately to God: That Baptism ought to be done with common
Which opinions the Author, who had looked more inwardly into them, carried by
that malice he bare toward them, sets down maliciously enough in his own
words: but being rightly understood, nothing differed from the true doctrine,
if distinctly set down as well in their confession as in ours. At the least
they free themselves from their false accusations which charge them with
errors, against the due obedience to Magistrates, and against a lawful oath,
and diverse others mentioned by Rainerius. And much Frederick the second
therefore in the costitutions which he made against them, accused them not, but
for seperating themselves from the Church of Rome, and from the ceremonies and
services thereof, without imputing any other crime unto them, Petrus de Vineis
li. 1. c. 25.26.27.
as appears in the Epistles of Peter of Vineis, his Chancellor. And also
Claudius Seisellienses Archbishop, a man of great Lewis the twelfth, although
he had written a book expressly against them, he acknowledges them to be a
good people, upright and honest, innocent and irreprehensible in their
conversation, and observations of the commandment of God. Notwithstanding they
were excommunicated by John de Bellamaine Archbishop of Lion, at the
commandment of Alexander the third, and soon after were summoned to the
Council of Lateran, but they would not appear, because they knew they should
have the Pope both their judge and adversary. Guido de Perpinian page 79. de
haeresibus.
Whereupon he proceeded against them with all persecutions, as wars,
slaughter, spoils, massacres; and whosoever could most cruelly pursue them,
obtained forgiveness of all their sins. But at length, through the great
providence of God, it Ponticus Iordanus, Arnoldus Aurisanus, Arnoldus Otho,
Philibertus Caslienus, and Benedictus Thermensis: On the other side Peter de
Castro nouo, a Monk of the order of the Cistertians, and the Popes Legate, and
also Rodolphus deputed by the Pope, Didacus Bishop of Erenenses, and Dominicus
a Canon of the same Church, both Spaniards. And there were chosen as
Arbitrators two of the Nobility, Bernard of Villa noua, and Bernard of Arre,
and of the Comminaltie Raimond Godeus, and Arnold Riberia: There, they say,
Guilielm. de Podio Laurentij Noguier en l'historie Tolouse.
that these Doctors of the Waldenses did constantly affirm, That the Church of
Rome was not the holy Church, nor the spouse of Christ, but a Church polluted
with the doctrine of the devil, and that Babylon whom S. John describes in
his Apocalypse, the mother of fornications and abominations, overwhelmed and
drowned in the blood of Saints: That the Mass was not instituted by Christ nor
his Apostles, but a humane invention; and many the like things, and so
departed, not agreeing upon any thing.

49. PROGRESSION.
The contentions and several differences between the Emperor Frederick and
Pope Lucius the third. Of the voyage to the Holy Land by the Emperor and the
Christian Princes, for the recovery of Jerusalem from the Souldan, with the
death of the said Emperor; and of the troubles that afterward arose to his
son Henry. The solemnity and manner of the coronation of the Emperor.

ALexander the third held the seat two and twenty years, which happeped to
Frederick made head against him, being often disturbed as well in Germany as in
Italy, through the rebellions which Alexander had stirred up against him;
whereby the cities and Princes took occasion, under the color of his
Ecclesiastical reformations, to revolt. Neither did the ambition of his son
Henry less troble him, who at what price soever would be King of Italy, yet
feared least the death of his father, then engaged in the Alexander therefore
being dead, and Hubald Cardinal of Ostia, named Lucius the third, elected in
his place, according to the order decreed in the Council of Lateran, by the
Cardinals only, without the consent of the Clergy and the people. Henry to
persuade his father to be at peace with Italy, omitted no means or
opportunity whatsoever; but first of all removing all lets, procured the
friendship of Lucius the third, who having a desire to gratify the city of
Lucca where he was borne, Frederick at his request soon granted that no other
money should be current through all Tuscane, Marchia, Romania, and Campania,
but that which Lucius in the mean time did no better agree with the Romans
than his predecessors, who when he sought to put down the Consuls, they
cruelly chastising his faction, and threatening himself worse measure, enforced
him, according to the example of his predecessors, to forsake Rome, and to hold
his See at Velitre. Who nevertheless providing himself against them, under a
pretense of a Sarasen war, called a Council at Verona in the year 1184,
where the Emperor Frederick himself was present. An. 1184. Naucler. vol. 2.
Gener. 40.
Frederick making benefit of the time, having now pacified Lombardie, and
received Alexandria into favor (touching which city there had grown so great
contention between him and Alexander) seemed to reduce things to their
pristinat Sigon. l. 14. de regno Jtal.
as appears by these articles, That all the citizens of Alexandria should at
his will and pleasure depart the city, and so long should abide from thence,
till they were brought in by his Deputy or Lieutenant in a solemn manner;
that by this act it might appear, he gave and they received their country
from the hand of the Emperor, and so the city should from hence forward be
called Caesaria. In this Council Lucius the third so far prevailed by means
of the Emperors presence to repress the Romans, that they were proclaimed as
enemies to the Church: But on the other part, as Frederick requested to crown
his son Henry Emperor, he expressly denied it, Mathilda, and other duties
which he withheld from the Church; thereby not so much renewing an old quarrel,
as determining it at his own pleasure. It was also requested by the Emperor,
That he would receive into favor those Ecclesiastical persons that were
ordained by the Antipopes; whereunto he consented: but the day following, when
he should have laid his hands upon them, utterly refused it, and referred it to
another Synod, Fearing, says Krantzius, least the Church, Krantzius l. 6.
Saxon. c. 47.
as in former times, should fall into a most dangerous schism, which evil the
nearer they knew it, the more they feared it. Even so both with grudge and
discontented minds dismissed the Council. And now Frederick passing forward into
Italy, straightly pursued the Lucius was resolved to use all extremities, even
when he died, in the city of Verona, having never dared to look back toward
Rome: and in the same place was chosen for his successor Lambert Archbishop of
Milan, who was named Urban the third. It is a thing worthy to be noted, That
this Lucius excommunicated the Waldenses, and Albienses, because they did wear
sandalls on their feet, and a hood, saying they did therein imitat the
plainness and simplicity of the Apostles. But out of all doubt it was rather
through malice; let it suffice us, that he had no greater crimes to charge them
withal. There is also extant another Decree of his, Abbas Visperg. in Chron.
extra de Judicijs Tit. 1. c. Clerici 8. Abbas Vrsperg. Ex Epistola quadam
Pragens. universe. ad Oxoniensem tempore Wenceslei Jmperatoris scripta. Sigon.
de regno Jtal. l. 15. ex Naubrig. Vrsprergens. and Viterbiens. Krantxius in
Saxon. l. 6. c. 52.
That a Clergy man for every crime should be conuented before an
Ecclesiastical Judge, notwithstanding any other custom Here is also of him a
certain Epigram, which is alluded to the fish called a Pike, being in Latin
Lucius, who deuoureth other fish.

Lucius est piscis, Rex. atque tyrannus aquarum,
Aquo discordat Lucius iste parum:
Deuorat ille homines, hic piscibus insidiatur,
Esurit hic semper, hic aliquando satur.
Amborum vitam, si laus aquata notaret,
Plus rationis habet, qui ratione caret.
Lucius is a fish, a tyran in water,
Like to this Lucius, as mother to daughter;
He deuours men, this fishes does eat;
He still hungers, this sometime's full with meat:
If both their lives we equally should praise,
He has most reason that reason denayes.
In the remainder of the history of these times we must follow the self same
steps. Vrbanus, although he continued not long, notwithstanding in that little
time purchased the name of Turbanus, through the troubles which he eueriewhere
Frederick made peace with William King of Sicilia, and for the better
confirmation thereof, married his son Henry to Constance the daughter of
Roger, the grandfather of the said William, who dying without issue was the
next heir. This manage pleased not Urban, and the less, because Frederick in
an assembly holden at Geilhausen, caused the Prelates of Germany to write unto
him, to preserve the tenthes held in fee, and other rights, to the Nobility,
being by her worthily obtained in the defense of the Church. But as he
prepared at Verona to excommunicat him, they of Verona, to whom he was now
retired, made known unto him, That they would not endure that in their city
such a Decree should be published against the Emperor: Whereupon, he departing
to Ferrara Being borne in Milan, in hatred of the Emperor, he was very
trouble some to the Church, which had a while been quiet; but he was prevented
by the will of God, and died, having continued in the seat but one year ten
Months and fifteen days.

An. 1187.
In the year 1187 the Cardinal Albert his Chauncelor, chosen by the Cardinals
at Ferrara, succeeded him, being called Gregory the eight; who soon after
writ to all Princes to persuade them to go personally into Palestina to
recover Jerusalem, which the infidels had forcibly gotten from the Christians,
assuredly promising them life everlasting, and the protection of the Church,
during Frederic, Philip king of France, and Richard King of England, and
diverse other Princes in their own person. Notwithstanding Gregory saw not the
success thereof, death preventing him in Pisa even at the setting forward of
this enterprise. But the Cardinals that were of his train, chose in the same
place Cardinal Paul a scholar of Rome (who was Clement the third; being so
named, because the dissension that had continued between the Popes and the
Romans the space of five and forty years, was extinguished and appeased by
his means) upon condition that they might have a Patricius: But the Senators
permantum, with a mantle by the Pope. Now Frederic died in this voyage after
many notable and worthy exploits, An. 1190.
in the year 1190, having entered into a certain river in Armenia, called
Serra, to refresh himself in the violent heat of summer, the sudden cold to
the extreme heat striking inwardly into him, presently overcame his vital
parts. Otho de S. Blasio cap. 35. Abbas Vrspergens. Sigon. de regno Jtal. l. 15.
A Prince commended by all Histories for his piety, virtue, clemency,
forgetfulness of all injuries, whereby he left a desire in all men of his
continuance, and yet no man ever endured greater and more unjust dealings by
the Popes. Through his death arose many molestations to his son Henry as well
in Germany as in Italy: But the thing that most troubled him, was to
Constance his wife, by the death of William; the which Pope Clement, for want
of an heir male challenged to belong to the church, and had sent his forces to
invade it, if the States and governors thereof had not opposed against him one
Tancred the Bastard son of Roger; by which means the invasion of Clement being
delayed, Henry had the better opportunity to provide for himself. Thus did he
observe the promise made by his predecessor to those that went into the holy
Land, to defend and protect their estates and rights in that state they should
leave them. Platina in Clement. 3.
Frederic being dead in this expedition, his son Henry, besides the grief
for the loss of his father through so extraordinary and unexpected an
accident, was no less diversely disquieted Clement while he was endeavoring to
put by Henry from the imperial Diadem, died in April in the year 1191,
whom Cardinal Iacynthus succeeded, a Citizen in Rome, and was called Celestine
the third. By this change Henry sped the better, and with all diligence came
to Rome, where he was crowned by Celestine, whom he had before bound unto him,
Naucler. vol. 2. Gener. 40.
by restoring into his hands the city of Tusculus which had been delivered
into his protection, a means for Celestine to gratify the Romans, because
that for the space of 50 years before it had been either the cause, or
pretense Vignier. ex Chron. Germa^. manuscr. Baro an. 1191. Sect 1. and 10. ex
Rogero authore Coaetaneo part posteriore in Richardo primo.
But as soon as he had restored it unto them, he refrained not any kind of
cruelty, that he might practice against those miserable people. But the manner
of his coronation is worthy to be noted. After the Emperor had taken his
oath to defend the Church, and the patrimony of Saint Peter, and to restore
whatsoever belonged to the Church, whole and entire, if any thing were withheld
or detayned from it; the Emperor and the Empress are brought into the Church
by the Pope, and Mass being solemnly celebrated by him, he annoynteth first
the Emperor with words instituted to that purpose, and afterward the Empress.
Then sitting down in his pontifical Chair, holds the imperial Crown
between his feet, himself is the Author, and likewise Ranulph in the same
words. Ranulph in Polycr. l. 7. ca. 26.
Thus this proud mystery did still rise by degrees. Now by the death of the
Bastard Tancred it was the easier for Henry to make his peace with the
kingdom of Sicilia. But Celestine was now ready to excommunicate Henry, and
also his brother Philip if his death had not prevented it, by an ancient
pretense, whereby Mathilda, though before, to the end that Henry should ruinate
and destroy Tancred, whom he saw now established by the States, he had
invested the said Henry into these dominions as his feudatarie. But Henry
dying in the year 1197 left only a son by Constance his wife of the age of
one year, and the troubles that eueriewhere rise about the succession, gave
Celestine means, or rather a fit opportunity to his successor Innocent the
third to do whatsoever they would in prejudice of the Empire: For as Philip
the brother of Henry, and Otho Duke of Saxony striued for the Kingdom of
Germany, Innocent taking an oath of faithful homage of the Governor of the
City of Rome, inuadeth Henry had given to Philip his brother, and sending to
the Bishops of Germany, commands them to deliver the hostages which
Henry had brought out of Sicilia, with him, namely Sibilla the widow of
Tancred, his children, and the Archbishop of Salerne; Butt if Vezilus de
Berco (their keeper) should refuse to deliver them, then they should
excommunicate him, by which means he seemed to have composed the business of
Sicilia to his own desires. The very same way, partly by force, and partly by
excommunication he chased away Marcoaldus out of Romania, and Conradus out of
the Dukedom of Spoleto, whom Henry had invested, and interdicted all the
Cities that Constantia the widow of Henry to take an oath to hold of him and
his successors in homage Apulia and Calabria, paying yearly six hundred
squifats, and for the Country of Mercia four hundred, upon condition that her
son coming to age shall take the same oath; And as Constancia not long after
chanced to dye, he took upon him to be the Tutor and Guardian of the child
(who was Frederic the second) and by these cunning sleights has made himself
Arbiter of the Kingdom. Philip brother of Henry, as excommunicated by him,
and approved that of Otho Duke of Saxony, thereby taking from his pupil the
support and help of the Uncle, neither does he dissemble it, that what he
did was in hatred of his predecesours, who had opposed themselves against due
See of Rome, that is to say, for defending the rights of their Empire. And here
the Reader may see the care they had of the affairs of the East, that whilst
they were bent wholly to the care of themselves all things went to ruin. And
here we make an end of the twelfth age.

OPPOSITION.
I willingly omit those frequent contentions between the Emperors and the
Popes in these times, contenting my self to have noted here what the better
sort have thought of the Church of Rome. Clement the third solicited the kings
of France and England to the voyage of the holy Land, who for the differences
that grew between them, thought it not fit and convenient for them to go
forward into a strange Country, unless the cause of the discord were first
taken away; and it seemed to Clement, that Philip the second, our king, was the
cause to delay and prolong it, whereupon he threatened to excommunicat him, and
to interdict Mat. Paris in Richardo.
if he did not the sooner agree. Matthew Paris the author of the English
History says, he made him this answer, That he nothing feared his sentence,
as being vpheld with no equity; he adds that it belongs not to the church
of Rome to punish by sentence any King, especially of France, if the said King
be disposed to revenge himself upon his ill deserving, untamed people, and
rebellious to his Kingdom: He adds moreover, that the Cardinal of Anagne his
Legate had smelt the sterlings of the King of England, by whose odor being
attracted, according to the fashion of the Romans, he became more favorable to
him, and therefore had the more reason to suspect him to be his judge. Moreover
the Earl Richard did hardly contain himself, and as hardly could the Lords
hold his hands, but that with his sword drawn he had furiously Verba continuit
ampullosa, stayed his swelling words. Both these Kings hoise up sail, and
Richard of England arrived within the River of Tiber, where met him Octauian
Cardinal of Ostia, sent from Clement the third; to whom (as Roger Houenden
says) he spoke many reproachful words, Blaming the Simonie of the Romans, that
to consecrate the Bishop of Man's they had taken 700 marks, Rogerus Houenden.
in Annalium part posteriore.
and 1500 for the legation of the Bishop of Elie, and besides a great sum for
not deposing the Bishop of Bordeaux, accused by his Clergy. But he says
besides, that he arrived at Messine about the same time that Philip King of
France went with a desire to see Ioachim Abbot of Courace of the order of the
Cistertiens, a man in that age very famous, and John in the Apocalypse, wherein
he received much content, Apud Rogerum de Houenden. Annal. part posteriore.
especially when he spoke of seven Kings, Whereof one was not yet come, he said
unto him, this man is Antichrist, who is now in the City of Rome, and is set
on high in the Apostolic seat, and of this Antichrist, says the Apostle, he
is an adversary, and exalts himself against all that is called God etc. The
king replied unto him, I thought that Antichrist should be borne in Antioch, or
in Babylon, of the progeny of Dan, and should reign in the Temple of the Lord
at Jerusalem etc. But Ioachim That the seven Diademes signified the Kings and
Princes of this world, who should believe in Antichrist, etc. but, he says, in
the times of this Antichrist many of the Christians should preserve the
Christian faith, in the fear of the Lord, in dens and caves of the earth,
and in solitary rocks and desert places, even until the consummation of
Antichrist. All this he spoke, notwithstanding the Archbishops of Roan,
Pamiers, and Dauch, who were there present, have endeavored to prove the
contrary: And to this purpose it was that the Abbot spoke upon Jeremy, There
is another fig tree, who through the malediction of his preuarication is now
withered; The Latin Church, or the little bark of S. Peter, whose leaves are
temporal things, whereof they make breeches to hide their wicked
conuersations, wherewith Now Baronius touches this history, Boron. an. 1190
art. 2. lom. 12.
but he takes good heed for disclosing the principal clauses which expressly
disciphers the Pope of Rome.

King Richard returning from Palestina, was stayed by the Duke of Austria
passing through his country, who delivered him to the Emperor Henry the
sixth, who would not release him without a great ransom. Queen Elinor his
mother thinking that Pope Celestine was content to wink at this shameful act,
because of the friendship that was yet between him and Henry, writ three
letters unto him, Peter of Blois: the last (for as much as he seemed to
neglect the former) was more sharp, and in more express terms, as
follows: Deliver unto me (says she) thou man of God, my son, Petrus
Blaesens. Epist. 144.145.146.
if thou be a man of God, and not rather a man of blood, if thou be
careless and negligent in giving liberty to my son, that the omnipotent God
may require his blood at thy hands. Oh and alas, that the Sovereign Pastor
should become mercenarie, that he should fly from the face of the Wolf, that
he should leave his sheep committed to his charge, yea a chosen Bell-weather,
the leader of the Lords flock, in the jaws of a cruel beast! Hardly truly
will thou adventure thy soul for him, for whom thou have not dained to speak
or write one word; and now three times we have been promised Legates, and yet
they are not sent, that, to say Ligati than Legati, bound that they shall not
come, than appointed to come. If my son were in prosperity they had come
with all possible speed, because out of his great bounty, and the public
profit they make of the kingdom, they expected plentiful rewards of their
Legations. And what greater glory can there be, than to set free a captive
King, to bring peace to the people, safety to the religious, and joy and
comfort to every one? But now they fail at a pinch. The Wolf holds his
prey, and the dogs either cannot or will not bark. Is this the promise which
you made unto us at the castle of Radolphus, with so much protestation of love
and fidelity? What can it profit you to deceive simple people, and by a vain
confidence to mock the prayers of the innocent? So, long since, King Achab
made a covenant of friendship with Benhadab, but their (comparing the Pope to
this Infidel King) and God prospered the battles of Judas, John, Simion,
brothers of the Machabees, but so soon as by their embassage they made a
contract of friendship with the Romans, they lost the succor and help of God;
and not once, but often, their mercenarie familiarity was turned into sobs and
bitter sighs, etc. I would to God they would remember, that for the negligence
of Hely their Priest, ministering in Silo, the glory of the Lord was translated
from Israel; neither is it a parable of the time past, but the time present,
because God forsook the Tabernacle of Silo, his own Tabernacle where himself
dwelt amongst men, delivered their power into captivity, and their beauty
into the enemies hands meaning the Church of Rome.) It was imputed to their
pusillanimitie, that the Church was trodden under foot, And it is here a Queen
wounded with grief that speaks it, but by the mouth of the Chancellor, the
Archbishop of Canterbury, and no doubt with the consent of the Clergy of
England; and they differ not much from the judgment and opinion of the Abbot
Ioachim, albeit the one in Italy the other in England; but he also describes
unto us in the person of an Official, the manner and fashion of the Church of
Rome, writing to the same: For as much, says he, as I love thee with all
affection even in the bowels of Jesus Christ, I thought good to exhort thee
with wholesome admonitions, that thou in time depart from Vr of the Chaldes,
and from the midst of Babylon, and leave the mystery of this most wicked and
damnable Stewardship, etc. I believe that these Officials are so called
Officium, but from the Verb Officio, which signifies to hurt, for the whole
intention of an Official is, ad opes Episcopi, to be careful for the profits
of the Bishop, whereof he has the charge, to sheere for him, miserrimas oues,
the poorest sheep, to poll them, and to pull off their skins: (he sets
riches against sheep) and afterward pursues their rapines with foul terms:
These Offcialls are those hidden doors, where the Ministers of Bell secretly
carried away the sacrifices which the King caused to be set upon the table: So
the Bishop cunningly, and as it were with along reach, gets other men's goods;
and if the crime happen to be discovered, to quit himself of discredit, lays
the blame on his Officials, etc. The office of an Official now a days is to
confound law, to stir up contentions, to break off agreements, to find
delays, to supprese Of Bishops he spoke not more mildly: In the house of a
Bishop, says he, comprehending the Lord with his family, nothing is more
damnable for merit, nothing more dishonest for manners, nothing more unclean
for conscience, nothing more culpable for reputation, and nothing And therefore
he oftentimes calls the heads of the Clergy, Syria Edom, the calves of
Bethel, the Idols of Egypt, the fat of Samaria, the Priests of Baal; and very
bitterly calls them back to their duty, The profession of thy order admits
not the cares of the world, nor the rigor and tyranny of the material sword;
the Kings of nations bear rule over these, and not thou. If thou accept the
ministry of Christ, if thou refuse not his yoke, stay in that condition, in
that rank whereto thou art called, and leave to the Laity the government of
the people. But we may read among other things an Epistle of his written to
Pope Alexander the third, in the name of the Archbishop of Canterbury, who
found himself grieved because he had usurped to himself the only Abbie that
was in his Archbishopricke; which is the After the death of Vrias, says he,
and the adultery of Bersabee, Idem Epist. 68.
the Prophet sent to David proposes unto him the example of a certain poor
man, who had only one sheep, which a certain rich man took from him, that
had many sheep: But David's advice being requested, gives judgment of death
against this rich man, and consequently against himself. And who is now the
rich man, that has innumerable sheep, but the Bishop of Rome, who possesses
all the Churches of the world? And who poorer than the Church of Canterbury,
who having but one only Abbie, that is to say, the Monastery of S. Augustine,
which in the bosom of his pastoral providence he cherished with a fatherly
care; and this rich man, I dare not say the Bishop of Rome, has usurped it, as
peculiar Then repeating again the general complaint, for that he exempted the
Abbeys from the obedience of the Bishops, and so reserved them to himself; in
so much that the Proctor of the Abbots did not fear to say, Base and miserable
are those Abbots that banish not the power of the Bishops, when for the yearly
payment of an ounce of gold they may obtainful liberty of the Sea of Rome:
That is to say, to live without a controller, letting loosse the raines of the
bridle to lust, without any discipline and fear of correction: They that judge
says he, let them see and judge these things, least wrong should seem to
proceed, from whence equity and justice should be had. We shall be condemned
of rashness, and said to open our mouths against heaven; but we write not
these things out of a spirit of pride, but with the ink of grief, we feel
our own private miseries and deplore the public, etc. The Apostle speaking to
the Romans, says, Every creature ought to be subject to the higher powers: If
the Apostle so writ to the Church of Rome, who in the Church of Rome will
presume to contradict this Apostolical doctrine? etc. Some Angels are greater
and higher in dignity than others, yet they admit not the pride of
emancipation or freedom the one above the other. One of them long since would
be freed from the power of God, and of an Angel became a devil: by these
extraordinary liberties now adays are In the same sense in the Epistle 158 to
John Bishop of Chartres, and upon the same subject, which was then pleaded by
the Author before the Pope, he says, All the laws and the Canons, and
whatsoever we could allege out of the word of God, Petrus Blaesens. Epist. 158.
to affirm and make good our cause, Maiores inter caeteros, the greatest have
held detestable and sacrilegious, and did publicly judge us enemies to the
Church of Rome, unless we would relinquish these word, by which we endeavored
to prove the Church of Saint Augustine, which they affirm particularly to be
his, to be subject to the Church of Canterbury, This pretended Martyr
notwithstanding suffered for the Popes authority, who, as Peter of Blois here
tells us (according to the example of the Pharisees) gilded his sepulcher, that
he might the better rob his Church. Neither are we to forget also, That in his
treatise of the Institutions of a Bishop, written to John Bishop of Worcester,
Peter: We read, says he, that our Savior said to Peter, Petrus Blaesens. de
Institutione Episcopi.
If thou love me feed my sheep: thou art the heir and Vicar of Peter, feed
my sheep: In being an Evangelist, do the works of an Evangelist, and of a
Pastor, be not ashamed of the office of a Pastor. Thy ministry has more
charge than honor; if thou affect honor, thou art mercenarie; if thou will
embrace the burden, the Lord is strong to increase his grace, that profit may
come by profit, and gain by gain: But if thou can not endure the burden,
and knows thy self insufficient, it is too late to complain. He said before,
Take heed by all means thou wrap not thy self in secular affairs, for there
is no agreement with the spirit of God and the spirit of this world; persist in
thy And this he afterward recited, Animabus Praelatus es non corporibus, Thou
have the charge of souls and not of bodies: Nihil Praelato commune est cum
Pilato, A Prelat has nothing common with Pilat; thou art Christ's Steward, and
Peter's Vicar; thou art not to make an account to Caesar, but to Christ, of that
jurisdiction that is committed unto thee. And by these and the like places we
may judge what he thought of the Popes, who so violently drew all secular power
unto them: But he was constrained very often to temper his style according to
the tyranny of those times; Petrus Blaesens. in Tractatu de Peregrinat.
Hierosolimit.
as when he said, The sword wherewith Peter cut off these servants ear
exceeds in these days, according to all men's opinion, the weapons of
Alexander and Caesar.

Abbas Vrsperg.
Let us now come to Innocent the third. The Abbot of Vrsperge tells us of his
entrance into the Popedom: I have heard in those times (says he) things
incredible to be related, and hard to be believed, that the same Pope said,
That he would take away the Kingly Diadem from Philip, or that Philip should
take from him the Apostolical Ensign. Now albeit it were not to be believed,
that he would prefer his will before the will of God, nevertheless it
appears that he was at all times contrary unto him. But God foreseeing from
above, permitted not, that through all Germany his divine service and the
Ecclesiastical dignity should perish, which continued there more permanent
than in And he notes especially, that Innocent opposed the authority of the
Apostolic See against Philips, Vt regium genus deperiret, To ruinat the royal
race: But Auentine says, That he raised cognatas acies, Auent. l. 7.
brother to fight against brother, and the son against the father, and the
one to pollute himself with the blood of the other: and then crying out, Who,
says he, can give any other reason of the discord among Christians, but the
spectacle of the Roman Bishop, quasi paria componentis, taking pleasure to see,
and to cause them, like Fencers, to murder one another? even so the Christian
people were slain, the Bishops of Rome encouraging the one against the other.
In the mean time Innocent the third, as says the Abbot of Vrsperge, Abbas
Vrsperg.
made That a man (says he) could not safely pass from one Parish to another;
for there was scarce any Bishopric or Ecclesiastical dignity, or Parish
church, that was not become litigious: by which means all process were
broughe to Rome, but not with empty hands. Rejoice our mother Rome, for the
floud-gates of the treasuries are opened upon the earth, to the end the rivers
may flow to thee, and thou may heap money in great abundance, make thy
self merry upon the iniquity of the children of men; the price is given to
thee as a recompense of so many evils; take comfort in Discord thy best friend,
because it is broken loosse from the bottomless pit of hell, that the heap
of thy treasures may be raised to the top: Thou have that thou have long
thirsted after, sing And this was of the entrance of Innocent the third that he
spoke. And here end the Annals of Baronius. Neither let us omit the affairs
of the East, under the schism of Alexander the third, and Victor. Alexander
sent a Legate into Palestina, that he might there be acknowledged Pope: so the
two Patriarchs of Antioch and Jerusalem, with the King and his Barons,
assembled together to consult thereon. The Kings advice was, to admit neither
the one nor the other, Guilielm. Tyrius l. 18. c. 29.
and to permit the Legate only Sine insignibus Legationis, Without the marks of
his Legation, to visit the holy That to those to whom he was best welcome,
his long continuance was burdensome.

50. PROGRESSION.
The contentions between Philip and Otho, procured by Pope Innocent. Of the
pride and presumption of the said Innocent, and the bold Decrees he made. Of
his intrusions in England,

NOw as Innocent had kindled the war between Philip and Otho, he takes
this man's part against the other, and the worser truly, if we may give credit
to the Abbot of Vrsperge; For he was, says he, proud and foolish, but
accounted the To establish him he omitted nothing, sent to the Bishops and
Princes of Germany, to obey him, and absolved them of their oaths toward
Philip, and would not give the Pall to any Archbishop unless by oath he would
acknowledge him; he made his Legate to crown him in Germany, and
excommunicated and disgraded Adulphus, Bishop of Collen, for crowning Philip.
But as he understood that Philip had won the field, and that in diverse other
battles Otho was always overcome, procured a treaty of peace through the
mediation of Hugoline Bishop of Ostia, and Leo Cardinal of the holy cross,
and the conditions were, that Otho should marry the daughter of Philip, and
relinquish the title of the Realm during his life, and after his death to
succeed him. But Philip Otho Palatine of Witelspach accompanied with certain
servants of the Bishops rusht in with his sword drawn and killed him, though in
vain his Chamberlain sought to defend. Here the Abbot of Vrsperge notes that
Innocent had broken the lawful election of Luitpold Bishop of Mence in hatred
of Philip; which in the Chapter Bonae memoriae Extr. de electis, is to be read,
non iudicia^ faciente^, Abbas Vispergens. in Chro.
says he, sed iniuriam, Not doing justice but injury; he adds that this
peace was made, as he understood of credible persons, because it was promised
(some say he was his Bastard) and therefore resolved with himself not to
request the Lands which his predecessors often used to demand of the
Emperors both in Tuscane, Spoleto, and Ancona, hoping they should come into
his Nephews possession through the aforesaid marriage. And so Philip left Otho
to succeed him, a man qualified with many virtues, as Vrsperg who lived at that
time often reports, namely for his great clemency and gentleness; for which
good conditions he was never the better thought of by the Pope. But let us see
whether Otho, whom the Pope had defended against Philip, found him more
propitious, when he challenged to himself the rights of the Empire. In the
year Otho therefore conueying his army into Italy, was entertained with
great applause of the people, An. 1209.
received the Crown of Iron at Milan from the hands of the Archbishop, and so
went to Rome to be crowned with the Imperial Diadem, and hitherto agreed well
with Innocent; But trusting to the counsel of his Lawyers he went about to
search the rights of his Empire in Tuscane, and to recover into his hands the
Towns which through the vacancie of the Empire, the Popes had drawn unto
themselves, in prejudice of the Empire; whereupon Innocent presently threatened
him with Ecclesiastical censures; Notwithstanding Otho proceeds in his
purpose, takes Viterbe, Montefiascone, Oruieto, Perusia, and all that was
accounted the patrimony of Mathilda; moreover he gave the Bertaldus his
favorite; That done he returned into Lombardie to suppress and hinder new
reuolts there. Now therefore Innocent upon new consultations was resolved to
serve his turn, by the means of young Frederic his Pupil King of Sicilia,
whom he caused to go into Germany, recommended unto them with the remembrance
of his father and grandfather Henry and Frederic the first, there to molest
Otho, and to cause him to forsake Italy. Otho being otherwise not greatly
beloved of the Princes, Auent. l. 7.
nor much esteemed for his virtue; so that not long after being inforst to go
into Saxony, was declared Innocent died in the year 1216, and Otho in the
year 1218, who as an argument of repentance left by testament the ensigns of
the Empire to young Frederic. Krantzius speaking of the causes of discord
between Otho and Innocent, although for the most part inclined toward the
Popes, Krantz. l. ^. c. 33. and 34.
says, That the Emperor demanded through Italy the ancient rights of the
Empire, whereof long since some of them were transferred to the Church: He also
challenged that great inheritance of Mathilda a woman of great estate in
Italy, as appertaining unto him by a double right, for he seemed to be the
heir of his Aunt, who descended from says he, exhorted the Princes Electors
(that forasmuch as he had cast off Otho, first excommunicated, and then
deposed) to chose unto the Empire another Prince, offering unto them Frederic,
of the age of 20 years; of whom, although he had the administration of his
Gardenship, he couerted all to his own profit: for the Continuor of the holy
war says, Frederic being yet a child, and a pupil, Continuator belli sacri
l. 3. c. 10.
was deprived by Innocent his tutor of the inheritance of his Kingdom, and
being free was made tributorie, without respect either of the prayers of
Henry his father, or Constance his mother, or his own promise made unto them.
Blond. Decad. 2. l. 6.
Blondus notes two bold Decrees of this Pope, the first, so often as one
Prince shall offend another, that the correction shall The which was done upon
the difference between the Kings of France and England, and is inserted into
the Decretals? The second, That two striving for the Empire, having voices
alike, Extra de election. c. Venerabilem.
he whom the Pope allows shall be preferred (which is there red, and put in
practice in favor of Otho the fourth) and ought to be received as lawful: and
by this means he was made the Arbitrator of the whole world. But the Books,
especially written by himself, do testify how much this mystery did prick
him forward: The Bishop of Rome, says he, Innocentius 3. ser. in festo
Syluestri Papae.
uses the Globe in sign of Empire (the Globe is the sign of the Empire) and
uses the Mytre in sign of his Popedom. But the Mytre he uses always and
every where, but the kingdom neither every where, nor always, because the
Papal authority is both the first and Jdem Sermon. 1. in festo Gregorij Papae.
Noah also was before Nemroth when of him the Scripture says, That Babylon was
the beginning of Nemroth, but Noah built an altar to the Lord, and offered
sacrifice upon it. But speaking of the Priests and Kings, he calls the
Priests Gods, and the Kings, Princes; From the Gods he says thou shall not
detract, and the Prince of the people thou shall not curse: and when the
Apostle spoke of the King, All humane creatures be ye subject even for Gods
cause to your Kings as the most excellent, or to you leaders as sent by him;
The Lord says to Hieremie, the Priest of the Priests of Anatoth, I have
appointed thee over Nations and Kingdoms, that thou may pull down and
destroy, build and plant Who did ever read such Divinity? And yet behold there
is worse; When our Lord and Savior said unto S. Peter, Duc in altum, Jdem in
Sermon. 2. de festo Sancti Petri.
cast into the deep, this deep Sea is Rome which obtained and holds the
prioritie and principality above all the world, as if he said, Go to Rome,
and transport thy self with all thine to the City, there cast thy nets abroad
to take. In another place; The Church of Rome owes not any reverence to any
person but the Pope, who has no superior but God. But yet see here his
companion and corriuall: The Bishop of Rome, says he, has the Church of Rome
his spouse, and yet brings in other Churches subject unto him. This is the
first (that I knew) that has gone so far as to call himself the spouse of
the Bernard. ad Eugen. Epist. 237.
if the Church of Rome be the true spouse. Let us hear what S. Bernard says
writing to Pope Eugenius: It remains now that thou take care that the spouse
of thy Lord, who is committed to thee, be made the better by thee: If thou be
a friend of the spouse thou shall not call his beloved, My Princess, but
Princess, challenging nothing to thy self in her, unless if occasion were to
give thy life for her. If Christ have sent thee, thou must make account thou
art sent to serve, and not to be served. Can a man think that it is
sufficiently excused by that poor distinction of Bellarmine, Bellarmin. de
Romano Pontif. l. 2. 31.
of a I omit his comparison of the two lights which God has placed in the
firmament, the Sun and the Moon; the Sun he compares to the Pope, the
Moon to the Emperor: for doubtless he that fears not to violat the
commandments of Christ himself the King of kings, we may think he will
little spare the Princes of the earth.

And truly under the pretense of this spiritual authority he required at
the same time the temporal homage of the kingdom of England; for there being
a controversy between the Bishops Suffragans of the Archbishop of
Canturburie, and the Monks, touching the election of the Archbishop; the
Monks pretending, that they only ought to choose him, and the Bishops saying
they could Innocent persuaded the Procters of the Monks to choose Stephen
Lanthon a Cardinal Priest, his servant; and albeit they protested they could
not do it without the King and their Convent, being ouerborne with his threats
of excommunication, he overcame them, and pronounced sentence for the Monks
against the Bishops; giving the Monks likewise to understand, that he would
excommunicat them if they obeyed not his Decree. King John, who then reigned,
was much offended, as well because Innocent had said, Math. Paris in Johan. p.
216.
That it was not his manner to attend the consent of Princes touching elections
celebrated in the Apostolic See, as also for that he had disannulled the
election made by the Bishops, of the Bishop of Norwich, to whom he had Innocent
interdicted his realm, offered it as a prey to the first inuaders thereof,
absolved his subjects of all oaths both natural and civil, armed all his
Clergy, and the greatest part of the Nobility and Magistrates of the realm,
against him, and in the end pronounced him deposed, and commanded another to
be put into his place: and for to execute his sentence, he appointed Philip
King of France, his enemy, promising him in reward of this service remission
of all his sins, giving this realm to him and his successors: proceeding so
far herein, that he writ to many Vt sese Cruce signent, That they should
sign themselves with the cross, and come to assist the King of France in this
expedition, promising unto them in their goods, persons, and souls, the same
prerogative and indulgence as those had that went to visit the holy Sepulcher.
And it is to be noted, that it is a Monk that relates unto us this history.
In the mean time that Philip prepared to take hold thereof, he privily sent a
Legate into England, who being received by the Bishops, caused his approaching
ruin to be made known unto him, unless he sought means to pacify the Pope:
resigned his Crown, Matthew. Paris in Johan. p. 225. and sequent.
with the realms of England and Ireland, into the hands of the Pope, and his
successors, in the person of Pandolph his Legate, confirmed under an authentike
Charter, with the general consent of his Barons, expressed in these words, For
the forgiveness of all our sins, and the sins of all our kindred, as well
they which are living as those which are dead, we freely grant to our Lord Pope
Innocent, and his Catholic successors, the aforesaid kingdoms. And thereupon
Innocent gave to him the said realms, to hold by faith and homage of him and
his successors, upon condition to pay yearly, besides the Peter pence, a
thousand marks sterling to the Church of Rome, that is to say, five hundred at
the feast of Saint Michael, and five hundred at Easter; that is, seven hundred
for England, This Charter was signed by many of the Nobility, and in
performance thereof he solemnly did the homage even at Pandolphs feet. In the
mean time King Philip, whom Innocent had stirred up to war, continued an
unreconcilable enemy to the King of England. But mark the monstrous pride of
the Legate, in receiving the tribute: Pandolph, says he, trampled under his
feet the money which the King paid, as an earnest penie in token of his
subjection: yet he took it, and refused it not, for God forbid he should say
with S. Peter, Thy money perish with thee.

Now as we have often said, as this Mystery of Iniquity did gather strength,
so Innocent, that both the opinion and name of Transubstantiation did first
come to light, and at the last expressed in these words in the Lateran Synod:
Concilium Lateranens. C. firmiter SS. vna vero etc.
The body and blood of Christ in the Sacrament of the Altar, are truly
contained under the forms of bread and wine, the bread being transubstantiated
into the body, and the wine into the blood, by divine power. And hereupon do
arise so many monstrous questions, which we read among the Schole-men of this
age, which we have elsewhere noted more at large: The ceremonies also from time
to time were brought in by the Popes that followed, especially by Honorius the
third, the successor of Innocent, that ceremony of bowing the knee at the
elevation, that is, when the bread is showed in the Mass, and the

But because to support such Idolatries, otherwise weak and shaken, they had
need as it were of a pillar, behold here these that arise so oportunely at this
time, Francis and Dominick; the one an Italian, the other a Spaniard; the one
principal and head of the Friars Minors, and the other of the Preachers; the
one confirmed by Innocent, the other by Honorius, his successor; both of them
striving by their clients and followers to be equal with Christ, nay above
Christ. But what could be done, or approved, that sauoured more of Antichrist?
Lib. 3. de Euchar. c. 17.
And of these things we have spoken more at large elsewhere; but it belongs
to the course of the history, that we here briefly repeat something again.
Of Francis therefore they say, Liber conformitatum p. 24. p. 39
John Baptist; John was the forerunner of Christ, S. Francis the Preacher and
Ensigne-bearer of Christ: John received the word of repentance of Christ,
Francis both of Christ and the Pope, which is more: John the friend of the
spouse (that is to say Christ) Francis like to the spouse himself: Fol. 66.
and 247. Prosa de Francisco ibid. initio libri and fol. 194. Fol. 144. Fol. 17.
Fol. 24. Fol. 149. Fol. 13. Fol. 5.
John elevated into the order of the Seraphins, Francis seated in the place
from whence Lucifer fell: Francis was better than all the Apostles, placed in
heaven, proceeding out of the wounded side of Christ, made a tipe of Jesus by
his passion, who received in a vision the same wounds of Christ, suffered the
same griefs, the passion of Christ renewed in him for the salvation of
mankind; of whom David has said, Thou have crowned him with glory and honor,
and have set him above all the works of thy hands, he is set as a light to the
Gentiles; which the Prophet Abraham saw that day, and was glad thereof. And to
conclude, whatsoever was foretold by the Prophets of Christ only, the same was
pronounced of him: Fol. 14.
Of whom may rightly be said that which is spoken in the Gospel, All things
are given me of my father. Matthew. 11. Of whom it is likewise said, I will be to
him a father, and he shall be to me a son. And again, that which was never
said nor interpreted by any but by Christ, In whom all the virtues of the
Saints, as well of the old as the new Testament, are put unitive and
conjunctiue, vnitiuely and coniunctiuely: Wherefore also through his merits he
was made the son of God, and sanctified by the holy Ghost, Fol. 4. Fol. 3.
Fol. 5. Fol. 144. Fol. 78.
by reason of a scedule which Friar Leo saw to descend from heaven, and fell
upon the head of Saint Francis, wherein it was written, This man is the grace
of God, Bernard. in Rosario Thom. in l. 4. Sent. did. 4. ex vitis Patrum
as upon him that is baptized: And the putting on of the hood gives unto them
full remission of sins, and freeth as well from the punishment as the sin;
and taking upon Will thou any more? Christ has prayed, Francis has obtained.
And when shall we have an end of these blasphemies? This book notwithstanding
was exhibited in the general Chapter of the Franciscans, by Friar Bartholomew
of Pisa, and approved by all with a general consent in the city of Assise,
the second of August 1389, with this express clause, We have searched,
debated, and caused this book diligently to be examined, and we find nothing
therein worthy correction: therefore it is called by them The Golden Book, and
sent by the commandment of the Popes, Gregory the ninth, Alexander the fifth,
and Nicholas the third, to all the faithful, under the pain of heresy to
believe the marks of S. Francis: Liber conformitatum Impressus Bononiae an.
1590. fol. 3. and 254. Item fol. 3. and 250. Anthon. part 3. tit. 23. 1. 28.
Bonauent. in Legenda B. Francis.
likewise by the commandment of Benedict the twelft, to celebrate the day
whereon they had received it: And that by a Bull of Alexander the fourth, the
hi^^ of Auernia, whereon they say these things happened, should be received
into the protection of the Sea of Rome. And yet the Authors of these times do
not agree among themselves upon these marks, for Bonauentura, who lived forty
years after, says in his Legend, That they were seen and acknowledged of
many, even to the putting in of the nails. Matthew Paris clean contrary, a
most superstitious Monk, who lived at the same time, affirms, that there
appeared not any mark or trace either in his side, his feet, or hands.

There was no less fained of Dominick, especially when he was to be opposed
Antonius Archiep. part 3. tit. 23. l. 1. 3.
Therefore the Archbishop Anthony, who was of his Order, so compares his
miracles with those of Christ's, as ever they excel them both in weight and
number: Christ, says he, raised three only that were dead, Dominick three in
the city of Rome: But what should we think of those forty strangers that
suffered shipwreck in the great river near Tolouse, the ship being
overwhelmed, and they a long time under water, but that by the prayer of S.
Dominick they came safe out of the river, and were restored to life. Christ
being immortal entered twice among his Disciples, the gates being shut, but
Dominicus as yet but a mortal man (which is much to be says he, is not a
little communicated to Dominick over all celestial, terrestrial, and
infernal things: Note how he always quarrels for the better: For he had the
holy Angels at his service, the elements did obey him, and the devils trembled
at him, and were not able to disobey him. This he proves by many examples: He
adds, That at Venice, before Dominick was borne into the world, there was in
Saint Marks Church two Images to be seen of all, whereof one was in a very
religious habit, of the Order of the Preachers, with a Lilie in his hand; the
other had the similitude of the Apostole S. Paul, as they use to paint him,
over whom was written (...) S. Paul, but under the feet of the Image was
written, Per istum itur ad Christum, By this man we come to Christ: Above the
other figure was written (...) Dominicus, that is, S. Dominick, but under him,
Facilius itur per istum, The way is easier by this man, that is to say, by
Dominick, for says Anthony, The doctrine of S. Paul, and so likewise of the
other Apostles, was a doctrine leading to faith, and observance of the
commandments, the doctrine of Dominick to the observance of Counsels, and
therefore the way more easy by him to come to Christ. And so thou have one
superior to S. Paul and the rest of the Apostles, and his rule better than
Apostolical doctrine. But worse follows, Because he was like unto Christ, he
was aptly named Dominicus, by our Lord Christ; for Dominicus, quasi totus
Domini, was that principally and by For the Lord says, I am the light of the
world, and the Church sings of Dominick, Ye are the light of the world. The
Prophets diverse ways foretold of our Lord, for they all bear witness of him.
Of Dominick and his Order says Zachary in his eleventh Chapter, speaking of
the person of God, I have taken unto me two staves, the one I have called
Decorem, Beauty; the other Funiculum, a Cord or a Band: Beauty is the Order
of S. Dominick, for the beautiful habit of their Prelates; the Cord is the
Order of the Minors, because they are girt with a cord. Thus play they with the
Scriptures. Furthermore, The Lord was borne upon the naked earth, but the
Virgin his mother, for fear of the cold, puts him into a manger; Dominick
being borne, and a little infant under the custody of his nurse, getting out
of that is to say, Ibidem paragra. 2.
because he never requested any thing according to the desire of the flesh. The
Lord has loved us, And Anthony the Archbishop prosecuteth this comparison
through all the parts of the life of Christ. Finally, our Lord departing from
this world, promised to his Disciples a Comforter, that is to say, the holy
Ghost, And Dominick said to his followers, My dear friends weep not for me,
Ibidem 4. paragr. 14.
nor let my bodily departure trouble you, in the place to which I go I shall
be more profitable unto you than I can be here; for after death you may have me
a better Aduocat than you can What then shall we think of that which S. John
says unto us, If we sin we have an aduocat, even Jesus the righteous? And
these blasphemies, because they make to the strengthening of their authority,
are confirmed by the Church of Rome: Jdem part 3. Tit. 23. c. 43. 17.
for Gregory the ninth canonized Dominick in there 1223, made him a Saint,
appointed him a festival day, and both approved, and with privileges
strengthened his Order: And he that writ these things was the Archbishop of
Florence, very famous among our adversaries, and put into the Canon of the
Saints. This is said, to the end the Reader may observe what might be then the
corruption of the Church, what the designs of the Popes, when these and the
like horrible blasphemies were supported by the Popes: and also with what
spirits Abbas Vrsperg. in Chron.
For the Abbot of Vrsperge says, by the command of the Pope they absolve
rapes, depopulations, burnings, seditions, wars; and therefore he said not
without good cause, That Pope Innocent had rather approve Who derogated from
the Priesthood by those sermons they made for the most part in the secret
places of Gods Church; for they preached against the vices of the Clergy, and
yet they were not accused of any heresy, because, says he, they reprehended
the vices of men, still obeying the Sea Apostolic, from which they derive
their chief authority. But these things we shall better observe in their due
place.

OPPOSITION.
Now it behooves us to see what judgment the Authors of these times have left
unto us of the wicked actions of Innocent, touching the war he kindled
between Philip and Otho. The Abbot of Vrsperge, who lived in those days,
speaks freely in this manner, Innocent endeavored by all means to hinder
Philip to attain to the Imperial throne, vpbraiding him with that which his
brother and kindred had cruelly done (which nevertheless they did by the
instigation of wicked men) wherein, under correction of the Apostolic See, he
seemed not to have judged according to equity; when the Lord says by his
Prophet, That the sins of the fathers ought not to be imputed to the
children, how much less of brothers, or of other kindred? Ezechias and Iozias,
most religious kings, had very wicked fathers: In the genealogy even of our
Savior Jesus Christ, some wicked ones are recited. There is yet extant an
Epistle of the said Innocent, directed to Bartholdus Duke of Zaringia, wherein
are written many absurd things against Philip, that is to say, of Celestine the
third. Moreover, he sent the Bishop of Sutrie to demand of him the hostages of
Apulia, whose eyes long since his brother Henry the Emperor had commanded to
be plucked out. But the said Philip, as he was gentle and courteous, when he
heard of the sentence of excommunication, he humbly entreated to be absolved by
the said Legate, and besides sent the aforesaid hostages to the Pope. Wherefore
the Bishop of Sutrie, for as much as he had unlawfully absolved Philip,
exceeding therein the bounds of his command, was deprived So that he
exclaimes against this wily monopoly: The horn of iniquity is exalted,
wherewith many have been anointed, against whom the Lord says by his
Prophet, I have said to the wicked, Do not wickedly, and to transgressers,
Lift not up your horn. This horn is now filled with adulterous ointment. The
horn of that ointment is far off, wherewith David was anointed King. What
therefore should be done in the members, but that which is done in the heads,
etc? O Lord, behold such as the ointment is in the head, such it descends upon
the beard: Oh that it were but upon the beard only with the reprobat; it
descended likewise upon the beard of Aaron: for they that had laid their
foundation in the mountain vtpote Claustralis, as cloystered Monks, seeming
to lead a religious life (that is to say, they whose help Innocent used to
alienat the hearts of the people from Philip) are far from the womb of our
mother the Church, in which they were conceived and baptized: They have
wandered from the womb, wherein they ought to be comforted and nourished with
wholesome admonitions, and now they have spoken nothing but lies. And here the
Reader may judge what the Abbot thought of him that used the help of people so
dishonest.

Through these discords in England Innocent proceeded so far, that king John
being brought into great extremity, was enforced to become tributarie unto
him. That king, says the history, having known multiplici experiencia, by
dear experience, Math. Paris in Johan.
that the Pope was ambitious and proud above all men living, and an insatiable
thirster after money, Et ad omnia scelera pro praemijs datis vel promissis
cereus and procliuus, Prone to all wickedness whatsoever, for rewards either
promised or given, was resolved to make a benefit of this his ill fortune,
purposing with himself a revenge of the Barons and Bishops of the kingdom,
with the good liking and leave of Innocent, nay he being the author. Whereupon
he sent Ambassadors unto him, who carried with them a great part of his
treasure, and withal promising more, swear unto him, That he would always be
his subject, and tributarie unto him, so that he would find some subtle
occasion to excommunicat his Barons and Bishops, especially the Archbishop of
Canturburie, for whom the Pope had so much molested Nicholas Bishop of Tuscule,
his Legate, came into England, to release the interdict that had continued six
years, three months, and fourteen days, To the irreuocable loss (says
the Author) of the Church, both in temporal matters and in spiritual. John
gave him this infamous resignation of his realm, no more in wax, as to
Pandolph, but sealed in gold. And because there was made a question of the
losses which the Bishops had received, the Legate in favor of the king deferred
it to a farther day. But Innocent, who desired to gratify the king by his
Legate of all the vacant Churches, to the prejudice of the Archbishop of
Canturburie, Intrusione magis quam electione canonica disponit, Disposed of
them rather by intrusion than canonical election. Hereupon this Archbishop
appealed, but the Innocent ratified the acts of his Legate, speaking now of
nothing but the praises and commendations of the Prince. The Barons they
assembled to demand their liberty, with whom also joined the city of London.
The Pope as the chief Lord reuoketh them, and because they would not presently
obey, he excommunicated them, and stirred up all the subjects of the realm
against them, promising them remission of their sins; and included in the
same excommunication all the Bishops that delayed to publish the Anatheme: But
because Stephen Archbishop of Canterbury, having lately been his favorite,
declared that he could not publish it, before he had seen the Pope; and being
ready to take shipping for the tacita veritate sententia erat in Barons lata,
The sentence was pronounced against the Barons, truth it self being silent,
the Bishop of Winchester, and Pandolph the Legate, the executioners of this
sentence, forbad him the Church, and suspended him from the celebration of his
office; of so great force and efficacy was the money king John powered into the
lap of the Pope. But besides, he was no sooner come to Rome but the sentence of
suspension was confirmed by Innocent. These proceedings now put the Barons of
England into despair, who (says the history) seeing all hope of their good
to be taken away, and knowing not what to do, Matthew. Paris in Johan.
cursed the fraud and infidelity of the king: Woe be to thee O John (say they)
the last of the Kings, the abomination of the Princes of England, Neither do
they less complain of the Pope: Thou (say they) who ought to be an example of
light to the whole world, the father of sanctity, the myrrour of piety, the
defender of justice, the keeper of verity, consentest thou to such a thing?
do thou approve and defend such a man? But doubtless thou defendest him,
because he has exhausted the money of England, exacted upon the English
Nobility, to the end that all this might be swallowed up in the gulf of the
Roman avarice: But this cause and excuse is an offense and accusation before
God. In the end they resolved to make choice of some Lewis the son of Philip
Augustus, the father afterward of S. Lewis, to whom they sent twenty four
hostages, to assure him the kingdom, which he accepted. Innocent understanding
hereof, sent Waldo his Legate to Philip into France, willing him, That he suffer
not his son to trouble England, nor John the King: but rather to defend him
as a vassal of the Church of Rome, and England as the demaine thereof. Philip
plainly told him, That the kingdom of England never was the patrimony of S.
Peter, nor is, nor ever should be: and that John condemned of treason against
his brother Richard, is not, nor ever was the true and lawful king, nor could
give the kingdom, although he Arthur, for which he was condemned in his own
Court. Moreover, no King or Prince can give away his kingdom without the
consent of his Barons, who are bound to defend it: And if the Pope be
determined to defend such an error, he will give a most pernicious example to
all kingdoms. All the Nobility therefore of the kingdom cried out with one
voice, That for this point they would fight even to death. This was at Lions a
little after Easter in the year 1216. An. 1216.
The day following Philip gave the Legate audience, commanding his son Lewis
to be present, where all this business was again disputed. The Lewis to enter
into England, and threatened the father under pain of excommunication not to
permit him: whereupon Lewis departs, the Legate demanding of Philip safe
conduct for himself, which Philip willingly granted unto him by his letters:
But if perhaps, says he, you fall into the hands of the Monks of Eustachius,
or any other belonging unto Lewis, which keep the sea coasts, blame not me:
and so with discontent he departs the Court. Lewis being resolved to this
enterprise, who also challenged a title to the kingdom by the right of his
mother, protested to his father even with tears, That having given his word to
the Barons of England to aid and succor them, he had rather for a time to be
excommunicated by the Pope, than incur the discredit of falsehood; Waldo, who
with all the Bishops of his faction excommunicateth Lewis with burning lights,
with all his adherents and followers, ordaining, that every Saboth and
festival day, throughout all England this sentence should be published. Lewis
nevertheless proceeds in his expedition, whom the death of John in the mean
time stays, which ended the hatred of the Barons. Wherefore recompensing
Lewis for his pains and expenses employed in their defense, they established
his son in his place. All the circumstances of these proceedings are wholly
related by Matthew Paris, Math. Paris. in Johan.
who was an eye witness of these affairs, and are there worth the reading.

Innocent the Western people having taken Constantinople, created Emperor
thereof Baldwin Earl of Flanders: and he, as depending of the Latin Church,
made the Greek Church forthwith subject thereunto. Notwithstanding he could
not hereby keep the favor of Innocent, who required such things as seemed
unjust unto him, complaining, That he let the Patriarch of Constantinople sit
beneath him on his left hand; signifying that Innocent preferred the dignity
of the Priesthood far above the Imperial, and thinking that what in this
behalf he took away from the Emperor, would be so much the more gained for
himself. Baldwin therefore writing unto him, could not hide from him that this
was not the voice of Peter, who on the contrary commands, 1. Pet. 2. verse.
13. and 14.
Be ye And therefore he subjected Ecclesiastical dignities unto secular
powers. Hence it is that we have that Decretall of Innocent directed to
Baldwin, wherein he expounds unto him this place of S. Peter: and his
divinity here is worth the noting: The Apostle, says he, wrote unto his
subjects, and provoked them to the merit of humility, yea rather unto
strangers of all sorts, scattered in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, etc. By what
right were these his subjects, unless it be in as much as they were Christ's
sheep, who acknowledged his voice in Peter? He proceeds, If thy exposition
take place, it will then follow, Extra de Maioric. and obedientia c. 6.
solicitae.
that every servant also should bear rule over Priests; for it is there said,
Be ye subject to every But he ought not to be ignorant, that the Greeks
interpret the word (...) by (...), Order: Oecumenius, (...), Excellency,
power. And here it is he alleges that pleasant allegory of the two great
lights, of which we have above spoken: Whence consequently, says the Sum,
The Empire is not above the Priesthood, but under it, and is held to obey it.
Also, Bishops ought not to be under Princes, but above them: and this saying is
very worthy to be alleged.

We have before made mention of new traditions intruded for articles of the
faith in the Council of Lateran. Peter Cantor a most learned Divine was there
present, who delivered there a long speech of the multiplicitie of vain
ceremonies, and of the profanation of the service of God; by occasion of which,
that Verbum abreuiatum, where he sharply inueyeth against them; but he told a
tale to them that had no ears to hear. Also flourished at the same time in
England, Walter Mapez Archdeacon of Oxford, a man of excellent wit, who in his
verses painteth forth in their right colors, the life of Popes, the exactions
and rapines of the Court of Rome, the excess, hautinesse and pride of the
Prelates, as may be read in his Book, entitled, Diverse poemes of the
corrupted state of the Church, which are longer than can be here fitly
inserted: The beginning thereof is thus, Roma mundi caput est, sed nil capit
mundum,
Quod pendet a capite totum est immundum.
Rome is our head, which nothing but uncleanness does embrace:
And in the same, all filthiness (that is) has wholly place.


But among the rest he composed a treatise, entitled Apocalypsis Pontificis
Goliath, by which name he signified, that Antichist was revealed in the Pope.
Also praedicationem Goliath, the beginning whereof is, Viri venerabiles, etc.
and other treatises in Papam and Curiam, and de malis Curiae Romanae, against
the Pope and his Girald. Cambrens. l. 3. c. 1. and 14. in speculo Ecclesiae.
and of the evils of the Court of Rome. Giraldus Cambrensis makes mention of
him in his Mirror of the Church, and witnesses that he was a man in great
estimation in that age.

In the mean season, the Waldenses or Albigenses multiplied in France,
maintayning and publishing every where their doctrine above mentioned, and did
so spread themselves from the Alps to the Pyrenean mountains, that very many
both in Cities and Countries departed from the traditions of the Church of
Rome; yea many great and noble men joined unto them, as namely, Raymund Earl
of Thoulouse and of S. Giles, the Kings cosen, Raymund Roger Vicount of
Besiers and of Carcassonne, Peter Roger Lord of Gabaret, Raymund Earl of Gasto
Prince of Bearne, the Earl of Bigorre, the Lady de la vaur, the Earl of
Carman, Raymund de Terms, Americ de Montrueil, William de Menerbe, and infinite
others, both Lords and Gentlemen; men truly of that rank, that no man of sound
judgment will think, they would have exposed to manifest danger their life
fortunes and honor for the defense of vices and errors so execrable as they
were charged withal: On the contrary it must needs be (whatsoever the Monks
of that time, and the Popes champions do prate) that by the only force of
their consciences they were moved thereto. And this does William Paradin
acknowledge in his Annals of Bourgundie, who testifies that he had red
Histories that clearly justified the Albigenses, Innocent then, about the year
1208, sent first unto them two Legates, the Bishop of Oxford and Dominicus, to
have a conference with them at Carman; and presently joined unto them the
Cistertian Abbot with twelve others of the same order, and again held a
conference with them at Pamiers: And of the part of the Albigenses were
defendants, Theodore (before Canon of Neuers) Baldwin and Bernard of Simorre
and others. Dominicus, whom the Pope (having been, as he said, warned in a
dream) had chosen to uphold his Palace of Lateran that otherwise was ready to
fall to ruin; he has recourse to other counsels, which these fore-proceedings
did but color, for form sake. He therefore excommunicateth Earl Raymund,
whose authority was chiefest, exposes his Country for a prey, discharges
and absolueth all men that were bound by Apostolic authority, affirming, that
to him that had not kept his faith with God, faith ought not to be kept; and
also gives leave to all men to attempt against his person, and against all the
Albigenses, no less than against the Saracens, largely promising them the like
indulgences; Insomuch also that the money that had been appointed for the holy
war is turned to the slaughter of Christians; The cross which in times past
was (at least in pretense) assumed against the infidels, is now taken up for to
crucify Christ in his members, by a new and horrible example. So that, such
was the fury or ignorance of that age, he incited many Princes, Lords, and
Prelates to assemble themselves on all parts, to Raymund is astonished, and
promises obedience to the Church of Rome. But (mark here the manner) Almarick
the Popes Legate, General of this army, draggeth him into the Church by a
stole cast about his neck, and with scourgings. From thence the countries are
laid wast, Towns are sacked, and all places filled with slaughters, fire, and
ruin; nevertheless the Albigenses courage failed not utterly, but many times
renewed the war. Earl Raymund also, after this so great disgrace, finding
himself no gentlier used by the Pope, takes arms again with them, assisted
Raymund is constrained to withdraw himself into Arragon, and the Albigenses
forced to forsake the champian Country and fly unto the mountains, and some
unwarlike families to seek new countries to inhabit. Mean time, it is here to
be noted, that although this war was made in France, yet King Philip
Augustus was not the head thereof, but the Pope and his Legate, who made it his
own conquest that was won in this war. The King only suffered his subjects
to enrol themselves for the Popes wars, and the Lords of the Kingdom to lead
troops of soldiers thither. An. 1215.
For in the year 1215 Peter the Popes Legate in a Synod holden at Monpellier in
the name of Innocent, appoints Simon Earl of Montfort Prince and Lord of his
conquest, others say Guardian, until the Council of Lateran should more fully
determine of it. The Albigeois History also notes, that Lewis the Kings
eldest son coming at that time into the army, the Legate was not well
pleased at it, fearing least he would dispose of the Land by right of war
gotten to the Pope, which the Sovereign Lord himself had so long time
abandoned to the poison of heresy. Therefore in the Council of Lateran, the
Pope pronounces Simon Earl Montfort, Lord of all that had been Raymunds, yet
on condition that he should do homage for it to the King, which also the King
admits. But presently after, all Simon to Raymund his son, and by this
means the hearts of the Albigenses were restored: So that new work is made,
the war revived again, Bishops and crossed soldiers sent for from all parts;
and whilst they lost in one place and gained victory in another, the Earl of
Montfort having nine months besieged the city of Thoulouse, in a sallie
received a blow with a stone, whereof the same day he dyed, so that the city
was delivered from siege, and the Albigenses got the vpperhand. This Simon de
Montfort was indeed a man of courage, and a great captain, but particularly
noted of ignorance, which perpetual enemy of truth we have also found in our
days; so as they only have persecuted it, as never had, nor would have the
care Peter des Vallees, and out of the Chronicle of Montfort it self.

In the mean season, whether it were by reason of the dispersion of the
Waldenses, or for that in other Provinces God, had made the truth known, at
the same time in diverse places the like sermons were heard, and by consequence
had the like persecutions: Chronic. Hirsaug. Naucler. 2. vol. Gener. 41.
For Trithemius, and others both before and after him, recite, That in the
city of Strasbourge, for the same, were burned to the number of fourscore;
and in the country about it were slain an hundred in one day. Nauclerus
says, That in Italy this doctrine (which he calls heresy) wonderfully
increased, as well among the Nobility as the common people; and that every
year Bruschius says, That at Mentz were burned nine and thirty. And from this
time forth nothing is more frequent, these ashes having been as it were by the
breath of Gods spirit strewed into all the corners of Europe; and yet this
cannot be ascribed to any conniuence, Trithem. in Chron. Hirsaug. Godofrid.
Monach. in Annalibus.
or tolleration of it: For Trithemius and the Monk Godfrey tells us
plainly, That Conrade of Marpurg, an Apostolic Inquisitor, was w^nt to prove
these men attainted of heresy, if they denied it, Iudicio ferri candentis, By
touching of red hot yrons, and those whom the iron burned he delivered over to
the secular power, as heretics, to be burned. So all, a few excepted, that
were once accused, and brought to this trial, were condemned to the fire. Some
believed that he had condemned many And a few pages after he adds, In this
time many noble and ignoble, Clergy men, Monks, Nuns, Burgesses, citizens,
and country people, in diverse places of Germany, were under the name of
heresy condemned to the fire, by a sentence (as some thought) too rash and
headlong; and that by a Friar of Marpurg, of the Order of Preachers, who had
been appointed by the Apostolic See general Inquisitor of heretics. For, as
one writes, the same day that any man was accused, whether justly or unjustly,
no refuge of any Appeal or defense being able to help him, he was condemned
and cast into the cruel flames. And a little before speaking of the great
number of them discovered in Germany, Italy, and principally in Lombardie, he
says, They which had been taken Now he ascribes unto them the enormities
above refuted, but I pray you who will believe that they would voluntarily
undergo the fire for such things? None other, truly, but monks could write
these things, whom no man hardly will be found so sottish as to believe. At
length, says Trithemius, this Conrade having made himself by certain
gentlemen, who had found no place of pardon or favor with him. Whereas we
said, that they were principally in Lombardie, let us add thereto the
testimony of an Author of those times, though an adversary: In all the cities
(says he) of Lombardie, and in other kingdoms and lands, they had many
Auditors, and disputed in public, and called the people to solemn stations in
a hall, and in the field, and preached on the tops of houses: There was none
that durst hinder them, by reason of the power and multitude of their
favorers. I have been often present at the Inquisition, and at their
examination, and there has been reckoned up And this so notable an opposition
happened in the time of the Council of Lateran, so famous for new inventions,
and of Innocent the third, whom they are wont in all qualities to compare with
Hildebrand.

51. PROGRESSION.
The voyage of Frederick the Emperor to the Holy Land, and of the affairs
and accidents there, with the wicked practices of Pope Gregory the ninth
against him in his absence; and of the tumults and factions in Italy, stirred
up by the said Gregory. Of his malicious

FRederick the second, being sometimes brought up under Innocent the third,
Apud Sigon. de regno Jtal. l. 7. inter literas Frederici 2. quae apud
Bononiens. seruantur.
as soon as he came to the Empire, found as little courtesy at the hands of
Honorius the third, Gregory the ninth, and Innocent the fourth, as his
grandfather and father, Henry and Frederick the first, had found before at the
hands of their predecessors: For when as purposing with himself to go into
Italy, in the year 1220, he had sent before Conradus Bishop of Spires, his
Chancellor, with a large commission, Honorius construing this as an alarm, and
much distasting the tenor of his commission, wherein he styled himself King of
the Romans and Sicilia; directing the same to all Prelates, Marquesses, and
Earls, in Lombardie, Romaniola, Tuscan, and throughout all Italy: and
declaring thereby, That he had sent before Conradus his Lieutenant, Bishop of
Spires, and Chancellor of the Empire, to take fealty of them, and other rights
belonging to him, without appeal to any other: was so exceedingly offended
thereat, the rather, for that Conradus in his proceedings termed himself
Fredericks Fredericks voyage into Italy. For they of Milan, by the persuasion
of Honorius, shut the gates of the city against him, and other cities by his
procurement did the like: But he setting light by them, passes on to Rome,
commanding the ambassadors of the cities to follow him thither. Now because
it was not safe for Honorius to refuse the coronation of Frederick, who was
ready to take the accustomed oath, he wrested another oath from him, That by a
day limited he should make a voyage to the Holy Land: desiring nothing more
than to keep him far from Italy. Frederick therefore making a step into
Sicilia, settles that kingdom, and leaving Conradus in Italy, returns into
Germany, where he Johannes Bremensis, king of Jerusalem, comes to Rome,
desiring aid and succor from the Pope, to support the declining state of the
Christians in Syria. The Pope embracing this opportunity, persuades John to
tender Yolanda his daughter unto Frederick, and to give him with her in marriage
the kingdom of Jerusalem, upon condition that he should undertake to recover
the same from the Infidels: which Frederic accepted of, requiring only two
years respite for settling the state of Lombardie. This was concluded on upon
pain of excommunication, which was presently denounced by the Cardinals; and
should actually take effect upon Fredericks breach of covenant. Now whilst
Frederick for the settling of the affairs of Henry out of Germany, the
confederat cities of Lombardie growing jealous hereof, and thereupon combining
themselves in a straiter league against Frederick, stopped the passage of Henry,
and increast their forces. Honorius himself did much mislike hereof,
foreseeing that Frederick would hereby excuse the delay of his voyage to the
Holy Land: and at this time, in the year 1227, died Honorius, and Cardinal
Hugoline, An. 1227.
called Gregory the ninth, succeeded him; who without any respect does so
press Frederick, as he commands all those of the Croysado to be ready at
Brundusium on the day of the Assumption, where he presently imbarkes his whole
army: but falling sick, after three days sailing, returned back again, not
Gregory would admit no excuse, but complained to all Princes, That Frederick
was convicted of perjury, by breach of his contract made with Honorius, and
therefore stood ipso facto excommunicated. On the other side, Frederick excused
himself by his letters, yet extant in Vrsperge, complaining much that the Pope
refused to give audience to the Cardinal of Brundusium, whom he sent of
purpose to the Council to make his defense. Collenutius ex Ricobal^. l. 4.
It is not my purpose here to justify Frederick, but Ricobaldus discouers the
ground of this malice, That whereas Gregory was desirous to make Frederick more
firm unto him by an alliance of marriage, this offer was rejected by the
Emperors children, and Frederick was afraid least in his absence he should
invade the kingdom Abbas Vrsperg.
The Abbot of Vrsperge, being a man of note in that age, has given this
judgment of him: This Gregory, says he, being a proud man, in the first
year of his Popedom began to excommunicat Frederick the Emperor, upon false
and frivolous causes, and contrary to all order of judicious proceeding. He
vpbraided him, That the Church of Rome under the tuition of Innocent the third,
had been a mother unto him. Frederick answers, That she was rather a
stepmother, being the root and fountain of all his troubles: And therefore he
sets before the eyes of Princes her rapines, sacrileges, simonies, and
injurious attempts against kings and kingdoms; alleging for instance how
cruelly she dealt with John king of England, and others: Math. Paris in
Henrico 3.
concluding at the last, That it was to be feared least the Church, and that
therefore it is high time for them that see their neighbors house on fire, to
look to their own. Let us note by the way, that the Popes earnest soliciting
of this voyage to the Holy Land, promising pardon of all their sins to such
as should go thither, was suspected by those of best judgment, which did not
only foresee the mischief that would follow thereof, but felt the present
evil which already it had wrought. Abbas Vrsperg.
The same Abbot says thus, Cardinal Conradus Bishop of Portua, when he went
Ambassador into Germany, Then a certain friar predicant called John, coming
from Strasbourge, preached daily and earnestly, laying men's sins to their
consciences with great vehemency, and for the intangling of their souls
broached certain doctrines before unheard of, which albeit in some sort they
might be maintained, yet it was found by experience, that much evil ensued
thereof, being misconceiued by the hearers, who were thereby encouraged to
commit many enormous crimes and offenses: for at that time Engilbert Archbishop
of Collen was slain by his own kinsmen, and many Priests murdered. For some
damnable companions said, I will commit villainies, for by the taking of the
cross I shall be not only absolved from them, but shall also deliver the
souls of many wicked Whereupon Auentine speaking of the same John, and such
like, says, Auent. l. 7.
That to encourage men to undergo the hazard of this dangerous war, they
delivered many strange doctrines, That whatsoever sin a man had committed, were
it parricide, incest, or sacrilege, as soon as he had sowed a cross upon his
coat, he was presently absolved both from the fault and punishment: And for
proof hereof he brought many examples. Let us now return to Frederick.
Gregory upon that day which is commonly called Coena Domini, excommunicats
him. The Frangipanes, being an honorable family in Rome, taking offense
thereat, incite the people against him, and drove Gregory out of Rome, who
retired himself to Perusia. Now Frederick having settled his affairs in
Sicilia with as much speed as he could, to the end he might Gregory might
well have pacified his anger, had not somewhat else than the zeal of Christ
inflamed him. But Sigonius himself tells us, That Gregory was so much the
more incensed against him, that he durst undertake that voyage before he was
reconciled to him: Wherefore taking opportunity of his absence, under the
conduct of Johannes Bremensis he inuades Apulia, stirs up the confederat
cities of Lombardie against Frederick, diuides, or rather rents asunder all
Italy, into the factions of the Guelfes and Gibellines, the one holding for
the Pope, the other for the Emperor, that scarce any city or town was to be
found, where the higher part against the lower, one Frederick for all this
desisted not from his purpose, which he so effectually pursued, that he did not
so much as think of Italy before he had recovered the city of Jerusalem.
But so soon as he had taken the city, and caused himself to be crowned King
of Jerusalem, and had settled his affairs there, being informed that the Pope
played rex in his dominions, for redress thereof, in the year 1229, he
returns into Italy. Matthew Paris, a writer of that age, though favoring
Gregory, says thus, Matthaeus Paris in Henric. 3.
He taking it in evil part, that the Emperor of Rome, being excommunicated,
and And yet a little before he had told us that Frederick at his arrival in
the Holy land found them in such a desperate case, that the Templers and
Hospitallers, at his coming, adored him upon their knees, and kissed his
knees. Moreover, he produces a letter of the Earl of Aterne, aduertising
Frederic, that Johannes Bremensis, his father in law, by the instigation of
Gregory, had invaded his dominions, and set on fire his towns and villages
etc. And if any man made mention of the emperor unto him, he said there says
he, wonder hereat most mighty emperor, especially those of the Clergy, upon
what ground, and with what conscience the Pope can do thus, Cuspinian. in
Frederico. Abbas Vrsperg. Collenutius l. 4. Neapol. Histor.
and war against Christians. The Abbot of Vrsperge and some other say
further, that Gregory to the end he might weaken the forces of Frederic in the
holy land, forbad those of the Croysado in Apulia and Lombardie to go
thither, and caused the Lombardes in their journey thitherward to be ransackt
and spoiled, and, that he might cross the good success of these wars,
scattered letters in Fredericks camp admonishing his soldiers to take heed of
him, and moreover, that he did write to the Souldan to be of good courage, and
not to restore any thing to Frederic; Whereupon this good Abbot breaks out
into these speeches. Who would not (says he) both bewail, and detest these
dealings? which are manifest forerunners and prodigious signs of the Churches
ruin. He says further, that when it was written unto him of the recovery of
Jerusalem, Nazareth, Ioppa, and other places, he cast away the letters in a
rage. Now, whilst the poor afflicted Christians were so ouerjoyed, says
Matthew Paris, as they thought themselves to be in heaven, Gregory causes the
messengers that brought this news to be surprised and slain, and to blemish
Fredericks reputation, gives it out that the emperor was dead. Whereupon the
cities that were yet subject to the emperor, resolved to yield themselves to
the Pope, and most cruelly and wickedly to murder all the Germans that returned
from the holy land, and remained in Apulta, had not God of his mercy
prevented it. And hereby let Frederic had cause to hasten his return, who
notwithstanding with all humility and obedience sent to the Pope for
absolution. The Souldan himself used Frederic more kindly than either the Pope
or the Patriarch and Temlers of Jerusalem, that were his followers: For Matthew
Paris thus witnesses: The Templers and Hospitalers, Cuspinianus in Caesarib.
Hieronimus Marius in Eusebio.
says he, envying the emperors proceedings, took heart against him by reason
of the difference between the Pope and him, and craftily and treacherously
gave notice to the Souldan of Babylon, that the emperor purposed to go to the
river where Christ was baptized by John Baptist, where he might either take him
prisoner, or kill him at his pleasure. Which when the Souldan understood, and
had received a letter to that effect, the seal whereof was familiarly known
unto him, he detested the Who (says he) to cover their treason, procured
Giraldus the Patriarch (one of their confederats) to write letters into the
West tending to the disgrace of this poor Prince, the copy whereof he
produces. The Abbot of Vrsperge touches this in a word, saying, That he
endured much by the perfidious treachery of the Templers.

Now Gregory seeing him returned, after he had made truce with the Souldan
Platina in Gregorio 9.
that he should pay unto the Pope 120000 ounces of gold for the damages done to
the territories of the Church, and also should assist him with his forces to
reduce the Romans to obedience; which he exactly fulfilled. But it is observed
by an Historian of these times, that of this enteruiew remained to him a
perpetual rancour of mind, Continuator belli sacri. l. 3. c. 11.
for that when the Pope presented to him his foot to kiss (as the manner is)
the Emperor had kissed but his knees, and scarsely with the top of the lip,
which neglect was so deeply fixed in the Popes mind, that he could never
forget it. Therefore, when he saw Frederick resolved to appease the tumults of
Lombardie, which he ever maintained against him, he sent his Legates thither,
under pretense to persuade them to submit themselves unto Frederick, whereas it
was indeed to encourage them underhand against him. And in this business he
also employed certain preaching Friars and Minorites, and among others one
Friar John, who after he had amidst the Caroches and standards of all the
confederat Cities begun his Sermon in these words of our Savior, Peace I give
unto you, Author Jtal. Apud Vigner. p. 440.
my (says the Author) the drift of his preaching, concludes, that whosoever
should in word or deed adhere, or take part with the Emperor, should be
adjudged rebels to the Church, and so he ended, namely, Apud Sigon. l. 17. de
regno Jtal.
interpreting this peace to be a general conspiracy, unto which he invited
and induced all the Cities, and bound them by mutual oaths, to the utter ruin
of Frederick and his Posterity. There remained, that he should trouble him in
Germany it self, which he also failed not to do. For after the example of his
predecessors, by sending his Legates, he stirred up against him a great
conspiracy of his Princes, and induced his son Henry to be head of the same
against his Father, the Citizens of Milan offering unto him the Crown of Italy,
which they had denied his Father, if he would Gregory hereof, Bertald
Patriarch of Aquileia, Otho Lord of Dalmatia, and of Istria his brother,
Eberard Archbishop of Saltzburge, Sigifride of Regensburge, who spoke in the
name of the rest, so that he was constrained for shame to revoke his
commandments. Mean time, Frederick having straightly besieged his rebellious
son, brought him to that extreamitie, that prostrate at his feet he desired
pardon, and, having convicted him of going about to poison him, he gave him his
life, but sent him prisoner into Apulia. Thus are we come to the year 1235.

In the year following 1236, Frederick being weary of the rebellions of Italy,
An. 1235. An. 1236.
Gregory answers, that he should take heed he entered not Italy with arms,
nor invade the Lombards, but rather should prepare himself to pass again
into the holy Land, where the truce within two years would be expired: If,
notwithstanding, he had ought to demand of them, that he should refer the
matter to him as Judge, and he would willingly take notice thereof. To which
Frederick answered both prudently (says the History) and modestly, Matthaeus
Paris in Henrico 3.
in this manner; Italy is mine inheritance, and that is known to all the world;
to aspire to other men's, and to leave a man's own, were extreme ambition,
especially seeing that the Italians, and chiefly them of Milan, have provoked
me by their insolence, in nothing re^dring me due reverence. Intimating, that
it was no equity to put to compromise, as a thing in controversy, that which
evidently pertained to him as his own. Gregory thereupon raised new tumults
against him in Germany, the Duke of Austria among others; but Frederick very
easily repressed him. He also fostred and incited against him the rebellions of
Lombardie; but these same also, in the year 1237, An. 1237.
Frederick having overcome in battle at Corte noua, brought them to that
extremity, that he constrained Gregory til then could find no cause to
manifest himself an open enemy against Frederick, who only sought but his
own. But behold an occasion offered, Frederick by force of arms recovered a
part of Sardinia, called Galura. Gregory pretends, that all Sardinia
belongs to the Church, therefore that this portion ought to be restored unto
him; and we have seen before upon what frivolous title: Contrariwise Frederick
went carefully about to retain it, as being the ancient demaine of the Roman
Empire; and hereupon Gregory being obstinatly bent, he gave the kingly title
thereof to Hentius, his bastard. Then was the Pope resolved, on the day of
Coena Domini to excommunicat him, heaping up together many vain and frivolous
causes, which Frederick understanding, being then at Padua sitting on his
throne of justice, declared and made his Apology by Peter de Vineis, his
Chancellor, who forgot nothing of the abuses and corruptions of the Pope, and
of the Court of Rome. To the same end wrote the Emperor to the Romans, and to
all the other Princes, clearing the equity of his cause against all the
objections of the Pope: and to show how little account he made of his
Anathemaes, he sent unto him these verses: Roma diu titubans longis erroribus
acta
Corruet, and mundi desinet esse caput.
Rome in great errors long time tossed and shaken,
Head of the world no more, shall fall, forsaken.


But on the other part Gregory openly professed himself head of the rebels of
Lombardie, stirred up new commotions in Apulia, joining to himself in league
the Genowayes and Venetians: so that daily appeared some new treasons against
Frederick, some new rebellions still arose, notwithstanding Frederick, who lost
no time, passed into Tuscane, and drew near unto Rome. Now was it time for
Gregory to have recourse to Precessions, in show for to mollify the hearts of
the people, Frederick, as were wont to be granted to them that crossed
themselves for the Holy Land against the Saracens: So that an army of
Croysadoes issued forth of Rome, and met him in the field, but were by him in
the first encounter overthrown with a great slaughter. With like faith and
devotion Gregory converted against him the money that he had exacted
throughout all Christendom, namely in Germany, France, and England, under
color for the Holy Land: and the Friars Preachers and Minors had none other
theme of their sermons but this, That there was greater merit in ruinating
Frederick and his, than in exterminating Gregory writes to king S. Lewis,
requesting that his letters might be read coram toto Baronagio Franciae, Before
all the Barons of France, That he had deposed Frederic and set Robert his
brother in his place, being resolved to assist him to this effect with all the
forces of the Church. Whereunto answered, in full Council, Circumspecta
Francorum prudentia (says the Author) the circumspect prudence of the
Frenchmen (the words deserve to be written at length) By what spirit, or with
what bold timerity has the Pope disinherited and cast down from the top of
the Empire so great a Prince, Thus writes the Monk Matthew Paris, an English
Chronicler. And let the Reader judge what opinion France and S. Lewis had of
this Pope. In the mean time the Gregory to call a Council at Lateran, An.
1240.
in the year 1240, in which Frederick consented to be present, having made
truce with him. But when he heard that he had sent his Legates, James Cardinal
of Prenest, and Otho of S. Nicholas, beyond the Alps, under color to exhort
the Princes to send to the Council, but indeed to make him odious, to exact
money of the Churches, and to abuse the Council against him, he entreated the
Princes his confederats not to send thither; and declared, that he would give
no safe conduct to such as should undertake that journey, especially for that
he had understood, that the Pope having had advertisement Matthew. Paris in
Henrico 3.
Cardinal John Columna having been author of the truce, Gregory receives
letters from the Legate, That in France alone he had gathered already so much
money, as whereby he might be undoubtedly able to wage war against the
Emperor for a whole year: Whereupon repenting, and grieuing that he had
accepted the truce, called for the excellent Cardinals John de Columna, and
Raymund, mediators of the same: I am ashamed in my self, says he to them,
that I granted truce to Frederic, the enemy of the Church: Go then in have,
thou (speaking to Columna) which wast the spokesman betwixt us, and tell him
But it very fitly fell out (adds the author) that the French king Lewis
having intelligence of it, made to be stayed in his kingdom, all that money
which had bin gleaned from the clergy by his permission, Mellitis sermonibus,
and fellitis comminationibus, By honied speeches and bitter threatenings; That
by this means the Pope, Now it so fell out that Frederic was not unarmed or
unprepared against him, for he had at that very time five armies a foot, the
first before Fayenza, which he himself in person commanded, the second on the
Tuscane Sea under Hencius king of Sardinia, against the Genowayes, the third
upon the frontiers of Germany against the Tartarians under the conduct of
Conrade king of Germany, the fourth in the Marca de Ancona and vallie of
Spoletum, the fifth in Palestina, under Rodolph Marshall of the Empire, for to
defend the kingdom of Jerusalem; which he did notwithstanding the trauerses
and hindrances of the Pope, for the space of fifteen years. The war then
continuing, the siege of Fayenza dured a long having shut the gates of their
city before and behind upon him, violently assailed him, and wickedly slew
another disguised like unto him in imperial armor, thinking it had been their
Lord. Yet notwithstanding they imploring his mercy, he gave them their city
and the like liberty as to other cities of the empire: which be spoken to them
that accuse him of being prone to revenge. The Legates also returned,
accompanied with many Bishops for the Council; them he requested to turn
toward him, and promised them all safe conduct, desirous only to make known
the justice of his cause unto them. Now they refusing it, and choosing rather to
commit themselves to the safeguard of the Genowayes his enemies, Hencius
Collenucius l. 4.
At which success, and others prosperously performed in the Marca de Ancona,
and in Romania, Gregory the ninth conceived so great discontent, being withal
very ancient, that for grief thereof he died.

It is not in the mean time to be forgotten, that the Popes to color their
affairs the better, had ever sounding in their mouths the holy land, that
when under Honorius the third king John of Brenna had taken the famous city of
Damieta, Cardinal Pelagius the Popes Legate pretended that he was to have the
chief command over the army; whereat the king incensed, retired himself
through despite to Ptolomais, whereby were lost the best opportunities to do
good, and in Gregory the ninth, Richard earl of Cornwall, the king of
Englands brother, was bent to the holy wars with an army, at his instance,
for recovery of these losses, and was come to S. Giles in Languedock, ready
to embarke himself; there came a Legate to him from Gregory, with the
Archbishop of Arles, commanding in his name that he should not pass the Seas:
All which was to despite Frederic, whereat this prince much offended, said unto
them, I thought there had been firmness of truth in the Apostolic words,
and in the preachers that he sent unto me, and now Detestans Romanae Ecclesiae
duplicitatem, Detesting the double dealing of the Church of Rome, with great
bitterness of mind, to go imbarke himself at Marseille; giving the Emperor
to understand by Robert Tuing, Knight, and other his ambassadors, Papalem
muscipulationem, The iuglings of the Pope and his Legates. The same had he done
a little before to the crossed soldiers in France and other nations, who being
come to Lions, that from thence they might take their journey into the Holy
Land, found there the Popes Legate, who made them the like prohibition, and
delivered a commandment in writing, That every man Vnde haec in Romana
Curia, and in Papa multiplicitas? Whence comes this variety in the Court of
Rome, and in the Pope? Is not this here both the time and place prefixed and
appointed by his Legates and preaching Friars: upon their promises we have set
forward our journey, have sold and engaged our houses, bidden our friends
farewell, sent our money before, etc. And little wanted they from laying violent
hands upon the Legate, if the discretion of some Prelates had not restrained the
fury of the people.

To provide for the election of a successor to Gregory there remained but
ten Cardinals at Rome: they therefore entreated Frederick to permit them two
whom he kept prisoners, to come to them, and to be present at the election;
which he graciously Godfrey Bishop of the Sabins, called Celestine the fourth,
who died seventeen days after, before he was consecrated. The Cardinals
assembled again, and as they were divided some for the Church, others for the
Empire, that they could not agree, the two prisoners, to perform their promise
given, returned; till at length the Seat remaining vacant for the space of one
and twenty months, they not finding any spark of charity at least under the
ashes, were on the o^^ ^^t urged by the Emperor, who to take away all excuse
from them, sent them back the said Cardinals, having taken their oath, That
they should procure the peace of the Church and of the Empire; and who boldly
declared unto them, That if they did not the sooner provide, they would elect a
Pope for themselves, according to the ancient privilege granted by Pope
Clement to S. Denis, who gave unto him the Apostleship of the Western people.
So that in the year 1243 they chose Signibard of Flisque, An. 1243.
a Genoway, named Innocent the fourth, whom straight the Emperor sent to
congratulat by Peter de Vineis, his Chancellor: but, as he was a prudent
Prince, he foresaw what would be, I have lost, says he, a Cardinal my
friend, and have gotten a Pope mine enemy; assuring himself, that being come
to the Popedom he would be no less his adversary than the others had been:
As indeed he straight renewed the excommunication Frederick, on which they
could not agree, because the Pope would absolutely be believed, and Frederick
would not submit himself thereto, but Praecognitis causis and praeuisa via,
and omnibus conditionibus, But with knowledge of the cause, means, and
conditions, Innocent privily departed Italy in the Genoway galleys, passed
into France and came to Lions, there to hold a Council, which began in the
year 1245, in show for the Holy Land, but indeed (as the effect proved)
against Frederick. Thither notwithstanding he went in person, and was already
at Thurin, when he heard that Innocent had excommunicated him, and that he
would not hear his ambassador Thaddeus of Suisserland, a man of quality,
requesting he would stay a little, Lewis king of France, and Henry king of
England, and the ambassadors of other Princes. Which stayed Frederick from
passing any further; nevertheless he offered, that he might have peace of the
Church, to defend Europe from the Tartarians, to free the Holy Land at his
own charges from the Sarasens, to unite the Greek Church to the Roman. But
the Pope answered, These are but words, and demanded of his ambassador, what
security he could give: The two kings (says he) of France and England: We
will not (answered the Pope) because if he should fail his covenants, neither
can we otherwise believe, we must turn our selves to chastise them, and so for
one enemy we should have three, than whom in the secular power are none
greater, neither yet equal. The Pope Matthew Paris particularly notes, That
when king S. Lewis set before his eyes the danger of the Holy Land, which could
not humanely be preserved by any but by Frederick, and requested him to receive
this great Prince into favor, being ready to undergo so great a humility,
in the name of Jesus Christ, and according to the Lords example and precept, to
open the bosom of mercy to a sinner even until seven times seventy times;
he answered him absolutely, That Innocent had sent to publish this
excommunication throughout all Europe, and particularly in France, the Princes
in the end requested, That time might be granted Frederick, within which he
might personally be present in the said Council. The Pope answered, Far be
that from me, I fear the snares that I have escaped, for if he should come I
would presently depart: I wish not yet the shedding of my blood, neither do I
feel my self disposed to martyrdom or imprisonment. And so in the end
pronounced sentence. A certain Curat of Paris acquitted himself well toward
his parishioners in these words: Give ear, says he, I have received
commandment to pronounce the solemn sentence of Excommunication against the
Emperor Frederick, candles put out, In like manner Krantzius tells us, that
many Princes and Barons exclaimed against this sentence: It pertains not to
the Pope to ordain or degrade an Emperor, but only to crown him that is
elected by the Princes. In a word, the Author above cited, says, That all men
for the consequence of the matter were wounded and grieved, judging well, that
in time the Pope would grow to that exceeding height This was the judgment of
all men concerning this Excommunication, which though it were grounded on
pretense of Heresy, yet could there none be found, but in this, That he
lightly regarded the Popes frivolous and vain Excommunication. But Innocent
Frederick; who were to pass into an island of Rhine, no man following them, to
determine of the matter: mean time, he recommendeth unto them by the Bishop of
Ferrara his Legate, Henry Lantgraue of Turing, whom also they for his sake
choose. But Frederick nothing astonished for all that; The Pope (says he) in
his Council has deprived me of my Crown: Whence has he so great
presumption? whence And yet he forgot not to purge himself, toward all the
Princes of Europe, of the crimes objected unto him, which was so much the more
easy for him to do, for that (as Historians affirm) all the Popes of that
age, had made themselves by their behavior infamous toward all men. This new
pretended Emperor in the year 1247 thought to be crowned at Aquisgrane,
having ouerthrown Conrade the son of Frederick, forsaken of his own people,
whom the Pope had corrupted with money: but Conrade repaired his army with
great celeritie, and upon the very point of the solemnity gave him proprij
vulnere doloris sauciatus, wounden (says the Historian) and suffocate wit^^^s
own grief, breathed forth his feminine soul vnwept for of any. And then
began to be verified, that which ^^had^^us the Emperors procurour had foretold
in the Council of Lions, when the Pope thundered forth his sentence against his
Master; Heu, heu, dies ista, vere dies irae, calamitatis and miseriae, this day
(alas) is a day of wrath, of calamity and misery. Neither yet for th^^ ^^th
Innocent yield, but dispatcheth four Cardinals into Germany, Italy, (...),
and Norway, so much the more grievously to complain against Frederick,
interpreting it (perhaps) an injury done unto him, in that he defended
himself; And resolved to cause William Earl of Conrade, whom Octauian the
Popes Legate labored with fair words to divert from his purpose: but he
answered him, I will never, for any of you traitors, be wanting to my father.
Yet it came to that pass, that by the subtle sleights of the Preaching
Friars, who corrupted the people, William was received and crowned at
Aquisgrane: But, not long time after, constrained to retire himself from
Conrade, who got again the upper hand; and Frederick in the end being ready
to fall upon him with an army, he was forced to go Frederick in Germany,
Lombardie and Tuscanie it self, so much the more eagrely did Innocent bend his
mind to all kind of fraud: Of his domesticke servants and familiars are
corrupted Theobald Franciscus, James de Mora, Pandolfe de Fasanellis, William
of S. Seuerin, and others, to lie in wait for his life, of whom some came and
revealed to him the conspiracy, the history whereof we have in Matthew Paris,
in the letters of Frederick to the King of England; In Epist. Petri de Viners
lib. 2. cap. 10.
If you demand the Author of the same, his name (says he) we would willingly
conceal, did not the public voice reveal him, and the evidence of the deeds
accuse him, though we by our silence Matthew Paris. p. 692. in Henrico 3. Anno
1249.
would wickedly deliver any man to so cruel a death. Insomuch, that Frederick
was upon point to have sent the six conspirators through out all the climats of
the world, to all Kings and Princes, with the Popes Bull imprinted on the
forehead, found in the Castle of Scala, where they were taken, that this
treason might be publicly known unto all. The same Author notes, that at
Rome not long after, were taken two pretended murders, sent for to kill the
Pope, but there were some (says he) that said, that it was a fraudulent
invention, craftily devised, to defame was not therefore weary in preparing
other snares, whilst to bleare the eyes of the world, he published thundering
writings against Frederick, making him worse then Pharaoh ^erod, Nero, and
other tyrans; and that so much the more vehemently, as he was ^^ad to see his
secret purposes discovered, and that he stunke thereof throughout all Europe.
This horrible writing (says the Author) against ^^^^^ic would have pierced
into the marrow of Auditors, but that the covetousness, Simo^ ^^^urie, and
stains of other vices, wherewith his adversaries were defiled, did take away
the credit thereof: Who under pain of excommunication, impudently move the
crossed soldiers, one while to the Holy land, one while to subdue Romania,
another while to set upon Frederic. And, that which is most detestable, they
suos Telonarios their publicans and exactors, the Franciscane and Dominic
Friars. Soon after another subtle practice comes to light: Frederic being
returned into Apulia, and finding himself ill at ease, would take physic by
the counsel of his Physicians. Peter de Vineis, his most familiar Counselor
had near about him a Physician, who made the physic and therein mixed a most
speedy and mortal poison; and least this should fail, he had also prepared a
poisoned bath to the same end. Frederick having by good hap had warning of it
at the same instant, said unto them; My friends, my confidence is in you, take
heed (I pray you) ye give me not poison instead of a medicine: Peter answered,
My Lord, this my Physician, has often given you wholesome The Physician amazed,
fained as if his foot had slipped and so spilt the most part of it; but the
rest being given to condemned malefactors, they died of it within few hours
after: the Physician then was hanged, and Peter de Vineis had his eyes put out,
whom Frederick caused to be led about through most of the Cities of Italy and
Apulia, for to confess this wicked fact before all men. And when he had
delivered him to the men of Pisa, that mortally hated him, through despair he
dashed his head against the pillar to which he was tied, and killed himself.
Thus much recites the Monk Paris, and Sigonius That the enemies of the Church
said, that the Pope had inclined the heart of this Peter, to this fact, by
great gifts and promises; And seeing the foregoing practices, who can doubt of
it: Mean time, this unhappy Prince, began to loath his life; What we (says
he) is fallen upon me, that mine own bowels arm themselves against me, That
this Peter, whom I esteemed the one half of my soul, has prepared my death;
That the Pope, whom my predecessors have created and enriched of nothing,
labors both to ruinate the Empire, and by death to destroy me. Et obsorduit
domini Papae fama per hoc non mediocriter, And the Popes reputation was thereby
not a little defamed: Yet God the infallible searcher of secrets, knows the
truth thereof. Of which truth, we may yet give judgment, out of that which
Krantzius An. 1249. Krantzius in Metropol. l. 8. c. 14.
That Pope Innocent the fourth was transported with so great envy against
Frederic eximperatorem, deposed from the Empire; That not only he opposed
against him the Christian Princes, but also sent an Ambassador to the Souldan
of Egypt, to divert him from his friendship. And it is great pity we have not
his letters; but at least, he represents the Souldans letters to Innocent,
translated out of Greek into Latin, and by the answer we may gather what the
demand was. The sum is this, after the accustomed complements, which deserve
to be read in the Author, That God would make him of the number of them that
affect and do good, and that earnestly seek peace, and persevere in the causes
thereof; and that God would assist him in things that are convenient, both
toward them of his own Religion That he understood that which he had declared
concerning Christ, to whom be praise: And of Christ (says he) we know more
than ye know, and do magnify him more than ye do: But as touching the
Emperor, that there was friendship between them, even from the time of the
Souldan his father; And between you (says he) and your Emperor, it is as
your self does know. Therefore that it was not lawful for him to treat with
the Christians, without the advice and consent of the Emperor. And surely it
is a marvel, that so many and so great troubles, especially now in his old
age, did not ouerwhelme him. Add to these, that his base son Hencius was
taken prisoner by the men of Bouonia, and himself suddenly taken with a
grievous sickness, called ignem sacrum. At and offered to the Pope an honest
form of peace: but the Pope rejoicing at his adversities, would not accept of
it, whereby he incurred the indignation of many, and namely of the French
Lords, who began to comfort Frederic and to adhere unto him, and to detest the
pride of the servant of the servants of God. And thus the affairs of Frederic
prospered so well, that Innocent entreated the king of England, that he might
make his abode at Bordeaux, under pretense of making a general peace: But in
the mean season died the greatest of Princes, says the Author, Stupor quoque
mundi, and the astonishment and wonder of the world, having made a most noble
testament recited by Matthew in his additions. Collenucius also tells us,
Collenucius l. 4. Hist. Neapol.
out Mainardine bishop of Imola, That his penitencie was so great, in the
confession of his sins, that thereby alone it might be coniectured, he had
been a singular vessel of Gods election. And as touching the course of his
life, after he had exalted the great and rare virtues, as well natural, as
acquired, wherewith he was endued, the excellent and profitable laws he had
made both Ecclesiastical and civil, coming to speak of the debate he
continually had with the Popes, for which he had been excommunicat by Innocent
the 4, he doubts much that it was without just cause: All these actions
considered (says he) such as diverse authors have described unto us, weighing
also his Epistles and writings, I know not verily, whether they declared him
enemy of the Church, because he spoke too truly de Pontificijs, of In
exordio, In the beginning of the birth of the world; and that also which
begins, Infallibilis veritatis testem, We take to witness the infallible
Judge of truth and Justice. Out of one, among others, written to the Christian
Princes, he produces these words, Petrus de Vineis lib. 1. Epist. 1.
That which our ambassadors have reported unto you, believe it as a thing most
true, none otherwise than if S. Peter had by oath confirmed it. Does it not
Deum humeris induunt, they counterfeit God, and choke our religion by the
superfluity of their riches. To withdraw from them then these superfluous
riches that hurt them, and ouerwhelme them with so great damage, is it to do
against charity? And at length the Author (a famous Lawyer in his time)
concludes, And these are (perhaps) the things for which in those times they
thought Frederick to deserve the name of the enemy of the Church. But yet
Historians are not silent, Math. Paris in Henrico 3. An. 1249.
that he was impoysoned; Matthew Paris, Potionatus, the Chronicle of Augsburg,
Veneno extinctus, Killed by poison, and Sigonius himself: others say, stifled
with a pillow cast on his mouth, namely to hasten his time; whereof Manfred
whom notwithstanding, says Sigonius, Compilatio Chronolg apud Pistorium.
he left heir with his other brethren; for which cause many discharged him of
it, without doubt for to burden therewith Pope Innocent, which Cuspinian does
express in these terms, Manfred, says he, choked him with a pillow, having
been corrupted, whether by his enemy (and who was a greater?) or by the Pope.
And thus are we brought to the year 1250. An. 1250.


All this passed whilst S. Lewis made war in the Holy Land, who there lost
the battle, and fell prisoner into the hands of the Souldan: neither do
Historians dissemble who was the author of this overthrow: The brethren, says
Paris, of the king of France entreated the Pope in the behalf of the said king
and of themselves, that (says he) had hindered the crossed soldiers,
corrupting them with money, from going to the kings succor, and had absolved
from the vow of their peregrination, them which before he had crossed for the
Holy Land by the preaching Friars and Minorites. Moreover, he had sold the
crossed soldiers to Earl Richard, and other great men, as in times past the
Jews were wont to sell sheep and doves in the Temple, whom Christ in his
wrath cast forth, as it is in the Gospel. This is the testimony that history
gives to this Innocent: contrariwise Frederick: Auentine says, That he was
without doubt the most potent, Auent. l. 7.
and the most profitable Prince to the Commonweal of Christendom, that had
been since Charlemaine, and without contradiction, the most wise: Witness
Nicholas Cusan Bishop of Brixen, Cardinal of Rome, a man every way most
learned; and Egidius Romanus Archbishop of Bourges in Gaul, a famous
Philosopher and Peripatetick, who in the books that he wrote of the institution
of a king, to the Western Emperors of France, exhorts them to follow him
for example. The same Frederick caused all the books of Aristotle, and many
others both sacred and profane, all the treasure of Philosophy, to be by most
learned interpreters translated out of the Greek and Arabian tongues, in which
he had taken pleasure from his youth: He gave great privileges, yea the
Burgesie of Rome, to all the people placuit, it was their pleasure, not only
to bruise and break it with discords, but also to bring it into ashes, and to
cast down Frederick from the highest step of humane things.

There remains summarily to quote what commodities these three Popes,
Frederick, have brought unto the Church, in counterchange of so many
discommoditie. Innocent the third, and Honorius the third, approved the rules
of Francis and Dominick; Gregory the ninth canonized them, Chronic. Martini
and Platina in Innocentio 4.
and Anthony of Padua besides; and Innocent the fourth, not to seem inferior
unto them, enregistreth in the same Calender Edmund of Canturburie, Stanislaus
of Cracouia, and Peter of Verona. And we have seen what miracles they did by
these Friars, and from that time forth you shall hardly meet with any Pope that
makes not some Saints. Let the Reader judge with what warrants these men can
place others in the kingdom of heaven, which by so horribly wicked actions
make themselves unworthy to live upon earth. Johannes de Oppido. Extra. de
Celebr. Missarum C. sane cum olim Durandus in Rationa l. 41. Nauclerus Gener.
42. vol. l. Math. Paris in Henrico 3. Sigon. de regno Jtaliae. l. 18. Extr. C.
Propos. de Concess. praebend. causa 25. q. 1. and 16 glossa Plat. in Jnnocentio
4.
Also Innocent the third ordained Transubstantiation, Honorius made the Host
to be on the knees adored, and to be carried to sick persons with burning
torches; Gregory the ninth, that he might not remain behind, ordained the
little bell, which being rung, warns all men to adore it, the Salve Regina
also, for to be sung in Churches, and the Aue Maria when the bell tolleth.
Alexander the third, Innocent the third, Honorius the third, and Gregory the
ninth, made many Decrees, the most part to authorize the Church of Rome in her
pretended fullness of power; Innocent the third went so far as he feared not
say, We can, according to the fullness of power, dispense of the law even above
the law, which the Gloss expounds, against the old Testament, the Apostles
and Evangelists. These Innocent the fourth made to be compiled into one volume
by one Raymund a Iacobin Friar, and will have them to be accounted authentical;
and is that which is named Decretals. The Council of Lions promised a great
reformation to the Church, and here it is; That Cardinals from thenceforth
should wear red hats and scarlet cloakes, and should ride, through the city,
on horses well caparisonned, for the honor of their dignity. Think that
Christendom was hereby wonderfully well restored. And this is spoken to show
who have been inuentors of this pomp, as also of the superstitious devotions
at this day held in so high account.

OPPOSITION.
Who will think it strange, if no man dare resist a pride so inueterat, a
possession of so long time taken to rule the world at his pleasure, to condemn
to hell whosoever resists him? And yet even in this most desperate wicked age,
there has not wanted some, that have opposed themselves against the exactions,
violences and corruptions of the Church of Rome.

In England they thought all things lawful for them, boasting themselves to be
Sovereign Lords thereof, under color of the Charter of king John, who had
submitted himself to their homage. There we shall see a piece of their
government, whereby we may judge into what ruin they would have brought the
church Lewis, and Henry the third, king of England, they see themselves
excluded; they therefore have recourse to the Pope to be restored: Among these
was Henry Bishop of Lincoln, of whom Honorius exacted a thousand marks of
silver, and so of the rest according to that proportion. Such, says the
Author, was the Spiritual dropsy of the Court of Rome: He also calls him,
Leonem feritate, sanguisugum auaritia, a Lion in fierceness, a bloud-sucker in
covetousness. This Pope sends Otho his Legate into England, who in full
Council produces the Popes letters, in which he is not ashamed to allege,
the scandale of the holy Church of Rome, and her says he, that poverty is
the cause of this infamy, children of a good nature ought to help the
necessity of their mother. And note the remedy that he brings for this;
That of all the Cathedral Churches, two prebends should be given him, one of
the Bishop, another of the Chapter, and in like manner of Abbayes and
Monasteries; promising, if this be granted, to do them justice without
rewards. The Clergy of England thereupon assemble, look one upon another
admiring the covetousness of the Romans, who had not learned this moral
distich: Quod virtus reddit, non copia sufficientem,
Et non paupertas, sed mentis hiatus egentem.
Virtue, not plenty, makes man rich indeed,
A greedy mind, though rich, is still in need.


But the king by the advice of the Prelates and Nobles of the realm, answered,
as he should see other Estates govern themselves, erga tales exactiones,
toward such exactions, the Pope should find him ready to follow their
example. And indeed our Frenchmen being assembled in Council upon the same
matter at Bourges, the king being present, where sat Romanus the Popes Legate;
to whom they propounded so many reasons, partly in refutation, partly in
derision of the proposition he made in the Popes behalf, and of the commodity
he promised the world thereby, that he himself was even ashamed therewith: the
conclusion was in these words, So much wealth would make the Romans mad, and
so between the diverse kindreds among them, would arise so many seditions (of
which now already they are After which the Archbishop of Lions said, My Lord,
we will ever have friends in the Court of Rome, and therefore we have need of
abundance of gifts. But, my Lord, let the Zeal of the universal Church move
you, and of the holy See of Rome, for if there were an universal oppression
of all, there would be cause to fear, ne immineret generalis discessio, least
a general revolt (or Apostasy) were at hand, which God forbid. That revolt is
foretold by the Apostle speaking of Antichrist, 2. Thessal. 2. He therefore
protested, that he had never consented thereunto, and that he had received

Gregory is no sooner come to the Popedom, but, following the steps of his
predecessors, he sends into England his Nuntio and Chaplain, who being heard
in the assembly of Prelates, produces the Popes letters, whereby he openly
demanded the tenths of all the moveable goods as well of the Clergy as of the
Laity, for the extermination of Frederick. The king, who had already by his
solicitors engaged himself to Rome, held his peace, as being become a staff
of a reed to them that trusted in him. But the Earls and Barons, and all other
lay persons, absolutely declared, That they would in no wise suffer that their
Baronies Stephen Segraue, a Counselor of the king: in so much that he took
the tenth of the fruits of Autumn, which was yet but in the blade, and for to
have ready money he constrained the Churchmen to sell Chalices, silver pots,
and other vessels of the Altar: the Land is filled with continual but secret
maledictions, all people curse both the exactions exactio suis nunquam
exactoribus fiat fructuosa, yea the Pope himself, that it might never prosper
with him. And after that time England was no more seen without foreign
usurers from beyond the Alps, who under the name of Merchants made gainful use
of the extorsions of the Court of Rome. Whereby in a short time after, the
subjects of the kingdom as well noble as ignoble, were brought to that
desperate extreamitie, that to seek some remedy for these mischiefs, they
write letters to the Bishops and Chapiters with this subscription, To such a
Bishop or such a Chapter, Vniuersitas, the whole body of them that had rather
die than be confounded by the Romans, send greeting. In these letters, they
particularly complained, That the Pope had commanded the Bishops under to the
value of a hundred pounds sterling the year. Neither did they design them by
their names, but the son of Rumfred, or of such a one, as if they would
fulfill that prophecy, They have spoiled the Egyptians for to enrich the
Hebrews. Wherefore seeing they had resolved with themselves, to deliver the
Church the King and the kingdom, from so great a tyranny, unless they
themselves (the Bishops) would feel and suffer in their goods, that which they
prepared for the persons of the Romans ere long to suffer, they should not
entermedle in their affairs. In like manner they wrote unto them that had
their lands Matthew Paris in Henrico 3.
here are two swords. And the matter came to that pass, that their corn was
taken away throughout all England, freely and without contradition; They
distributed them in large alms to the poor, and sometime cast their moneys
about on the ground and exhorted the poor to gather it up. The Roman
Clergymen hid themselves in Abbaies, not daring once to mutter at the
injuries done them; choosing rather to lose their goods than incur the
Sentence of death; Until at length Gregory being advertised of these things,
wrote unto the King, that under pain of excommunication and interdict, he
should proceed against the Authors thereof: nevertheless Robert de Tinghe
knight, their head, that he might more easily obtain absolution.

But Gregory gave not over for all that, but the next year after, sent his
Nuncio's with Legantine power into all parts, one while pretending the ruin of
Frederick, another while for the recovery of the holy Land, for to exact money
on all sides; Matthew. Paris in Henrico 3.
Inuenting (says the History) and multiplying argumentosas extorsiones,
extorsions, fortified with arguments: especially in England, he appointed his
Legates, in show simple messengers, yet having power Legantine, who, as if it
were for succor of the holy Land, exacted very much money, by preaching,
entreating, commanding, threatening, excommunicating, and exacting
procurations; whereby infinite many in England were And here he gives us a
copy of his letters, Excellent words (says he) able to pierce the stony
hearts of men, had they not been followed with deeds notoriously contrary to
humility and justice: he would have said, had it not been for that it was
mere hypocrisy, of such as represented in their Bulls, as it were on a stage,
the pason of Christ and desolation of the Holy Land, not so much for to move
the people, as to pull out their bowels. He therefore adds, To these men was
given power to press crossed soldiers, and for money also to release them of
that vow; wherefore many,

Cardinal Otho coming as a Legate into England, at his first arrival refuses
all gifts, contrary to the custom of the Romans (says the Author) and with
his gesture won the good liking of the people: but scarcely has he given this
taste of him, but he takes all things with both the hands; from the Bishop of
Winchester alone, fifty fat oxen, an hundred measures of wheat, eight buts of
the best wine, and so from the other Bishops. And when there was a Council to
be held, he commands there should be set up in the Church of S. Paul, a seat,
nimis fastigiosam and solemnem, too solemn and too high raised up, mounting
with many steps. There he propounds new inventions to the prejudice of the
Clergy and Nobility; from Matthew Paris) a great scandal is made among the
people, with a schism; even the most simple observed the absurdity, quam
diuersis muscipulis, by how many mouse-trappes the Court of Rome endeavored to
deprive the simple people He exacted moreover of all the Clergy the fifth part
of their revenues, to be employed against Frederick, and wrested it away
perforce, the Lords of the kingdom in vain crying out to the King; Most
renowned Prince, why suffer thou England, to be made a prey and desolation
of strangers, as a Vineyard without enclosure common to all that pass by, and
for the wild bores to root up? The King answering them; I neither will nor dare
gainsay the Pope in any thing: And thereupon a lamentable despair grew among
the people. We must not omit, that at the same time was taken at Cambridge a
certain Carthusian Monk, bearing the habit and gesture of an honest and
austeer life, who would not enter into the Church: he is brought unto the Legate
to be committed Gregory is not Pope, is not head of the Church: The Church is
profaned, divine Mysteries ought not to be celebrated, until first it be
again dedicated: The Devil is let loosse, the Pope is an heretic, polluteth
the Church, yea the world, Gregory that is called Pope; All this in presence
of many Prelates, named expressly by the Author; Again the Legate asks, Is
there not given from above a power unto the Pope our Lord, to bind and loosse
souls, and to execute ahe place of S. Peter on earth? And whilst all men
expected what he would answer, believing that the judgment thereof depended
on his answer, he replied by way of question, How can I believe, that to any
person tainted with Simonie and usury, and perhaps with greater crimes, any
such power is granted, as was to S. Peter, Nevertheless he proceeds for all
that in his enterprise begun, in so much as the Abbots of the kingdom are
constrained to come to the king to make their complaint, with their heads lowly
bowed, and their faces full of tears: We are beaten very sore, and yet we
dare not cry out; our throats are cut, and yet we may not weep or complain.
The Pope imposes an impossibility upon us, an exaction detestable to the
whole world. New and unexpected services are daily thus and thus revived and
invented of the Romans, so that they suffer us not to have never so little time
to fetch our breath. The Bishops then universally gather together, and fortify
themselves with reasons, which they Matthew) seize upon his prey, Gregory (de
pecuniae congreganda vigil contemplator) a vigilant contemplator in gathering
of money together, expecting his desired prey from England, signified to the
Legate, That he should not, as before, assemble the whole Clergy together,
least they should encourage one another, and strengthening themselves with
their former reasons and exceptions, should flatly contradict him; but rather
that he should endeavor to bow every one of them by himself, having first by
all means weakened the constancy of the king, to the end that he, who before
stood for the Clergy, and had given them horns, being made effeminat, might
be for their ruin. When the Legate had de docto factus est doctior ad nocendum,
becoming more skillful to hurt, called together before him, by the Popes
authority, the whole Clergy of England, to London, on the feast day of all
Saint, and in the end obtained his full desire: For the poor sheep were
delivered up as it were rictibus Luporum cruentatis, to the bloody throats of
Wolves, by the seducings of the Legate, mellitis and super oleum mollitis,
sweeter than oil and honey, which he afterward turned into darts. The same
also did Gregory in all the other Provinces of Europe, in Scotland, Denmark,
and France it self, in which notwithstanding, according to the measure of his
power, the matter had diverse events, finding eftsoons many impediments: For,
as we have seen before, having gathered money in France, when he would abuse
it against Lewis intercepted the money, and made it be stayed: nevertheless he
continued in the same obstinacy until his death, as Matthew Paris witnesses;
Gregory, says he, being unable to sustain the griefs he had conceived (and
yet stirred up and drawn upon himself) the eleventh of the Calends of
September dyed, pro meritis a summo Iudice recepturus, to receive of the
sovereign Judge according to his deserts, etc. The greatest grief which more
inwardly pricked the heart of Gregory at his death, was for that the Emperor
anon after the feast of the Assumption had taken a certain castle of the Popes
nephews and other his kinsmen, in Campania, near Mountfort, etc. and in sign
of the subversion thereof had left a tower half ruinat, that the memory as
well of the fault, as of the vengeance taken, might not dye. The zeal of thy
house has eaten me up.

Neither are we to expect better of Innocent the fourth: from new Popes proceed
new exactions: No sooner is he seated in his Pontifical chair, but he
presently sends every where new exactors; into England, as into his farm,
he sent first one master Martin, with power to excommunicat and suspend; which
he so well fenced withal, that he presently obtained whatsoever the Pope
challenged to himself in benefices, Ad opus Clericorum and consanguineorum
suorum, For the use of says he, to exact and extort from the Prelates, and
especially of Monks, in a commanding manner, Palefridos concupiscibiles,
choice palfreyes, or ambling nags: by letters straightly commanding this Abbot,
and that Prior, That he should send unto him such horses as became a special
Clerk of the Pope to ride upon; but such as gainesayd, and pretended excuses
and causes of denial, though reasonable, as did the Abbot of Malmesburie, and
Prior of Merton, he grieuosly punished, by suspending them until such time as
they made full satisfaction. At length the king himself was weary of these
and such like extortions, who, after he had yielded all sorts of subjection to
the Pope, so that he placed his Legate in his own throne, could not choose but
be moved at the complaint made unto him by the John had made England tributarie
to the Pope, was withal burned to ashes. Therefore having assembled a
Parliament, he began to set down a most excellent order for the well governing
of the realm, and for the reforming of justice: But the devil (says Matthew
Paris) enemy of mankind, disturber of peace, and raiser up of schisms,
unhappily hindered all that, by the Popes covetousness: For the Pope believing
that the flexible English had already submitted their necks to the said
contribution, according to their custom, as well by reason of the kings desire
thereto, as for the instance of his request, sent a Latere suo one master
Martin, his Clerk, whom many for his wicked ad opus ignotorum, for to supply
the need of unknown persons, and violently took away the revenues for to give
them to the Popes kindred, being cruelly armed with the Popes authority, whose
Bulls he daily showed, new at his pleasure, and according as the business on
every sudden occasion fell out. Whence it came, that some said he had many
papers unwritten, yet sealed, that he might write in them what he pleased,
which far be it. But Iste Legatus sophisticus, That sophistical Legate
comes to the king, beseeching him, That he himself would diligently labor
in the Popes behalf, that the Prelates of England might generally give consent
to The king answers, That his Barons and Prelates are so often spoiled of
their goods under diverse pretenses, that they neither would nor could
thenceforth promise any thing, They will not, neither are they able to
contribute either to me their king, or to the Pope, who yet have promised to
aid me. And at this master Martin being greatly troubled, departed from the
kings presence. And when he presented his letters to the Prelates, they say unto
him, The king our Lord and patron, and founder and repairer of many of our
Churches, being destitute of treasure, demands aid of us for the strength
and defense of the realm, that is, of the Commonwealth, the same also does the
Pope instantly request us for the king. And there comes moreover another
unexpected demand Nevertheless master Martin urges, and is instant,
vigilantissime and incessanter, vigilantly and incessantly, for the gathering
and bestowing of revenues in what fashion they would, for the use of the Pope
and his kindred; and of his sauciness and injurious extotion, I think it
honester and safer, for reverence of the holy Church of Rome, to be silent,
than to offend the ears of the hearers, and trouble the minds of the faithful
in rehearsing such things. In the mean time the Ports of England are very
narrowly observed, that the Popes carriers might bring no more dispatches from
Rome; and there was one Multas abominationes de diuersis argumentis emungendi
pecuniam continentes, says the Author, containing many abominations for to
wrest away money; so that the king, detesting the insatiable covetousness of
the Court of Rome, resolved to provide a remedy, and to that end sent certain
honorable persons ambassadors to the Council of Lions, in the name of the
whole kingdom; And to Master Martin, in the mean time is signified by one
Fulke Warin, that he should forthwith depart out of England; he asks from
whom he has that commandment; he is answered, from them which of late were
assemble in arms at Luithon, and that, if he were wise, he should not tarry
three years longer: then went he to the king and asked if that Martin,
trembling, requesteth of him safe conduct, for the honor of the Pope; the king
answers in anger, The Devil lead and carry thee into hell; yet he commanded
his Knight Marshall to bring him safe to the Sea side. So soon as he is come
to Rome, he declares this his ill success to the Pope; And behold with what
repentance he is touched: The king, says he, of France, and the king of
Aragon have forbidden our Nuncios entrance into their kingdoms, we must
therefore, says he in great anger, make peace with prince Frederic, that we may
break in pieces these petty kings, vt hos regulos co^teramus, which kick
against us; for the draggon Voce sursurra, says the Historiographer, oculos
obliquando and nares corrugando (thus describes he his choler) which word
being spread among the people, beget a scandal of indignation in the hearts of
many. But the ambassadors of the realm of England, being arrived at the Council
of Lions, partly by the words of William of Powerick, partly by a most large
letter, declared quantu^ est extortum tributu^ iniuriose, how great is the
tribute wrongfully extorted; And after some accustomed complements to the Pope,
Behold, say they, by you and your predecessors, not having any consideration,
besides the subsidies abouesayd, Italians now are enriched in England, of whom
there is already an infinite number, in Churches, the patronage whereof
belongs to the religious persons themselves, and concluding with entreatie,
that he would remedy the same so soon as might be, especially that violent
oppression, intolerable grief, and impudent exaction, which is committed by
that hateful clause often inserted in the Popes letters, Non obstante etc. But
the Pope put them off to a long day, for their answer: neither could he
dissemble the passion of his mind, for that they complained to the Council;
threatening among his familiars, that if he had once repressed Frederic, he
would trample under his feet the English The English Ambassadors then are
urgent for an answer; to whom by a third he answers, that they could not
obtain what they demanded: And thereupon, they protesting, that they would
never pay that detestable tribute: he privily sends secret messengers into
England, who made every bishop particularly to subscribe to that lamentable
Charter of king John; namely (as it is likely) to supply the want of the
original burnt at Lions with a copy thus made authentical. But the king
hearing of it, made an oath, that whatsoever the Bishops did, he would never
pay it, though it cost him his life. Math. Paris.
And the author adds, that in the conference that Innocent had with the king
S. Lewis at Clugni, he used all the art he could to persuade the king, to
revenge him of this ipsum regulum Anglorum, the petty king of the English,
either for to deprive him of his kingdom, or to make him, will he nill he,
submit himself to the pleasure of the Court of Rome; which if he would do,
the Church, with the Papal authority, should to the uttermost of his power
assist him: But yet, that the king of Frannce constantly refused him. In the
year following, are made new admonishments to the Pope and Cardinals, by the
letters of the king, States and Prelates of the kingdom, whereby were
represented unto them innumerable grieuances, the articles of which are
rehearsed by the same author. These among others were new, that the Pope by his
letters enjoined the Prelates, that they should every man at their own proper
charges, furnish forth Innocent then was so far off from reuoking them, that
in despite of the king he made a new statute in England, That the goods of such
as died intestate should be converted to his use, and appointed the Preaching
Friars diligently to put the same in execution. Which the king having
intelligence detesting, Romanae curiae augmentosam, multiplicem, ac multiformem
auaritiam, the augmenting, multiplying and every way manifold couetuousnesse
of the Court of Rome: He also forbids thenceforth to pay tribute to the
Pope; whereat the Pope being greatly moved, resolves to excommunicat the king
and kingdom. Hereupon Cardinal John an Englishman, a Cistertian Monk, says
unto him; For Gods sake, my Lord, refrain your anger, which is (if I may so
speak) indiscreet; and with temperance bridle the passions of your will,
considering that the days are evil; The holy land lies open to danger, the
Greek church is departed from us, Frederic is our adversary, then whom none,
among the Christian Princes, is mightier, or yet like unto him: You and we
which are the highest of the church was inflamed to punishment and revenge,
there came messengers from England, who Yet whilst he waited and expected the
same, taking boldness of this hope, he commands the Prelates of England,
solito imperiosius, more imperiously than he was wont, That they should cause
to be paid him from all beneficed persons resident, the third part of their
revenues, and by nonresidents the one half, with this detestable clause, Non
obstante, etc. which abolisheth all justice. And for to urge these exactions
are sent John and Alexander, Friars Minorites, who armed with Bulls from the
Pope, and covering under sheep clothing their woluish ravening, presented
themselves to the king, and ad opus Domini Papae charitatem petituri, to
demand a charity for the need of the Pope, promising that they would do
nothing by constraint. But a while after they became proud with the gifts of
the Clergy, mounted upon noble horses, with golden saddles, decked in most
costly apparel, and with soldiers shoes, vulgarly called Heusees, shod and
spurred after a secular, or rather a prodigal manner; which turned to the hurt
and opprobrie of their Order and profession, exercising the office and tyranny
of Legates, and exacting and extorting procurations, and account twenty
shillings for a procuration but a small matter. First then they go to the
chiefest Prelates of England, and shamefully exact money from them for the Popes
use, under terrible In so much that the Bishop of Lincoln, who had ever
protected the Order of the Minorites, and was minded to have made himself one
of them, seeing such a monstrous transformation, was wholly astonished: and that
so much the more, for that they demanded of his only Bishopric six thousand
marks. Neither yet is the Pope moved at the complaint made unto him thereof at
Lions, but although they appeal unto him, yet are they constrained with all
kind of rigor. But we must bring here the whole Author throughout, if we
should set down all that he says of these tyrannical exactions: it suffices
us here for conclusion, to show the description that he Gregory and Innocent;
under Gregory in these words, In those times faith waxed cold, and scarcely
seemed to sparkle, being almost brought to ashes: For simonie was practiced
without blushing, usurers openly by diverse occasions did shamelesly extort
money from the meaner sort of people: Charity is dead, the liberty of the
Church is withered away, Religion is become vile and base, and the daughter
Sion is as a bold-faced harlot, having no shame. And of the Court of Rome he
properly speaks, plentiful setting forth the injuries thereof, which he
concludes in this one word, Armato supplicat ense potens, He entreats us
with a sword set to our throats. It were better for us to dye, than to see the
evils of our nation, and of the Saints. But these are scourges to Englishmen,
they having committed But under Innocent, Heu, heu, Alas, alas, now the
natural inhabitants of the kingdom are despised, men holy, learned, and
religious; and strangers are intruded, that are unworthy of all honor,
altogether ignorant of the letters and language of the country, wholly
unprofitable for confessions and preachings, not stayed neither in gestures nor
in manners, extorters of money and contemners of souls. In times past holy,
religious, and learned, the holy Ghost working with them and inspiring them,
were unwillingly drawn into the Chaires, which now are violently occupied, per
fas and by courtyers, wranglers in law, and barbarous. All the houses, of which
the election pertains to the Pope, are thereby destroyed. Patronage is now a
burden, not an honor, a damage, not a profit. O Pope, Father of fathers, why
suffer thou the climats of Christians to be defiled with such persons?
Worthily therefore, worthily being chased from thine own city and seat, as
another vagabond Cain, thou art forced to banishment, thine enemies prosper,
thou fliest before the partakers of Frederick, and they which persecute thee
are swift and mighty. Every where thy Bulls do shine as lightening against
them that obey thee, and is of no esteem with such as rebel. Prelates are
every where suspended, that others may he provided of their benefices, which
are unworthy, barbarous, and unknown, who seek the milk of the sheep of the
Lords fold, sheere them, flea them, and pluck out

In France, under the reign of S. Lewis, Innocent spared us not the more,
although he soiourned there: hear what the same Author says, He is no sooner
come to Lions, but without the consent of the Chapter he would give away the
vacant Prebends: the Canons resist him to his face, and threaten those to whom
he gives them, That if they came thither the Archbishop should not be able to
hinder them from casting them headlong into the river Rhosne. But as the matter
passed further, others more entermedled in it; For, says he, all and every
one saw and perceived, that the Pope did insatiably gape after money and
spoil, to the damage which is there at large expressed: the sum of it is
this, All the confederats, whose seals did hang at that writing, unite
themselves together for to defend their rights and prerogatives against the
Court of Rome; and there was named for heads of the league, the Duke of
Bourgondie, the Earl Perron of Britain, and the Earls of Angolesme and of S.
Paul, who, if any of the league have need, are to help them with necessary
forces; and that, Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and unto God the things
that are Gods: and by these new customs abolished their ancient privileges,
whereas indeed the kingdom had not been gotten by the pride of the Clergy,
but by the soldiers and men of war. Which when the Pope understood, fearing
least that were done by intelligence with Frederick, he thought it his wisest
course to content them in their grieuances, and to appease the chiefest by
giving them store of benefices; yet nevertheless he sends the Friars
Preachers and Minors to all the Prelates of France, who require of them to lend
him money, promising to restore it them so soon as he should be able to take
his breath: But king And so these sophistical Legates of the Pope departed out
of the kingdom, hissed at and derided of all men. Yet true it is (says the
Author) that after infinite extortions in France, worthy of eternal silence,
the Pope consented to king Lewis, in favor of his voyage to the Holy land,
that he might collect a tenth for three years, on condition that himself
might also for other three years following receive the like; which was with
such rigor extorted, that the Churchman that had yearly but twenty shillings
coming in, and was ready to perish for hunger, was constrained, without all
pity, to pay two of them: and of this cruelty he brings Lewis did permit or
tolerate the Pope to make these extortions in his kingdom, it was undoubtedly
believed, that his voyage to the Holy Land took such unfortunate success. Now
of all these, as we have abouesaid, these new Friars Preachers and Minorites
were the executors, being the Popes ordinary Publicans or Toll-gatherers, who
in the mean time also devoured one another, And which is terrible and of
unlucky presage, says he, no Monasticke Order in the space of three or four
hundred years or upwards, has grown so much, and so soon near a downfall,
as is their Order in twenty four years, that their mansions were first
founded in England. When any great and rich men lie at point of death, they
come diligently about them, to draw profit and riches from them, not without
Who does not here perceive the true picture of the Jesuits? And there he
further sets down the great privileges given by the Pope, for to be
served of them, which in this and other places may be read. Matthew notes, That
when they had with great industry they provided a certain stone of white
marble, which they said they had bought for a great price, wherein they fained
was printed the sole of the foot of our Lord ascending up into heaven: That
others of them showed some of the blood of Christ, and milk of the Virgin
Marie. In those first ages of the Church (gentle Reader) when all things were
fresher, how comes it that there is no speech of any such things? And in the
mean time this good Monk adds, In these days multi generati per incubos,
many children were begotten by spirits; which seeing it follows together in
the same place, there is none but may understand what is meant thereby.

Gregory attempteth to stretch forth his hands unto the East parts, and behold
Baldwin had submitted the Church of Constantinople to that of Rome, in hope to
be the better aided of the Pope, for the strengthening of his new Empire, and
there rested only, to agree the controversies of religion. Therefore Germane
Patriarch of Constantinople writes unto Gregory, That he desired nothing more
than to enter into conference about them, being ready (old as he was) to
resort to any place where need should be, to that effect: But (says he)
because no man ever can see the spots of his own face, unless he look
himself in a glass, or be certified by some other, whether his face be
spotted or not; so we have many great and shining myrrors, namely, the Gospel
of Christ, the Epistles of sieve nothe sieve legitime, falsely or truly. The
same also to the Cardinals, but that he passes further: There is a scruple of
offense bred in our minds, that gaping only after earthly possessions ye
gather together the gold and the silver that ye can from any place extort, and
yet say ye are the disciples of him (to wit Peter) that said, Silver and gold
have I none: Ye make kingdoms tributarie unto you: ye multiply moneys by
negotiations: ye vnteach by your actions that which ye teach with your mouth.
Let temperance moderat you, that ye may be to us and to all the world an
example and But Gregory answers him with his Tu es Petrus, thinking to put
him down with the only name of Primacie: And indeed Germane said unto them,
The division of our unity proceeded from the tyranny of your oppression, and
of the exactions of the Church of Rome, which of a mother is become a stepdame.
To this Gregory answers, That to him alone belongs the decision of the
questions of faith: moreover, that to the Pope of Rome belongs both the
swords, material and spiritual, by the testimony of the Gospel, where it is
said, Ecce duo gladij, behold two swords: consider, I pray you, what a goodly
course he takes to convert the Greeks. These admonitions being heard, but not
yielded to, the Grecians submitted not themselves to the Church of Rome, Forte
(says the Author) tyrannidem and auaritiam ejus pertimescentes, Fearing
perhaps the tyranny and covetousness thereof; the Pope and Cardinals having
a diligent treaty thereupon, they resolve to turn the whole army of crossed
soldiers against them: And a publication thereof being made, many are crossed
to go against the Greeks, and chiefly them of Constantinople. He adds,
This was the seed of schism between the Roman and the Greek Church. A
certain Archbishop canonically chosen to a noble Archbishopricke in Greece,
went to Rome to be confirmed, but could not obtain it, unless he would
promise infinitum aurum, abundance of money for the same. But he, without
doing any thing, returned, detesting the simonie of the Court, and told it to
all the Nobility of Greece: And others that had been at Rome, witnessed the
like and worse actions; and so all, in that Gregory's time, departed from the
subjection of the Church Hereupon the Author gives his judgment: The Greek
Church having seen so much malice and oppression, rise up against the Roman,
and expelling their Emperor, obeyed only their Archbishop Germane of
Constantinople. Not long after the Patriarch of Antioch also followed the same
steps, and proceeded so far as to excommunicat Gregory, Solemnly preaching,
That he and his Church in time and dignity was to be preferred before the Pope
and the Church of Rome, and that it was more excellent than the Roman Church,
because the Apostle Peter had first governed with great honor the Church of
Antioch the space of seven years, and there was received with all due
reverence, and likewise established in the Chair; whereas at Rome he was
manifoldly vexed with many injuries and reproaches, and at length suffered
under the And these things passed in the East.

What shall we say then, if the Romans themselves have not been able to hold
their peace? When Gregory went about to excommunicat them, they spoke against
him, maintaining, That for no cause the city ought to be subject to his
interdict: And the Pope replied, That he was less than God, but greater than
any man whatsoever, therefore greater than any citizen, yea than any King or
Emperor. Secondly, the Magistrates and Senators exacted a yearly tribute of
the Roman Church, Gregory's time. He answered, That this was a free gift which
the Church under persecution was wont to give for to redeem their peace,
which ought not grow into a custom, seeing for so many ages there had been no
persecution at Rome, but that which the Popes themselves used against others.
If this right had had none other foundation, who can doubt, but that many ages
before that, they would have exclaimed against it, and abolished it. Thirdly,
the Romans extended their county or bounds of their jurisdiction, so that they
included therein Viterbe, Montalto, and other towns and castles, which were
pretended to belong to the Church. He answered, That this was to usurp another
man's right, and that Christ on the Note, gentle Reader, the pleasant divinity
of this Pope. For these causes therefore contentions being debated between the
Pope and the Romans, he with his Cardinals depart the city, and withdraw
themselves to Perousa; thence he thundereth forth an excommunication against
them: whence came (as the same Author says) wars, and many conflicts, and
great effusion of Christian blood for many years. And for this cause Innocent
his successor set no firm footing at Rome, but assigned a Council at Lions;
and also by his Ambassadors requested Henry the third, king of England, That
he might with his good leave soiourne at Bourdeaux, because the brethren of
king S. Lewis (being prisoner among Frederick. But the wisest men of England
(says Matthew) feared such a guest, Because from thence he might soon pass by
ship into England, and by his presence make it worse, and defile it. And this
is that which Cardinal John the Cistertian Monk said, in his admonition to
Innocent, above recited, We are in exile, chased from the Papal seat, from
Rome it self, yea and from Italy.

But as in Germany their venom did chiefly spread it self, so it is worthy
our observation, to see what strong resistance the force of nature made against
that strange force. And Gregory the ninth (as we have seen) had taken upon
him to ruinate Frederick; not forbearing to say, that the Empire of Germany
flourished Auentine, that could not well be brought to pass by the means of
the Bishops of Germany, and the reasons are these, Because they were then yet
universally given to the love of arts, Auent. l. 7. Annal. Boiorum
and of the common good, and not subject to servitude; not, as now, shunning
labors, and given to sloth, idleness and pleasures; they applied themselves
to wisdom, in study on books, in loving Christ, and diligent feeding their
sheep; they took care of the Commonwealth, and provided for Christian
preaching. The Ecclesiastical dignities of these men, were first conferred
upon them by our Emperors and Princes: then, fom the time of the Emperor Henry
the fifth, the Clergy and people being assembled, and suffrages by each man
particularly given, they were chosen, with the joint consent of the people and
all the Priests, the common Apostolicae sedis gratia, that is to say, By the
favor of man, as now they do: but after the manner of S. Paul, sola
miseratione diuina, By the only mercy of God, they acknowledged they had
received that gift and office, etc. Wherefore Gregory would take away and make
void this order, and subvert this authority of Bishops, and reduce all things
to the power of one man; neither could he otherwise oppress Frederick, whom
they openly proclaimed their most dear and most pious Prince, and seemed they
would in no wise for sake him, matters remaining as they did. The Emperor then
(says the Author) after he had appeased the rebellion of Gregory by the
counsel of one Matthew a preaching Friar (for there is nothing that such sort
of men will not undertake) enters into a league with James Tiepoli Duke of
Venice, having allured into the same confederacy the Bishops of Milan,
Bononia, Bresse, and others of Lombardie, over whom was appointed General,
Gregory de Montelongo, that they might break forth into open rebellion, upon
the first occasion offered. And least Frederick should receive aid from
Germany, he won the Germane Princes and Captains, according as he understood
they were led with covetousness or ambition, in distributing Frederick, and
under pretense of zeal, the conspirators of Italy take arms; at the same time
assemble the troops of Germany, assisted with his Legates, men of chief
authority, but particularly pricked forwards by one Albert Behan, a noble
Churchman, factious and learned, to whom he had committed the care of the whole
business for four years, having first by oath secretly bound him unto him,
Frederick, a Prince (as it said) believing amiss concerning Christ, having
none other drift than to overthrow Christian Religion, which that he may more
easily effect, he labors to bring the Pope and Cardinals into extreme
poverty. The second contained an interdiction of Divine service to all the
followers of Frederick, and pronounced all his officers, vassalls and subjects,
absolved from their oath of fidelity. The third, a prohibition, that no man of
what quality or condition soever, should assist him in deed, word, or will,
under pain of eternal damnation. And he fortified these Bulls with gifts,
benefices, and dignities, for to corrupt and win more easily the Counselors
and Secretaries of Princes, according as he knew Auentine declares
particularly all the circumstances. Thus at length this mighty rebellion in
Germany brake forth; and at the same time were these Bulls carried about by the
Preaching Friars. But on the other part Conrade son of Frederick calls to
him all the good men, and inuiteth the faithful Princes and cities of the
Empire to their duty, and setleth himself to a defense. Of all the Bishops
to whom those Bulls came, not any one obeyed the Pope, and of all the Abbots as
few: they all were astonished at this novelty, all are inflamed with anger, all
protest publicly, That the Pope has in Germany no right, without the consent
of the Bishops of Germany. Let the Bishop of Rome (say they) feed his
Italians: We being ordained of God dogs of the flock, will keep And in like
manner said Sigefride Bishop of Ratisbone, and others, in a solemn sermon
before Otho Duke of Bauaria, promising at their own charges every year to
maintain six hundred horsemen for the excellent, most Christian, and most
pious Emperor Frederick. So Conrade Bishop of Frisingen, so Eberard of
Saltzburg, and Radiger Bishop of Bathaw or Passaw, in so much that he gave a
box on the ear to him that delivered him those Bulls in the temple, and cast
him into prison; Wherefore they all declared that Albert (and in him the Pope
himself) to be an enemy of the Christian Commonwealth, a disturber of peace,
a most dangerous hypocrite, and Neither yet is Eberard content with this, he
reconcileth Frederick of Austria with the Emperor; and the Pope
excommunicateth this Prince of Austria, but Eberard presently absolueth him,
and moreover, writes to Otho Duke of Bauaria, That he could do nothing more
acceptable to God, than to expel that Albert, a serpent in his bosom, out of
his dominions. Also the Bishop of Bamberge takes the messengers of Albert and
strippeth them: the Bishop of Brixen stops the passages of the Alps, to the
end that none might go to Rome: the same did also the Bishop of Alteich, whom
he had excommunicat for praying to God for Frederick. In a word, All the
Bishops not only called his commandments into doubt, but as a hater of
Christian concord, and as a most pernicious arch heretic It came so far,
that the Bishops of Ratisbone and of Bathaw led troops of crossed soldiers
against Albert. Wherefore the Duke of Bauaria himself, with whom he was
retired, began to faint, especially upon the receipt of the Emperor Fredericks
letters out of Italy, by which he was commanded to chase him away as guilty
of high treason. All which the Pope was advertised of by a devout old Katherine
Begute, and a certain young stripling called Henry, oftentimes sent from
Albert into Italy. In this extremity they have recourse to superstition:
Agnes the Dukes wife was religious (he might have said more truly
superstitious:) Albert deceives her by Henry the Dukes Secretary; Provost of
Munster, and Theodoric Otholim her household Chaplain, they affirming unto her,
That on the feast eve of Saint Philip and Jacob, whilst they were in their
quiet sleep, they saw twice a sword let down from heaven to Albert, the
Virgin mother of God and the Apostles of Yuorie, with inscription in letters
of gold, That they approved and confirmed all the actions of Albert, and made
themselves authors of all that he should take in hand. Whereupon he boldly
commanded the Bishops of Ausbourg and of Eichstat, Frederick: but none obeys
him. Then he calls them together to Landshut, yet no man also appears. At
last the Pope in his favor sends to the Canons and religious persons, that
they should choose themselves other Prelates: neither are yet these any thing
moved. He cites to Rome out of every diocese, them that Albert designed unto
him: but no man prepares himself to go thither. In the mean time Eberard
Archbishop of Saltzbourg, and Radiger Bishop of Bathaw, go to Otho Duke of
Bauaria, admonish him of his duty, promise him the Emperors favor, and
entreat him to be present in their assembly at Ratisbone, there with a great
number of Eberard Archbishop of Saltzbourg opened his bosom in an Oration,
which we have at length set down in Auentine, where after he has said unto
them for Preface, That Christ had left unto us for his badge, whereby we may be
discerned from others, the duty of love and peace; He earnestly also, says
he, admonishes us, that we should avoid false Christ's and false Prophets, who
covered with sheep skins, that is, under the name of a Christian, and title
of Pope, seek to have dominion over us, and delude us. Whom he teaches us to
know by their thorns and works, namely, covetousness, excess, contention,
hatred, envy, wars, discord, desire of domination, ambition. With what words
could the Emperor of heaven more plainly have demonstrated unto And here he
amplifieth his discourse upon Hildebrand about an hundred and seventy years
ago, under show of religion, first laid the foundation of the Empire of
Antichrist, first began the horrible war which his successors have continued
ever since till now. At first they excluded the Emperor from the election of
Popes, and transported it to the people and Clergy: And afterward having had
both these in mockery and scorn, they now also labor to constrain us to
subjection and servitude, that they may reign alone; and being now delighted
with the custom of command, and having often weighed their own and their
adversaries forces, they use the specious color of Ecclesiastical liberty,
for an occasion of violently taking to them domination, and of oppressing
Christian liberty. Believe him that has experience of it, They will not cease
till they have brought the Emperor under, ingentia loquitur, he speaks great
things, as if he were a God; meditateth new counsels in his breast, that he
might get an Empire to himself: He changes the laws, establishes his own:
He polluteth, teareth asunder, spoyleth, defraudeth, kills. This is that
son of perdition (whom we call Antichrist) in whose forehead is written this
name of contumely, I am God, I cannot err. He sits in the Temple of God,
and has dominion far and wide: but as it is in the mystery of holy
Scriptures, Let him that reads understand, And here he briefly notes unto
them, what of these things is said in the Revelation, which he applies to the
present state of the world, and chiefly to the corruption of Rome: then by and
by after he says, The Emperor is but a vain name, and only a shadow. There
are ten kings likewise which have divided the whole earth (sometime the Roman
Empire) not for to govern, but to consume it. The ten horns (which seemed
incredible to Saint Augustine) to wit, the Turks, Grecians, Egyptians,
Africans, Spaniards, Frenchmen, Englishmen, Germans, Sicilians, and Italians,
possess the Roman Provinces, and in these failed the Roman Colonies: And the
little horn (alluding to the place of Daniel) having grown up under these,
which has And at length concludes, That this Albert the Popes incendiarie, as
a pestilent fellow and a Serpent, should be banished by Gregory died.

Innocent the fourth succeeds, who (as above is showed) left nothing
unattempted against Frederic, and opposed against him two Emperors one after
another created at his pleasure. Albert also continues constant in his
service, till he was taken by Otho Duke of Bauaria in the town of Pathaw,
which with many others he had moved to rebellion against him, and being
presently convicted of perjurie, sacrilege, treachery and impiety, by his
commandment is flead alive. About the same time died Sigefride Bishop of
Ratisbone, and Eberard of Saltzbourg. Innocent ordained for successor of
Sigefride, one Burchard de Zighenhaghen, and of Eberard one Albert Pitoegius.
And when they of Saltzbourg refused Burchard, he accepts of Philip the Dukes
son of Carinthia, whom they had chosen, but on this condition, that they
should excommunicat Otho, unless he renounced Fredericks part; a part that
seemed to be weakened by so many rebellions he had stirred up in diverse parts
in Germany. Otho on the contrary, declares unto the bishops and Prelates of
the province, assembled in Synod at Myldorff; Ye have preached unto me (says
he) that the Bishop of Rome is Antichrist, and I have left the sect of the
chief Priest to take part with the Emperor, ye have persuaded me to it, I
concluded peace with you, and now again war better pleases you, ye are
more variable and mutable than an Alluding hereby to Iehu king of Israel. This
being said, Otho departed, and having joined his forces with Conrade, the
Emperors son, goes to besiege Dornberg. The Prelates assembled at

Hither might be referred many things out of the Epistles of Peter de Vineis,
Chancellor of Frederic, but which may be thought to proceed from passion in
the heat of contention between the Popedom and the Empire. There does
Frederic reprove the Pope, how unlike or rather contrary he is, by the
testimony of all men, to S. Peter; That the Pharisees sat in Moses chair;
That he was excommunicated of the Pope, by a key manifestly erring, without
having heard him; That the Pope, contrary to Saint Peter, adoreth his belly
and his money, Petrus de Vineis l. 1. Epist. ca. 1.
Then he exclaimeth, And when this gluttonous belly and stomach is full
gorged with wine, then thou think that thou sit on the wings of the
wind; Then the Empire of the Romans pertains unto thee, then the kings of the
earth bring thee gifts, then the wine makes thee admirable armies, then all
the Nations of the earth serve thee. Let the Church our mother weep, for that
the Pastor of the Lords flock is become a ravenous Wolf, eating up the
fattest of the flock, not The Lombards and men of Milan, who then in great
number professed the doctrine of the Waldenses; which that zealous man little
regarded, so that he might bring his own purposes to pass; and in the mean
time he leaves Jerusalem to destruction, and the land of God subject to dogs,
and tributarie to Saracens, whilst he troubles that great Emperor, and
makes the ways of Sea and land cumbersome and dangerous; the impious enemy
Herod, the stone of offense. In the letters also of Frederic to the Christian
Princes, Petrus de Vineis Ep. 13.14 15.16.17.18.20.21.31.34.
he fears not to call the Pope, hipocrite, Apostata, the old serpent, which
conuerteth Yet no man can impute to Frederic the opinions of the Albigenses,
seeing that in many places he inueigheth against them, and stirs up et quod
est, says he, ipso dicto durissimum, superstites etiam non terrentur exemplo,
and which is even hard to be spoken, they which survive them are nothing
terrified with their example. Now there was given unto them diverse names
according to their teachers, for to make the^ the more odious. Epist. 26. and
27. lib. 1.
Among these Epistles also we read one of Philip king of France, son of S.
Lewis, written to the Cardinals of the Church of Rome, the Sea vacant, who, by
reason of the ambition of parts in choosing the Pope, could not agree, out of
which may easily be gathered, what judgeme^t the French church Frederic or his
cause: Behold, says he, the noble City of Rome lives without an head, Epist.
35. l. 1.
which has bin the head of others. But what has provoked them to discord? the
covetousness of gold, and ambition of dignities. For they consider not what is
expedient, but what is their own will. They prefer their own particular profit
before the general, and unduly prefer profit before honesty. How then will
they govern others, that cannot govern themselves? who do good to their
enemies and hurt themselves, and do nothing profitable for themselves? The
Court of Rome was wont in times past to shine in honesty, knowledge, good
manners and virtue; and was not moved with the treats of fortune, because they
placed their refuge more firmly in virtue, than in chance. But now they are
beaten down in adversity, and non curia, sed cura, marcam desiderans, plus
quam Marcum, more desirous of a mark (of silver) than of Saint Mark (of the
Gospel) or of taking a Salmon, than of reading Solomon. Then declaring unto
them, how great wisdom was necessary in this election; But, says he, we may
not forget, that wisdom is for evil, when they which desire honor, do shun
the burden of it; desire to be chief rulers, and neglect the profit of their
subjects; fly care and labor, and give themselves to sleep and lust, and are
delighted with plays and bankets. Such Pastors truly, are not Pastors, but
may be called most impious Wolves, by whose perfidious dealing, our holy
mother Church is trodden under foot, faith consumed, hope taken away, and
charity rooted out. Wherefore he concludes, Keep the truth, fear God,
resisting and vltra, and more yet, but we will not say it, least perhaps we
arrogantly seem to set our mouth against heaven, etc. Thus spoke our Philip.
In the same Author is also read an Epistle, in which the Sacerdotal Order
complains of the Friars Preachers, who were in that time crept in: We are
constrained to lay open by a lamentable complaint, the disordered Order, which
has been brought in in contempt of us, and to the scandal of all; whereby,
in making believe that the force of faith grows, error arises, and matter
of dissension is propagated. Then he declares, How the Predicant Friars and
Minorites having conceived a hatred and rancour against them, have depraved
their life and wicked conversation by preaching, and have diminished their
rights, in so much that they are already says he, yea rather our Prelates and
betters, And they conclude with this supplication to the Emperor, That he
would remedy the same the soonest that might be, least (say they) the stream
of hatred increasing between us and the said Friars, faith suffer thereby
shipwreck, whence it is thought to take growth.

Neither wanted there of all nations diverse excellent persons, which observed
the same things: William Bishop of Paris in his book of the Collation of
benefices, speaking of the Clergy of his time, In them (says he) appears
neither piety nor learning, but rather devilish uncleanness, monstrousness
of all filthiness and vices: their sins are not simply sins, but most
horrible monsters of sins: They are not the Church, but Babylon, Egypt, and
Sodom; Prelates that build not the Church, but destroy it, and mock God, and
with other Priests they profane and pollute the body of Christ: Prelates, that
honor with Ecclesiastical dignities the members of the devil, and enemies of
God; they restore Lucifer into the heaven of the Church of Christ. He often
particularly notes, That among the Papists (that is, the Popes parasites) are
some such industrious Caesaris in Dialogr distinct. 10.
Caesarius also tells us of another William surnamed Goldsmith, who in that
same time made a treatise, wherein he proved the Pope to be Antichrist, the
Prelates to be his members, and Rome to be Babylon. And in England Robert Bishop
of Lincoln is commended for a man of great piety and learning, famous also
for his knowledge of the tongues: Matthew. Paris in Compend. Historiae Angl. An.
1250.
He went to Rome for to bring the Monks of his diocese to a better
discipline: To that Court (says Matthew) (for they obtain of the Pope
whatsoeeuer they will for money:) This Bishop therefore complains to the Pope
of it, I thought, my Lord (says he) by your counsel and help to chastise all
them that I have complained of, and to bring them back from their error; but
they, proh dolor, for money have redeemed themselves. The Pope answers,
Brother, thou have delivered thy soul, what is my grace to thee? We have given
them grace. And so being returned into England, he opposes himself against
the Popes extortions in England; for which he is excommunicated, and dies in
excommunication, disputing even to his last gasp, That the Pope straying from
justice and truth, is worse than Lucifer and appealeth from the Popes
excommunication to the judgment of Christ. There is read a certain sermon of
his, de Pace, of Peace, which he made before the Pope; where after he has
described and bewailed the wicked Pastors, that have no care of their sheep,
authors of schisms, heresies, and infidelities, he stoutly maintains, That
seeing the principal work of Christ, for which he came into the world, is the
quickening of souls; and Satan's proper work invented by him, as being a
murderer from the beginning, is the killing and mortification of souls, those
Pastors which put on the person of Christ, and preach not the word of God,
although they add thereto none other wickedness, are Antichrists and Satan's
transformed into Angels of light, thieves and robbers, killers and destroyers
of the sheep, making And here he largely discourses of them: But (says he)
what is the first cause and original of this great evil? I most vehemently
tremble and fear to say it, yet I dare not hold my peace, least I should fall
into that Vae of the Prophet, Woe to me because I have held my peace, because I
am a man of polluted lips: The cause, spring, and original hereof is this
Court, not only because it purges not these abominations forth of it, when
it alone may and is bound to do it; but further in that by provisions,
dispensations, and collations, it ordains to pastoral But of this we are to
speak more hereafter, in following the history of Innocent the fourth.

There is read an Epistle published in England about the same time, bearing
this title, De extrema expilatione Angliae per Papam effects, Of the extreme
pillage made by the Pope in England; wherein the Author having particularly
reckoned up all his extortions, at length bursteth forth into these words,
Shall we compare him to king Nabuchadnezzar, who destroyed the Temple of the
Lord, and carried away the gold and silver vessels? For what he had done this
man does also: and he spoiled the ministers of the house of God, and made it
destitute of due aid, the same does this man And ever and anon he uses this
versicle, Let all that pass by, daughter, have pity on thee, for there is no
sorrow like unto thine: For already through too much sorrow, and over much
shedding of tears, thy face is made blacker than coals, so that thou art no
more known in the streets. Thy foresaid superior (meaning the Pope) has set
thee in darkness, he has made thee drunk with gall and wormwood. Hear* O
Lord, the affliction of thy people, and their groves, behold and come down,
for the heart of this man is hardened more than the heart of Pharaoh, he will
not let thy people go free, but by the strength of thy arm: For he does not
only exact miserably above the earth, but (speaking to the Pope) take heed to
the words of the Lord, and prophecy of Jeremy (to beat down such
proceedings) which say, Thou Pastor, which have dispersed my people, and cast
them forth of their habitations, behold I will visit upon thee the malice of
thy designs, neither shall there be a man of thy seed to sit upon the throne
of David, or have further power in Judah: let thy neast be This is that Psalm
of David full of all sorts of imprecations against a most desperate and reprobat
enemy of God and Christ, and is interpreted by S. Peter to be a figure of
Judas. This is with the Hebrews the hundred and ninth. Neither is it needful
we should add any thing here of Matthew Paris, a Monk of S. Albans, a notable
English Historiographer, seeing it is enough manifest out of diverse places
above cited, what was his judgment of the Church of Rome; it is ordinary with
him to say, That the covetousness thereof is grown so insatiable, confounding
divine

All this time the Waldenses, or Albigenses, continued in Dauphinie, Languedoc,
and Guienne, and in all those mountains which reach from the Alps to the
Pyrenean. These had some release and respite of breathing under S. Lewis, who
molested them not, but in as much as they were subjects of Raymund Earl of
Thoulouse, who had war with the Earl of Prouence his father in law, whom he
was bound to succor: but the war being ended, they maintained their religion
principally in those mountains. But they had spread themselves very much in
other places, for in Germany were a great number of their Preachers, at the
sound of a bell, having called the Barons, preached in publica statione, in a
public place, That the Pope was an heretic, his Prelates tainted with simonie,
and seducers: That they had no power to bind and loosse, neither yet to
interdict the divine service, or the use of the Sacraments: That those their
Friars Preachers and Minorites, by their false sermons perverted the Church:
That the truth was held and preached only among them: And that although they
had not come, God would have raised up others even of the very stones, for to
enlighten the Church by their preaching, rather than he would have suffered
faith utterly to perish: Our Preachers (say they) have till this time preached,
Krantzius l. 8. c. 18. in Metropol. and Saxon. l. 8. c. 16.
and have buried the truth and published falsehood: We on the contrary preach
the truth, and bury falsehood, and in the end In which words Krantzius
expresses their doctrine, though very contrary unto them. Matthew Paris says
further, That they spread themselves so far as into Bulgaria, Croatia, and
Dalmatia, and there took such such root, that they drew unto them many
Bishops: And thither came one Bartholomew from Carcassonne in the country of
Narbon in France, unto whom they all flocked, who in his letters wrote himself
Bartholomew servant of the servants of the holy faith: and he created Bishops,
and ordained Churches. These Bartholomew reestablished the order of the Church
a new in those Countries, and labored to set true Pastors in the places of the
false. And the Cardinal commanded the Archbishop to be present in a Synod
holden in the City of Sens, to give counsel in a business of that
importance, otherwise he threatened he would signify his disobedience to the
Pope. This was about the year 1220 under Honorius the third; and it must needs
be, that they have largely multiplied since, for the same Author tells us,
that in a certain part of Germany, under Gregory the Robert Bulgarus, who
was fallen away from them, and become a Iacobin Friar, and wholly gave himself
to persecute them, and in Flanders especially delivered up many to the fire.
But he being found to abuse his power, and that he imputed crimes unto them, of
which they were clearly innocent, he is presently better to conceal than to
speak of, is condemned to perpetual prison. Let the Reader judge, considering
the furious rage wherewith they were transported against these men, whether as
well their innocence, as that man's filthiness be not hence manifestly and
sufficiently proved. In Lombardie at last they were very greatly multiplied,
when in the year 1229, An. 1229. Sigon. l. 17. de regno Jtaliae.
at the instance of the Popes Legate it is ordained, that they should be
banished both out of Cities and Countries, their houses rased, their goods
confiscat, and they which received them put to a great fine; and in the City
of Milan is appointed in every quarter two Friars Preachers and Minorites, who
in the authority of the Archbishop should Frederick, in the year 1225 in the
letters he wrote to Gregory, An. 1225. Jdem l. 18.
complains that they increased, imo siluescant, yea grew up to a forest; In
Italy and in the Cities began already to choke the good come (so spoke he
according to the style of the time;) And to conclude, when, the truce being
made between Gregory and Frederick, from which them of Milan were excluded,
that they might justify themselves to each other, and gratify one the other,
they took a great number of these poor men, whom they offered up in sacrifice
by putting them to death. Whereunto may the only valley Camonica they had ten
schools; as also that of Petrus de Vinei, in his Epistles, that their little
rivers streamed so far as to the kingdom of Sicilie; who in the mean time
alleges none other cause for which they should be persecuted, but for that
they withdrew the sheep from the keeping of S. Peter, to whom they had been
committed of that good Shepherd to be fed, and departed from the Roman
Church which is the head of all Churches: But were in this their profession,
above all belief, constant, prodigal of their life, and careless of death,
and which is more hard than can be spoken (says he) the suruiuours are nothing
terrified by example, affecting to be burned alive in the presence of men. This
virtue in the minds of men,

52. PROGRESSION.
Innocent to disturb Conrades proceedings, returns into Italy, but after
many contrarieties of fortunes his hopes were frustrated, and he dyed at Naples.

THe death of Frederick thus occurring, affoorded opportunity to Innocent not
only of renewing his own designs in Italy, but also of disturbing other
men's affairs in Germany. He intending therefore these molestations to
Conrade, son, he thought good to return into Italy. But it is not
altogether unworthy of observation, how ceremoniously he took his leave of
those of Lions, after the Council was dismissed: For assembling together the
Lords and Nobles therein assisting, as also the whole people, Cardinal Hugo
made a farewell sermon in behalf of the Pope and the whole Court of Rome, and
so at last began to speak in these words, Matthew Paris in Henrico 3.
Loving friends, since our arrival in this city we have performed much good,
and done great alms; for at our first coming hither we found three or four
stews, but now at our departure we leave but one, marry this extends it self
from the East to the West gate of the city. And these were very scandalous
words in the ears of all the women, who were present at the sermon in great
numbers, for the He therefore went down to Genoa, and from thence he went to
Mylan, where being received in triumphant sort, he obliged the cities by new
oaths against the Emperor, many he drew again into a new league, and they
which perseuered in fidelity toward Conrade, he excommunicated, and most
severely persecuted; to conclude, he omitted no means whereby he might prevent
Fredericks successors entry into Italy. When he came to Ferrara he preached
to the people out of a window, and he used preualent persuasions to intimate,
that this city was his: His text was, Happy is the nation that has the Lord
for their God, and the people whom he has chosen for his inheritance:
inferring by this, that the city and Octauiano behind in Lombardie with an
army: but yet being very doubtful in mind he delayed his entry into Rome;
for the Romans through his absence augmented in reputation, and the Popes
leaving Rome had now for many years held their seat in diverse other places, as
at Viterbe, Oruietto, Perugia, Anagnia, Assisia, that there they might rule and
govern over other Provinces, being uncertain what authority or power they
should retain within the city. And at this very instant Brancalone from
Bologna (a man very famous for his justice and equity) to be a Senator of
Rome, who doubting the petulancy and insolency of their Youth, would not
accept of it, without being confirmed therein for three years, and pledges
given him of thirty of the chief citizens sons, as also they themselves
bound by solemn oath to do their uttermost endeavors that they might
faithfully obey him; whom he presently sent to Bologna, there to be kept under
safe custody. And questionless he bare himself so strictly in this charge,
as he stroke terror into the best of them: but the more authority was
ascribed to Innocent, being at Perugia, to entreat him that he would return to
Rome, That so he might help his flock, Matthew Paris in Henrico 3.
like a good Pastor, and that Rome might enjoy her Bishop, as other cities
enjoyed their Prelates: For they thought it a great abuse and error, that only
Rome which was instiled the Empress of other cities, should among so many
other cities, for so long time be deprived of her Prelat For (says Matthew
Paris) while he lived beyond the Alps, gaping after the profit of concurrents,
and opening his bosom to gifts, he was vagrant and altogether unsettled, by
being resident amongst the Cisalpines. But he framing delays, they once again
urged him after a preualent manner, Intimating to him, how they greatly wondered
that he would run up and down here and there like a wandering and instable
person, and leaving Rome, his Pontifical seat, together with his sheep, whereof
he was to yield a strict account to the supreme Judge, he left them to be rent
and torn by the incursions of wolves, himself only gaping and thirsting after
coin; as also with this peremptory clause annexed, That he should either come
then or never. But when he saw that the Romans threatened the Perugians and
Assisians, both with siege and ruin, if they longer detained yet trembling and
fearful he made his entry, because it was reported, that the Romans would
presently redemaund of him that money which at his instigation they had
disbursed in the attempts against Frederick. And in effect, not long after, the
people required at his hands the damages which they had sustained through his
absence; For (say they) the world knew well enough, that he was neither Bishop
of Lions, Perugia, nor Angiers, where he did often reside, but of Rome. In
which very words we may see they did not acknowledge him for universal
Bishop; and out of doubt had not the Senator pacified the people, he would have
undergone some great troubles.

Now on the other side Conrade, Fredericks son, passed over into Italy, the

Afterward marching further up into his kingdom, he took in Naples, which
had formerly yielded it self to the Pope, overthrowing his army, over which
his kinsman William was General, and putting to the sword four thousand foot,
which were even the flower of the Italian Youth, he recovered all his cities,
reduced Conrade, which was Richard Earl of Cornwall, brother to the king of
England, being a Prince (according as the fame ran of him) of indomptable
courage. Wherefore to this end and scope he offered unto him the kingdoms of
Naples and Sicily, to be held in homage of him; Using herein (as the
Historiographer says) his diabolical sophistication, who said, All this will
I give thee, if falling down thou will worship me. Besides, his Bulls should
not be spared against Conrade, wherein he should be anathematized, and his
subjects absolved of their oath of obedience, with other like interdictions:
for he had formerly denounced him an heretic, and Richard, though he was
earnestly solicited by Legate Albertus, who was sent to this end and purpose,
not remaining satisfied in words, required pledges to be given him of the most
eminent persons of his family, as also sufficient sums of money to defray
the charges of the war: certain holds also which lay on the frontiers of his
kingdom, he demanded to be delivered into his hands, whereinto, being urged,
he might at any time retire, Otherwise (said he, speaking to the Legate) it is
as much as one should say, I sell, or give unto thee the Moon, ascend and lay
hold on her. When therefore they could no ways agree upon the matter, he had
recourse to the king of England himself, Richards brother, a Matthew) very
credulous, and apt to embrace his own prejudice; to whom he made offer of all
the Croisado forces, destined for Palestina, and they should serve in this
expedition. Hereupon grew a wonderful discontent and murmr of the Patriarch
of Jerusalem, and all the Prelates of Palestina, together with the Templers and
Hospitalers, who fell into a great detestation of the Popes delusions, that
having long time been fed with such large hopes, he went now about, not to
forsake, but rather to betray them. Yet the king of England proceeded on, and
accepted of the kingdom of Sicile offered, in his son Edmonds name: whatsoever
money he was able to raise, either of the Christians or Jews, he sent to the
Pope, and gave him authority to raise what treasure soever he could, or at what
rates soever and hereunto he obliged himself upon pain of deposition from his
Crown and State, with which sums of money the Pope being backed, he levied
an army. Conrade on the other side was no whit hereat dismayed, but intended
to resist the Pope, and therefore he the more encouraged his nobles and
subjects: And here our Historiographer, a Monk, bursts out into these words,
Whether the Pope did well herein or no, let the Judge of all Judges decide. But
for an abridgement of this war, this miserable Prince had poison presented
him, who wasting away by little and little, when he drew near to his last
breath, in complaining manner he uttered these words, The Church which should
be a mother, to my father and me is rather a stepmother: and so he left behind
him a son, who Matthew says, That having heard this news, with great joy of
heart, cheerfulness of countenance, and elevation of voice, he uttered these
words, I rejoice certainly, and so let all the vpholders of the Roman Church
exult together with me, because two of our greatest enemies are now dead, one
Ecclesiastical, the other of the Laity, Robert Bishop of Lincoln, and
Conrade king of Sicile. He therefore embracing this opportunity, found it an
easy matter to recover into his hands, Naples, Capua, and a part of the
kingdom. But Manfred, being assisted by the nobles of the kingdom, he both
crossed him in this prosperous and so his last error was worse than the first.
Whereupon Innocent took such sorrow to heart, that within a few days after he
dyed at Naples, suruiuing Conrade but a few months, and being molested by the
Bishop of Lincolns means even to his last gasp, as in proper place shall
plainly appear. These things occurred in the year 1254, An. 1254.
in the month of December. And so both the king of Englands treasure and
ambitious designs perished together with him.

Innocent, wherein his drift and maine scope was, That whatsoever had been by
his predecessors out of wonderful pride digested and decreed against the
temporal Monarchy, by them it might be ratified, and made authenticke; as
also whatsoever profane or sacrilegious act they had performed against the
Spiritual, it might be in them as it were hallowed and consecrated. To him
also the Canonists have reference, over whom he was head and principal,
having promoted them to some of the highest dignities of the Church, and many
of them also he raised to the Cardinals hat: out of which fountain sprung
that hideous gulf of forensiall contentions, and first of all that detestable
clause of Non obstante, of which Matthew so often Out alas, alas, why looked we
after these days: Behold the Courts civil are now corrupted, according to the
example of the Ecclesiastical; and the rivers are poisoned by a sulpherous
fountain. Now the manner was, that the money ordained for war in the Holy
Land, and the Indulgences of the Croysadoes were then, in their use, by the
Popes diuerted against the Emperors, and other Princes. This man, Conrade, he
should obtain more ample remission of sins than if he fought against the
Souldan: So that if any man were crossed against Conrade, both he, his father,
and mother, should gain full pardon of all their sins. He married also his
neeces very highly, and amongst the rest, one he married to Henry, Fredericks
son, and nephew to the king of England, that thus he might be adopted a
son of the Church: Which seemed a thing marvelous strange to all the Nobles
of the Empire, That a Pope (said they) would presume so to disparage a noble
and royal gentleman. In conclusion, he so pilled and polled the Christian
Commonwealth, as upon due competation made, it was found (says our and that
most truly and exactly, that this present Pope, Innocent the fourth, had more
impouerished the Church universal, than all his other predecessors, from the
time of the primitive Papacy: and the revenues of the Clergy by him alienated
in England, which had aunciently been endowed therewith by the Church of Rome,
amounted to more than seventy thousand marks, whereas the kings mere revenue
could not be valued at a third part so much.

OPPOSITION.
And for that same Robert Bishop of Lincoln, whom we formerly spoke of,
Innocent had commanded him to perform some wicked office, Which (says
Matthew) he did both to him and diverse other Prelates of England: Wherefore he
made answer by an Epistle, which he produces whole and entire in this tenor:
Health: Your discretion shall understand, Matthew. Paris in Henrico 3.
that devoutly and reuerenly I obey with filial affection, the Apostolical
injunctions, and so affecting reverent honor, I oppugn and resist such as are
opposite to commands Apostolical; for to both these courses I am obliged by
commandment divine. The Apostolical commands neither can be nor are any
other than the doctrine of the Apostles, and of our Lord Jesus Christ, Master
and head of the Apostles, whose figure and person our Lord the Pope specially
represents in the Hierarchy of the Church, being consonant and conformable.
And there he enters into a detestation Non obstante, From whence springs up
(says he) the head and fountain of inconstancy, boldness, and obstinacy,
of shameful lying, deceiving, distrustfully believing, or giving credit to
another; and so from these a number of other subsequent vices, which do but
disturb and coinquinat the purity of Christian religion, and the peace and
quiet of civil conversation. Furthermore (says he) next to the sin of
Lucifer (which shall be the same of Antichrist the son of perdition, in the
end of times, whom God shall destroy with the breath of his mouth) there
neither is nor can be any kind of sin so opposite and contrary to the
doctrine Evangelical, and of the Apostles, and to the same our Lord Jesus
Christ, so odious, detestable, and abominable, as to kill and destroy souls,
by defrauding them of Pastoral offices and ministeries, etc. The introductors
And so inferring, that his commandments were of this nature, and therefore
not Apostolical: For this (says he) would be but either a manifest defect,
corruption, or abuse of his sacred and absolute power, or an absolute recession
from the glorious throne of our Lord Jesus Christ, and a present accession to
the pestilentiall chair of infernal torments, intimated in the two
forementioned Princes of Upon the receipt of these letters Innocent so stormed,
as he vowed by Peter and Paul, That if a certain natural clemency did not
dissuade me, I would bring him to such a confusion, that he should be an
example, terror, prodigy, and a very fable to all the world: Is not the king
of England our vassal, nay and to say more, our bondchild, who at a beck of
our finger can imprison and impose upon him any reproach or shame? And the
Cardinals could hardly assuage his fury, by saying, How it was not convenient
to denounce any hard Decree against the Bishop; for, to confess but truth,
said they, these things are most true which he infers: Condemn him we
cannot, he is a Catholic, nay and a most holy one, more holy, more religious,
and more excellent than our selves, and of a far better life, so But observe
the reason which he annexed to all the former allegations, Especially (says
he) because it is known that a departure must one day happen. That departure
foretold by the Apostle in the second to the Thessalonians, cap. 2. Antichrist
himself being to be the author hereof, whom they expected and looked for; not
as they would have it believed, from Babylon, but even out of the heart of the
Church, from Rome it self. And hereupon grew Innocents mortal hatred to
Lincoln. But this very year he fell sick in his house at Buckdon, where
speaking to Friar John of S. Giles, one of the Predicant Order, he both sharply
reprehended him and others of his institution, vowing poverty, That they
Christ (said he) came into the world that he might gain souls; and therefore
whosoever fears not to loose souls, he may not worthily be termed an
Antichrist? God in six days created the whole world, but for man's And here he
spoke liberally against the rapines and simonies of the Roman Church, which
enjoined the Friars Mendicants to be always near at hand to those who were
departing the world, to the end to persuade them to bequeath a part of their
goods by Will and Testament for the aid of the Holy Land, or if they recovered
health to vow a journey thither. They sold the Croisado to lay persons, even as
they were wont to sell oxen and sheep in the Temple: they sold many things,
and these, peradventure, to be appropriated to their own uses. And we also
viewed the Popes letter, wherein we found written, That they which made such
Testaments, took upon them the cross, or affoorded In brief: Eius auariciae,
totus non sufficit orbis,
Eius luxuriae, meretrix non sufficit omnis.
The whole world not sufficed his avarice to content,
Nor harlots all, his lust: so ill his mind was bent.


And it was in this, that he did manifest by what means the Roman Court, like
Behemoth (in Job) promised to swallow up all Jordan in his throat, might usurp
unto her self the goods of all intestates, and distinct legacies, and for the
more licentious performance hereof, how she might draw the king to be a
pertaker and consort with her, in her rapines: For (said he) the Church shall
never be freed from her Egyptian servitude, till she embrue her sword in
blood: But toward the end of this prophecy, being much pressed with sobs and
tears, this same holy Bishop of Lincoln, Robert the second, left the
banishment of this world, which he never loved, who was a severe reprehender of
our lord the Pope and the king, a reformer of Prelates, a corrector of Monks,
the director of Priests, an instructor of Clerks, a supporter of scholars, a
preacher to the people, a persecutor of incontinent men, a careful searcher of
diverse Scriptures, and the very

Innocent notwithstanding, out of an obstinat will, against all his Cardinals
consent, caused his bones to be thrown out of the Church, and that he should
be proclaimed over all the world, for an Ethnic, disobedient, and rebellious;
and such a letter he caused to be written, and sent over to the king of
England, in that he knew the king would willingly assume any occasion of rigor
toward him, and to prey upon the Church. But the night following the Bishop of
Lincoln appeared to him, in his Pontifical roabes, and so with a severe
countenance, and ghastly aspect, he approached and spoke to the Pope in a
lamentable and mournful voice, as he lay in his bed, taking no rest, and
giving him a forcible push on the side with the point of the Pastoral staff
he carried till his whole army was difcomfited, and then his sadness
converting into deep and grown melancholy, he ended his life at lifting up
his eyes, which were almost drowned in death, he said, Poor miserable souls,
why do you lament? do not I leave you all rich? What would you have more? and
instantly upon the words he gave up the Ghost, his soul being to undergo the
strict and severe sentence of the everliving God. Auent. l. 7.
Auentinus observes thus much in few words: that Innocent entending to devour,
and swallow up the kingdom, from Conrades son of 2 years old was suddenly
taken away, in a day divinely prescribed unto him (as we find in the Annals)
by the supreme Caestr. l. 7.
Caestrensis says that the same night he died a voice was heard in the Popes
Palace, Veni miser ad Iudicium: and a pale deadly wound was found in his side:
But the vision of a certain Cardinal which happened the same week, is worthy
of special note, and Matheus conceales his name for some purpose: He though
the was in heaven, before the Majesty of the everliving Lord, sitting on the
Tribunal; and on his right hand stood the blessed Virgin, and on his left, a
certain noble Matron very venerable both in body and in habit, who stretching
out her right arm over her left hand, she supported as it were a Temple, on
the Frontispice of which Temple, was written in golden letters, Ecclesia; and
Innocent the fourth prostituted before his divine Majesty, with hands joined
and erected, and bended knees, requiring pardon and not Of the same kind was
that of Alexander his successor, who saw him in this state, and a beautiful
woman expostulating with him before God on his throane in these words:
Dissipasti Ecclesia^ Dei, du^ viueres, and carnalis penitus factus etc. And he
heard God denouncing the same sentence formerly related; whereupon (says the
author) being vehemently terrified, for the space of certain days, he could
not well come to himself again: and therefore one presenting him a gift, to
obtain from him a grant of a certain church, he made answer: No brother, the
Church seller is dead: but it is thought, that if out of All which things have
some reference to Robert of Lincolnes History, whom he, of all Ecclesiastical
persons, took to be his greatest enemy, although he is celebrated by writers
of those time, to have been a man most renowned, both for sanctimonie and
miracle. Matheus auers, that diverse excellent men were also of this opinion,
whom he had both seen and heard in France, as the Abbot of Flaie, of the
Cistertian order, James de Vitry, Robert Curkham and others. The same Author
also makes mention of an Epistle written by Innocent from Lions, to the bishop
of S. Albones in England, wherein he entreated him, nay, and by authority
Apostolical commanded him, to inuest one John de Canecaua, John, or any
procuror of his should desire it; that of Wengrade being perpetually
notwithstanding reserved to his donation, non obstante the privilege and
indulgence granted to the English, That no benefices should be immediately
conferred upon Italian Priests: And this we thought good (says he) to insert
into this book, that the Readers may discern, with how many injuries and
oppressions the Court of Rome surchargeth us miserable English: but this was,
that the threatening saying of the Apostle might be fulfilled; Except first a
departure come, the son of iniquity shall not be revealed. Behold here the
cause, behold here the matter, why hearts, though not bodies, And on this all
men fix their eyes.

Let us now come to France. We see how Innocent excited and stirred up the
Croisado against Conrade, the Emperor Fredericks son, promising larger
indulgences to them that would serve against him, than to those that should go
into Palestina; for remission of sins was not granted only to every one of
the Croisado, but further, to their parents and kinsfolks also; yea and that
even at the same time (says Matthew) when S. Lewis lay distressed for all
necessary things at Caesasarea, the which he intimated to his mother,
brethren, and faithful subjects, in a But when Madam Blanch heard of this, who
swayed the French government beyond feminine force or ability, she conuocated
all the nobles of the kingdom, to advise seriously on this affair; and in
this treaty much murmuring and anger occurred, they alleging how our Lord the
Pope excited a new and intestine war, which within the confines of
Christendom raised Christians against Christians; and preaching to this end to
men ordained for Gods service, for the augmentation of his dominion, he showed
himself careless and forgetful of our Lord the King, who sustained for the
Christian faith so many discommodities and adversities. For now his foresaid
sermon was divulged over all the French confines. Blanch being therefore
herewith much moved, because this murmr grew not without just cause, she
took into her hands the lands and In the Lewis his succors were cut off, his
army defeated, all Palestina exposed to spoil and prey, and himself was
taken by the enemy: whereupon he conceived such an irradicable grief and
sorrow, that for a certain time after his liberty procured, he would not be
comforted.

The Friars Mendicants, as has formerly been said, were either chief
ministers, or in a great part authors of these calamities, whereupon they grew
so powerful, that the rest of the Clergy began to be afraid, while by their
confessions they diued into the peoples hearts, beat the Popes ears with
continual flatteries, and at length deprived all ordinary ministers of place
and function: whom they Matthew Paris in Henrico 3.
and leaders of the blind, which never studied in the Decretals, nor had
learned so much as to resolve one doubt: not shaming to demand of many, Are
you confessed? to whom if they answered, Yea; they would ask, Of whom? Why by my
parish Priest: And who is that idiot? I think he never heard of Divinity:
Confess hardily unto us, to whom you both see and hear such authority is
granted. Wherefore many of the Nobles and their wives, contemning their proper
Priests and Prelates, were confessed by these Predicants. And here again
(courteous Reader) observe the form and express Idea of these times. The
matter grew to such an head, as the Pope himself perceiving What means this,
brethren (said he) where is your humility, your vow of poverty? And hereupon
the University of Paris began first to stir and oppose, but especially,
because with their subtilties and sophistries, they had adulterated the true
Christian doctrine; teaching first, That the divine essence was neither beheld
by angel nor glorified man. Secondly, That though the lively divine essence
be one and the selfsame in the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, yet as
it comes within the reason and compass of Form, it is one in the Father and
the Son, and not alike unto these in the holy Ghost; and yet Form is the
same thing with divine Essence. Thirdly, That the holy Ghost as he is Love,
and connexed, does not proceed Marie. Fifthly, That the evil angel was evil
at the very instant of his creation, and how he never had been good. Sixthly,
That there were many verities from eternity, which were not God. Seventhly,
That an angel at the same instant could be in diverse places, and that every
where, if it so pleased. Eighthly, That beginning, present time, creation, and
passion, is neither Creator, nor creature. Ninthly, That the evil angel never
had the means to stand, no nor yet Adam, in his state of innocence. Tenthly,
That he who has the We severely prohibit this error, Matthew. Paris in Henrico 3.
and excommunicat the maintainers and defenders thereof, as men (says our
Author) that dare touch the holy hill, to be oppressed with Gods glory, and
that rashly endeavor to search out the inscrutable secrets of God, and are
presumptuously inquisitiue into the judgments of God, which are like
bottomless depthes. Afterward the Author also notes in diverse places, how
they labored as much as in them lay to overthrow the Parisian Academie, to
whose laws and statutes they would in no wise be subject, since they were made
Confessors and Counselors to kings. The students therefore were to contribute
and make a collection, every one according to his means, to send to Rome; and
every ones weeks allowance was cut shorter. But they found the Pope adverse
to their proiects, as also the Cardinals of the same stamp, who in the behalf
of the Mendicants augmented the number of Divinity Doctors, that so they might
be brought in: by means of which schism the University was in great danger
of a dissipation. What was the effect and issue of all these turbulencies, will
afterward more manifestly appear.

Concerning the Waldenses, they did so spread abroad both in France and
Germany, that throughout the course of all histories, we may as it were
discern their prints and footsteps. And also in Lombardie, where Petrus
Veronensis, a Dominican, Credentes, Believers, indicting upon them all kind of
severe punishment; when seizing on some of the principal, he was found slain
in the territories of Mylan. One Carinus was apprehended for this slaughter,
who notwithstanding the tenth day after was dismissed by the Praetor, as
guiltless, and Petrus Veronensis, least others should be discouraged,
canonized by the Pope for a Saint. But we must not omit to mention, how
Innocent, though he employed much labor and study to this end, and in
authorizing his Decretals (nor any of his successors) could ever effect that
the French Churches would be subject to them. As concerning the Canons, they
rested in the ancient collection of them which commonly is called Corpus
Canonum; Gregory the seconds time, that is to say, before Boniface Archbishop
of Magunce infringed the liberty of the French Synods, about the year 742:
which was so sound and good law, Johannes Andreas in Prologu^ l. 1. Nichol. 1.
ad Episc. in Gallia constitutos in Epist. Bonifacij l. 3. Epist. 42.
that John Andreas, a famous Ciuilian, testifies in his Prologue upon the
Decretals; That whosoever cited any thing not conceived within this body of
the Canons, he was to be esteemed a criminal of false testimony: The which is
far from that opinion which Pope Nicholas the first held in the nineteenth
distinction, above by us mentioned.

53. PROGRESSION.


POpe Innocent dying at Naples, the Governor shut the gates, and enjoined the
Cardinals to choose a successor. This was Renaldus of Anagnia, Cardinal of
Hostia, who was called Alexander the fourth. This man, whether out of the late
vision moving him, or his own natural instinct thereto enclining, gave greater
hopes of better regiment; which principally was conceived from this, because
after his arrival he solicited in general by letters, to make prayers in his
behalf unto God, That he might prove fit and sufficient for the government of
the Church; For his other successors (says Matthew) never used any such
custom: as also for that in his letters, especially in those to the Bishops of
Germany, a copy Auentine, Auent. l. 7. Matthew. Paris in Henrico 3.
he sharply rebuked their abuses and vices: But (says Matthew) giving too much
ear to the imposterous whisperings of flatterers, and to the wicked
suggestions of men auaricious (that is, to his Cardinals) his simplicity was
suddenly diuerted and misled: And his Bulls, which is as it were the earnest
and testimony of Papal integrity, came to be termed unexpected fraud;
although in these points also I cannot excuse him, that relying on the advice
of some in whom he was most confident, and by the persuasion of Pope Innocent
the fourth, his predecessor (who on his death bed animated the Cardinals
thereunto) in that he powerfully determined to continue the war begun against
Fredericks partakers, especially against Manfred, Fredericks natural son.
The which resolution was pretended with devotion and piety, because Edmond his
son king of Apulia and Sicilia: and this incircumspect Prince thought that
he both possessed the cities and the hearts of the subjects too. Wherefore he
presently set forward on his journey, taking care for nothing, but how he might
convey his treasure through France. Presently after, another Legate called
Rustand was sent to demand a Tenth in England, Scotland, and Ireland, as also
he had authority to absolve the king of his Manfred. Thus this credulous
Prince suffered himself to be deluded with these arts; nay, and Rustand
moreover both in London and other cities, preached the Cross against Manfred
in express words: And Christians wondered (says the Author) when they heard
him promise as largely unto them for the effusion of Christian blood, as
sometimes he did for killing of Infidels: And the Preachers instabilitie moved
mockery and laughter: As also on a certain day, at the end of a sermon, not
doubting to add, Be sons of obedience: And wherein should this consist, I
pray you? Why, be bound to such or such a Merchant in such or such a sum of
money. But now observe the Catastrophe: Manfred defeated the Popes forces in
Apulia, and the Manfred, yea even they who before were of the Popes
partiality, raising against him a mighty army: Wherefore (says our Author)
the usual respect and devotion borne by the Prelates and people toward our
mother the Roman Church, and our Lord, our Father and Shepherd, the Pope, was
almost expired. For though that Court had many times with great bitterness of
spirit terrified Christ's faithful ones, yet it never so mortally wounded, both
in general and particular, the servants of Christ, as both in this and the
year following; for innocents were enforced to idolatrtes, and as Apostates
And here the Author stays a little in declaring some circumstances, which were
these, Prelates were sold like Oxen and Asses: Behold the uttermost condition of
servitude: behold the sellers which should have been cast out of the Temple
and been whipped. But because it is a more unworthy thing to commit an
injury violently, than to suffer innocently, it may be thought that the
complaining cry of this will ascend up unto the Lord God of revenge. But at
length he concludes, The Pope has power in all those things which tend to
edification, not in those which lead to ruin, according to Robert Bishop of
Lincoln.

Neither did matters succeed any better with him in other places; for (says
he) when they perceived his actions so different from those prayers which at
his first Manies devotion grew cool toward him, and diverse construed it to be
mere hypocrisy, and masking of his secular power; therefore their former
hopes conceived of his sanctimonie fell to the ground. And first at Rome
Senator Brancalone, of whom former mention was made, executing justice at Rome
without any exception of persons, and the Nobility hardly digesting this
severity, after apprehension they put him in prison, but his wife escaped out
of the tumult, and got to Bologna, and there caused the hostages to be closely
kept. The Romans moved the Pope, that out of his Pontifical prerogative he
would command the Bolognians to deliver them: who to gratify the Romans,
omitted neither threats nor entreats herein; yet he had the Brancalone. The
Pope, being hereunto solicited by the Nobility, excommunicated both the
Senator and all his followers, that is to say, the people of Rome, omnes cachi
nantes, all of them with scorn and laughter condemned and mocked at his
threatenings. The Senator suppressed all the seditious, not sparing the Popes
friends and near kinsfolks; and at length he urged himself to forsake the
city, and threatened to demolish his natural town and country Anagnia. The
matter came to this pass, that, will he nill he, in very submisse and humble
words, he was enforst by Legates to entreat them to forbear the ruin of his
natural City: least he should become an opprobrie to the whole world.
Brancalone makes even with the ground the Palaces of the Roman Nobility, part
of them he casts into prison, and other some he hanged, and maimed, many of
which were kinsmen and nere allies to the Cardinals, being as great a friend to
Manfred as he was an enemy to Alexander. Yea, and after his death, his memory
was so venerable amongst the people, that in hatred and detestation of the
Pope, they chose his uncle Senator in his place, and closing his head within a
rich vrne, they set it upon a marble pillar, for a monument of his integrity
and justice. These things turn the rather to the skorne and contempt of the
Roman Court, because the Pope understanding of his death, admonished the
people, That they should choose no man Senator without his consent: but they
laughing These things Matthew relates, whereby he proves as much as he had
formerly spoken, in what great contempt and skorne the Pope was held of all
men, for his evil proceedings and government.

An. 1259.
In Germany, about the year 1257, William Count of Holland retained the Title
of Emperor, being conferred, and continued in him by the Popes; who retiring
out of an hot battle, being shot through the body with an arrow, died.
Conrades son was yet too young to be chosen Emperor; Alexander
notwithstanding, commanded the Archbishop of Magunza, and the other German
Frederick was to the Popes: but so he highly commended unto them Richard Earl
of Cornwall, of whom, part of the Princes accepted, especially for this
respect, because he was reputed to be rich in treasure and coin: whereupon
grew this verse, Nummus ait pro me, nubit Cornubia Romae.

The money plainly says it self: Rome marries Cornwall for vile pelf.

Part of the Electors, made choice of Alphonsus king of Castile, but the most
voices concurred, at last, with Richard, who being sent for out of England, he
was conducted into Germany. Alphonsus began to move war, for the holding of
his place, and solicited the Pope by Ambassadors, that no other might be
crowned but himself. Answer was returned from him, that the custom was, that
none could receive the imperial crown, except he had formerly been instald
in the German and Italian kingdoms. Summa constitut. Firma profecto
consistit. An. 1262. Sigon. l. 19. de regno Jtaliae.
The Empire therefore hanging in doubt, Germany was divided, while Octauius
(his Legate) abusing the institution of the cross, proceeded with all kind of
cruelty against the imperial adherents; and during Alexander died in the
year 1261, to whom, three months after, Urban the fourth succeeded, borne of
obscure parents in Troie, a town of Campania Celtica.

Men observed one notable constitution of his (our author calls it most cruel)
which was, That every Bishop or Abbot elect, was bound personally to travel
beyond the Alps, Math. Paris in Henrico 3.
that is, to enrich to his own hurt, nay, and utter ruin, the Romans purses.
Urban called a Council at Rome, not about matters of faith, which now grew
obsolete, but about the expelling of Manfred. He thought good therefore Charles
Earl of Anjou, brother to S. Lewis, he also called into Italy, out of hope to
be installed in the kingdoms of Apulia and Sicilie. And thus all the treasure
which Henry king of England had so unadvisedly disbursed, was sunk and
swallowed up in this ambitious gulf: And Charles took counsel of king Lewis
about this affair. But Vrbans death prevented his coming, whom Clement the
fourth (prosecuting the same design) succeeded, borne at Narbone, and elected
at Perugia, he presently sent Legates to Charles: who commanding his army to
follow him by land, went by sea to Rome, where he was lovingly entertained by
the Romans, being created perpetual Senator, which then was the supremest
dignity Clement in the mean while held his residence at Viterbe, by reason of
some controversies that occurred betwixt him and the Romans. Wherefore by four
Cardinals the inuestiture of the kingdom was conferred upon Charles, on this
condition, That he should pay 40000 crowns yearly, in token of homage, which
he reserved to himself; as also further, that he should not accept of the
Roman Empire, though it were imposed upon him. Collen. l. 4.
Charles therefore went forward into Apulia, the Bishop of Constance, who was
Clements Legate, accomganying him, Giving plenarie remission of sins to those
that should take up arms for Charles. Near to Beneuento he discomfited
Manfred in battle, who was there slain; by means of which victory he
presently after secured to himself Conrade, Fredericks nephew (commonly named
Conradinus) out of Germany, to oppose Charles. He in the later end of the
year 1267 coming to Verona, about the beginning of the Spring he went forward
into Apulia, and so being proclaimed Emperor by all the Gibelline faction, not
far from Arezzo, he by the way defeated part of Charles his forces, and then
going to Rome, ouerslipping the Pope that lay at Viterbe, he was with general
voice and acclamation received by all the people: But not long after joining
battle with Charles in the confines of the kingdom, upon the first Charles
reenforcing the fight, obtained victory, and himself with the chiefest of his
nobles being driven to fly, he fell into his enemies hands. And here Clements
pastoral mercy and commiseration plainly appeared. Sigonius glauncingly
uses these words, Conradine, by Charles command and definitive sentence,
Collen. l. 4.
was put to death like an ordinary thief, because by arms he made claim to
his fathers and grandfathers kingdom. The Princes are at great variance
amongst themselves, upon ambiguous title. But the Neapolitan Historiographer,
and some others, write freely, That after Charles had kept him a whole year in
prison, he consulted with the Pope what should be done with him; who briefly
made Conradines life is Charles his death, and Conradines death is Charles his
life, Collen. l. 4. Hist Neapolitano.
understanding by this, that he was to be put to death. The Historiographer
observes, That diverse of the French Nobility could not be brought to
condescend unto this sentence, but especially the Earl of Flanders, Charles
his son in law, who thought it fitter to set him at liberty, and have him
obliged by some matrimonial affinity, whose opinion the nobler sort were of,
especially those who were free from preiudicat passions: but (says he) the
more cruel sentence took place. Neither certainly happened this (to omit the
law of Nations) without some super-humane instinct; for besides the Vespers or
Sicilian Euen-song, which took public revenge hereof; Charles Prince of
Salerno, son to the above mentioned Charles, having thirty galleys
overthrown, himself with a number of other Nobles was taken, and with nine
other kept close prisoners, and two hundred other gentlemen had their heads cut
off at Messina: others also that were in durance, in a popular tumult, who set
fire on every part of the prison (in contempt of the Popes excommunication)
were burned together in the same flame. And the Ciuilians of the kingdom,
assuming a president, from the proceeding against Conradine, sat in trial upon
Charles; and the like sentence and execution he had undergone but only for
Queen Constantia, wife to Peter king of Aragon, a Lady of singular prudence
and piety, who under pretext of conueying him into Catalogna to the king,
prevented this intended just revenge; for which she purchased amongst Charles
caused Conradine, being scarce eighteen years of age, to be beheaded in the
public market place of Naples; who called God to witness of the injury and
injustice done unto him herein; and so throwing his gloves up into the air, he
denounced Frederick of Castile, his aunts son, heir and successor to his
kingdoms. Henricus Guldelfingensis in Historia Austriaca.
In his view and sight Frederick, Duke of Austria, his inward familiar, and
equal in years, had his head cut off, that by his death he might the more be
daunted and terrified; which he took up and kissed: then after him, eleauen
other noble men, Italians, and Sueuians. The Historiographer adds, that Charles
would needs have the executioners head chopped off in the place by an other
Lewis, and this Charles his brother, being taken prisoners, not long before, by
the Souldan in Palestina, were courteously and friendly entertained. And from
hence it proceeds, that Peter of Aragon exprobrateth to Charles in some letters
of his: Tu Nerone Neronior, and Saracenis crudelior, thou art more bloody than
Nero, and more cruel than the Saracens. There was not any one which ascribed
not this cruelty in Clement; and the very sentence it self denounced against
Conradinus may testify as much: Apud Pertam de Vineis.
which was, For disturbing the peace of the Church and falsely usurping to
himself the Royal title. But I pray you was not his right good enough for the
clayming of this title? Furthermore, we have the same Clements own letters,
that is to say, the letters of this Charles king of Sicilie, to Peter of
Aragon, ordained and devised, says the Author, by Pope Clement the fourth,
wherein he proudly threatens Peter of Aragon, being backed by this Pope, that
sought to obtain the kingdom of Naples by arms: Thou most wicked man, says
he, did thou not consider the inexplicable excellency of the mother the
Church, who is to command over all Nations, and whom the whole earth and all
the people in the same do obey? So as he exprobrated and cast him in the teeth
with Conradines death for a terror to himself, of whom notwithstanding he
shamed not to say, that he had well deserved: who being taken in fight like a
thief, and by the just sentence of death had deserved the gibbet, yet he
permitted him to undergo the stroke of cruel death, by the sword of a bloody
heads-man, presaging unto him also the same ruin: which sounded not like the
style of a king or prince descended of the French royal race, but of the Popes
of Clement. And thus much the Author himself intimates. Peter of Aragon
returning an answer to the same, set before his eyes the just judgment of God,
in that he lately put his hand to such a brutish immanitie, as was detestable
and execrable to all men. And long time they slept not in this flagition, for
as Collenucius notes, Charles from that time forward was continually afflicted
and tormented with the anguish and terror of his daily misfortunes and
ouerthrows; and Clement suruiued them but one month, when, as the fruit and
triumph of victory, he thought to have gotten all Italy into his hands. The
Papacy was then vacant for two years and nine months, though his
predecessors had every way studied and endeavored to prevent such an
inconueniencie: For Sir, Onuphrius in Pontificibus.
we had need open the top of this Conclaue, for the holy Ghost cannot descend
through so many roofes down upon us. At last Philip king of France, and
Charles king of Sicilie, were feign to come thither, to their rebuke and shame,
and for the further encouragement of the Gibelline faction; who after long and
many contestations, at last brought it to pass, that they consented to choose
Theobald Vicont of Placentia, and Archdeacon of Liege, who was then in Syria:
he returning into Italy obtained the place, and was named Gregory the tenth;
and hereupon grew these verses of the Cardinal de Porto.


Quem Patrem Patrum, fecit disdordia fratrum.
An Archdeacon obtained the Papal dignity,
Father of fathers made by brothers enmity.
These things occurred in the year 1272. An. 1272.
In the mean while Richard Earl of Cornwall dyed, being another competitor
for the Empire, for supply of whose place the Princes assembled together to
take some order. Part of them, after Richards Alphonsus of Castile: others
alleged, That a king of Germany was to be brought from no other part but
Germany, when Gregory put in his spoke, and told them plainly, That if they
presently resolved not upon some body, he, out of his Pontifical authority,
would constitute them an Emperor. All things therefore being maturely debated
and considered, at last they concluded upon Radulph, son to Albert Count of
Hasburg, a Prince of no great State, but renowned for his military experience
and judgment, whom they declared Emperor. All gave their consent, except
only Otocarus king of Bohemia, whose steward this Radulph had been, and he
was herewith highly moved, so as they came to a sharp war amongst themselves.
He was Alphonsus was much discontented because Gregory gave his consent
thereunto, complaining wonderfully against Gregory, in that, unknown to him,
he had condescended to this election, aduising him to desist from this
enterprise, proceeding no further in it.

During Pope Gregory's reign a Council was celebrated at Lions, whereat
Philip king of France, the Emperor of Greece, and many other Princes were, and
for the better success and issue hereof, certain Prelates out of every
Province, well affected to him, were cited to be there present. Their
proposition was out of the example of the Machabees, to show, That the Bishop
of Rome, as he Rodulphus, without the priuitie of the States of the Empire, did
first yield unto him Romania, which before was wont to pay to the Empire
yearly seventy thousand dragmes of gold. The Emperor of Charles of Anjou
disturbed him with other attempts; and after his return into Greece he
promised Gregory by ambassadors, That if he would but cross Charles his
designs, he would join a new to an old Rome, which was Constantinople. The
which embassage Gregory readily gave ear unto, returning unto him again by
his Nuntioes, who were to accord with him of three conditions; Nicephor.
Gregoras l. 5.
First, That in their sacred administrations and offices, (...), with the four
Patriarchs he might be first nominated. Secondly, (...), That any might be
permitted to appeal to Rome, as to the higher and most sovereign tribunal.
Thirdly, (...), That in all things he might About any other points of divinity
(says Gregoras) there past not a word, No not of the addition made to the
Creed, (...), but all things were quiet and pacified. In these things there was
a long addormentation and silence, only he regarded that which belonged to
his own peculiar interest. But it fell not out well with him, that the Greek
Church disauowed the Emperor, especially in this Council, where a certain
form of electing the Pope was set down, which at this day is observed in the
Conclaue, Vbi pericul. de election. and electi potestate in sexto. Innocent. 3.
in sermon. 3. de Consecratione Summi Pontificis.
as we may read in the chapter, Vbi periculum de electione in sexto. And there
he does not only exhort the Cardinals, That they would choose the Vicar of
Christ, Peter's successor, governor of the whole Church, and guider of the
Lords flock, For a necessary provision of the whole world, and as a fit
spouse for the same Church. That which Innocent the third, in truth, did
formerly produce, in the third sermon of his consecration, he brings it out
more audaciously from a Decretall, which they esteem of highest authority,
being the order and form according to which the Popes are chosen and invested,
with their proper attributes and titles. What can be done more to Christ our
Lord, the only true Bridegroom of the Church? Oseae 3.
Or besides him who could say, In mercy and pity I have espoused thee? Ephesians.
5. v. 25. and 26.
Who besides him does sanctify her? He yielded up himself for her, that so
she might be sanctified and cleansed, by the washing of water in the word: and
therefore who is that fit Bridegroom for the Church but he? and who will
arrogate Bellarmine here say, Bellarm. de Romano Pontific. l. 2. c. 31. Bern.
Epist. 237. ad Eugenium.
That Gregory did this but as he was Christ's Vicar; I ask him, Whether he
ever so much as heard, that if a Princes ambassador contract any matrimony in
his Masters name, he calls himself the Bridegroom, or if he could do this
without committing an heinous offense? Or how can he in thus doing avoid S.
Bernards reprehension, who forbids Pope Eugenius this title, but rather that he
should take heed of S. John's Prophecy, in assuming to himself Thomas de
Corsellis apud Aenean. Sy^uium 7 Comentar. de Council. Basiliens.
Questionless Thomas de Corsellis speaks not so in the Council of Basil, We
said (says he) that the Church was Christ's spouse, and the Pope we know is
his Vicar: but no body substitutes a Vicar in such a sort as that he will
submit his spouse unto him, nay the spouse in matters very important may be
thought to have more authority than the Vicar, whereas she and her husband
have but one body; but so it stands not between the Vicar and his Lord. This
Gregory died about the beginning of the year 1276, whom Peter of Tarento
succeeded, that was Bishop of Ostia, of the Order of Predicants, being
nominated Innocent the fifth; and about five months after Otho Fliscus, a
Genoway, came to the Papacy, after this man also, who was called Adrian the
fifth, he being chosen at Rome in king Charles his presence,

This manner of election was no ways pleasing to the Cardinals because their
authority herein seemed to be somewhat impaired. Presently after his coming
to the Papacy he departed to Viterbe, the better to abate Charles his power
and greatness, for extenuation whereof he sent for the Emperor Rodulphus into
Italy, to oppugn and make head against Charles; who being formerly solicited
by Gregory, had promised to come. And here the Reader may easily judge,
whether he was not wonderfully transported with this affair, that having
occupied the chair Pontifical but eleven days only, and not yet being fully
consecrated, he studied and devised how to supplant Charles. Platina in Adriano
5.
Neither were the Cardinals satisfied Gregory, the which was not observed in
the election of his successor, nor likewise of this present Pope, but
contrariwise it was revoked by Adrian, in the small time he lived, by an
express Bull published to that end, that so by this means all ambition and
practice might be cut off, and all means of attaining to the place by bribes
and gifts, that so they might rather choose to create the Pope by bandie, and
partiality. When therefore this Bull could not stand in force and vigor, by
reason it was made before his consecration, John the 22, who succeeded him,
presently confirmed the same. And hereupon Nicholas the third, Martine the
fourth, Honorius the fourth, Nicholas the fourth, and Celestinus the fifth, were
elected without Conclaue. Whereby you may plainly discern John treads his
predecessors footsteps, though he was but a foolish and unworthy man, Platina
in Johan. 22.
Bringing (as they say) more detriment than either honor or profit to the
Papacy: and therefore he importuned Rodulphus to come into Italy. But he
e^cused himself through the war he had in hand with the king of Bohemia: and
John in the second year of his Papacy died at Viterbe, being by the fall of a
vault crushed to death. Upon this occasion the Cardinals returned to Rome, and
now likewise Charles discharging the Senators place of the city, carried
greatest sway in the election, who laboring (but in vain) that some French
man might be nominated, after much altercation, Platina and Stella in Nichol.
3. Machiauel. hist. Flor. l. 3.
the sixth month after, John Vrsinus was chosen, being afterward called
Nicholas the who was a man full of ambition and insolency; for so he is
deciphered by Machiauel, and he impatiently supporting Charles his so great
power, he instantly propounded to him how behouefull it was that Rodulph should
come into Italy, and so from thence to pass by sea into Palestina, which
otherwise could by no means be succored and relieved: also, That Tuscan was
under the jurisdiction of the Empire, and except it were restored again to
Rodulphus, he would make this serve for him as a just excuse. Under this
pretext therefore he took away from him Tuscan, which his predecessors had
conferred upon him, by way of Vicariate, as also at Rome, in that he could not
endure to see him a Senator of such sovereign authority, he excited his
fauouries against him, laboring to be chosen Senator himself. Charles, he
alone discharged both the Pontifical and Senatorian dignities. Blondus Decad.
2. l. 8.
He furthermore ordained, That no King, Prince, or any other borne of royal
stock, or otherwise of any high and eminent dignity, should be preferred to
the Senatorship, and that the city, under no title or office whatsoever, might
not be governed by any one for above the term of a year, without his special
favor and permission. And thus the Sueuian family being wholly extinct, in
that he could the more easily forbear his amity, he now began to tread
Charles under foot: For Rodulph, he heard that he had business enough in
Germany, without attempting any thing in Italy; in whose mouth the saying was
very frequent, Vestigia Italiam adeuntium videre se, non cernere redeuntiu^,
He saw the steps of those that Rodulph therefore not minding to loose a
certain substance for a greater shadow, Martinus Polonus in Chron. ad an.
1277. Platina in Nichol. 3. Blondus Decad. 2. l. 8. Stella ibid.
that he might be freed from this burden, he peaceably surrendered and confirmed
unto Nicholas the possession of all Romania, upon this condition, That taking
Tuscan out of Charles his hands he should restore it unto him. Which being done
Nicholas created Bertold Vrsine, his brother, Count of Romania, furnishing him
with an army wherewith to recover those towns that were held by the Gibellines.
Franciscus Latinus, his sisters son, being Bishop of Ostia, with the same to
scour over all Tuscan, the Marquisat, and Lombardie. And thus he disposed of
the greater part of Italy. Martinus and Platina say, That if death had not
prevented him, he was minded to have made two kings of his name, one of
Tuscan, and the other of Lombardie, that the one with his power might ever be
ready to suppress the Germans beyond the Alps, and the other to over awe the
French within the kingdom of Naples: but against these principally he stirred
up Peter king of Arragon, whom he persuaded, that enjoying his favor and
assistance, he would set afoot again his title, that grew from his marriage
Constantia, Manfreds daughter, although formerly, both by very many Bulls of
his predecessors, as also by the Decree of two Councels at Lions, all
Fredericks posterity was excluded. And doubtless some two years after this
Peter by him incited, plotted the Sicilian Vespers, or Euensong (so by writers
termed) on an Easter Monday, every one killing his lodger and guest. And so by
this means Peter was reduced into his kingdom by the inhabitants. Here we
must note, that after he had taken from Charles the Vicariate of Tuscan, and
the dignity Senatoriall, by some privy intelligencers of his he diued into
his mind, to see whether he now ought any rancor or revenge against him: who
affirming, That they found him no other ways affected to the Church than
before, Yea, yea, says he (measuring the Princes nature and disposition by his
own) his fidelity he has from the House and Furthermore, this good Nicholas
was author of that famous Decretall which is extant in the chapter Fundamenta
de electione and electi potestate in sexto; Ca. Fundame^ta de electione and
electi potestate.
whose words run thus, Peter (says he) God called into the society of the
individual Trinity, to be called as he was, the Lord saying, Thou art Peter,
etc. that from him, as from a certain head, he might derive and power forth
all his gifts throughout the body, meaning the Church: That the worser men
they be, and the Ca. Fundamenta de electione, and electi potestate. An. 1282.
so much the more they might continually and impudently arrogat and assume to
themselves.

Nicholas dying in the year 1282, Simon of Tours succeeded him, who was called
Martine the fourth, the French Gardinals preuayling in number, and he was
consecrated at Oruetto. He prosecuted the same design which his predecessors
begun, of getting all Italy into his hands, but by contrary means: for he
restored the Senatorian dignity to Charles, and in favor of him,
excommunicated Peter of Aragon, publishing the Croisado against him and all his
abettors, as if the spirit that governed them had been quite contrary in
himself; Johannes Nouio dunensis in illustrationibus Beatae.
concurring only with his predecessor in this, that he retained his
concubine, and Peter of Aragon being mightily pressed by Charles his forces,
who intended a revenge of the Sicilian butcherie, he took occasion out of this
man's letters to turn the war into a duel; and therefore he offered to decide
the quarrel of the kingdom in a battle of a thousand to a thousand, an
hundred to an hundred, or in single fight: Charles chearefully embraced the
condition of single combat, a day was constituted, and the field appointed at
Bordeaux in Aquitane, and the king of England, as a kinsman to them both, was
to be judge of Blondus decad. 2. l. 8. Collenu. l. 4.
They relate also that Martine (though this seemed very absurd) consented
thereunto, and sent thither Gerard, Cardinal of Parma, to observe both the
progress and event of this matter, Charles appeared attending there the
greatest part of the day, which the judge of the field did testify; but Peter
of Aragon failing of his presence, he departed and left the field, the Pope for
this cause excommunicating Peter, and denouncing him unworthy and incapable of
the kingdom of Naples: as also he deposed him from the kingdom of Catalogna,
which then was conferred upon Charles, second son to Philip king of France.
Not long after, he turned likewise the Croisado against him, and in the
assistance and favor of Charles, he promised plenarie remission of sins to all
those that would assume this Peter's affairs obtaining hard success, in most
submissiue manner they had recourse to Martine, and so prostrat on the earth
they were enjoined to cry out aloud, far off from him, Agnus Dei qui tollis
peccata mundi, dona nobis pacem, Lamb of God that take away the sins of
the world, grant us thy peace: which blalphemie he no ways refused to but
back, neither did these miserable souls discern that while he showed the
horns of the Lamb a Dragon spoke out of his mouth. Nicholas de Biberach, Pull.
Aemilius in Histor. Francorum in Philip. tertio.
a Divine of Erford, Hic iacet ante chorum submersor Teutonicorum
Pastor Martinus, extra qui totus ouinus, Nicholaus de Biberachin. l. qui in
scribitur occultius.

Et lupus introrsus, cui nulla redemptio prorsus,
Sed sit ad inferna, detrusus ab arce superna.
Before the Quire, a restless enemy
To German name, Pope Martin here does lie:
Without a sheep, within a ravening wolf,
From heaven thrust down into the infernal gulf.


And hereupon many instile him Teutenicorum inimicum, the Germans enemy, but
especially the Author of the history of the South. There succeeded him about
two years after, Iacobus Sauellus, a Roman, who was called Honorius the fourth,
who proceeded in the reduction of Romania under the obedience of his See, and
at last obtained his desire, partly by subjugating in a war Guido of
Montefeltro, head of the Gibelline faction, that principally withstood it, and
partly urging him Rodulphes either too great simplicity, or too great
wisdom: from the one side he fearing the powerful oppositions which the
Popes had raised against his predecessors, and then on the other understanding
by Princeuall Fliscus his Chauncellor, how hard a matter it was to reduce the
cities of Italy, now for so long time inured to liberty, under their ancient
obedience, he resolved to yield them their absolute liberties, so that each of
them would furnish him with a certain sum of money, whereof he stood in
great need: He therefore sent Princeuall again to pass these covenants with
Iahannes Nouio magus in illustr. Bedae.
which being by this means made free, they were afterward called Imperij
fideles, Feudatories to the Empire. The Historiographers, Blondus, Sabellicus,
Trithemius, Cuspinianus, Krantzius, Nauclerus, and others, reprehend Rodulphus
much, because herein he wonderfully impeached the authority of the Empire: But
so Pope Honorius (say they) was no ways displeased with this redemption,
though it did altogether misbeseeme so great a Prince, because he thought the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction would in the future come to be the more secure,
and better confirmed.

Hereunto may briefly be added, the superstition which together with ambition
so much augmented under Alexander the fourth: for then at Perugia, where he
held his seat, rose up the sect of Flagellantes, a certain hermit being author
and patron thereof, and men and women stripped naked to the nauels, for expiation
and satisfaction of their sins, would whip themselves throughout the towns
and villages, with fearful howlings and cries, calling out upon the Virgin
Marie, compassing in this manner the whole city, exciting others by their
example to do the like, and drawing after them people of all kinds and
conditions. Out of Tuscan they went and spread themselves in the Marquisat, and
then in Romania, this foolish superstition like a fire devouring whatsoever it
met withal. Blondus l. 8. Decad. 2.
Auentine A bloody kind of penance did then arise at Perugia in Tuscan,
neither could any weather or way stop them from going forward in their journey
once undertaken, or afflicting upon themselves these sacred cruelties,
especially in Germany, where for three and thirty days continuing in these
austere regularities, without so much as taking their quiet sleep and rest,
they then thought themselves absolved from their sins, and perfectly
reconciled unto God. Now (says he) they were passed the Alps, gone through
high Bauaria, and entered as far within the land as Frisinghen, where Lewis
forbad them to go any further forward in his country, and Henry commanded
them by public Edict, But Krantzius delivering what the better sort of men
thought of them, Krantzius in Metrop. l. 9. c. 44.
In this sect (says he) horrible errors did lurk, which being by Gods
goodness discovered, were occasion to banish these diabolical inventions: In
the mean while they being of dejected countenance, and framing looks to move
commiseration and pity, they sung hymns in praise of Christ's cross, and as
often as the name of Christ was mentioned, which was not seldom, they fell
down flat on their faces, no ways respecting the place, whether it were
durtie, craggie, brittle, asperous, moist, or dry, fearing nothing. For the
devil amongst mortal men has also his Martyrs. These be the words of the
Pontifical Author, although this fearful superstition was not only by the
Popes approved, but even moreover adored. Clare was canonized, having her
festival day by her self apart, that she might obtain the same respect from
women, as S. Francis had from men. Other such blasphemies as these even scraule
and creep all over his Legend. Urban the fourth out of the same spirit at this
very instant instituted the festiuitie of Corpus Christi, or Corpus Christi
day, of whose original diverse Authors have written diversely. Some say it
sprung from this, That the Priest celebrating the Sacrament in the city of
Bolseua, blood was seen to come forth of the Host: From whence that Bull
came, which began, Summa constitut. Et in Clement. 3. de Reliquijs and
Veneratione sanctorum tit. 10. c. 1. Petrus Praemonstrat. in Chron. qui
inscribitur, Biblia pauperu^. Arnoldus Bostius. Krantzius Saxoniae l. 8. c. 17.
Auent. l. 7. Volaterra in Antropologia. c. 21. Chron. Aeditui.
Transituris de hoc mundo, etc. Others report, That a certain woman, a Recluse
of the town of Liege, called Eve, whom Pope Urban, before his being Pope, had
known familiarly, Scimus o filia, etc. grounded on the like foundation. Under
Clement the fourth John Semeca was the first that dared to write commentaries
against Gratians Decree; for thus they relate of him, Some call him John
Teutonicus governor of Haluestat, who thought he had not slenderly deserved of
this chair, by many good maxims and digests which he had published in favor
of the Popes, of which we will speak in their proper place. But when vnclement
Clement demanded the tenthes of the German Clergy, under pretext of an holy
war, he discerning the knauerie, opposed himself, and appealed to a
Council; for which cause he was excommunicated: in which state notwithstanding
he dying, for the renown of Gregory the tenth, as before you saw, ordained a
form and use of electing the Pope in the Conclaue: he also in the Council of
Lions reduced the Orders of Mendicants to four special obseruants, new daily
creeping in, and were now grown to be in number nine or ten; that Saccorum
Fratres, Fratres Pratorum, and others. But Nicholas the third would have the
Minorite regularities publicly read in the schools, threatening him with
excommunication that should but withstand it. And yet we may clearly see what
manner of man he was, for as every one of the rest did, he likewise augmented
the esteem and repute of the Mendicants, that so they might make them the
ordinary toll-masters, and gatherers of his impositions and exactions. But it
was Honorius Exhibita nobis, etc. which was sent forth against the vpholders
and favorers of heretics, that is to say, even as their humor or passion lead
them.

OPPOSITION.
This monster of the Papacy grew at length to such a greatness, that all the
Christian parts would scantly satisfy their ambitious thirst; to which the
Legates and Mendicants were like cloukes and talons to gripe and fasten on their
prey: For first Princes feared their censures, not so much out of religion, as
that they feared least their people would be abused by these stratagems; or
that ambitious neighbors, under this pretext might make some use of them, for
their own avarice and greediness. And yet there wanted not those that opposed
and withstood them, even, as above all others, our king S. Lewis, who shined in
an example herein beyond all the rest, in that his pragmaticall sanction, which
discreetly runs in Bochellus l. 4. Decret. Gallican. p. 647.
We will and command that the pestiferous crime of simonie, which defaceth and
ruinates the Church, be utterly banished and extirpated out of our kingdom: As
also we will in no wise permit any such exactions, and grievous pecuniarie
impositions, laid, or to be levied upon our Church by the Court of Rome,
whereby our kingdom is miserably impouerished; or that hereafter shall be
imposed and laid, to be levied or collected, except upon a reasonable, pious,
and very urgent occasion, or inevitable necessity, and that by our own
voluntary and express consent, as also by that of the Church of our whole
kingdom. He likewise reformed the location of benefices called Prouisiones,
according to the ancient Canons of the Church; expressly forbidding the
transporting of any money to Rome, Matthew. Paris in Henrico 3.
for the confirmation of Prelates, either elective or presentatiue. Legatos
sophisticos, sophistical Legates: and no doubt they had obtained this suit, but
that they light on a king who was ready to join hands with the Pope, that so
by a common accord they might both glib, and even flea the people. Rustand the
Popes Legate urging a most tyrannical and steeming out of the sulphurie
fountain (Oh miserable) of the Roman Church, Fulco Bishop of London, in a
very solemn assembly, said, Before I will agree to such a servitude and
injury to the Church, I will by intolerable oppression yield first my head to
be cut off: Then followed the Bishop of Worcester, who spoke in a loud voice,
Before holy Church shall be subject to such corrodiation, and utter
subversion, I will be hanged on a gibbet. Rustand replied, All Churches were
under the Pope; when master Leonard modestly made this exception, Tuitione, non
fruitione, in tuition, not in fruition; not to be ruined, but preserved. The
king, to whom the Legate had granted a share in this gain, threatened the Bishop
of London with severe punishment, as he that instigated the rest; when he The
Pope and the King, who are stronger than I, may take away my Bishopric, which
notwithstanding by no equity they can do; they may take away my Myter, but
yet I shall have an head-peece left. All this occurred under Alexander the
fourth, to which the people added, This is the Pope who at his first coming to
the chair caused prayers and supplications to be made to God for him, that he
might reign and govern well, how can it be that he should perform worse
things than all the rest? God forbid.

But no man bore himself herein more stoutly than Seuual Archbishop of York,
Edmond, Archbishop of Canturburie, out of whose schole he came, had presaged so
many excellent things. This man perceiving how the Pope with his provisions,
left nothing throughout his whole Archbishopric vnharrrowed, he with a noble
constancy oppugned his proceedings. First, because he placed all the
Ecclesiastical benefices in Italians that were about himself, and so
consequently were leauers of their flocks: and secondly, in that he commanded
all the Prelates of England to pass personally over the Alps, to be confirmed
at Rome: Our Lord the Pope, therefore bare an heavy hand over him, Math. Paris
in Henrico 3.
and procuring him ignominiously to be excommunicated all England over, with
lighting of tapers and ringing of Bells, that by this terrible and fearful
form he might quail and daunt his constancy: And here it must not be
omitted, that S. Edmond was ever wont Multi tribulationes iustorum, de quibus
quandoque liberabit omnibus eos Dominus, Many are the tribulations of the
righteous, but God shall deliver them out of all. The same Author also
recounteth, that perceiving himself approaching to death, lifting up his watrie
eyes unto heaven, he burst out into these words. I call the Pope by appeal
before the supreme and most incorruptible Judge, and both heaven and earth
shall be my witnesses, how unjustly he has prosecuted and scandalized me, with
sundry and important oppressions. Wherefore, in this bitterness of Robert the
bishop of Lincolns example, he by letters laid down to the Pope all his
enormious actions, and that he would observe his admonitions in abandoning his
accustomed tyrannies, and returning again into the humble paths of his holy
predecessors: For the Lord said unto Peter, Feed my sheep, do not sheare or
flea them, do not euiscerat and by continual deuorations consume and destroy
them. But our Lord Pope, scoffing and deriding hereat, conceived no small
indignation, that they would break out into such a presumption and rashness,
as to dare in any wise to solicit and move him: and therefore he stopped his
ear to the healthful admonitions, both of Archbishop Seuual, as also of
Robert of Lincoln. And yet our Author ascribes miracles to this man. And
these things also happened during the Alexander the fourth.

Under Gregory the tenth, one Nicholaus Gallus a country man of ours,
flourished, who was borne in Languedoc, the seventh Prior general of the
Carmelites, who distasting the corruptions that then crept into his order,
returned into his ancient hermitage, and there ended his life, he being
Author of that book, entitled, Ignea sagitta, wherein he lays open the
customs and manners of the Monks of his time, especially the Mendicants, who
being but newly risen up, were yet grown to such an hight of deprauation,
that in their conuents there was no so much as any mention made of studies, or
any Christian exercises; so wholly they were transported with pleasure and
uncleanness. That these, after Elias Rubeus in Semidiali l. 2. c. 3. and 4.
who denied them nothing, both to the Churches prejudice, and the danger of
their own salvation. Much after this vain Elias Rubeus an English man, in his
Simidiali inferres, That the Monks had converted religion into superstition,
and turned from the interior to the exterior, to the form of an hood, to
color, and to meats; making salvation to consist in things of themselves
vain, or indifferent. That there was no kind of men more blind in
concupiscences, or infamous for uncleanness, than the Clergy: that a man who
otherwise was good and commendable for his life and manners, if he but once
attained to any Monachum promouendo perimunt, They kill the Monk by promoting
him. All Bishops, breaking down the walls, entered not into the Bishoprics by
the open gate, neither could inferiors by any other means be promoted or
preferred. The saying was in the Court of Rome, Except you bring purses laden
with money, you cannot be promoted to the honor of any Ecclesiastical
dignity. No esteem was made of learning, virtue, or religion, In such a case
real allegations of royals prevailed above learning, virtue, or moral
understanding: And therefore, because they thus promoted of Biberache in
Germany affirmed no less: He tells how he was at Rome, and declares how they
there used only fained flatteries toward strangers and learned men, and that
Iuramenta per oscula Judas, Oaths passed for Judas kisses: Faith and piety
were there rare and dear like aromaticall spices. And that the Pope and his
assistants raked all to themselves, being robbers and thieves, worse than
Pharao, and daily lulling in women's laps: he concluding in these verses: Papae
dicatis, precor intuitu pietatis,
Quod stat in Ecclesia, iam multiplex simonia:
Et mala quamplura, fidei quae sunt nocitura,
Quae si durabunt, eclipsin forte creabunt.
Show to the Pope in zeal and piety,
That in the Church reigns too much simonie,
And evils many more that hurtful are,
Which will eclipse true faith in spreading far.


He presaging herein some eclipse and revolt in the Church. But Arnold de Villa
noua, borne in Catalognia, a man endued with the knowledge of all Tongues and
Sciences, speaks somewhat more broadly: The devil (says he) led all
Christian people from the verity and truth of Jesus Christ. The faith that
Christians now retain is but such as the devils themselves hold. All
Cloysterers swerve from charity, and are damned. All falsify the doctrine of
Christ, and Divines did ill, namely the Schole-men, in mixing Philosophy with
Divinity. The Popes And as for doctrine, he expressly condemns the sacrifice
of the Altar. Masses are not to be celebrated. We must not sacrifice for the
dead: Nothing herein is offered unto God. Alms rather represents the passion
of Christ, than this sacrifice. He therefore for these propositions was
condemned of heresy by Friar John of Longuil, of the Order of the Predicants,
and Geoffrey of Crudilles.

But Germany under, Honorius the fourth, renewed her ancient virtue, Bernard.
Luitzenbergens. Catologo haereticorum.
and sent John Bishop of Tusculum, a Roman Cardinal, to Rodulphus the
Emperor, under pretext of entreating him to go into Italy, there to be
crowned, which notwithstanding he did not greatly desire: and he demanded of
all his Clergy for five Probus Bishop of Thoul, a Doctor of Divinity,
standing on his feet near to the Font, made this Oration: How long (dear
Colleagues) shall these Romultan Vultures abuse our patience, Auent. l. 7.
Nauclerus vol. 2. Gener. 43.
if rather I may not say, our folly and blindness? How long shall we endure
their impiety, avarice, pride, and exorbitancies? This wicked race of arch
Synagoguists will never give over before they have brought us all to poverty,
and slavish servitude. And comparing the Popes to the Jewish Priests, Our own
discord (said he) brought forth this incouenience. These imposters have made
use of our differences, and as long as they are vpheld the Christians will
never be able to enjoy happy peace, to avoid the miseries of war, or to
exercise piety and charity one toward another. They lately set the Sueuians
and Saxons against Charles) causing them to take up arms, as a spectacle of
pleasure and delight to themselves; afterward against these they excited the
Spaniards, and now they would set us against the French and Spaniards, being
our consanguinians, and coming heretofore (to drive both the one and other out
of Italy.) You must needs remember what that famous Decimist, Gregory the
tenth, about ten years since, did with his tenthes, and the same will this
Honorius the fourth do with his fourthes. Thus this subtle Gregory, to wipe
us of these tenthes, he armed against us the Scythians, Arabians, and Turks:
And, if I should not lie, I verily believe, considering the great profits that
come in to him by this means, that be wishes better to them than us. These of
the Order of S. Bernard, to whom notwithstanding he professed much kindness,
were feign to redeem themselves with a sum of 600000 crowns. Hereby you may
see what his conuentions cost, and what sums of money are raised thereby. One
deceit intrudes another, and his Decrees pass under the form rather of
subtlety and deceit, than of open equity But the Pope for revenge of this
contumely, thundered excommunication against Probus, and did what he could to
deprive him of his Bishopric.

Matthew Paris in Henrico 3.
In the like case Matthew Paris the Monk breaks out into this exclamation, O
the servile and vain solicitations of the Roman Court, O blind, though holy
ambition (so he speaks by ironie) which notwithstanding is oftentimes abused
by the counsel of the wicked, why do thou not suppress thy violence with
the bridle of discretion, learning wit by things past, and having been taught
and chastised by so often and much experience? In thy ruins we are all
punished. We all suffer and feel with opprobrie a general confusion. Thou
did attempt to create two Emperors in Germany, in whose preferment infinite
treasures (howsoever gotten and brought in) must needs be wasted, and yet both
of them uncertain and doubtful of the dignity. And now in the parts of
Apulia the Popes army being twice most shamefully overthrown, that is to say,
once under the conduct of William These things fell out a little before under
Alexander the fourth.

Under the same Pope also fell out the controversies between the Divines of
Paris and the Mendicants, who of Pharisees becoming the Popes Publicans,
proved the very scourge of other ordinary Pastors, and the disturbers of all
Universities: As also we have lately seen that they were rebuked and
condemned Eternal, by which they meant to have buried in oblivion the sacred
Testament of our Lord Jesus. Authors therefore speak of it in these words,
Rancors and hatreds multiplying between the Masters of Paris and the Friars
Predicants, Math. Paris in Henrico 3.
certain famous Doctors, public Readers, were chosen, with sound deliberation
and advice, that is to say, Master William de Sancto Amore, or S. Amors, Master
Otho of Douuay, Incipit Euangelium aeternum, Here begins the eternal Gospel;
with some other points which it is not requisite to repeat. The Predicants on
the other side sent their special messengers against the University, that they
might oppugn the masters face to face. The people scoffed at them, withdrawing
their accustomed alms, and tearming them Antichrists, hypocrites, and the
successors of Antichrist, false preachers, flatterers, and misleaders of
Princes, contemners of ordinary Pastors, and their supplanters, creepers into
royal chambers, and adulterators of confessions; The opinions of this Gospel
were these, That God the Father reigned under the Law, and the Son under
Grace, but by the rising of the four Orders Mendicants, the holy Ghost began
then to reign, and so The authors notwithstanding of these inventions, which
were to be extirpated, the Pope did tollerat and support; because any thing
whatsoever, seems just and equal to them, so it make for their prerogative
and power; and they were afraid especially, least these their hucksters should
grow out of grace with the people, by whose tongues and talons so much William
of S. Amors, one of wonderful estimation amongst good men, both preached and
writ against them, declaring in his sermons, That he affected above all other
crimes, to be zealous in discovering of hypocrisy, because this brought more
damage and prejudice to true piety than all the other besides; as also in that
the Church was now ouergrowne with the same sin, and no body, for fear of
the Pope and Prelates, durst lay hand to the irradication of it. Amongst others,
we read at this day a book of his entitled, De periculis mundi, seu
nouissimorum temporum, which begins thus, Quia nos vacantes sacris Scripturis,
Matthew. Paris in libro de Antichristo.
etc. printed at Basil in the year 1555, and no ways to be suspected of
falsitie, seeing Matthew Paris in a great volume that he writ against
Antichrist, comprehends the same wholly and entirely, Gulielmus de Sancto Amore
lib. de periculis mundi edito Basileae An. 1555.
whom by this means they bring under their power, the easier to command and
rule them: And they call themselves General aiders and supporters of the
Church, preferring themselves before all men, even before the religious Orders
themselves: And to appear the more holy, they devise new Duo Conciones
Gulielmi de Sancto Amore in Antilogia Basileae edita, An. 1555.
That Christ chose plain and simple men to preach, but Antichrist on the
contrary, for the propagation of his falsities and errors, made election of
men of a double heart, subtle and expert in worldly policies, and not only
Antichrist himself made choice of such, but also his members and champions. No
marvel therefore though they persecute the professors of the Christian faith
to death, seeing John says in his Apocalypse, I saw a beast rise out of the sea
that had seven heads this beast was intended by Antichrist and his followers.

And certain years after, John de Poliaco, Williams disciple, and Laurence an
English man, defended these propositions publicly in Sorbon: In a sermon of
his he particularly admonished the Church, Laurentius Anglicus in defensione
Gulielmi de Sancto Amore, and Tractat. Cauendum esse a Pseudoprophetis. Sermon.
2. in die Philippi and Jacobi, Thomas Cantipratensis in Apibus mysticis.
That a great danger hung over her head by the Monks: That they were the
seducers and ministers of Antichrist, of Antichrist who was hard at their
doors. But when the Pope had suppressed the scandal of this new Gospel,
least it might have prejudiced his affairs, taking an occasion of revenge
against William of S. Omers, and some other his like, for the denunciation of
these truths, whether by right or wrong, he published and declared him for an
heretic; as also he complained of him to our Princes, that had need of his
help and favor, Thomas Bonauentura and others, to write against him: so as
all true Divinity yielded to Sophistry, and Paul to Aristotle. But so the
Mendicants on the other side even seized on the Divinity Schools, and the
Canonists on the Ciuilians chair, that so all points were decided by Gratian
and Lombard, and of the holy Scriptures there was not so much as any mention
in schools. Out of their studies therefore from this time forward came books,
easy to be smelt by their very titles, as Summae, Repertoria, Quodlibeta,
Rosaria, with other such like: by means of which the mysts and darkness of
ignorance and superstition taking further condensation, even in these our
days, the Papal tyranny is risen to her very top and height.

And here we must by no means omit, that Michael Paleologus Emperor of
Greece, upon hope to be succored by Gregory the tenth, promised in the
Council of Lion to make the Patriarch of Constantinople consent to the
Primacie of the Bishop of Rome, and that whosoever would he might thither
appeal, by a necessary Trithemius, at his return into Greece putting John
Beck, and some of his nearest friends into a deep dungeon, and there
detaining him a good while, he wrought him to such a pass, as that he by
letters gave his consent and agreement thereunto. Chron. Hirsaug. Nicephorus
Gregoras in Histor. l. 5. and 6.
But Michael was no sooner dead when the Bishops of Greece deposed John by
common consent, created another in his stead, and renounced all that which had
formerly passed in the Council to the prejudice of their liberties and
prerogatives; so as also the Clergy of the country being wonderfully provoked
by this matter, they denied Michael burial in the holy Temple,
notwithstanding any instance and suit that his son Andronicus made.

The Waldenses still continued during all these times in diverse countries,
Thomas Cantipratens. l. 1. c. 56 Blondus Decad. 2. l. 9.
against Martine the fourth having the Papal dignity. An. 1283.


54. PROGRESSION.
An accord of peace made betwixt Charles of Aniou and James of Arragon, by the
Popes means is broken, and reentred into again. Pope Nicholas dies.

John de Ascoli, of the order of the Minorites, succeeded Honorius, being
elected on Mount Auentine, who was called Nicholas the fourth. He presently
removed the Court to Rietto, either through the intemperature of the air,
which had bin very infectious the year before, or that he was vexed with
popular seditions, but being weary of the place, the year following he
returned to Rome. The Kingdoms of Apulia and Sicilia, were then the very
roots of all discord: wherefore Charles the second of Anjou, and James of
Aragon, that James should have Sicilia, wherein he should be invested by the
Pope, and this, Charles took upon him, and the Pope promised. The occasion of
this accord grew from a nauall overthrow that Charles received, wherein he was
taken and imprisoned, and being set at liberty he promised to return again,
except within three years he made a full satisfaction: and in the mean while
he left Charles and Lewis his sons for hostages. The affairs of Siria were
now reduced to so miserable a pass, as nothing but final ruin and
destruction was daily expected: for the Souldan having taken in Tripoli, Tire,
Barut, and many other important places, there remained only Ptolomaida to the
Christians in all Palestine, and this Nicholas to convert all the Christian
forces that way: and so consequently by his authority to ratify a peace
between Charles of Anjou, and James of Aragon. And himself sent fifteen
hundred horse at his own charge to Palestina, but so unseasonable and with
such ill direction, as employing their first force against the Christians, they
filled all places with rapines, adulteries, whoredoms, and deuastations: then
secondly they broke the truce with the Souldan when it was most necessary to
have been observed, for the attending of fresh supplies: and this first error
of Nicholas is specified unto us in the History of his time; Another is
annexed, which defaced the only happiness of his Papacy; Blondus l. 8. Decad.
2.
For desiring to gratify Charles the second, he with this permission, That for
six years it should be lawful for him to demand the tenths. The which James
being no ways able to digest, he pressed Charles so hotly, as that the Pope
himself consenting thereunto, he was enforced to his former accord, which he
promised within two years to perform: but then during these protractions,
Ptolomais was miserably lost, and whatsoever had been recovered in Asia, by so
much toil and Christian blood spilt, Cyprus only excepted and the coast of
Cilicia. An. 1290.
This happened in the year 1290, wherein both Pope Nicholas Rodolphus the
Emperor died. Rodolphus, who while he lived never made account of his
consecration at Rome, though he was often persuaded thereunto, both by the
Popes and by his own Nobility; Chronic. Hirsaug.
Italy, said he, has overthrown many Alman kings, I will not go to Rome, I
am a king and an Emperor, and I hope I shall discharge my self no worse for
the benefit and good of the Commonwealth, than if I had been crowned at Rome.
And Nicholas at his death endeavored to propagate the Papacy, Krantzius l. 8.
cap. 35.
in the order of the Minorites. It is reported, says Krantzius, that when he
saw he should die, he called all the Cardinals together, and recounting unto
them his whole life past, out of his plenarie and absolute power, he discharged
them of the place and dignity they held, for the remainder of their lives to
live privately: whereat This so singular a note of blind and precipitant
ambition, both in and after his death, deserves thus briefly an end of this
Progress.

OPPOSITION.
Under Nicholas, the Clergies complaint against the Mendicants was revived,
they informing, That these men supplanted all ordinary Priests; the
University of Paris joining with them herein, but especially the College of
Sorbon. Now let but the Reader judge what equity or conscience one might
expect in this Pope, transported with such a violent ambition of perpetuating
the Papacy in a profound Clerk (says our Author) generally reputed, made an
Oration of charity in these words, At this day charity is waxen cold, and
Order Ecclesiastical wholly confounded, seeing many put their sickles into
other men's corn; so as the Church may now truly be termed a monster: For
even as in a natural body we count it monstrous, when one member discharges
another office, even so is it in a body spiritual, that is, in the Church,
when the learned and prudent Friars, I mean the Maiorites and Minorites,
usurp the place and office especially committed to us, though most unjustly,
in that no man should assume After this the Bishop of Amiens rose up, who
declared by many reasons, how it was no Innocent the third, Omnis vtriusque
sexus, he entreating the University to join themselves in this cause with the
Prelates, who were resolved to repel this injury, though it were with the
loss of their lives: Exhorting likewise the Friars Mendicants to repair to
Rome for a solution of these doubts and difficulties. The Mendicants by one of
their society made answer, That the same Bishop of Amiens was at Rome when
these privileges were granted them; as also that the Prelates had then there
both procurers and sollicitors, who spared no labor nor endeavor, and yet the
Pope absolutely denounced, Placet, it pleases because we are no members of any
University. The day following the festiuitie of the Virgin Mary's conception
was celebrated at the Minorites, when one of the Majorites (the Dominicans I
mean) applied his whole sermon to this point: There the Scripture was
fulfilled, which said, That day Herod and Pylat were made friends; for
concerning her conception the difference was betwixt them. At length in an
assembly following, held at the Bernardines on Saint Thomas eve, the Bishop of
Amiens again rose up, and expounding that place, Prope est Dominus
inuocantibus eum in veritate, according to a certain Gloss of the Decretals,
he made three The truth of Life, the truth of Doctrine, and the truth of
Justice; showing by many authorities both in Divinity, the Canons and the
Laws, as also by evident effects, That there neither concurred with the Friars
truth of Life, because they are convicted of manifest hypocrisy; nor verity
of Doctrine, because their mouths preach honey, and their hearts harbor gall;
neither any truth of Equity and Justice, because they usurp and take unto
themselves other men's functions. And so coming to a conclusion, he caused the
said privileges to be once more read with the said Constitution. Thus much
Godefridus de Fontibus, Godefrid. de Fontib. in Quodlibet. Sorbona.
who was then a Sorbon Doctor, reports.

But Germany neglecting the branches, put her hatchet to the ve^^e root of the
Nicholas had commanded the Archbishops of Germany, every one in his several
Province, to call a Council: where under pretext of recovering the holie-Land,
he demanded again the tenths, which had so often before bin abusiuely exacted,
and employed: and the Bishop of Saltzburg to this end conuocated his Suffragans
and Diocesans: who perceiving the Roman avarice, to aim again at the tenthes,
some few in behalf of the whole assembly made answer, How it was an hard
matter to be granted, and that with extraordinary tribute and taxations they
had been wonderfully worn and wasted; and therefore it were much more
necessary to debate of an head for the Christian Common wealth, and then to
reduce the Princes to love and amity, for without their authority, nothing
could be decreed. In the Meynard Count of Tyroll, was excommunicated out of the
Church, for two causes: first because he detained certain holds, within the
Bishopric of Trent, by maine force, and then in that vexing Henry the Bishop
with continual war, he enforced him at last to give over his Bishopric: but
when he was dead Nicholas gave this Bishopric to Philip of Manton, by whose
instigation he had excommunicated Meynard. He therefore protested against the
injury done unto him by the Fathers, and by a public Apology, Auent. l. 7.
made a defense of himself. Undoubtedly, says he, I do not raise but repel
a war, for there was never any thing more dear unto me than to maintain
peace with every man, especially with the Bishops; but that these good
Fathers, being and cassis carminibus, ambiguous verses, deprave their
understandings, and dull their senses, as it were with a potion of Mandragoras:
does it belong to the Shepherd, to share or milk the flocks? and must not a
messenger advance the affairs of his Lord, or of those whomsoever for whose
benefit he is sent and employed? And therefore from a cruel and unjust Pope, I
appeal to a most just Pastor, and a most clement Father. While these things
daily came to the Popes understanding; he left this life: And Celestine, the
fifth, did afterward release Meynard of this excommunication.

55. PROGRESSION.
After a long vacancie, Peter Moron, an Hermit, was chosen Pope, but out of his
simplicity, being abused by Benedict, who was afterward Boniface the 8, he
renounced the Papacy; and privily retourning to his hermitage, he was in the
way by Boniface intercepted and put in prison, where he died, as reports went,
being by Boniface put to death.

AFter Nicholas death, the Cardinals by reason of the intemperature of the air
left Rome, and went to Perugia: and some were ready to affirm that all the
Nicholas brought upon Christendom grew from this, that he was chosen at Rome
in an infectious time. But in deed the true cause was their own ambition,
which so distracted their minds, in such sort, that in three months space they
could agree upon no successor. Although Charles king of Apulia, who foresaw
these inconveniences removed thither, to press them forward, yet they delayed
it for certain months, so as Benedict, Cardinal of Cajeta, who afterward
was Boniface the eight, urged them with many entreaties, as if his words should
have enforced them. But when he was gone they chose Peter Moron, an hermit, one
that was very old, but voyced to be of a very good life. This was Celestine
the fifth, if we may believe Stella, Stella in Pontific. Platina in Celestino.
5. Christianus Masseus in Chronico. Henricus Erfordiensis in Chronico. Auent.
l. 7.
elected by way of skorne and Charles persuaded him by all means to retain the
Papacy, Benedicts policy carried the matter sheere away; for being returned
to Rome, Benedict being a very subtle Canonist, put many toys into his head,
representing herein unto him the great burden and trouble of his function:
what a charge it was to give an account of all the souls in the world: then
how the course of his salvation should be hindered, if either through the
infirmity of his years, or ignorance in affairs, the Christian Church should
suffer any detriment: Nay further, he suborned diverse, who privily in the night
by a reed or trunk conveyed to his ear, should admonish Platina and Stella in
Bonifac. 8. Continuator Vircentij l. 37.
Celestine, Celestine, give over the Papacy, if thou meanest to be saved, it
is a burden beyond thy strength to support; that so he might think himself
persuaded and urged thereunto by some angel. This simple man therefore
intended nothing else but how he might resign the Papacy, so this scruple
could be removed, That he might do it with a good conscience; wherein Benedict
easily gave him satisfaction, and producing many reasons, he caused a Decretall
to be passed, Extra de renunciatione cap. in Sexto.
That the Pope might lawfully give over his charge. And not long insisting in
this, he digested another like Decretall, which we find in Sexto, That the
Pope might freely renounce the Papacy; although when Celestine was dead he
passed another, That it was scelus inexpiabile, an inexpiable sin to renounce
Celestine therefore reuolued only in his mind how he might renounce the
Papacy, and return to his hermitage; but withdrawing himself privily to go
thither, Boniface intercepted him in his journey, and cast him into a most
strait imprisonment, that so he might hasten his death, as was thought: Auent.
l. 7.
For this subtle man much feared (says our Historiographer) and not long time
after it plainly appeared, least the people should rather follow Peter, so
famous for his unspotted sanctity, than himself swaruing in doctrine,
swelling in pride and arrogancy of mind, as Pope of Rome, successor to Peter,
and Chrsts Vicar upon earth. There was none out of doubt which did not utterly
condemn his violent imprisonment, diverse opprobrious and ignominious reports
were openly diuulged both in the Court and City, against Pope Boniface. Thus
spoke Blondus, Collenuc. l. 5.
Platina, and others, of the ambition, impudency, insolence, and ingratitude
of Boniface. But above all others Colenucius speaks plainly to the point, and
auers, That he cruelly caused him to be put to death in prison.

His Papacy afterward exceeded in all kind of injustice and violence, so as
not without cause Langius Monachus Citicensis said of him, Langius ad An. 1295.
Tyrannizing rather with a Lyon-like mind, than Papizing, he sought to strike a
fear and terror of himself in all the world. Being jealous of James and
Peter Colonna, Cardinals, as also of the whole Colonesi, he raised the
Croysado against them, so as they were driven to retire into Preneste, which
then was held by Sarra Colonna their uncle. This town he presently besieged
with the Croysadoes, who, to escape his hands, left the town, and the same
afterward being driven to yield, in revenge and hatred to them, he utterly
demolished it, extending the same fury and rage to Zagaruolo, and other places
whither they fled. Afterward he deprived both the Cardinals of their hats, he
excommunicated and banished out of Rome and the Church the whole family, and
Sarra by name, their uncle, as Petrarch says, he drove to such plunges, as he
was constrained to roue privily up and down the woods and deserts, not daring
to commit his life into any ones hands, for fear of being betrayed unto
Boniface. They complained to all Christian Princes of this violence Blondus
Decad. 2. l. 9. Ex Petrarcha.
And here we will make mention of a stratageme well beseeming and worthy of
this profane Pope: Porchetto Spinola, one of the Minorites Order, was
nominated to succeed James Varagine, Archbishop of Gennes; for his confirmation
he came to Rome on an Ashwednesday, amongst many others Porchetto also fell
down at his feet, Blondus ibid.
to be signed on the forehead with a cross Boniface, Carmine mutato, changing
the words of that Scripture, Remember, says he, that thou art a Gibbeline, and
with the Gibbellines, thou shall return to ashes: and so casting ashes in his
eyes, the same day he deprived him of his Archbishopricke. The Reader may
hereby evidently judge in what esteem and reverence he held his own
ceremonies: and afterward, in the year 1300, An. 1300.
celebrating the jubilie, whereof he was the inuentor, he used no better
respect, being the first, according to Historiographers, that opened the golden
gate; a gate, at the opening whereof there is such a concourse of people, from
all parts of the world, as if by this they expected infallible salvation, and
plenarie remission of sins, the which he ordained to be opened every hundredth
year. Krantzius in Saxon. l. 8. c. 36.
And let Before him (says the Historiographer) the Popes never dreamt of
troubling Christendom with such glorious festiuitie: and to show his pomp and
majesty, in this Jubilee, which then was celebrated in Rome, he is reported to
have showed himself on the first solemn day, to all the people in his
Pontificalibus, bestowing upon them his Apostolical benediction; but the day
after, Krantzius ibidem. John Marius Belga. lib. antiq. quinto. Liberties of
the French church. Extra Tit. de moioritate, and obedientia C. vnam sanctam
Ecclesiam.
he presented himself in imperial habit, which was very resplendent and
remarquable, in an imperial Diadem; when having a naked sword borne before
him; and sitting on a throne he uttered with a loud voice: Behold here two
swords. And now Authors exclaim, Here, O Peter, thou see thy successor; and
Savior Christ, thou may here discern thy (The which words notwithstanding,
many father upon himself.) See to what height the pride of the servant of
servants is mounted unto.

And because he would not be satisfied in these extremities, he prosecuted the
matter hotly in effect: For he published a decretall, which is in the
extrauagants, wherein he peremptorily declared: That faith urging us thereunto,
we were bound and obliged to believe one holy Catholic Church, and that to be
Apostolical. And from this he brings us to the Roman Church, to obey one Pope:
to whom in the person of Peter it was said, Feed my sheep: so as whether they
were Grecians or others, they were not to be accounted Christ's sheep except
they obayed him. In this, and his power, says he, are comprehended two swords,
that is the temporal, and spiritual, Arguing out of these words quite
contrary to the Fathers sense made thereof, That both the material and
spiritual sword, was in the Churches power; but the one to be used for the
Church, the other of the Church: one by the hand of the Priest, the other by
the hand of Kings and soldiers, but this by direction and permission of the
Priest, that is of the Pope: but, says he, one sword must be under another,
and the authority temporal must be subject to that And here again shamelesly
against his own understanding and conscience, he cites the Apostle in these
words (behold the place) Let every soul be subject to the higher powers; for
there is no power but of God, and whatsoever power is, is ordained of God. In
which words, by all the Fathers explications, it is manifest that the Apostle
in this place meant temporal powers, he in those general words, excepting no
man from their obedience, of what quality or order soever he were. Then he
goes forward, affirming, That we must needs confess the spiritual power so
Which sense of that place none of the Ancients ever applied to the Pope: and
thus he might easily be victorious, where he had no opposite. But if this
supreme spiritual power should offend, whether in this case must be our
refuge? I pray you see how perspicuously he resolves this doubt, If this
supreme power err, 1. Cor. 1. v. 14. and 15.
must only be judged by God and not by man, the Apostle testifying, The
spiritual but is this spiritual man of Paul's to be only understood by the
Pope, does he not there rather oppose one to another, the man merely animal and
living, to the man spiritual, the man regenerat by the spirit of God, to one
unregenerate? and have all the faithful this power to judge of Kings and Princes
as their superiors? Is the Bishop of Rome then only a faithful one, in that
he only assumes to himself this power and prerogative? And thus in their
Decretalls the Popes make as mere a mock of the Scriptures, no less than
Roman Pasquill does. Yet notwithstanding out of these ridiculous antecedents he
impudently concludes, We therefore affirm, declare, determine, and pronounce,
That under pain salvation every creature must be subject to But now let us
see how wicked an use he makes of so impious a Decretall.

After the Emperor Rodulphes death there grew a schism and rend in the
Empire, there concurring at the same time a vacancie of the Popedom; for part
of the Princes, especially the Ecclesiastical, chose Adolph Count of Nassau,
and the other part Albert, Rodolphes son. But when Boniface came to be Pope
he rejected them both, under this pretext, that without his approbation they
could descend to no election. Hereupon grew a civil war in Germany, and at
a last a battle was fought, wherein Adolph was slain, so as then Albert came
to be easily confirmed Krantzius in Saxon. l. 8. c. 36.
But this stout Pralat made answer, That without his authority the election
past was not validious, affirming, that he had in his hands the power of both
swords. Another pregnant testimony he gave of himself in the Eastern Empire:
Charles Count of Valois, brother to Philip le beau king of France, married
Katherine daughter to Baldwin Emperor of Constantinople; he permitted him to
invade the Eastern Empire, out of which his father in law was driven, under
color (says Platina) of using his aid in an expedition to the Holy Land,
Platina in Bonifac. 8. Extra in Sexto l. 5. c. 23. Clericus.
but rather, in truth, to constitute him his Lieutenant in Tuscan, for the
extirpation of all the Gibellines. And at last he grew to that height of
insolency, as that he commanded by authority Matthaeus Westmonast. in
Floribus Temporum, an. 1301.
and that by the Pope himself. A bold enterprise, very injurious and
prejudicial to all Princes and magistrates, which notwithstanding presently
took effect in England, where the Clergy pleno iure, in true right and
equity, it belonged to the Sea of Rome. Thus far he prevailed without any
resistance: but attempting the like oppressions in France, he light upon king
Philip the fair; who making no such extraordinary account of his decretall,
to the great benefit and emolument of all Princes, curbed as we see and bridled
his unjust insolences.


In the year therefore 1301, An. 1301.
Boniface sent the Bishop of Pamiers into France to Philip the fair, a man
very like himself in pride and arrogancy, to stir him up to a sacred war,
with no greater fidelity questionless than his predecessors formerly had
done. He furnished his Legate with imperious and menacing Letters unless he
stoopt at his beck, to thunder out against him excommunications, as also the
Legate out of his own froward disposition, inserted with his persuasions, very
unseemly and distasteful words. But Philip could not digest so great
arrogancy, for apprehending his Legate, he committed him in custody to the
Archbishop Boniface grew into a rage herewith, and sent the Archdeacon of
Narbon, by birth a Roman, to Philip, by whose embassy he commanded the king
forthwith to set his Legate at liberty: the Bishops and Peers of France also
were enjoined to appear in Rome at a Council by a certain day. But Philip
moving some scruple herein, Henricus Steron. in Annalib. Ann. 1301. Chronique
de S. Denis. Paulus Aemilius in Philippo Pulchro. Blondus Decad. 2. l. 9.
Naucler. vol. 2. Generat. 44. Bochellus Decret. Gallican. Eccles. l. 2. c. 32.
Chronic. Monsort. Theodor. a Nyem. Gulielm. de Nangis. Iean le Maire de Belges.
the Pope protested that the kingdom of France did belong to the Roman
Church; and therefore he should refrain the government thereof, committing
the same to him and the Church: forthwith he absolved his subjects from the
oath of fidelity, speaking to them personally that were present; and for want
of obedience in this point, he suspended all the indulgences, pardons, and
graunts, Philip being exasperated with these threatenings, forbad the Prelates to
go out of the kingdom. The Pope ratled out his excommunications the more
against him, because he had laid hands on a Bishop, disposed of the goods of
seats vacant, and invested Bishops. True it is that Philip, to justify and
confirm his own right, freed the Bishop out of prison, but snatching the Bull
out of the Archdeacons hand while he red it, he gave the same to Robert of
Artois, to be burned in the Palace Court at Paris, commanding him presently to
Boniface were of this tenor, Fear God and keep his commandments: We would
have you to understand that both in Spiritual and Temporal things you are
subject to us: The collations of benefices and prebends no ways belong unto
you; for though you have the vacancie of places, in your custody, yet reserve
the fruits and profits thereof to the due successors: And if you have
conferred any, we denounce such collations void; or being already past, we
revoke them again: and whosoever believe otherwise, we declare them heretics.
Philips of return, were to this effect: Let your gross foolerie take notice,
That in matters temporal we are subject to none: the collation of certain
Churches and Prebends vacant, Even as he was answered by Peter Flot, Philips
ambassador, to the like menaces and threatenings, Your sword is verbal, but my
Sovereigns sword is real. And here our country man John Tillet, Bishop of
Meaux, is worth the hearing, Let us but behold (says he) this man's impudency,
who dares affirm the kingdom of France to be feudatarie to the Papal
Majesty. Platina in Bonifac. 8. Nauclerus vol. 2. Gener. 44. Chron. Martin.
manuscriptum.
And yet more foolish are they whosoever go about to debate whether the Pope
may do thus much or no.

During these controversies the States of the kingdom assembled at Paris,
assisted with all the Archbishops, Bishops, Prelates, Decretists, Divines, and
Masters of Faculties; before all whom the Bishop of Narbon making an oration,
he produced ten several heads of accusation against Boniface; First, That he
was a Symonist: Secondly, in that he said he could not commit simonie: Thirdly,
That he was an homicide: Fourthly, an usurer, which was most manifest: Fifthly,
That he gave no belief to the ministers of the Eucharist: Sixthly, in that he
affirmed the soul to be mortal, and there was no other joy but of this
present life: Albertus Argenti^. in Chron. Krantzius in Saxon. l. 8. c. 37.
Seventhly, because he was a reuealer of confessions, for he enforced a
Cardinal to reveal unto himself a confession that was made unto him by a
certain Bishop of Spain; which being known he removed the Bishop from his
place, Wherefore he appealed unto the Sea Apostolical, as he said, then
vacant, and unto the next Council. In the mean while it was enacted under
grievous penalties, That no man might transport any gold or silver out of the
kingdom, to the use or service any ways of the Court of Rome. Wherewith
Boniface bursting for anger, calling a Council at Rome, he imposed his
interdiction upon the kingdom of Boniface resolved to confirm Albert in the
Empire, whom before he had so often repelled, so he would promise to undertake
a war against Philip, and to invade his kingdom; upon which condition he
gave him both the titles of king of Romans, and king of France. But Albert,
doubtless out of his wisdom and discretion, refused these offers; but to the
end he might not make him his open enemy, his answer was, That he could not
entertain these offers, except he would permit the perpetuation Boniface his
vain and hollow counsel, he embraced Philips affinity and alliance by the
marriage of his daughter.

And Philip seeing himself entangled with an implacable man, resolved to make
an end of this great altercation and strife. As formerly we heard, Boniface had
deprived the Cardinals Colonnaes of the hat, and their uncle Sarra wandering up
and down by sea and land, fell into the hands of pirates; who now had nothing
left but only his will Philip. Now the king was formerly determined to send
William Nogarete of Narbone, a gentleman by birth, into Italy, to declare unto
Pope Boniface presentially, how the king appealed from him to a Council, and
whatsoever came of it, to put upon him such an affront as his insolency
worthily deserved. Philip therefore joined Sarra with Nogarete in commission,
and Nogarete made some stay at Sienna, about taking up some money out of the
Bank of the Petrucci, while Sarra in disguised habit visited and solicited his
old friends, but above all others he secured to his party three hundred French
horse, which Boniface then was in his fathers house; who upon so sudden a
tumult, being ignorant what the matter should be, roabing himself in his
Pontificals, he sat on a throne, and Nogarete entering in, showed him the
Appeal in the kings name, signifying, that the Pope must come to Lions, that
so afterward he might be deposed of his dignity, in France: and taking him by
the neck, when he made some resistance, he gave him a good blow on the cheek
with his gantlet, and caused him to be carried to Rome. The History relates,
That when they had taken him they set him on an unbridled horse, his face
turned to the horse tail, and so they This Bonifacie (says the Author of
Mounforts Chronicle) who lately made Kings, Popes, Prelates, and oftentimes the
people, to tremble and fear, now suddenly in one day both fear, trembling,
and grief, assailed and overwhelmed, and thirsting so much after gold, he now
lost the same, that all superior Prelates may learn by his example not to
tyrannize too insolently over the Clergy and people, but rather be an example
to their flock, and to take care of those under their charge, striving more to
be loved than feared. The same Boniface, Platin. in Bonifac. 8.
who (says Platina) sought rather to strike terror and fear into the minds
of Emperors, Kings, Princes, nations, and people, than there to plant religion
and piety; as he that at his pleasure would give and take away kingdoms,
expel, and reduce men back again, greedily thirsting after But after this
just judgment he fell into such a desperation and madness, as some thirty
days after he yielded up his life; giving occasion of a proverb, which did as
it were epitomize his whole Popedom, He entered like a Fox, lived like a Lion,
and dyed like a Dog. Some say, thus much was presaged unto him by Celestine in
these words, Ascendisti vt Vulpes, Ranulph. in Policronico l. 7. c. 39.
Walsingham in histor. Angl.
thou did ascend like a Fox. The Tuscan story questionless delivers it
written, That in the election of Popes it ran by way of prophecy, Intrabit
vt Vulpes, which the history called Fasciculos Temporum notes to have been
fulfilled in every respect: This Pope grew to such an height of arrogancy, as
he would style himself to be the Lord of all the world, as well things
temporal as spiritual: and many things he did out of

Concerning matters of doctrine, there flourished at this time in France one
Robertus Gallus, a man very famous, who of a Prelat became a Dominican, and as
it seemed he did not approve of the manners and customs of that Order. There
is a book of his extant at Paris, coming forth together with the prophesies
of Hildegard, wherein comprehending certain visions of his own, in the fifth
chapter he calls the Pope Idolum, an Idol; and he brings in God speaking in
these words, Who set this Idol on my throne, to command over my flock? he
has ears, yet does he not hear the clamor and cry of those that lament and
descend down into hell, though their howlings drown the sound of trumpets,
and the fearful claps and reports of the Could that place of Zachary be more
fitly applied to the Pope? O Pastor idolum, O ydoll Shepherd: In the first,
and twelfth Chapters, in the figure of the Serpent, he describes the Pope, or
Antichrist, who extols himself above measure, oppressing the godly, though
they be but of a very small number, and being environed with many false
Prophets, who, in contempt of God, and Christ, only preach and magnify him,
contrariwise, obscuring and defacing the name of Jesus: In conclusion,
deciphering the Roman Church, I did pray (says he) on my knees, with my face
toward heaven, nere to the Altar of S. James, at Paris, on the right hand, and
I saw in the air before me the body of the only high Priest, clad in white
silken Roabes, and his that is to say, wherein there is no blood nor humor of
life remaining. That it might also signify what manner of bread she distributed
to her children; Again, says he, intending the same work another day, I saw
in the spirit: And behold a man of the same habit went about, bearing on his
shoulders delicat bread and excellent wine: and the bread and wine hung down
on his sides, but he in his hands held Was it possible in more significant
words to express the Sophistries and cauilations of these times, which having
the word of God ready at hand to distribute unto the people for their
nourishment, they rejected this (though this was a burden laid upon their
shoulders) continually living, and dying, in chewing, and eating of idle and
contentious questions. The which, in like manner the Prophet objects to the
Esaias 55. v. 2.
Why lay you out your money for no sustenance, and bestow your labor in a
thing that affords no repletion? As also in the vision before he thought that
he saw the Church reformed: I saw (says he) a certain clear bright Cross of
silver, like the Cross, the Arms of the Counts of Toulouse; but those twelve
Apples which are in the extents of the Cross, were like certain rotten
corrupt Apples cast up by the Sea: and I said, Lord Jesus, what means this?
and the spirit said unto me, This Cross, which thou see is the Church, which
through purity and cleanenesse of life shall be bright, and resonant through
the shrill voice of the preaching of verity: and The which cross undoubtedly
did truly decipher the Church, in that the cross of Christ is the Churches
salvation; the true preaching of this cross the exact reformation of divine
worship, inuolued in humane traditions, which do but obscure the glory of the
Cross, and even cast a black cloud over the Church. Posseuinus in Apparatu
tom. 2. An. 1302.
And yet Posseuine the Jesuit calls this Author, An excellent preacher of the
word of God. Neither need we to doubt, but that in such a general coherence of
the French Clergy against Boniface, there were many more who together with
Robert discerned both the Popes tyranny, and the Churches deformity. For king
Philip in the year 1302, when he made his progress Nogaretes father, Paulus
Aemilius in Philippo Pulchro. Guido Perpinian. de Haeresib. Blondus Decad. 2.
l. 9. Gulielmus de Nangiaco. Nicholaus Emericus l. 1. Jnquisitionum.
who by Philip the Fairs iniunction took Pope Boniface, was burnt in
Languedoc, for the opinions of the Waldenses: for these Waldenses did not only
persist and go forward in France, but even out of the blood which the
Inquisitors daily shed, their steps and impressions grew more frequent and
famous over all Italia and Germany. Boniface with all rigor and severity,
rooted out those whom he called Fratricellos, The brethren, whose principal
Doctors were, Gerardus, disciple to Sagarellus of Parma, and Dulcinus, disciple
to one Nouarius Hermannus, who while he lived, being in Italy esteemed for a
Saint, was afterward by Pope Boniface his commandment dug out of his grave
at Ferrara; whom notwithstanding, after their manner, they accused of six
hundred several foul crimes, now plainly convinced to be false and untrue,
because they seriously did inculcat, and above all other things beat upon this
point, the adversaries themselves bearing witness, That the Pope was
Antichrist, the Church of Rome the Apocalypticall Babylon; and that they who
would feign seem and appear to be spiritual, Boniface, a most unconscionable
and profane Pope: yet we see that at the same time we find them to have been
in Germany.

Hereunto we will annexe, That under Nicholas the fourth, Guido Perpinianus de
Haeresibus.
Peter the son of John de Besiers, a Franciscan, made the Postille upon the
Apocalypse, wherein he refers all those special places to the Roman Church, the
which he calls a carnal Church, the Synagogue of Satan; and the Pope
mystical Antichrist, as also his Prelates Antichrist members: For which cause
he was condemned of heresy by the Inquisitors: and because they could not come
by him when he was alive, they plucked Peter Cassiodorus, an Italian, who writ
that vehement and persuasiue Epistile to the English Church, Bernard. de
Lutzemburg. de Haeresibus. Nicholaus Emericus l. 1. Inquisitionum.
Super Cathedram Mosis sedent Scribae and Pharisaei; cuinam illos aequiparabo?
etc. Wherein he exhorts them to shake off the yoke of Antichrist, with his
unjust and continual exactions. And these things fitly lead us unto the
fourteenth Age.

56. PROGRESSION.


BEnedict the eleventh, a Tuscan, of the Dominican Order, succeeded Boniface,
Boniface his overthrow. At his first entry he excommunicated Nogarete and the
inhabitants of Anagnia, which assisted his enterprise; but so he restored both
John and James Colonna to be cardinals, and yet they were commanded for a time
to refrain wearing of the hat. King Philip he absolutely released of all
censures, restoring to him all those privileges that Boniface had taken from
him: but in the ninth month of his Papacy, as many write, being killed with a
poisoned fig, he dyed. Thomas Walsingham in Chronico. Leandro Alber. An. 1305.
Wherefore in the year 1305, after ten months altercation, the Cardinals
chose Raymond Goth a Gascoine, Archbishop of Bourdeaux, who was absent, who
took upon him the name of Clement the fifth. He understanding of his own
Herman and Occan, Friars Minorites, who were renowned Divines, in this
contentious age of the Church, lay upon this Pope the notes of wonderful
ambition, avarice, and sensuality: but more particularly Villanus and
Antoninus, who peremptorily write, That he kept a concubine publicly in
Auignion, who was daughter to the Count de Foix: Moreover, That all the vices,
crimes, sins, impieties, and flagitions, which formerly possessed the Roman
Church, under a vale And hereupon our whole country of France brought forth
little better fruits, Nicholaus Clemangis in l. de corrupto Eccleclesiae statu.
if you consider loosse and lascivious liberties: for Clemangis Archdeacon of
Baieux says, That Rome might clearly herein discern the imminency of her own
ruin and overthrow, because leaving that city for her odious and abominable
fornications, she fled into Auignion, where the more freely, the more openly
and shamelessely, she discovered the courses of her simonies and wicked
prostitutions, and so brought strange and corrupt manners into our France,
which were the introductors of many other As also for forensiall delays and
trauerses, because they taught us all the wiles and subtilties of the Roman
Court, and the very style and form of the Rota, which utterly extinguished
our natural simplicity, so as we could never afterward be repurged of these
corruptions. Neither shall you read of any man who alleged, That Rome was S.
Peter's seat, or that we must go thither where the holy Ghost had his
residence. Out of question Auignion, which liked and pleased them well, was
then to them no less the same than the other: whereas now at this day they
refer the universal Church to Rome only, as also only to Rome this seat and
chair. When the Cardinals came to Lions, they crowned Clement with a
wonderful concourse of nobilie from all parts. King Philip and his Charles
were present, which Charles was lately returned out of Italy, and had not
faintly furthered Clements election: John also Duke of Burgondie, and many
other Princes: The recourse was such, as at the entering in of the multitude a
wall instantly falling down many were crushed, amongst whom Charles the kings
brother and the Duke of Britain were sore hurt, and the Pope himself was
overthrown, and his Myter struck from his head, whereof one jewel of
inestimable price was lost: And all these things presaged disaster and ruin.
This made all men believe that he transferred the Papacy into France for some
special end, because this new Pope at his first entry created many French
Cardinals, in whose hands lay the whole authority and power of election: Then
on the other side,

Now in the years 1308, Albertus being slain, An. 1308.
the electors chose for Emperor Henry, son to Henry Count of Lutzemburg,
called the seventh, being a Prince of noble valor and fortitude, imposing on
him the Diadem at Aquisgrane: who presently sent ambassadors to Clement being
at Auignion, to obtain at his hand, that his coronation might be celebrated at
Rome: which Clement yielded unto upon this condition, That within the space of
two years he should go into Italy. But Henry not attending an appointed
day, passing the Robert king of Sicilia, the Popes friend, who supplied them
with forces, to erect strong garrisons where special need did require. An
army in like manner he brought with him, to defend their league and society.
But so on the other side many that received him with great applause, suffered
him willingly to have both succors, and captains, but especially in
Lombardie, which being more remote from Robert, was the less subject to his
plots and stratagems. When he came to Viterbe the Clergy and people of Rome
met and saluted him, conducting him honorably to Rome. At his entry he
discovered a conspiracy on Robert king of Sicilia, who, under color of
honoring this festiuitie, was come thither. Henry therefore being crowned at
S. John Laterans, leaving the city to the Cardinals, was enforced to retire to
Tiuoli, whither he being gone, they then manifestly showed, how they were not
so precisely enjoined to set the Crown on Clement presently enacted this Law,
Henricus Steron. in Anna^ibus sub annum ^313. Clemes Ne sede vacant aliquid
innouetur. Jdem de sententia and de re iudicata. Collenuc. lib. 5. Henricus
Stero in Annalibus Trithem, in Chron. in Abbate Hen. 13.
That the elected kings of Romans in Germany, could neither be held nor taken
for absolute Emperors, before they received this title and inuestiture from
the Popes own hands: and moreover, That during the Interregnum, and vacancie
of that dignity, the Pope should rule and command over all the Cities and
precincts of the Empire. But the controversy betwixt them lasted not long; For
this good Prince going toward Sienna, and besieging Bonconuento by the way, in
few days after he was poisoned, whereof he died. Out of the precedent Story,
let the Reader conjecture of his death, although in this point all writers
consent that this poison was administered to him, by one Bernard Henry's
confessor, in the Host, from whence grew this verse.

Iure dolet mundus, quod Iacobita secundus,
Judas nunc extat; mors Caesaris haec manifestat.
The world much grieves, a Iacobine, making great show of piety,
Should prove a second Judas, poisoning the imperial Majesty.
And some affirm, the Popes Legate, instigating him thereunto. They that put
Henry Count of Flanders, and other Noble men of the Army; but the party,
after he saw the effect of this poison, made an escape. Auentine notes, that
Clement became an enemy to Henry, because in receiving the Crown he denied
to take an oath before the Cardinals, saying, How, it was against the custom
of his predecessors, and the liberty of Christian religion, that a Prince of
Princes, and Lord over all the whole earth, should be put to an oath by a
servant of servants: By means Robert of Naples and other Princes against
himself: then he perceiving this Robert's practice to take away his life by
poison, appointed him a day of trial, when he meant to have pronounced him a
rebel and Traitor, and so have stripped them of his kingdom: But Clement gave
him to understand, that it belonged not to him, to dispose any way of the
kingdom of Naples, but to the Roman See, of which he held in homage.

Clement being made Pope, by Charles Count of Valois his procurement, according
to Antoninus, he promised by solemn oath, to perform six things, which are
set down, Antonin. part; Tit. 21. c. 1. parag. 3. Villan. in Historia Florent.
both in Antoninus and other writers. First that he should absolve all those
that had colleagued against Boniface, and that he should redeliuer the
Collanaes: one thing he reserved to be propounded in due and convenient time,
which was to raze out the very memorial of Boniface, excluding his name out
of the Catalogue of Popes, and to disinterre his carcass. An. 1310. Chronic.
Martini. Chronic. Monsort. Thom. Walsingham in Chronico.
In the year therefore 1310, in Auignion, Philip King of France being
publicly excused by him of some matters that he had attempted against the
memory of Boniface sometimes Pope, he pronounced further in the Kings
behalf, That what he did he did out of a good mind, intention, and zeal,
the Kings Orators, being then present: and these things consequently as has
been said A further clause of favor was added by the consent of the whole
Consistory, which was, That neither the kings nor kingdom of France could not
be subject to any excommunication or interdict: which Bull is reserved in the
Treasury of the Charters. Momforts Chronicle says expressly, That he revoked
two of Bonifaces Decrees, one wherein he had written to the king, That he was
subject to the The, Colonnaes were already provided for; but the defacing of
Bonifaces memory remained yet to be performed, being sufficiently convicted by
Philips testimony, and the absolution of the attemptors: but this point was
referred to the Council of Vienna, which began about the end of this present
year. There it was debated on the behalf of king Philip, That Boniface was to
be condemned for an heretic; which three Cardinals above all the rest
vehemently argued: but at last the stronger party overcame, partly because the
Cardinals by him created feared least by this means they should endanger their
own places; and partly, because Clements election, Philip was so perseuerant
in this affair, Walsingham Chronic.
That by special messengers (says Walsingham) he with much importunity
demanded the bones of his predecessor Boniface to be burned as an heretics.
And this questionless he did not without the consent of the Parisian Senate,
and of the Sorbon.

In this Council three heads were propounded, The affair of the Templers, The
war of the Holy Land, and The reformation of the Church. The Templers were
condemned both of heresy and other crimes, and hereupon cruelly burnt in many
places, proscribed over all Europe, and spoiled of their goods. Bocatius,
Villanus, Antoninus, Nauclerus, Auentinus, and others: Some say, that
greediness of enjoying their goods brought upon them this prosecution; and
herein they blame Philip, and Clement himself, who would deny him nothing.
Others affirm, that the Popes choler was incenst against them, because they
detested the Court of Rome, which was the only cause of all the miseries in
Christendom, and of the utter destruction of the Holy Land. So as by no
torments nor cruelty of punishment inflicted, they could be brought to
confess the crimes imposed and laid upon them. Paulus Aemilius in Philippo
pulchro.
And they of Germany proved their own innocence in an assembly called at
Mogunce, as Aemilius witnesses: They be not obscure Authors which allege that
James Burgond, Principal of that Order (some call him Molanus) being brought
forth to dye, and environed with a mighty multitude, while the fire was a
setting about him, and being offered his life, and release of that paineful
punishment, if confessing publicly that which he had delivered during his
imprisonment both of himself and his whole Order, he uttered these words: In
these my last actions, it being unpardonable impiety to lie, I freely and
frankely confess, that I committed a great offense both against my self and
my Order, and that I have therein deserved a most tormenting punishment,
because in favor of them for whom I should not, and allured with the
sweetness of life, I have in my tortures slanderously imposed many impieties
and detractions, upon my Order, which has ever deserved well of the Christian
religion. I have From hence the Reader may easily observe and judge of the
calumniations and slanders that the Popes in all ages have imposed and laid
upon their oppugnants. Some Authors of no small esteem add, Supplementum
Martini Parad, in Historia Burgundica.
That two Cardinals were present at this execution, and that this great Master
summoned Pope Clement before the tribunal of the everliving God, to answer
Clementines.

For that which concerns Palestina. The cross was published to be assumed
against the Turks, with a more ample and large grant of Indulgences than ever
before, that is to say, Whosoever took upon them the Cross for this
expedition, he could not incur damnation, in these plain words, We will not
that he be subject to the torments of hell: We further granting to those that
be signed with the Cross for this end, three or four souls at their pleasure
to be delivered out of Purgatory, by Whereat the Parisian Divines were
wonderfully scandalized, and so much the rather, because there was a special
clause annexed to this Bull, We command the Angels, that absolutely freeing
the soul from Purgatory, they conduct it into the glory of Paradise.
Conformable to a doctrine taught then by themselves and their adherents, That
the Pope could command the Angels as his officers and serieants. And many
copies of this Bull are yet reserved at Vienna, Poictiers, and Limoges.

As for Church reformation, little or nothing was spoken at all, as shall
appear in the section ensuing. But by the conclusion and shutting up of
Clements life we Antoninus himself: After the celebration of a general
Council in the year 1313, Clement going from Vienna to Bourdeaux, fell sick
by the way, and dyed. This man, as Chronicles relate, was too much addicted to
concupiscence, and for this cause the sin of simonie, so deeply detested,
and punished by the Canons, took deep root in his Court, about the
recommendations to benefices. And whereas some say, That simonie cannot
concur nor stand with the Pope, S. Thomas sharply reproues them. Besides, it
is reported, That when he was departing out of this world, a certain nephew of
his, whom he had sensually before affected (mark well these words) brought in
one that was skillful in the art of Negromancie, that by his wicked art he
might seek out how his nephew should be disposed of in another Clement. l. 2.
tit. 11. de sententia and re iuditata C. Pastoralis.
And yet this is he which in his Clementine, Pastoralis, We, as well out of the
superiority which undoubtedly we have over the Empire, as out of the power by
which (in the Empires vacancie) we are to succeed the Emperor, but more
especially May we not rather believe, by the points above mentioned, that he
took his power from him that said to the Lord, I will give thee all these
kingdoms, if falling down thou will worship me? This is he also that
commanded Corpus Christi day to be kept holy of all men, in a Council at
Vienna, which was first instituted by Urban the fourth, and then afterward
came to be neglected again, and therefore he granted new Indulgences, which is
to say, Lib. 3. Clementinarum tit. 16. de reliquijs and veneratione sanctor.
To all (says he) penitents and confessed which shall be present at the
Matines of this feast, in the same Church where it is celebrated, shall have
100, and he that is present at Mass as many: as also they that were present
100, and they that were at the second as many: and they that were present at
the offices of the first, third, sixth, and ninth hours, and at those
completorie, for each of the hours he had granted forty Indulgences: And to
him that was present at the Matines of the Octaues of that feast, and the
Masses of the foresaid hours, he obtained an hundred for every day of those
Octaues; And trusting the mercies of God we release him of all enjoined
penances. Can we better judge of these inventions, than by the inuentors
themselves, who made but laughter and scorn of these things, whether in life
or death? And yet abusing the reverence falsely by them usurped, they dare
presumptuously upon any occasion offered, most unworthily dare and provoke
Princes and Emperors. This Francis Dandulo to require absolution in their
names, after many detractions and delays, the matter was thus concluded, That
he lying prostituted at his feet so long as the Popes pleasure was, to obtain
the same, he was enforst, with a collar of iron about his neck, by way of
penance, like a dog to lie under his table; and therefore amongst his
countrymen he was termed Canis, a Dog. And yet Baronius would needs excuse the
cruelty of Alexander the third against Frederick the first, Because (says he)
to be true, it digresseth

OPPOSITION.
When Clement published the Council of Vienna, to give some hope of Church
reformation, he commanded Durandus, Auditor of the Rota, and Bishop of Mende, a
French man (vulgarly called the Visitor or Examiner) to digest certain
principal heads thereunto tending, to be propounded in this Council. There
is a treatise yet extant, whose title is, The celebrating of a Council,
printed at Paris Anno 1545; this book began with a sharp reprehension of the
Roman They follow (says he) the way of Balaam of Bosor, who loved the reward
of iniquity, and bore the chastisement of his own madness: for a dumb she
Ass speaking to him in a man's voice, discovered the Prophets folly and
impiety. The same happens amongst us at this day, seeing so many foolish and
dissolute parts are played in the Church of God, by the said Ecclesiastical
persons (who should be a light unto others, as candles set on candlestickes,
according to that which the Lord says) as that they dull and amaze the sense
both of Jews and Pagans: yea, and they who are altogether deprived of the
understanding of divine wisdom, do detest their folly, and their by and
digressing steps from Gods paths, they correct, and convince by a sounder
understanding. And Tit. 2.
By a sacred Council (says he) both Kings and Popes joining their hands
together, we must have recourse, First to the Law, to the Gospel, and to the
Councels approved and confirmed by the instinct of the holy Ghost, as also to
good and wholesome humane laws; And whatsoever we find to the contrary to
have been attempted in worldly government, let it be reformed and amended,
as well as may be, and the contrary no ways permitted to escape unpunished.
Let all abuses, customs, dispensations, privileges, liberties, and
exemptions, which are opposite to the same reformation, be removed, being to be
reputed but mere deprauations and corruptions. Tit. 2.
Secondly, Let the Popes themselves conform their words and deeds, Their
honor will swell up into pride, and what was ordained for concord will turn
to offense and discord. Thirdly, It cannot be denied, but that the Roman Church
has in many things declined from the Institutions of the sacred Primitive
Church, and from the sentences and approbations of the holy Fathers, Councels,
and Decrees, So as it appears to have utterly forgotten the first
Institutions, although we should prefer the Qui vult totum, perdit totum, All
crave, nothing have. And here he inueyed against the promotion of strangers,
whose voice the subjects could not hear, they neither understanding the
people, nor the people them, being therefore unworthy, blind leaders of the
blind: And thus the whole Church may Roman Court so reigns (says he) as if it
were no sin. Part 2. tit. 2. 11.12.20.21. Titul. 32. eiusdem partu and 4.
Plurarilitie also of benefices he reprehended, and Cardinals pensions,
wherewith the Bishoprics were charged; as also other benefices perpetuated to
the Popes nephews and kinsmen, which never dye, nor are vacant: and that Saint
Gregory the Great refused the title of Universal Bishop, neither would have
had any other to assume this nomination: Further, That the old Popes in their
Epistles were wont to prefer other Bishops before themselves; which he
proves by examples: and therefore the Church of Rome was so to be honored,
that the reverence and honor due to other Churches might not likewise be
abridged, he auerring, That Vt vnaquaque causa in sua prouincia terminetur.
Sixthly, That it seemed very behouefull in this Council to allow the marriage of
Priests, seeing hitherto they had idly and in vain bin urged to chastity, the
Priests of Greece being permitted to marie, as also it was used in the Apostles
time. Seventhly, That hand-labour was to be imposed upon Monks, conformable
to the customs in times past in the Churches of Egypt, who would by no means
receive any Monk which had not learnt some trade or mystery; marie above all
the rest, it was no ways to be suffered that they should, discharge Part. 2.
Tit. 53 and Part. 3. Tit. 16. and 28. Part. 2. Tit. 57. Part. 3. Tit. 15. and
16.
and much less therefore the Mendicants. Eighthly, That the abuse of Images was
necessarily to be suppressed, and the sale of indulgences and penances: as also
the vagrant liberty and rouing of Monks in their Sermons, who leave the
sacred Scriptures, to preach the mere inventions of men. Ninthly, Returning
ever to the first point, That there was no hope nor means of reforming the
Church, either in policy, discipline, or manners, except that of Rome would
begin with an example, whose corruptions in every respect he displayed; except
the Pope, before all others, prescribed a Law to himself, and were
comprehended within sacred Laws, both divine and humane, affecting nothing in
any wise Peter, not on the Roman Courtries: Except also, the primacie of the
Roman Church might be distingusht by Ecclesiastical and secular Laws, and
that the Pope would forbear to be called the highest Priest of the Church
universal, taking this person upon himself which Gregory utterly forbad.
But, says he, Part. 3. Tit. 32.
The Church universal suffers much scandal by the bad examples of the Roman
Church, and the whole people in general are infected, the rulers of the
people, according to Esaias, tollerating by this means the name of the Lord to
be blasphemed: For, according to S. Augustine, nothing more confounds or And
from hence he proceeds to the rapin of Legates, Nuntios, and of all the Popes
Ministers, the exactions of indulgences, of privileges, of dispensations, the
excess and pride of the Pope, and his Prelates, by many degrees surmounting
that of any King or Prince: as also, therewithal, the ignorance and negligence
of a number, whereby innumerable souls perish. And then here again he
exclaimes, casting away all hope, as in case of a most desperate disease: Part.
3. Tit. 28. and seq.
Oh what a grief is this, says he, for the saying of the Prophet Esaias, seems
now to be verified even in the Church it self, Chap. 34, in the figure of the
City of Babylon, glorious above other Kingdom, and renouned for the pride of
the Chaldees, of whom it is said, Also, I would the words of the Prophet Esaias
might not be verified upon the Clergy, when he said, Part. 3. Tit. 28. and 50.
This people honors me with the lips, but their hearts are far from me: with
many other places occurrring in this treatise, which is very worthy to be
wholly read over, neither will the Reader repent his pains taken. But in the
mean while, these good admonitions brought forth no fruit: Contrariwise, in
this Council, that Decretall came forth, which begins, Pastoralis etc. wherein
Clement magnifies himself far I came out of Paradise, I said I would water the
garden of plants, says that heavenly husbandman, who was the true fountain
of wisdom, the word of God proceeding from the Father, in the Father
remaining, begotten from all eternity etc. But in uttering these words, see
what he adds: That is to say, this garden is the sacred order, and institution
of the Friars Minorites, which being immured round about, with the walls of
regular observance, and satisfied only within it self, with Gods comforts, is
wonderfully adorned by the new plantations, on initiants and nouices, which
throughout all this prolixe Bull he studies and contends

Dant the Florentine Poet flourished also in that time, who amongst the writers
of the same age obtained the praise both of piety and learning: he writ a
Tractate, Monarchia, wherein he proved, that the Pope was not superior to the
Emperor, having no right nor prerogative over the same; which is diametrally
opposite to that Clementine, Pastoralis, wherein the Pope peremptorily arrogates
to himself both the one and the other: he proceeding thus much further, when
in his Canto of Purgatory he says, Di hoggimai che la Chiesa di Roma,
Per confonder in se due reggimenti
Cade nel fango and se bruta and la soma.
The Church of Rome which now will needs confound
And join in one two diverse gouernements,
Her self defiles in dirt, and brings her keys to ground.


He refutes also the donation of Constantine, that it neither was de facto, nor
could be de iure, and therefore by some he was condemned of heresy: There are
a third sart (says he) whom they call Decretalists, ignorant and unlearned in
all Divinity and Philosophy, who cleaving absolutely to their Decretalls,
putting all their hope, as I suppose, in the vigor and force of them, they
derogate from the Empire: And no marvel, when I have heard one of them say,
and constantly auerre, That the traditions of the Church In his Poem of
Paradise, written in Itaalian, he complains, That the Pope of a Pastor was
become a Wolf, and diuerted Christ's sheep out of the true way, and therefore
the Gospel was forsaken, the writing of the Fathers neglected; they relied
only on Decretals, no man thinks on Nazareth, where Gabriel displayes his
wings, but the Popes and Cardinals only repair to the Vatican, and some other
selected places of Rome. These things Peter, whose pure doctrine in the mean
while lies deeply buried at Rome. In times past war was made upon the Church
by the sword, but now the same is inflicted by a famine, that is, by taking
away the bread which God allotted for the nourishment thereof, Dante del
Paradiso C. 9. and 20. Del Purgatorio C. 32.
this being denied to no man, which is the preaching of the holy word: But
thou (says he) addressing his speech to the Pope, which by the Chancellor
only writest thus:
Propter vineam, quam vastas, etiamnum viuere.
Potes tu quidem dicere, firmum habeo desiderium.
Sic ad eum, qui voluit viuere solus,
Quique per saltus fuit pertractus ad supplicium,
At qui nec piscatorem agnosco nec Paulum.


In another place he delivers what an unworthy thing it was, that the holy
Scriptures were either wholly laid apart, or violently perverted: That there
was

Frederick the third, king of Sicilia, a most religious Prince, was so moved
with the depraved government of the Church of Rome, that he began to doubt of
the verity of the Gospel; but being urged by a vision, wherein his mother
appeared to him with her face uncovered, and whom he knew by these words, My
son I give thee my blessing, Colloquium Frederici Regis and Arnoldi de Villa
noua.
that thou may study daily to obey the truth, he sent for Arnold de Villa
noua, who was then of great estimation amongst all men, that by his assistance
he might be resolved in his doubts. His principal doubt was this, Whether the
doctrine of the Gospel was an humane invention, or a divine tradition. And
here three things principally disturbed his mind; First, That the whole
Clergy, as well great as small, it was but an illusion. Diverse out of this
made implication, That his mother Arnold de Villa noua, by many reasons and
examples, and especially, in that her admonition was consonant to the words of
the Gospel, plainly affirmed, That questionless this vision was of God, and
thereupon exhorted him earnestly, to serve God according to his vocation, to
perform justice and charity, to provide as well for the cause of the poor as
of the rich; and for matters belonging to God, he should continually prefer
them before all humane respects and considerations. For the doctrine of the
Gospel, that he must firmly auerre and believe, that all the doctrine of the
Evangelists is the very doctrine of God: That Jesus of Nazareth is the Christ
promised unto the Ancients for a Savior, even God himself which

Then for the reasons of his wavering and being in doubt, they were of that
nature, as they rather strengthened the belief and truth thereof, than any
ways impaired or weakened the same; especially the first and second, which
touch the deprauations and corruptions of Regulars and Seculars, because our
Savior himself, being the foundation of the Church, both by his own, and by
the words of his Heralds, foretold expressly, That this should come to pass in
those times, and that not only in the Canonical Scriptures, but further as
much has been Even as (says he) I have seen, and handled with these my
hands in the sovereign city. For the third point, of the negligence and
carelessness of the Sea Apostolical, That which our Savior Christ did in his
own time, and would shortly again perform, might satisfy him: he formerly
did it in that he twice commanded, That the Sea Apostolical should be taxed
with a diabolical Apostasy; first under Boniface the eighth, and lastly under
Benedict the eleventh, and that sometimes with plenitude of directory light:
For (says he) the denouncer declared, first, that the things he denounced
proceeded not from Thirdly he declared to them, That if they should neglect to
execute this message, God would make them taste a presagement of he eternal
judgment; so as it was told Boniface in writing, that he should fall into such
and such a danger says he, of Antichrist they endeavor to divert the these
offices in Provinces, not for the reducing of those that erred into the way,
but rather that by mere calumniation and slander, they might thrust the man
righteous and of good conversation, into the furious oppressions of devils and
Tyrans: where he enueyes mightily against diverse coinquinations, which reigned
commonly amongst them, as also the frauds and deceipts wherein they maintained
themselves: which being prolix and long, I would rather refer Arnold: but yet
these things ensuing by him prosecuted, are no ways to be omitted: They burn
and condemn the Scriptures, says he, as superstitious and erroneous,
expressing the verity Euangelical, declaring the mysteries of the sacred
texts, and touching too nerely to the quick their transgressions and
uncleanness, not upon any erroneous or false, but only for some ambiguous and
doubtful saying. They forbid all the Colleges of that state, to read or
study the foresaid holy Scriptures, under pain of death, and so by damming
up the well of the water of life, they deny the understanding of the holy
Oracles, and this water of life to those that are thirsty and cry out for the
same. Sixthly, because the Popes were by this denunciation enjoined to reveal
these things in the behalf of God unto This man is zealous, for the honor and
glory of Christ's spowse, and the salvation of souls: Let us therefore examine
and diligently by experience make trial, whether those things he speaks, and
declares, tend to the conversation or corruption of the Gospel: But the Senate
was all mute, and only because he revealed the blemishes and defects of the
spowse unto the Bridegroom (out of a zeal obscuring and healing these
wounds) he was whipped: And they that bore the colors of Evangelical
sanctity, persecuted him more He concludes notwithstanding. That Fredederick
should in no sort be scandalized with this negligence of the Sea Apostolical,
for these reasons to make any doubt of the infallible verity of Christ's
Gospel, seeing he himself foretold as much long time before, and God had now
in one self same time made twice denunciation thereof: and this Herald being
unworthily repulsed, scorned, and cast into bonds, was not at all therewith
shaken, nay, more constantly and firmly than ever before, he perseuered in the
Faith: For I know (says he) that God will yet the third time denounce his
predictions to the Seat Apostolical, And certainly much about that time grew
that great and long discord between the Emperor and the Pope, Lewis of Bauaria
then wearing the Diadem. But this Denouncer and Herald, of whom mention has
been made, was questionless Arnoldus himself, being a In which words (says
he) they endeavored to seclude Christ's little ones out of the field of
Divinity, desiring only to have this field possessed by Giants; that is, with
such as make war against God. Frederick therefore being moved by Arnolds
relations he resolved in himself very curiously to search out the truth of
the Gospel, to frame his life according to Christ's doctrine, who is truth it
self, and can only bestow on men eternal life: That he would by all labor
and endeavor procure

We also read an Epistle of king Edwards to Clement, wherein he inferres, how
many kings and nobles of his kingdom, from the very original of the Church,
had religiously built many Churches, liberally endowed them, and placed therein
very sufficient and fit ministers, so as the Catholic Faith might the more
spread and increase among the people and nations subject to him: and by this
means the Lords vine did wonderfully grow and spread; But (says he) a thing
But if you doubt whom he meant, observe, While (says he) the impositions and
provisions of the Sea Apostolic, which daily grow more burdensome, contrary
to the intentions of the donors, and the best benefices are conferred on
strangers, and those many times very unworthy, and not altogether free from
just suspicion, who are not resident in the said benefices, know not the
countenance of those sheep committed to their charge, nor understand not their
language. And he set many discommodities before his The successor (says he)
of the Prince of the Apostles received a commandment from Christ, to feed,
and not to feed upon, the Lords sheep; to confirm and strengthen, and not to
suppress and tread upon, his brethren. But because Clement opened not readily
his ears to these things, Edward forbad the Annates to be conveyed out of his
kingdom, as also that Prelates should not go personally to Rome for their
ordination. The Epistle began thus, Pensata sedis Apostolicae clementia, etc.

Fratricelli, Little brethren, and because they hated the Pope, the Roman
Court, and such as had brought in deprauation and corruption, both into
doctrine and manners, they were not only most cruelly put to death, but
further by calumniation and detraction made infamous to posterity, in many
kinds of uncleanness, though their opinions were never any other than those of
the Waldenses and Albigenses, being in the greateh part consonant to the
confessions of the reformed Churches. This is most apparent out of the
relations of Raynerius, a writer of those times, who says he was mortalia,
mortal: all which points have small Clement therefore commanded the Cross
militar to be taken up against them, exposing these poor souls to prey and
spoil, proscribing them to be stripped both of life and goods, and four
thousand of them he destroyed, being assembled together in one place. Others of
them recovered the inaccessible and insuperable places of high mountains,
where, till Pope Eugenius time, which was about an hundred years after, our
Author Antoninus says, they abode. Antonin. Part. 3. Tit. 22. c. 10.
And these be the very race of them from father to son, which we see in the
valleys of Oste, Angrogne, and other places. The same opinion is held of them
which at the same time were burned in great numbers within the town of Crema,
in the Duchy of Austria, which Chronic. Hirsaug.
that there were innumerable multitudes of this profession, in Austria,
Bohemia, and other bordering countries; and that one of their But they (says
he) with joint will and consent perseuered in their errors even unto death.
Now let the indifferent Reader judge, whether any one could ever cheerfully
and joyfully lay hold of the flames for such heinous crimes and offenses as
they are imputed and charged withal, much less so great a number of all kinds
and qualities. Not long after Lombardus was taken at Collen, a principal
Pastor amongst them, who drew unto him both there and elsewhere many disciples,
by his books which were written in the German tongue, and vulgarly dispersed:
leaving many (as himself confesses) both within and without the city, secret
professors, and disciples of his errors. Moreover he adds, That Bohemia being
then infected with this heresy, even to this present day abounds and swarms
with such errors and obscenities, as hereafter in the year of Abbot Blasius 17,
shall more fully be related; though afterward it was evident enough to all the
whole world, what the Bohemians were, especially in the time of the Council of
Constance, in whom no blemish of those corruptions appeared; and therefore
Trithemius mouth may herein fitly be stopped, who transported too violently with
a vulgar aspersion, replenisheth

57. PROGRESSION.
Afer a vacancie of two years, three months, and seventeen days, the
Cardinals dissenting, and referring it to his own arbitrament, James de Ossa
chose himself Pope, and was called John the two and twentieth. Lewis of
Bauaria subduing Frederick of Austria, went to Rome with an army, where,
against the Popes will, he was crowned, and afterward he elected another Pope,
Peter Corbario of Rietto,

An. 1316.
IN the year 1316, after a vacancie of two years, three months, and seuenteen
days, during which time the Cardinals could not agree of their election, James
d'Ossa of Cahors, whom Platina calls John the three and twentieth, came to the
dignity. The Cardinals dissenting, referred it to his arbitrament, to make
choice of any one out of their number, whom he should judge worthy and most
fit. But beyond all men's expectation, and through Cardinal Neapolion Vrsinoes
advice, deluding them all, he chose himself Pope, and so mounting upon the
throne, I Antonin. part. 3. tit. 21. c. 4.
says he. And here Antoninus adds, Though in other elections no man can choose
himself, yet in the electing of a Pope this is not prohibited, when the
election is thus absolutely referred to himself. Let the indifferent Reader
but censure of this kind of vocation to the Seat, by events ensuing. All these
things passed at Lions, and not long after he went to Auignion, there to settle
his residence. This John was borne of very obscure parents, and as it is noted
by the writers of those times, he much affected innouations, and was very
ambitious. Henry the seventh being dead, for supplying the place of the vacant
Empire, the Electors were greatly Lewis, Duke of Bauaria, and diverse to
Frederick, Duke of Austria. Lewis to procure his own coronation, solicited by
Ambassadors John's consent. John alleged, that he had already presumed to do
things every way exceeding the power of an absolute Emperor: and so he
repelled his entreaties. Then Frederick on the other side propounded unto him
by Ambassadors, the demerit and valor of his predecessors, Rodolphus and
Albert, both Emperors: His answer was brief in one word, Blondus Decad. 2.
l. 10. Auentin. l. 7.
That Salomons son was not so wise a man, and so dismissed them: detayning them
thus as long as he could betwixt two stools, That he, according to the Law of
his predecessor, might sway and govern the Empire; the which he challenging
out of that law, arrogated Lewis, notwithstanding, still held his possession,
and subdued Frederick in battle, taking both him and the chiefest of the
Nobility in the field. Afterward, providing for the affairs of Italy, he
constituted Matthew, Vicount of Milan, and restored the Gibbellines in many
places. When John observed these proceedings, he commanded him to lay down
the government of the Empire, under pain of excommunication: as also he sent
a Cardinal, Legate into Lombardie, who upon the same penalty enjoined the
Vicounts, Antonin. Part. 3. Tit. 21. l. 6. Parag. 10.
both father and son to depart Milan: and they using some protraction, he
excommunicated them, interdicted the City it self from all sacred offices,
and armed the Croysados against them. To this end therefore, in the Cathedral
Church of Auignion, Lodouick only making some delay in his obedience, might
be charged with heresy. And hereupon, Italy was divided into more cruel
factions than ever before, and the Guelphes rose against the Gibbellines in the
self same Cities, being one fleshed against another, yea the very Monks
themselves, some holding with the Pope, and others with the Emperor, the
Minorites against the Dominicans, and the Dominicans rent and divided amongst
themselves. Notwithstanding amiddest all these tumults, Lodouick passing
through Italy with an army, was lovingly entertained at Rome: and that he
might the better manifest to all the world, the incredible love and consent of
the people herein, Nauclerus vol. 2.
And then they set the Crown on his head, at S. John Laterans, or as some say
in S. Peter's Church; and at the peoples great instance by the hands of Stephen
Colunna, and Vrsinio d'Vrsini, he being consecrated likewise by James de Prato,
Bishop of Castello, and the B. of Ellera: for they thought it not requisite to
attend the Popes coming or any Legate from him, because then the government of
the city was in the hands of certain principal Barons, or Nobles, who
instiled themselves to be the king of Romans Substitutes, they executing full
and absolute authority; but they were yearly changed, except the Senate at any
time thought good to use some prorogation: Lewis proceeded yet further, by the
Romans instigation (who had many times in vain summoned and solicited the Pope
as their natural Bishop, to reside at Rome) causing election to be made of
Peter Corbario of Rietto, An. 1327.
a Friar Minorite, by the Clergy and people of Rome, he being a very learned
man, and fit for the managing of any government, who was called Nicholas the
fifth: and there were many that he made both Cardinals and Bishops. Nay and
moreover, John being convinced in a solemn Council of heresy, he condemned
him to be burnt: which sentence was presently and publicly executed in
effigy or picture. After the performance whereof, setting all things in as
good order as was possible in Italy, he thought good to return into Germany,
which John's arts and stratagemes. From such a form of contention kindled in
Christendom, what could be expected but a general confusion? and so much the
rather, because some years before John called Philip de Valois, and other
Princes, into Italy, with preualent forces, against Lewis; and the more to
endeere unto him Philip, who afterward came to the kingdom, he permitted him
to leuy a tenth of his whole Clergy, Antonin. part. 3. tit. 21. c. 6. part. 6.
and 9. Auent. l. 7. Guiielmus de Naugiaco.
under pretext of an entering into a war against the Infidels: which custom
his predecessors had formerly taken up. Thus all things hung in doubtful
balance, by the variable success of affairs, till Lewis in Germany came to
an accord with Frederick, who was glad to redeem his own liberty by yielding
up the Empire. Now Nicholas the fifth, John's An. 1334. Supplem. Martini.
being delivered into John's hands by the Pisanes, who revolted from Lewis,
Antonin. part. 3. tit. 21. c. 6. part. 15. Summa Constit. a Greg. 9. ad Sixth.
5. vsque constit. paternu^ morem. Annals Franciae. Christianus Massaeus in
Chronico. Guilielmus Ockam. in opere 90 dicrum. Ad^ianus 6. in quaest. de
confirmat.
he was cast into prison: Wherefore John king of Bohemia interposed himself to
procure some peace betwixt them upon conditions; but during the negotiations,
in the year 1334, John dyed at Auignion, Christendom being all over in
turmoyles, but especially all the Provinces and cities of Italy.

All Historiographers concur in this, That John left behind him a huge
treasure in ready coin, some say fifteen, and others five and twenty
Milliones auri, millions of gold, which for those times was very wonderful:
For under color of recovering Palestina he gramd and gript all the world. And
yet he was not ashamed to admonish Edward king of England, That he should not
impose such The government of whom (says he) my predecessor Adrian granted
unto you under certain conditions. But by what right or succession, suppose
you, should these people any ways belong to the Pope? For other matters, he
publicly preached in Auignion, That the souls, yea of the most holy and
faithful, did not behold the face of God before the last day of judgment:
which he pretended to understand from certain visions of one Tundall an Irish
man. And two Monks he sent to Paris, one a Minorite, and the other a
Dominican, to preach this opinion out of his suggestion, and to exhort the
Sorbon to embrace the same: laboring also the like in other Universities. But
king Philip of Valois assembled all the learnedest Divines of his kingdom at
Bois de Vincennes, Thomas Wallis, Durandus de Sancto Portiano, William Caleth,
and other Authors, are plentiful: Auentine adds, That he read a certain
Epistle of the Divines living amidst these dissentions, especially of those of
Paris, by which they taxed him of heresy, persuading him to renounce this
opinion; which, they say, he did, by their persuasion, not many days before
his death. But he might rather, peradventure, be condemned of heresy by the
modern Divines of the Roman Church, because (as the same Author relates) he
sent for certain men that dwelt in the confines of Bohemia and Austria, who
had painted the Trinity, Auent. l. 7.
under the forms of an old man, a young man, and a dove (as yet at this day
they use to do) whom he charged with irreligion, denouncing them to although,
in so clear a Sunshine of the Gospel, both Bellarmine and other of his
followers, are not ashamed to allow, and defend the same.

Jn extrauag. Johan* 22. tit. de verb. signific. c. 1. 2. 3. 4. and cap. ad
Candidorem, Cum inter, non nullos quia, quorundam.
Nicholas the fifth wonderfully promoted the Minorites, and John labored hard,
according to the usual inconstancy of the spirit of lies, to suppress and
beat them down, and this by such arguments as plainly overthrew the
Mendicants foundation: For concerning the question, Whether Christ or his
Apostles held any thing in proper, he says, we must herein believe the holy
Scripture, by which de facto, permitted to them by Nicholas the fifth, with an
exception of property reserved to the Church of Rome, was but a plain
delusion and cousenage, that so they might cunningly be exempted from that
poverty which they professed: and therefore the Mendicants being driven to beg
their living from door to door, grew mightily incenst against him. He further
argued, That Christ never commanded Auentine) That such Franciscans as now
lived from hand to mouth, and begged from door to door, that spoke against
his opinion, in preaching, That Christ and his Apostles possessed nothing, he
condemned of impiety and pernicious error, banished Fraterculos, Silly
brethren; and many also he burned. The same Auentine observes in these times,
That what was formerly distributed for the sustentation of the poor, was now
converted to ornaments, setting forth of walls, and glorious pomp, which was
out of Ecclesiastical goods, Then came in private sacrifices, sacrificing
Priests, sacrileges, pilleries, peculiarities of temples, and these that we
call Incorporations, and Non-residencies, all which may be found out in the
ancient Records. From this John also proceeded that Decretall Supplement
called Extrauagantes, so called of John the two and twentieth, as the
Clementines were of Clement. And some affirm, That they were both published by
him, because Clement perceiving many things in his repugnant to Christian
verity, Summa Constit. C. cum nonnulli. C. super gentes extr. de consuetudine.

Can. Solita de maiorii. and obedient.

Clementina vnica de iureiurando.

Clementina Pastoralis de sententia and de re iudica^a.

C. Venerabilem de electionibus. C. 2. de sententia and re iudic^ta. August. de
Ancona in lib. de potestate Eccles. q. 36. art. 2 et q. 35. art. 1. 37. 38. 44.
45, 46. De Rescriptis 6. and ibi Glossa Decis. Rote.


he Lewis party. The heresy was this, in that they served their lawful
Prince against the Pope, which there he says is, in praecipitium damnationis
and mortis sese iminergere, to throw themselves down headlong into damnation
and death.

And thus at length the Decretals came forth accomplished, from which our
fathers left unto us a common proverb, That since the Decretalls had wings
(which is, that Decretals were added to Decretals) the world daily grew worse
That the Pope of Rome is constituted by the Lord over nations and kingdoms.
There is as much difference betwixt Popes and Kings, as there is betwixt the
Sun and the Moon. That the Emperor was bound to take an oath of fealty to
the Pope. That the Pope is the Emperors superior, and the Empire being vacant,
his successor. That he may depose the Emperor, and, if he so think good,
elect another only of himself. In like manner, That he may appoint him an
ouerseer, and so any other King or State. Kingdoms he may transfer from one
to another, as he that is their rector and corrector. All these privileges
accruing unto him (so you will believe it) from that saying of our Lord, Omnes
potestas mihi data in coelo and in terra, In Decret. Gregorij tit. 7. c. Quanto
Glossa Lancelot in templo omnium Judicum l. 2. c. 1. par. 4. Bald. in l.
rescripta, C. de praecib. Imperat. offer. number. 7. August. de Ancona, de
potestat. Eccles. q. 18 art. 1. 2. 3. 5. Canonistae ad cap. Quanto de Translat.
Episc. and C. Proposuit de Concess. Praebend.

Gloss. did. 4. C. 4. August. de Ancona vt supra. Hostiensis in caput cum
venissent de iudicijs. Crauetta post Baldum, Council. 566. colum. 2. and
Rolland. Council. 1. number. 93 and number. 130. Baldus Council. 359. and Crauetta
Council. 241. number. 3.

Glossa in Can. 4. de concess. Praebend. and Can. 3. q. 6. causa 15. Decisius
1. vel 447. in compilat. Rebuffi edition. Lugdunens ann. 1555. p. ^7. Bald. in
Lege vltima.


as also that which David prophesied of Christ, He shall bear rule And
hereupon the Canonists enlarge, hand over head, in their Glosses and Decisions
of the Rota: The Pope undoubtedly is Christ's vicar, not only in earthly,
celestial, and infernal things, but further, over the Angels both good and
bad: He only has the power and jurisdiction of all the Patriarchs together,
a greater privilege than all the Saints, or all the Angels have; so as he may
excommunicat the Angels themselves. The whole world is but his Diocese, the
square he may make round, right of injury, and something of nothing. He also
may against laws natural, of nations, those civil, humane, and divine,
determine absolutely, and yet justly. Above and contrary to any law, above and
contrary to all Decrees, Canons, and Statutes of Councels, as he whose decree
and sentence is above all the Bishops of the earth, he being the cause of
causes, make himself equal to God; and therefore the Pope is their god: But
hear more, He may dispense against the Apostle, as superior, and against the
old Testament, in that he is greater than all the Authors of the same. Why
says he not greater than the holy Ghost, which inspired them? And some say,
against the Gospel it self: For the Popes will is the rule of all justice:
whatsoever he does, God holds it well done: God and he have one Consistory,
Christ and he one tribunal, the Pope being like to God, sin excepted, so as
if he might change opinion, we may as well presume that God can change
opinion. Item, We cannot appeal from him to God, in that upon earth he is
God, and as God he judges. In conclusion, He may command The books of this
Age are full of these Axioms, and no man is ignorant thereof, and now they
strive who shall blaspheme highlyest; for the Canonists are not only thus
violently carried, but even the Authors themselves of the Glosses, who should
have made a more strict examination before the yielding of them up for
authentical; they recommending unto us the Pope for a god, yea and that in
essence, if it were lawful for us to believe them: The which who would ever
have believed, if the spirit of God had not foretold as much? The Gloss upon
the chapter Periculoso, of the state of Regulars in Sexto, terms him, The
Prince of the whole world; but I suppose Cod. de sententijs rescindend. and ibi
Lancelotus and alij. Lancel. l. 1. c. 1. par. 4. de respons. Pontif. C. debetur
de Appellat. Lancel. Conrad. in Templo omnium iudicum l. 2. c. 1.
but to be accounted God himself. But Peter Bertrands addition upon Pope
Boniface the eight his Extrauagant, speaks peremptorily to this purpose, Jesus
Christ the Son of God, both while he was in this world, and also from
eternity, was natural Lord over all, and out of natural right might denounce
sentence of deposition and condemnation against the Emperor, or any other
whatsoever, as against such persons whom he had created, endowed them with
gifts natural, and those of grace, as also preserved them: by the same reason
therefore his Vicar may do the like. But did he, I pray you, create or
preserve these creatures? In stead of any reason alleged, observe but the
execrable blasphemy: For the Lord should not else have been discreet Bald. in
cap. Cum super de causis propr. and possess. Jn Extrauaga^t. Comm. l. 1. de
maiorit. Et obedientia. C. vnam sancta^, and ibi Glossa. Et additio Petri
Bertrandi in iure Canonic, Editionis Gregorianae Lugdunens. C. Fundamenta de
Electione in 6.
that could do all these things: now Peter was his Vicar, and so the same may
be affirmed of Peter's successors. But because many Canonists of those times,
were ashamed of such words, in certain editions they were quite rased out, and
Gregory the thirteenth, under color of reformation, restored them again. The
Gloss upon the chapter Fundamenta electionibus sexto, pronounces flatly, That
the Pope is not a man: and in a little verse it is said, Thou greatest of all
ehings, thou art neither whereupon he surnames the Pope Admibilis, Admirable,
by which name Christ is called in the 9 of Esaias; and it was a wonder omitted
the attribute following, Emanuel, God be with us. That Gloss upon the
Extrauagants of John the two and twentieth, titulo 14, says, Non est purus
homo: Glossa in proemium. Clementinar.
but yet that of the chapter Cum inter nonnullos, titulo 14, speaks as it were
infuriated, To believe that our Lord the Pope could not so or so decree, is
merely heretical. Now judge by all precedent inferences, Ius. Canonicum
impressum Lutetiae an. 1^20. apud Claudium Cheualonium in sole aureo. Ius.
Canonicum Gregorij 1^. impressum Lugduni postr^me. Editionis apud Rouillium in
Extrauag. Johan. 22. C. cum inter. nonnullos. Tit. 14. ni verbo declaramus
circa finem.
what reformation is to be expected from these men, when Gregory the
thirteenth perusing the whole Canon law, left this Gloss absolute and entire,
and being formerly rased out by others, precisely renewed the same: such an
heart-griefe it is unto them, howsoever they may feign and dissemble,

OPPOSITION.
Lewis the fourth, Emperor, suppressed his competitor Frederick, and fortified
himself by the king of Englands affinity, whose wifes sister he married,
being daughter to the Count of Holland: and therefore Pope John thought to
raise a Charles the Fair, king of France, and Robert king of Sicilie,
enjoining further Leopald Duke of Austria, and brother to Frederick, to take up
arms: he made the Duke of Poland a king, upon condition that he should war
against him: and further, he commanded the Teutonian Knights, to make peace
with the Lituanians, who were yet Pagans, to invade the Marquisat of
Brandenberg, which belonged to Lewis his son. When he saw that in all
likelihood he would not leave Germany, he sent Philip de Valois into Italy,
with Cardinal Bertrand, a Dominican, in his company, to open a way for him,
and he excommunicated Lodouikes partiality. Lodouikes partakers cried out unto
him in these distresses, requesting his aid: He notwithstanding; to claim his
right, fairly sent an ambassador to John, yea to his Legate, to treat of a
peace; who being entertained with threats and contumelies, returned back
again. John still reiterates his thundering excommunications; so as all other
affairs laid apart, Lewis must needs enter Italy with an army. Auent. l. 7.
In Auentine John's Bull against Lewis is to be read, taken out of the ancient
Libraries of Bauaria, the which it will be very requisite here to insert
absolute and entire: After (says he) that the Roman Empire, transferred by our
predecessors from the Greeks to the Germans, was committed to the custody and
protection of Charles the Great, this sovereign honor suo numine, with his
divinity. And further, the Empire being destitute of an head, the absolute
power and prerogative lay in the Pope, whose see it manifestly is. And we have
seen throughout all precedent discourse, what strife has been about this
word Benefice, or Fee, as also how much blood was shed in all parts of Italy:
In like manner when the seven Electors are divided, neither the one nor the
other of the elected (And this is continually for such an heresy as neither
the Apostles nor the Fathers ever made mention of:) We therefore, according to
the authority derived 1321. And that we may aggrauat nothing out of our own
constructions, let the Reader but only observe this form of speaking, which
retains with it a certain similitude of that which he God has committed to
me (says he) the prerogative of Emperor, both celestial and earthly. When
this Bull came to Lodouikes hands, prudent as he was, he seriously consulted
with all the famous Divines and Ciuilians both of Italy, Extrauag. ne sede
vacant C. si fratrum.
Germany, and France, but especially with those of Bologna and Paris: and all
their opinions agreed in this conclusion, That John's Decrees and promulgations
against Caesar, were altogether repugnant to Christian integrity, and divine
Philosophy. These resolutions of the Divines (says Auentine) are yet extant
in Libraries, written in parchment. Many renowned men also, of whom some were
Ciuilians, and some Divines, writ stiffly against John, whom they sharply
refuted out of the holy Scriptures, and the ancient laws and Canons: John,
to cleave unto Lewis, summoning John as it were to a day of hearing. Lodouike
in the mean while being constituted, published a solemn Diet to be held at
Ratisbone, whither all the greatest Princes and Bishops of Germany had
recourse. Amongst these there assisted John king of Bohemia, Matthew, Henry,
and Baldwine, of Magunce, and the two Archbishops of Collen and Treuers: Where
it was decreed, That Lodouike the Emperor should be provident to prevent the
bringing of the German liberty into servitude, and that the Majesty Imperial
might be freed from tyrannical By the force of these Acts Otho Bishop of
Carinthia, and Lambert of Tolouse, the Popes Legates, were expelled out of
Germany, and all the Bishops, Prelates, Priests, Monks, yea, and the
Franciscans themselves obeyed this Decree; only the Dominicans hung neutrall,
bending sometimes to John, and sometimes to Lewis, as their own interests
moved them, one while observing John's interdict, and another time for fear of
being expelled, celebrating and discharging sacred functions: as also by the
high authority of this Diet an Act was published, which is to be read absolute
Auentine, whose principal heads (to avoid tedious prolixitie) it may suffice
here to insert: Christ the Savior our Lord and God, Auentine l. 7.
and his chief Legates, Peter, Paul, James, and John, ascending into heaven,
told us of very dangerous times, imminent and hanging over our heads, but
above all they instantly admonished us, That being subtle in some sort as
serpents, we should take heed of the leaven of the Pharisees, and avoid false
Christ's, false Apostles, and false Prophets, being so termed, by reason of the
lying and hollow hypocrisy of their religion, who call themselves Christ's
Priests, when they are the very messengers of Antichrist: They may be
discerned by their unquenchable thirst of honor, power, and worldly treasure,
and their excess avarice and pride is grown to a proverb. We cannot deny,
but must clearly confess, that our times At last he applies this theme to
Pope John, declaring how many sundry ways he wasted and spoiled the Christian
Church; as he that provoked Christians And this Antichrist (says he) will not
suffer us to keep that peace recommended to us by God, so great is the
perverseness of that man, or rather of Satan, as in public sermons he sets
forth his own flagitions, for singular benefits. When Christian Princes are at
discord, then the Roman Priest reigns. In brief, the Pope is then of greatest
authority and power, when all others being weakened and plucked down by
discords, seditions, and mutual hatreds, his thunderings grow terrible, every
beck of his obeyed, and we observe even his very spittings, etc. And
questionless it was by this policy that both of us were created to the
dignity, whom a very brief letter from him might easily have reconciled, or
at least have persuaded us to determine people and the Commonwealth, whose
destruction he has conspired, reduce Christ's Then he comes to refute the Popes
Bull, by a president from his predecessors, especially the prerogative that he
so arrogated to himself; as that in the vacancie of the Empire, and upon the
dissenting of the electors, the government of the Empire belonged to the Pope.
He justified also the course and proceeding of his He most falsely, says he,
accuses me for a favorer of Heretics; I am a Christian, but he is an
Heresiarck; for he cannot be Christ's disciple that scorns his life, contemnes
poverty, despises piety, pollutes Religion, prophanes holy functions, sets
light by modest manners, condemns institutions, and treads under foot all rule
and precept: For S. Frauncis, who was an Herald of verity divine, the
ensigne-bearer of Christian poverty, and all his whole order he condemned of
impiety in Auignion, the sixth of the Ides December, anno 1322. I pray you
hear for what cause. An. 1322.
This pernicious man, thirsting after dominion and Empire, preferring silver
before the At last, drawing to a conclusion, he says, If he be not Antichrist,
yet he must needs be his predecessor and forerunner: and therefore, for
defense of Gods Temple (whereof he has charged us to have a special care) we
appeal from him, to a general and universal Christian Council. This appeal
many supposed to be full of peril and danger, but William Ockham, a
Franciscan, a Divine of great reputation, and his colleagues, diuulging Books
upon this subject, they fully satisfied all those, says Auentine, who made a
great scruple where none This Apology of Lodouickes, was of such force among
other Princes, yea even with his adversaries, that the Counts of Tyroll and
Goritz, treated a peace betwixt the two competitors, Lewis and Frederick,
Lodouick taking Frederick in battle, as has been related, held him in
custody for certain years, he therefore restored him to liberty, upon
condition that Frederick, should abjure all royal Title and plight his
faithful promise, That the house of Austria, should never contend with that of
Bauaria for the Empire: hereupon they received the Sacrament together; but as
many Historiographers make mention, Frederick did not afterward perform his
promises.

Lewis, in the year 1327, as you have heard, went into Italy, An. 1327.
and ordering his John, Diverse heavy censures past, and many things were
spoken freely, boldly, and resolutely: and so at length John, being deposed,
another was chosen in his place. It will be very material, here to express
the principal points of that decree, Auent. l. 7.
which may be read in Auentine whole and entire; which Lewis in form of
patents directed to all Christians in general. He therefore declares, with
what patience hitherto, he had borne so many gross and important injuries, to
whom notwithstanding God had given a sword to be revenged of them: but because
that which he did out of a mere love According to the prerogative granted to us
from above (says he) we will pluck the Lambs skin over the Wolfes ears,
and to tell you in few words, without any collusion, the whole affair, do but
give ear, and attend, for all in general in this matter are interessed. We
are all vulgar Communities, without authority, without favor at home or
abroad, exposed to base sale: True Majesty and authority, the liberty of
religion, the Empire of the Christian people, the laws, and whatsoever is
either divine or humane, is come into the hands of a most cruel enemy, his
repose lies in sedition, and his trouble in peace; a most wicked man, of
bloody hands, of brutish avarice, most nocent and most (who followed Absolon
against David) converting the Imperial sword granted to us from heaven, even
against our selves: contrary to divine precept be only intends the temporal
cares of this world, gapes after worldly dominion. As he is a masked
shepherd, so is he a mystical Antichrist, who being Apud Marquardum Frelierum
rerum Germanic. Tom. 1. in Appendice. An. 1328.
Given and published before the famous Temple dedicated to Saint Peter and Paul,
Christ's Legates, the eighteenth day of April, in the city of Rome, Anno 1328.
And to this time, or much thereabout, ought to be John the two and twentieth
his Bull, directed to all Princes and States, as well Ecclesiastical as
Secular, in which contrary to that the other contended to prove both by the
Canon law, Glosses, and opinions of Doctors, he auerred, That the Empire no
ways depended on the Pope, and how all the laws never approved the Popes
plenarie power both in spiritual and temporal things: That an Emperor
formally elected, before his consecration at Rome might execute all his
authority and prerogatives: and whosoever thought otherwise were traitors and
heretics. Of which kind also that information is, De nullitate processu Johan.
22, whether Marsilius Patauinus, or Ockam, be Author thereof. Wherein Lodouike
appeals from a Citation unduly

And thus it was enacted against John the two and twentieth, or, according to
Platina, the three and twentieth. Furthermore, Trithemius in Chronic.
Hirsaugiens.
the Divines and Ciuilians of these times argued this question by way of
Thesis, De potestate Imperiali, and Papali, earumque distinctione, Of the
Emperors and Popes power, and their several distinction. For, to omit what
Vldarick, the Emperor Lewis his Chancellor, Apologia Ludovic. 4. contra Ioh.
22. publice^ proposita.
wrote to John in certain letters directed to him in his Masters name, wherein,
amongst other Bestiam illam de mari ascendentem, That beast arising out of the
sea, of which mention is made in the Apocalypse; an Apology was published in
Lodouikes behalf, by the Divines, whereby they stiffly affirm, Quod nullus
Papa potestatis plenitudinem in temporalia sibi arrogare potest, That no Pope
could arrogate to himself any plenarie power in temporal things, much less
in the Empire, and yet much more less such an one as John, a man most
unworthy of the Papal chair: as also, that the Pope swaruing from the Faith
might have a superior on earth, which is, the whole Church represented in a
general Council, which out of their authority may judge him, and to which
for this cause it was lawful to appeal.

And the same we read printed at this day. But beyond all others, out of
William Ockam, a Franciscan, an Englishman borne, being a very witty and
learned Doctor, assayles him very stoutly: Defend me Caesar (says he) with
thy sword against the Popes injuries, and I will by word, writing, and
irrefragable reasons maintain thee against him: the which indeed he performed
while he lived; he constantly auerring, That the Pope was an heretic and
schismatike, whose censures were nothing at all to be esteemed. From hence came
those Dialogues of his, Pro Ludouici defensione, Liber nonaginta trium dierum,
pro Michaele Caesennate, General of the Franciscans, excommunicated for the
same cause, Errores Iohannis 22, Dialogus inter Clericum and militem, and other
such like: In which he debates this point with so unanswerable arguments, as no
man need to call his opinion into doubt or ex iure diuino, has no Primacie:
That Peter never had, nor never sat at Rome, and therefore the Pope cannot have
it: That the Pope may err, yea and the whole Roman Church, and therefore ought
to be liable to a Council. Concerning the controversy betwixt the Pope and
the Emperor, he discusseth eight several questions, First, Whether the
Imperial and Pontificiall dignities might be jointly discharged in one man.
Secondly, Whether Caesar only received his authority from God, or from the
Pope of Rome also. Thirdly, Whether by any authority from Christ the Pope and
Church of Rome have power to confirm Caesar, and other kings, in the exercise
of royal jurisdiction. Fourthly, Whether Caesar being elected, has Caesar and
the king of Romans, being consecrated by Bishops, receive any authority from
them. Sixthly, Whether such kings are in any sort subject to those which
consecrated them. Seventhly, Whether if they should use any other rite or
solemnity, or assume another Diadem, they lost in so doing their royal title
and prerogative. Eighthly, Whether the seven Electors confer as much right
upon the Emperor elected, as other Kings and Princes have by lawful
succession. All which questions he arguing on both sides, he determines in the
greatest part for the civil Magistrate, I mean for Kings and Princes; utterly
overthrowing by the way, the Extrauagants of John the two and twentieth, as
Timothy admonishes us, 2. ad Timoth. c. 3. v. 3. and 4.
The time will be when they shall not give ear to sound doctrine, but
according to their own lusts they shall seek out for teachers that may
delight their ears, which themselves shall stop against all truth, and open
wide unto fables: For this is the state of the present time, that all men in a
manner enquire not what was the doctrine of Christ, of the Apostles, or of the
Fathers, but only they listen what the Pope wills and commands them.
Ascentius in his Preface says, That he writ six other Tractats, which he
wittingly omitted, because they were somewhat too sharp and bitter against the
Pope of Rome.

Editus Basiliae.
Marsilius Patauinus, the Author of that golden Treatise, whose title was,
Defensor Pacis, of the authority of the Emperor, and of the Pope, writes much
out of the same vein; where, out of the holy Scriptures, the Laws, the
Canons, and both the sacred and civil history, he affirms and auerres these
propositions ensuing: That Christ was the only head and foundation of the
Church, and not Peter: That he constituted none of the Apostles, no not Peter
himself, Universal Vicar, and head of the Church; and that by as good right
any one else may usurp to himself this title: That Peter was never Christ's
general Vicar, neither Peter: How it was most probable, that Peter was never
at Rome, much less that there he held his seat, who, as the rest of the
Apostles, had no peculiar seat: That the Pope laboring to confirm his
Primacie by succession, has no right at all, and therefore it is not
validious: That he has no greater authority than other Bishops, no not in
that which appertains to Indulgence, and remission of sins, and that
otherwise by divine right all men are equal with him; the Bishops of Magunce,
Collen, and Treuer, are Primats as well as he: That the plenarie power
attributed to him, was a manifest lie, an execrable title, and the very
original of all evils, and the use thereof was to be interdicted the Popes by
some good general Council. But Peter when he lived, as he was a man, might
fall, nay, and err; neither was the Pope by any privilege exempted from
error. And whereas it was said to Peter, Oraui pro te, this may be extended
likewise to the rest of the Apostles; and therefore he could be no surer of his
faith and constancy than Marsil. Pataui. part. 2. c. 24.
Those (says he) which have visited the Roman Court, or to speak more
significantly, a Staple of traffickes, more horrible than a den of thieves;
Or they, who have not seen it, may understand by the report of a multitude of
men worthy of credit, that it is at this day become the very receptacle of
all bad and wicked practicioners, both spiritual and temporal: For what other
thing is it than a concourse of Simoniacks? What other than an harsh rude
bawling of Barretters, an Asylum And so applying it in every part, Brazen
breasts and thighs (says he) because of the shrill and large promises, and
the vocal, though fallacious, absolution from sins and penalties; and the
unjust and terrible maledictions and condemnations of such as but defend their
own liberty, or observe due fidelity to their Sovereigns, though, through
Gods protection, all this rage and tumor is but vain and innocuous. And no
marvel it is, that the Index Romanus forbad all men the reading thereof.

John de Iandun a Gantois, maintained the same propositions, who also was
comprehended Leopald of Bebemburg, Doctor of the laws, and Bishop of Bamburg,
who handled the same argument, namely, That the Emperor had absolute power of
governing the Empire, presently after his election, and the Popes coronation
added nothing to him, to whom he was neither vassal nor feudatarie. He also
convicted Constantines donation to be a mere fable. The title of the book is,
De translatione Imperij, printed at Paris anno 1540: but Michael of Cesenna,
General of the Franciscans, spoke much more broadly and confidently; for he
said expressly, The Pope was Antichrist, the Roman Church Babylon, Antoninus
places him among the Fratricelli, or poor Friars of Lions, who, as formerly
we saw, were the very progeny of the Waldenses. This man and his followers
particularly auerred, That Pope John was an heretic, and all the Popes and
Prelates that should come after him. Antonin. part 3. tit. 21. c. 5. sect;. 1
And diverse (says Antoninus) were burnt in sundry parts of the world, that
stood firm in this opinion. He also notes, That long time after the Marquisat
of Ancona, and Florence it self was full of them, from whence being expelled,
they dispersed themselves over the countries of Greece; as also that Lewis of
Bauaria the Emperor was a supporter of these opinions: and amongst others he
makes mention of one John Castiglio, and Francis de Harcatara, Paulus Aemilius
in Carolo Pulchro.
who were burnt. Hereupon our Paulus Aemilius descends into these words: Under
king Charles the Fair there lived many admirable wits, and most learned men:
This age flourished in learning: Some of them were very holy men, and some
contending ambitiously to excel others, exceeding a mean, grew to be wicked
and impious: Others there were, of whose manners and intentions a doubtful
conjecture may be made: Good men grieved for the evils of the times, and
silently lamented. And they who were called Fraterculi, condemned both by deed
and writing, Ecclesiastical wealth and opulencie, and preached, That riches,
the purple robe,

But in the life of Philip de Valois, we learn both out of him and other
French writers, That Pope John, what need soever he had of our help, made no
such great account of us, nor we of him, but that these amities brust forth
many times into open war and contention. Those of the kings Council, and of
the body of the Parliament, showed him how diversely the Pope and his adherents
sought to infringe and cut off his prerogatives: The kings officers complain
that all jurisdiction was transferred from the royal tribunal to sacred
decisions: That many more temporal causes, and controversies between
temporal men, were heard and adjudged by the Bishops and other Priests than by
the kings officers and Judges. Whosoever in any thing Wherefore the deputies of
the Prelates and Clergy were commanded to appear in the month of December,
at Bois de Vincennes, near Paris: there Master Peter de Cugnieres, the kings
Attorney, defended his Sovereigns cause, and producing those words of our
Savior in Saint Matthew, Give to Caesar that which is Caesar's, and to God that
which is Gods, he argued the distinction betwixt the jurisdiction spiritual
and temporal, very worthy of observation: of which the one belonged to the
civil Magistrate, the other to the Church, which could not interpose her self
in matters Exceed not the ancient bounds and limits which thy fathers laid;
Because (says he) if any customs were introduced contrary to the same, they
could be of no worth, nay rather they should be corruptions: and Prescription
can take no place against the kings royal prerogative; neither can the king
himself renounce these laws and jurisdictions, as may be proved by many
chapters which are in the tenth Distinction. If therefore (says he) the king
is sworn at his coronation, no ways to alienate the laws of the kingdom,
and to revoke again those alienated, so if And with that he brought forth a
scedule comprehending sixty six particulars, wherein were expressed such
aggrauations and oppressions, for which the Clergy was to make satisfaction.
Bertram then Bishop of Hutum being to speak in behalf of the Clergy, he
ripped up the memory of Charles the Great, Lewis the Godly, and S. Lewis, and
other Pinces, who in times past had endowed and immunified the Churches,
advancing highly their glory, who had augmented Church liberties; and so by
many examples exaggerating their reproach and infamy, who had prejudiced and
impaired the same: and this cause being referred for a day of hearing, even to
the very feastiuall of S. Thomas of Thomas as on that day shed his blood for
the liberties and immunities of the Church: and yet we formerly observed, that
the Divines of Paris disputed how this Thomas was more probably (to be
supposed) condemned, because he suffered death for his rebellion. But the king
plainly made answer, That he would have a special care of all things to come.
Bertram urges further, for the better explication of himself, when the king
replied, I would rather have the liberties of the Church augmented than
diminished, I mean, the true immunities and liberties, but not usurpations.
And therefore he consulted with them about the preservation of royal rights
and jurisdictions: in hatred of which fact they endeavored to deprave the
memory of Peter de Cognieres. Peter de Cogniet. An Epistle of Lucifer to the
Pope and Roman Church fell fit with these times: Epist. Luciferi ad Papam.
Some think it was written under Philip the Fair, but because in some
exemplaries it is said to be dated in the year of his Palace overthrown 1351,
Here seems in the original to be some error in computation of the years.
about the year from Christ's birth 1318, it is referred to that year. Lucifer
is in it brought in discoursing, How in times past Christ's vicar preaching the
word in poverty of life, the world was so converted, that Erebus was turned
into Eremum, Hell into Hermitage: but he had carried the matter so wisely, as to
suborne in their places those that should with both their clookes lay hold of
worldly kingdoms, which Christ heretofore refused, being offered him; Reddite
Caesari, quae sunt Caesaris, etc. Subiecti estote Principibus; but seizing both
on spiritual and temporal things, they should assume unto themselves both
swords, endeavoring proudly to bear rule over Princes themselves. And hereupon
came in all excess, pride, wantonness, wicked devises, and simonie, which
carried that sway (as he plentifully laid open) that what aunciently in times
past had been forespoken by the Prophets, was completely fulfilled: The Church
of Rome is become the Synagogue of Satan: The purpled harlot has committed
fornication with the kings of the earth: Of a mother she is become a
stepmother, and of a Bride an adulteress, forgetting her original charity,
and chastity; and principally ruinating Because (says he) we are about to
send forth Antichrist, for whom all these treasures are to be reserved, in the
mean while we would have you to be our Vicars, etc. They that spoke so broadly
in general of the Roman Church, what thought they, suppose you, of many her
particular abuses.

Hereunto we may add, That John Mandeuil, an English man, a writer very near
to those times, said, Pope John sent to the Grecians, exhorting them to be
united to him and the Roman Church, for the known and accustomed reasons of
that plenarie power granted unto him over all the Church, in the person of
Peter: But they answered him laconically, We undoubtedly believe thy Sovereign
power over those that are subject to thee, but we cannot endure thy extreme
pride, nor are we able to satisfy thy greedy avarice. The devil be with
thee, for God is with us.

58. PROGRESSION.
Benedict the twelfth succeeded John. He holds the Sea while the year 1342,
when as Clement the sixth came to the chair after him. Lewis the Emperor dies,
and, after some opposition Charles, son to the king of Bohemia, obtaines the

BEnedict the twelfth succeeded John, the Cardinals having been sixteen days
in the Conclaue, before they could agree upon an election: at last they
resolved either for envy, or in despite one of another, to give their voices
to this man, nominated Iacobo de Furno, the son of a Baker of Bearne, or, as
some said, of Tolouse, of a Doctor of Divinity being made Cardinal, called
the White, the basest and most contemptible of all the rest. And the
Bulletines, or scedules I N. name such an one, and if he may not be, I name The
white: Albert. Argentinens. in Chron. sed aduerte in Jndice Hispanico p. 1.
multa eradi.
whereat, himself being much amazed, You have done very well, said he, for you
have chosen an ass. For though he was a great Divine, yet he was thought but
an ignorant man for this place, because he was not learned in the Canon Law,
wherein consists all the depth of their Mysteries. It is worthy of memory,
that a certain Bishop of Rome, going to Auignion, it was told him in a vision,
the same night that John dyed, Papam quaeris, non est, You seek the Pope, and
he is dead; then being showed the Pope that should be: when he came to
Auignion, and looked for him amongst the Cardinals, and not knowing him he asked
whether they were al present, answer was made one was wanting: which was the
white Cardinal, to Father you are to be Pope: Then he added, He that showed me
your countenance, brought me into a most foul and unclean stable full of
dung, where I saw a very white Marble chest, but nothing in it; your self no
question is that Chest, which in your office and place you must seek to fill
with virtues, and wonders: And therefore, O Pastor and stabularie, O shepherd,
and horse-keeper together, you must now strive to purge the Court and See
Apostolic, at this instant, a most unclean stable of auaricious and
Symoniacall dung, and take unto your cure the holy Roman Church and the City.
And yet if we may believe Hieronimo Squarzafico, in the life of Petrarch (who
deeply protests, that he would write nothing rashly, nor nothing For while
Petrarch, says he, Hieronimus Squarzaficus in vita Petrarcae.
was in esteem in the Popes Court, and was promised honors both by the Pope
himself and other Princes, he had a sister, about some two and twenty years
old, which dwelt in Auignion, where she was borne, with his brother Gerard,
being exceeding beautiful, and endewed with singular manners and customs;
with whose beauty the Pope was desperately in love, and many ways he attempted
to enjoy her: For this end he thought to purchase Petrarchs good will, by
rewards and preferments, promising that he would make him a Cardinal, so he
might compass his will of her. Frauncis Petrarch, who in all things had God
before his eyes, from whom nothing is hid, and as he that had not learnt to
flatter, feign or Io non vo'piu cantare come solea. The Pope notwithstanding,
enamored beyond all patience, tampred likewise with his other brother Gerard,
who being corrupted with a few bribes, yielded his sister; when Frauncis
understanding of this heinous offense, and seeing the Church of God so
violently transported to all vice and wickedness, in his Chronicle, sets down
a speech of his, wherein Benedict clearly manifests, what himself thought of
his own Court; for creating six Cardinals presently after his coming to the
Sea, and demanded why he made no more, he replied, I would willingly have done
so, if at the same instant, I could likewise have created a new world, for that
already made is not enough to satisfy those that are.

In the mean while the Emperor Lewis was the butt whereat he meant to shoot
Benedict certainly gave the better ear unto him, because Philip de Valois
importuned, that himself might be constituted the Popes Vicar general, both
in Italy and over all Christendom besides; and that a tenth might be granted
him of all tenthes for ten years, as also that all the Churches treasury
might be delivered into his hands, for the expedition and succor of Palestina,
to wit, that unspeakable treasure left by John the two and twentieth: so as all
of them were herewith mightily vexed and perplexed. Albertus Argent. in Chronic.
Apprehending therefore due opportunity, the Emperor Lodouike sent Robert
Count Palatine of the William Duke of Iuliers, to Auignion, to congratulat with
Benedict, who were closely whispered in the ear, That if Lewis, under certain
articles which should be set down in writing, would demand absolution and
pardon, it should be granted him. When they were returned he sent other men of
high note, with ample commission to perform the greatest part of that which he
desired: amongst whom Marquard de Randeck, a Canon of Auspurg, afterward
Bishop of Bamburg, a man of special estimation, delivered the embassage. And
Benedict made a very mild and courteous answer, How he was very glad that
this branch of Almaine would be reioyned again unto her stock^, this Prince,
the most noble and renowned of all the world; much commending Germany, and the
Emperor Lodouike, But the Cardinals who were partly created by John, and
partly again feared least their co^mings-in in France would be intercepted, and
then further moved by a great embassy sent from Philip king of France, and
Robert king of Sicilie, who protested, That he could not without a great
scandal receive again into the bosom of the Church so famous an Heresiarke,
and that the Pope had need take heed least he a favorer of Heretics, they
suddenly resolved, that Lodouikes submission was to be rejected, and so they
withdrew the Pope from his absolution, though he constantly maintained, that
Lewis was not in fault: and they obiecting, how Lewis had done many things
against the Church: He replied, nay rather we did against him, for he would
have come with a staff in his hand, falling down at our predecessors feet,
but he would never receive him, and whatsoever he did, he did it by
provocation. In which words he manifestly condemned both his predecessor and
his proceedings. The ambassadors therefore returning into Germany, made
relation what was there to be hoped for: In brief, that the court of Rome was
wonderfully afraid of peace and concord: how it was an usual proverb amongst
them, That it made well for them the Germans were so foolish. And so in the
year 1328 an Imperial Diet was summoned at the Bourg of Reynsey, Auent. l. 7.
An. 1328.
on the bank of the Rhine, where all the Electors of the Empire were present,
and many Princes, both lay and Ecclesiastical: where giving up an oath, and all
solemn rites performed, they published a Decree, That the Empire depended
only on God, to whom the Emperor is bound to yield an account: That being
once chosen by the Electors, he is absolute Emperor: That with a good
conscience he could not against the Imperial Majesty solicit the Pope by
Legates, yield him an oath, or demand leave Wherefore (said they) we
perpetually enact, That all power, and the Empire it self, proceeds only from
the benefit of election, and that by no means we need herein the Bishop of
Romes sanctimonie, consecration, authority, or consent: and whosoever speaks,
thinks, or practices to the contrary, let him be condemned of high treason,
let him be reputed an enemy to the Commonwealth, and proscribed, let him be
punished with the loss of his head, and his goods confiscated to the Emperor.
And so the whole assembly concluded in these words. Not long time after Edward
king of England crossed over the seas into Germany to see Lodouike (for the
Empresses sister was his wife) and they met both at Franckfort, whither many
Nobles and Bishops, both of Italy, Germany, France, and England, repaired:
There, by the advice and consent John the two and twentieth his Bulls (for to
spare the living they laid upon the dead) he should be condemned of high
treason. The principal heads and points of this Act, may more fitly be
reserved to the section following. Albertus Argent. in Chronic. Auent. l. 7.
Nine days after the Princes of the Empire assembled again together at
Lenstaine, within the Diocese of Magunce, binding themselves mutually by oath
to defend this Decree, and denouncing him that did otherwise, a pernicious
schellem, or knave. This Decree is extant in Albericus de Rosata in Legem 3.
Cod. de quadrienni praescriptione, and apud Hieronimum Balbum Episcopum
Gurcensem, in his book de Coronatione ad Carolum quintum, Imperatorem: William
a most famous Divine, and his whole society assisting in all these
promulgations. And the Dominicans themselves understanding that Pope Benedict
out of his own enclination was not opposite to Lewis, made choice rather to
join with him than to depart out of the cities. In some places also, to avoid
the blame of weakness and leuitie, being resolved to obey, they caused
themselves to be enforst to celebrate sacred functions. And to this time Pope
Benedict held the chair, that is to say, until the year 1342, An. 1342.
described for his time in these two short verses: Iste fuit vero Laicis mors,
vipera Clero
Devius a vero, turba repleta mero.
This man the Laities death, the Clergies viper proved,
Himself did swerve from truth, the people strong wine loved.


Peter Roger, a Lymosine, of the Order of S. Benedict, succeeded him, called by
the name of Clement the sixth. Albertus declares, That after his election,
Albertus Argent. in Chronic.
making a speech, he said, That first he was promoted to be a rich Abbot, then
to be a better Bishop, and lastly to the best Archbishopricke of all France
(which was, of Roan) that he left all these dignities deeply indebted; Then
(said he) I afterward rose to be Cardinal, by divine instinct, because the
former places could not support him. Observe how this man feared the weighty
burden of his Pontifical office and function. It is specially noted in him,
That contrary to the custom of his predecessors, he was the first that
fastened the arms of his family to his Bulls, which was the five Roses. And
at Paris, in a public sermon, while he was Archbishop of Roan, the kings of
France and of Bohemia being present, he grossly and foolishly preached against
Lewis. Afterward being Pope he overthrew all the Churches of Christendom by
his exactions. He was addicted to women, was covetous of honor and dominion,
observing no mediocritie in his promotions; so as he made himself and the
Court of Rome infamous for simonie: And being That the hills and mountains
(which they were to pass) had examined them sufficiently; Idem ibidem.
that was to say, had drawn their purses dry enough. And amongst other things
the English Historiographer observes, Thom. Walsing. in Hypodeigm. Neustriae.
that when his Cardinals told him that he had made the king of Englands
Secretary Bishop of Excester, An. 1345.
a lay and ignorant man, he replied, That at his entreatie (the king of
England he meant) he had made an Ass Bishop.

Lewis, though he had sufficient testimony of his ill affection toward him,
yet defatigated as he was with civil wars, he sent unto him an honorable
Embassy, which was Henry Dolphine of Viennois, Lewis Count of Ottinghen, and
Vlric his Secretary of State, having commission to attend while any hope of
peace remained: as also Philip king of France affected the same matter, by this
means to abate Lewis his affection toward the English: But (says the Author)
the Cardinals, Auent. l. 7.
a perverse kind of men, detracted day after day for the space of three years,
in diverse conuocations deluding him, while at length they resolved, That his
impiety toward the Popes, the greatest gods upon earth, was no ways to be
let pass unpunished. The sum therefore of his answer was this, That Lewis
should first so dispose of himself, as to give full satisfaction to the
Church, and then he might solicit the Pope for his absolution. The Pope caused
his Monetorie in form of a Placart, to be fastened on the gates of all the
Churches in Auignion, Albertus Argent. in Chron.
when he thus enjoined, That he should unfeignedly confess all his errors and
heresies. Item, That he should resign the Empire, and not to reassume the same
before by the Popes favor it were conferred upon him: to commit both himself,
his sons, his goods, and his whole state, to the Popes will and disposition:
with many other strange and unusual injunctions. There was no man supposed
that ever Lewis would have accepted of these conditions, and yet he did not
only subscribe unto them, under hand and As that he should revoke all the
Decrees enacted against John the two and twentieth, Christ's Vicar, cut off
former The which articles being communicated to the Princes Electors, and
cities Imperial, by copies sent all over, they met at Franckfort the year
1344, in the the month of September, to deliberat and consult of them: There
with joint consent, all solemn rites observed, they decreed, That these
articles were most impious, and tending to the overthrow of the Empire: That
the Emperor by his oath Imperial undertaken, could by no means assent
thereunto: That ambassadors should be sent to the Pope to complain of these
articles, Lodouikes destruction and ruin, and thereupon he began to plot with
the king of Bohemia, with Charles his son, and the Bishop of Treues their
uncle, to erect another Emperor opposite to Lewis, the which egg was hatched
some two years after. Auentine here notes, That the king demanding of the
Parisian Divines about this affair, they made answer, That Clements answers
were not only wicked and insolent, but contrary to all Christian equity and
justice.

Clement therefore the year 1346, An. 1346.
in the administration of the Sacrament bitterly Lewis, he denounced him both
an heretic and schismatike, admonishing the Princes by a certain day to choose
another Emperor, That the Church might not long be destitute of an Aduocat,
otherwise the Apostolical See would think upon one. He also deposed the
Archbishop of Magunce from Virnberg, because he had maintained the
prerogatives of the Empire, constituting Gerlac Nassau in his place. The Bishop
of Strasbourg he absolved, after he had taken an oath no more to assist Lewis:
He employed Bernard of Lutzemberg Elector of Treues, and by his solicitations,
through money and promises, drew unto himself many Princes. And thus by the
negotiations of this new Elector of Magunce he called a Diet at Reynsey upon
Rhine, wherein Charles of Lutzemberg, son to John king of Philip against the
English, the Pope absolved him of his oath made to Lewis, and encouraged him
both with words and means to assume the Diadem Imperial. Lewis on the other
side assembled the States at Spire, complaining of so great and singular a
treachery, entreating and importuning the Princes both Ecclesiastical and
secular, to revenge this injury done unto him, who also undertook his
protection, detesting both the Popes and Charles his attempts. Then Ockam and
many others writ the more vehemently against Clement, as hereafter you shall
see, and a more cruel war than ever before arose in Germany; wherein,
notwithstanding the Popes favor and assistance, Charles having Lewis, opposing
his wisdom to Charles his youthful heat, was taken out of the world in the
year 1347, An. 1347. Paulus Langius in Chron. Citicens. de an. 1347
leaving the place vacant. Some say he dyed of poison, othersome say of an
Apoplexy: But certainly the most famous men of that age highly commend this
Prince, who, to the accumulation of all virtues beseeming a noble and renowned
Prince, was in Clement publishing a Bull in favor of Charles, wherein he
enjoined the Princes of Germany to receive him, as the faithful child of the
Church, extorting this fruit from all his labor and study employed, That from
that time forward none was to be reputed Emperor whom the Pope, Christ's Vicar,
did not approve of; and to believe otherwise was a most pernicious heresy. And
for the surer obligation of them to these points, he urged them to an oath,
which part of the Princes shrunk from, and some very openly oppugned: For
(said they) does that servant of servants so swell and insult in pride and
arrogancy, as that openly with a shameless countenance he contends to
surmount the vices and insolences of all the most cruel tyrans From words
therefore they came to blows: for when Charles heard of Lewis death, he came
to Ratisbone, the Consuls themselves giving him entry into the city; and when
the people heard of the Popes pretenses, they ran violently to arms, himself
was scarcely exempted from their fury, so as of necessity he must needs
depart the city. From thence going to Nuremberg, and being honorably
entertained by the Senate, the people again expelled him, and sent for
Lodouikes son: All this proceeding from a detestation of those articles
imposed by Clement upon Charles; as also from the form of a Commission granted
to the Bishop of Bamberg, for the urging of such to a reconciliation to the
Church, who had followed Lewis party: which ran in this manner, They shall
(but mark wherein it must consist) to be faithful to the Sea Apostolic, to
believe nor favor no heretic: That it is a condemned heresy, to think that
the Emperor may depose the Pope, and create another: That the Emperor is to be
esteemed no Emperor, except he be first approved by the Sea Apostolic: neither
were they to cleave or adhere to the progeny or children of the same Lewis,
except they were reconciled to the Church: And lastly, That they should obey
Charles king of Romans, approved and confirmed in the throne; otherwise they
were not to be absolved from these censures and penalties. Charles was advised,
not to publish this form, if he meant to be lovingly entertained of the
people: But the Bishop fearing the Popes displeasure, durst not absolve any of
the Interdict, unless he would perform Conradus Burneueld, Burgomaster, who
when Charles entered the city, he protested before a public Notarie in behalf
of the whole city, My Lord of Bamberg, understand, that we will neither
believe nor confess that our Sovereign Lewis, Roman Emperor, was ever an
heretic: and whosoever the Princes Electors commend unto us, or the greater
part of them, for king of Romans, or Emperor, for the same we will take him,
though he never seek to the Pope; neither will we perform any thing which may
be in any sort repugnant to the royalties and jurisdictions of the Empire. Yet
the Bishop was counseled to remove the Interdict, and Charles by stealth left
Basil, coming by water to Strasbourg, where he met with the like, and yet more
bitter distasts; as also presently Charles was received into Magunce, with this
prouiso, That he should not establish Gerlac, constituted their Archbishop by
the Pope, nor suffer any patent to be publicly read in his behalf: In many
places, this Gerlac, minding to depart, all his people garding before his
lodging in arms, the hosts not being paid for the charges of his train, and
kitchen, he was detained, and namely at Worms, upon the complaint of a And
having no other m^^nes, he was enforst to pawn his Patent, or collection
Warrants, to pay his hosts. And all this, out of doubt, not properly out of any
hatred to Charles, but to the Pope and Pontificiall exactions.

But the Princes yet attempt further; for assembling in the greatest part at
Reinsey, upon the Rhine, under the castle of Longstein, they con^^^ed about the
deposing of Charles, and choosing Emperor Edward king of England, Lewis his
near allie; to whom, by ambassadors they solemnly offered the Empire: but,
after many thanks given, he excused himself by reason of the war he had in
hand with the French men. Then they betook themselves to Henry Marquess of
Misnia, Lodouikes son in law, but for a sum of money he yielded his right
to Charles. At last they resolved on Gunther, Count of Swartzburg, as renowned
a gentleman for martial prowess as was in that age: who accepted of it on
this condition, That in a solemn assembly of the Princes to be co^^ocated at
Franckfort, the vacancie of the seat were confirmed by the greater part; which
was effected in the year 1349: An. 1349.
So much they grudged to receive an Emperor from the Popes hands. But being
sick (as our Author Albertus says) one master Fridanck, a famous Physician,
ministered to him a p^tron, which Gunther commanded him, though greatly against
his own will, to assay and taste of in his own preence; and presently after
his assay Gunther himself took some: but the Physician, who incontinently
began to discolor in his countenance, within the space of three days died,
and Gunther By reason of this bodily indisposition Gunther was the readier to
come to accord, being also excited thereunto by diverse of the Princes his
friends, who looking into this discommoditie, meant to advance their own
interests, both by benefits and affinities with Charles. It was therefore
couenanted betwixt them, That for the right of his election accepting of 22000
marks of silver, and two Imperial towns in Turingia, he should renounce his
title for term of life. But within a month after Gunther died, and Charles
remained peaceably installed; but this was by sinister means, and to the
irrecouerable damage of the Empire: For in him, and by his baseness, the
process was ended, to Gregory the 7, called Hildebrand, for con^^rmation of
the authority of their Sees, against the liberties of the Empire, being wholly
exhausted of treasure; and therefore to appease the towns and States, who were
provoked by his molestations, and to be acknowledged in them, Charles was
constrained to acquit them of the greatest part of his taxes and subsidies, in
such sort as the Majesty of the Empire was scarce able ever after to recover it
self again.

By the same means the German Emperors lost all their authority in Italy,
while Lewis the fourth was at variance and strife with the Popes, partly
because Popes ordained Magistrates in the cities Imperial, and out of the
Vicariate which they arrogated to themselves in the Empires vacancie, they
appointed the principal Clement by authority Apostolical, made Lucino
Viconte, and Io^^ his brother, his Vicars in Milan, with absolute Mastinus de
Scaliger to be his Vicar at Verona, William Gonzaga at Mantoa and Rhegio,
Alberto Carrara, at Padua, Opizo d'Este at Ferrara, Modena, and Argento: All
which places, did undoubtedly formerly belong to the Empire. Blondus Decad. 2.
l. 19.
The same course Benedict the twelfth entered into, which, being prevented by
death, he could not accomplish and finish. As also Lewis, out of his imperial
authority, placed John de Vico, his substitute at Viterbo, Galeot Malatesta
and his brethren at Rimini, Pesara, and Fano. Antonio de Montefeltro at Vrbin,
Gentile de Varano at Camerino, Guido di Polenta at Rauenna, Senabaldo
Ordelaffi, at Furli and Cesena, John Manfredi at Faenza, and Lewis Alidosio at
Imola: places no question Nicholas Laurentius notarie or Chancellor of the
Capitol at Rome, attempted to expel the Senators out of Rome, to invade the
Capitol, to summon the people to recovery of liberty; to whom such
multitudes flocked, that all Italy was only attentive on him and his
proceedings, nay diverse forrainers visited him by Ambassadors: he enstiled
himself Nicholaus Seuerus, and Clemens the Tribune of liberty, peace and
justice, and the famous deliverer of the Roman Commonwealth. Machiavel. l. 1.
Hist. Florent.
And Petrarch speaking of his beginnings with great admiration, by and by
reprehends him, because he flattered the Where is now become, says he, thy
redeeming spirit? Where is that same consulting genius of good actions, with
which thou were supposed to have daily conference? for it seems such things
could not be performed by a man, and it is very wonderful, how this man
desisted from his commendable initiations. But distrusting the issue of his
innouations, he stole privily out of Rome, and went into Germany to Charles
the fourth, to have some treaty with him; who being of a base disposition,
sent him bound to Auignion to the Pope, condemned to perpetual imprisonment:
where the Popes yet remained as it were in an hired and borrowed habitation.
When Robert King of Sicilie dyed, he left Ioane his niece by the brothers side,
his heir, to whom by Testament, he allotted Andrew his Ioane being married a
little while, grew into great detestation of him, and thereupon caused him to
be slain in the City of Auersa, and then she chose Lewis of Tarento, another
cousin of hers, to be her husband. Lewis king of Hungary, came to be revenged
of Andrew his brothers death; but Ioane, not daring to attend Lewis presence,
consulted of flight, and so she and her husband retired into Prouence,
committing her self to the Popes protection; who through the intercession of
Guido Cardinal of Porto her kinsman, made her peace upon this condition, That
he might be restored to the kingdom; That Lewis her pretended husband should
lay down the style of king, and be contented under him, with that of Prince,
and that the king of Hungary after Pandolf. Collenucius l. 5. Blondus Decad.
2. l. 10. Matt. Villani ^ Annal. 1. Jac. Card. Papiensis (...) Epistolis.
should to succeed al her rights and titles. And that you may not suppose the
Pope labored herein in vain, behold the reward of his arbitration: The City
of Auignion, together with the County, a part of her fathers enheritance, was
granted to the Pope, but yet this under a certain show and color of sale, as
if the sale of the City, had not counteruailed the Tribute which Joan was yet
to pay out of her kingdom, since her obtaining the dignity. Blondus speaks
very plainly out of Petrarch. The Pope did not all this mere gratis, for he
enjoyed the city and county of Auignion, her fathers Patrimony, and the
payment of money was changed into the payment of a Fee, or Recognition, writes
in deed, that it cost him three hundred thousand florins, whereof the discharge
of the said pension and arrerages was a part. He at would but know what
valuation the Court of Rome made of this purchase, let them read the Epistle of
James Cardinal of Pauia, about this matter; when a motion was made of
restoring it again to the house of Anjou, We must provide by all means, says
he, Henricus Reb. dorff. in Annalib.
that the Roman See, loose not her patrimony beyond the Alps. It is a refuge
to distressed Popes, an hard bit in the mouths of the Italians to curb them
from too licentiously disturbing the Church: If we cannot be quiet here, in
threatening only to transfer our selves to that City of ours, we work our
own peace.

Boniface, as formerly you have heard, had ordained the Jubilee to be
celebrated every hundredth year, promising many great indulgences: and Clement
knowing what profit it turned him to, would needs have one also in his time:
wherefore in the first year of his Pontificat (let the Reader observe his
zeal) he brought it to every fifty year, so as himself being absent, it
might be celebrated at Rome, and this was done the better to reconcile the
Romans to him, who should be greatly enriched hereby. And because it concernd
him so nerely, he sent thither four Cardinals, his Legates, with plenarie power
if need required, upon this occasion, to reform the state of the City of
Rome. His drift was indeed under this pretext to have put down the Senators;
but though the Roman mouths watered at the gain and lucre of a Jubilee, yet
could he obtain no further of A Papa declarabuntur, they shall be declared by
the Pope. In the Records of many famous Cities, there is yet at this day, a
Bull extant, which he pubisht upon the proclamation of the Jubilee: Legitur
haec Bulla in Tractatu de materijs Jndulgentialibus Joan. Phesteo Professoris
Friburgensis. anno 1472.
wherein these clauses are expressly set down, Whosoever by way of pilgrimage
determines to come to this city (he means Rome) the same day that he goes out
of his Inn, onwards on his journey, he may choose a Confessor or Confessors,
both on the way and in any other place whatsoever, to which Confessors by our
authority we give full power to absolve all Papal interests, as if we were
there in proper person. Item, we grant, that if being truly confessed he dye in
the way, that he be absolutely freed and discharged of all his sins. And But
the Parisian faculties of Divinity, condemn the Pope of intolerable error,
and temeritie. There are that refer such an other, as you have heard to
Clement the fifth. Questionless all Authors exclaim of wonderful Symonie in
his time, and unusual reseruations of Benefices, throughout the whole Church;
some of which he reuoaked, only to avoid public scandal. But, gentle
Reader, while thou see him here thus commanding over Angels, why do thou
not listen to the Apostles prediction in the second to the Thessalonians 2,
where he speaks

OPPOSITION.
The oppositions declared throughout this whole Progress against the Papal
Tyranny, may seem sufficient, without adding any other: because we see him to
have been ever mightily oppugned, by all the famous men of those ages; as also
by most commendable and virtuous Princes: yet for the Readers better
satisfaction, John the two and twentieth, as you heard, was approved by Edward
king of England, who also was present at the digesting it: For the flanckering
and seconding of which, the Emperor Lewis dimulged another Edict, whose
principal heads it will not be altogether impertinent here to insert. Lewis
the fourth Emperor, and by Gods grace Caesar Augustus, to all Christians
health: S. Peter and S. Paul, the first Ambassadors from the eternal
Majesty, declared and foretold long time before, seriously informing us, That
after their times there should arise false Prophets, audatious and subtle, and
that Priests should become lying messengers; plainly deciphering their works
unto said they, that is the Church, they shall sit as gods, and be exalted
above all that is reverenced or worshipped by any Nation, as God. That those
things are most true, which the true Prophets of God, and the interpreters of
his secrets, did denuntiat, by manifest experience it is confirmed: and except
we be dull and senseless, we cannot but perceive and even feel the same. We
cannot deny but that men now are too superstitious to oppose the abuses of the
times; though in hipocriticall frauds and delusions, wherewith the ignorant
vulgar are many times taken and ensnared, they are most witty, and crafty;
brasen-faced to uphold customs and rights received, and herein abusing the
simple credulity of silly fools, whereof the number is infinite. But it is my
part to detect and refell such impostures and digressions, to the end they may
not affront Christian integrity, And here he refuted this proposition, as
being flatly opposite both to the sacred Scriptures, to the ancient Laws and
Canons, and to the customs For these reasons, well, rightly, and wisely I
appeal, from the enemy of the Christian Commonwealth, to a future general
Council of all Christendom to be held, whereof he is but a member and no
head: for as S. Jerome says, The church of the whole world is greater than
that of the City etc.

Clement perseuering in this his rage and fury, William Ockham incessantly
defended Lewis right, especially because (through his plot and devise) Charles
came to be nominated Emperor: and in a book which he published upon this
subject, He taxed Clement, with the note of an heretic, calling him very
Antichrist, an hater of Christian poverty, an enemy of the Commonwealth, a
mortal foe to the Germans, a most Christian Nation, and a follower of Clement
the fifth, and John the two and twentieth, also, he accuses of perjury,
treason, parricide, and of impiety toward his grandfather, and nere kinseman,
in breaking the oath, Auent. l. 7.
wherein he stood bound to Lodouick, and perfidiously infringing the Laws of
Constans, Franckfort, and Longsteine, promulged by the Dyets Edict: and terming
him a vile servant to the Priests of Auignion, of whom, he bought the Diadem
imperial. Leopald also, Bishop of Bamberg, and Ockhams Colleagues do no less,
in a Tractate entitled, Vindex pacis Christianae, wherein they affirm, That
the Pope except he had rather take upon him Antichrists pride, than emulate
Christ's and his Indeed Conrade of Magdeberg labored hard in the answer of
these men, but seven years after Ockams death, who dying anno 1347, and was
honorably buried at Franckfort, in the Franciscans College, together with
other two of his companions, Bona gratia de Bergamo, and Michael de Cesena.
Some few years also before Vlric Hengherohr, Lodouikes Chancellor, and
Secretary to the Empire, deceased, who fearing the Auignion Antichristians
revenge (so he termed them) he gave order in his last Will

But no man shows us more plainly than Florentine Petrarch, what opinion all
the renowned men, of those troublesome seasons, held of the Pope and of the
Court of Rome, who was Archdeacon of Parma, the very light of that age, and
greater had been if he could have soothed and flattered the Popes, of whom he
might have obtained any thing. And so much the rather, because he writ for the
most part as one exempted from the heat and spleen of those present
contentions and partialities. I omit to set down how lively in his Poems he
deciphers the Roman Court, many times calling her the Babylonian Harlot, the
Schole of all Sine titulo, where he describes the Court of Rome under the
nomination of the Occidentall Babylon: Know (says he) in brief, Petrarch.
Epist. 8.
that neither mine nor Ciceroes pen himself, if he were alive, would suffice
to decypher it: Whatsoever we read of the Aegiptian, or Assyrian Babylon,
whatsoever of the four Laberinths of the mouth of Auerne, of the groves
infernal, or of the marish of Sodom, being paralelled with this hell, they
are all but fables and bables. Here is tower-topping and blaspheming
Questionless he that he writ to, whom he calls Father, must needs be a man
of some eminent note in those times. In his ninth Epistle to the same party he
subscribes himself an exile from Jerusalem, amongst and upon the rivers of
Babylon; Epist. 9.
alluding to the hundred thirty and seventh Psalm, where the Psalmist
deplores the state of the Church, and his own condition, in the Babylonian
captivity. And in his tenth Epistle he lays open You marvel (says he) at
the subscriptions of my letters, and not without cause, in that you have only
read of two Babylons, one in times past amongst the Assyrians, where Symiramis
lived with so great renown, and another amongst the Aegiptians, which
flourishes still in this our age: But cease to admire (says he) for this part
of the earth has also her Babylon (Auignion) for where, I pray you, may the
city of confusion be better seated, than in the quarters of the West? By whom
it was built is very uncertain, but by whom it is inhabited is manifestly
known, by people certainly, who in all right may give her this name: And, if
you please, believe me; Here dwells puissant Nemrod on earth, the strong and
mighty Hunter, conspiring against the Lord, and with his ayrie towers aspiring
unto heaven: Here also abides a more furious Cambyses than he of And in the
eleventh Epistle protesting what danger hung over his head for speaking truth,
Epist. 11.
Even as (says he) without the kingdom of virtue verity was always feeble
and weak, being destitute of any aid or help, what must needs happen, do you
suppose, where virtue lies clean extinguished, and deeply buried? There
verity, no question, is a most capital crime, and only of it self
sufficient to acquire many men's hatred, Then he concludes, To this Epistle I
have neither set to my hand nor my seal, neither time nor place, you know
where I remain, and can understand me well enough by my words. Then in his
twelfth complaining in his heart to God for the miseries of the time, Epist.
12.13.
in the thirteenth he does particularize the same: That renowned Court of
Christ (says he) that famous Propugnacle of divine worship in times past (our
sins being the occasion thereof) being now destitute of heavenly aid and
potection, In regard of the Church, comparing the Pope to that monstrous tyran
of Sicil. I see with what a Myter, though counterfeit, Symiramis adornes her
head, by what arts she inchaunts the eyes of the beholders, and being polluted
with incestuous imbracements, treads under foot men of constant disposition and
manners; alluding to the Harlot in the Apocalypse. I perceive by what arts and
stratagems our Pericles defends himself, that he may not be urged to render
the account he is not able justly to give up; as also his Alcibiades, that
runs violently headlong into all wicked devises and practices. Wherefore he
confounds and turns all things topsie turuie, and for what cause may you
suppose? Why questionless, that like a Iugler or Mountibanke, with an hair or
small thread, not seen, or a counterfeit wound, he may Then in the 14. What
has a virtuous man to do with bad places, Epist. 14.
or what commerce have thou with Babylon? We read, that the more magnanimious
and valiant Romans used to shun and avoid Baia in Campania, though a very
healthful and pleasant place, but where Then he delineats their hypocrisy to
life it self, propounding many examples and instances thereof: But my singular
loving Father (converting now my style to thee) I pray, beseech, entreat, and
even conjure thee no otherwise than by thy self, to whom if thou be dear,
or still retainest the accustomed vigilancie and care over thy soul, that it
never hereafter enter into thy heart to go thither, from whence never any
returned by example bettered, but innumerable multitudes depraved and
corrupped. In his fifteenth Epistle he concludes, That God was no less angry
with them than with Aegipt and Pharaoh, Epist. 15.
and that Epist. 16.
who can escape? In the sixteenth, he heartily congratulates with a friend, his
departure from the Popes Court, If there be any presagements true, then Gods
revenge must needs be nere at hand; God give, and retribute plentifully to the
proud doers, for it is his own justice and revenge, etc. I cannot but call to
mind, what, many years past, I said to a friend of ours, which of all that
wicked number, might well be At length he concluded, All things will they, nill
they, return again to their proper And even so all the godly in those
times, with sobbes and sighs, groaned after the Churches restoration, Epist.
17.
and Babylons ruin. In his seventeenth Epistle, the same friend,
notwithstanding his own admonition to the contrary, would needs enter into
the like discourse, concurring then with him in the same judgment, that the
infernal rivers there had their course, and whatsoever wickedness had ever
been in the world, it ran and fell thereinto, as into the center and gulf of
such innundicities: wherefore, that he might not perish therein, If, says he,
thou worshippest Christ, which you always most religiously have done, let the
beholding of his enemies impiety Aue Rabbi, God save thee Master: and cladding
him in Aue, King of the Jews: whom as a King they neither reverenced with
divine or human honors, but contrariwise, out of a carnal and corrupt
judgment denounce him a blasphemour and guilty of death, worthy of all
contumely and punishment. For I pray you, what other thing is performed amongst
these enemies of Christ, and the Pharisees of these our days? The same Christ
whose name both day and night they exalt with high praises, whom they clad in
gold and purple, whom they lade with gemmes, salute and adore; the same I says
he, in the same Epistle, if Judas should bring into this Court the 30 pieces of
silver, the price of blood, he would be admitted, and poor Christ would be
driven out of doors. That thus it is, no Christian can be ignorant, there is
no man but laments, and yet no man does revenge. And thus while one looks upon
another, impunitie of evil, as you see, does gather strength; and that evil
which in the beginning was medicable, is now with time grown rotted and
Hereunto he adds the testimony of a great man in that age, who with sighs was
wont to say, Two of our Clements in a few years have more spoiled and defaced
the Church, than seven of your Gregory's were able to restore in many ages:
neither do I my self, or any man else, as I think, doubt thereof. Then in the
eighteenth, describing the French Babylon (for so he called Auignion, whether
the Roman Court was transferred) The hope, says he, of the life to come sounds
in thy ears but as a mere fable, and all the relations of hell thou take to
be idle dreams, the resurrection of the flesh, the end says he, addressing
his speech to her, that famous, or rather infamous harlot, which committest
fornication with the Kings of the earth; the self same strumpet thou art,
which the sacred Evangelist saw in the spirit; she, the self same, I say thou
art, and no other, having thy seat upon many waters: the people, Nations, and
Tongues are the waters, on which, being an harlot, thou sit: observe thy
habit; a woman, girt about with silk and purple, dawbed with gold, precious
says he, a woman drunk with the blood of the Saints, and with the blood of
the Martyrs of Jesus: Why art thou silent? either show some other drunk with
this blood, or if thou can not, deny not thy self to be this drunken
strumpet. For the Evangelists and Apostles vision, must needs be true, who
admiring with such extraordinary wonder, when he but beheld thee in spirit,
into what an admiration may we justly be driven, that see and discern thee
with open eyes? Of all the fornications which the Nations and Kings of the
earth have drunk, and of all the abominations, what other end do thou
expect, but the same prophesied by John, Great Babylon is fallen, is fallen,
and made an habitation for Devils? it is well known what follows: For thou
art now truly become such an one, and how much better is a pernicious
Afterward he exclaimes against the disordinat lusts even of the Elders in the
Roman Church. Deuastations, whoredoms, rapes, incests, and adulteries, which
now (says he) are the sports and May-games of Pontifical fire and lust; I,
banishing the husbands of ravished wives, not only from their fathers seats,
but from their countries confines: and which of all contumelies is the most
grievous and insupportable, they constrain the husbands to receive again
their violated wives, being And he propounds many fearful examples of these
things. Now (says he) under these men's conducts, do but suppose whether
Christ can be favorable to this people, or prosper the Commonwealth. In the
nineteenth Epistle he congratulates with his friend, because he saw him
departed safe out of the Roman Court. Epist. 19.
Such a man (says he) was a faithful, but an improvident persuader of me to
make choice to live and dye in Babylon: but why, I pray you, or to what end?
That I may see good men suppressed, and evil erected? Eagles to creep, and
Asses to fly? to see Foxes in chariots, and Crows on turret tops, and Doves
on dung-hils, Wolves at liberty, and Lambs in bonds? and in brief, Christ an
exile, Antichrist a Lord, and Beelzebub a Judge?

These points Petrarch roundly touched to his familiar friends: from whence An.
1351. Albertus Argent. in Chronic.
as Albertus Argentinensis in his Chronicle, anno 1351, A certain preaching
Carmelite making a Sermon upon the Popes Mass, so reprehended both him and the
Cardinals, of their enormious vices, that all who were present were
wonderfully astonished: and for this he was disgraded. He also adds, A closed
letter was fastened on a Cardinals door, directed to the Pope and Cardinals:
which being opened, they found there written, That Leuiathan, the Prince of
darkness, saluted the Pope his Vicar, and the Cardinals his servants, by
whose endeavor he hoped to overcome Christ, laboring to Afterward, And your
mother Pride, and your sisters Avarice and Luxury, salute you, etc. who
rejoiced, that by their assistance they were very well. With many other
things. And it was subscribed, Given in the infernal Center, before a
multitude of devils. And the Pope being mightily stirred up with this Pasquill,
labored what he could to find out the Author: but presently upon it he fell
into a dangerous infirmity, whereof notwithstanding he recovered; but the
writer of this letter could never come to be known. Albert, it seems, had
reference to that Epistle Lucifers, a little before mentioned; but that seems
to have been written at Paris, and that with the consent of the better and
more learned sort, because it was printed together with that Tractat of William
of Paris, De Beneficiorum Collatione. And many writings of this nature came
forth at the same time. Not long before which, in the year 1345, An. 1345.
Haiabalus a Franciscan preached publicly many times at Auignion, and plainly
said, That he was commanded from God to declare the Roman Church to be the
Babylonian Harlot, the Pope and his Cardinals to be true Antichrist, and that
Benedict and John, his predecessors, were damned; with many other things
pertaining to this purpose. Henr. E^ford. in Chron.
And being brought before the Pope, he constantly euerred, That this was
expressly commanded him

For matters of doctrine, though we have spoken more copiously hereof in
another place, yet by the way let us here note, That the article of Free
justification through faith in Christ, the principal Base and foundation of
Christian religion, began in these times to rise as it were out of darkness:
For Thomas Brandwardine, who was vulgarly called The profound Doctor, taught
the same in his public Lectures, not only in England, but also in the
University of Paris. And there is yet extant a book written by himself of
this subject, at the entreaty and persuasion of many godly men, divided into
three parts: Wherein he complains, Elias, when the eight hundred and fifty
Prophets of Baal rose up against him, in this cause: How many, O Lord (says
he) contend with Pelagius at this day, for Free will, against free grace, and
against Paul the spiritual champion of grace? How many at this day reject free
grace, and only declare free will to be sufficient unto salvation? Or if they
make any use of grace, they speak of it but for form sake only. And so he
extends himself at large in the explication of this doctrine, agreeing herein
with Augustine, Jerome, Fulgentius, Prosperus, Bernardus, and many other
ancient writers: In such a conflict (says he) not being lightly afraid, I was
long time perplexed, but with my whole heart I had refuge to divine aid, and so
being presently comforted with the spirit of fortitude, I These things he
properly delivered against the scholars of those times: he preaching also unto
his disciples, That the days would come, and they were not now far off, when
their false doctrine should be plainly detected, and Raphael Volterranus, and
John Picus Mirandola, who had perused his books, make mention of him, with
singular praise and commendation: also Gregorius Ariminensis, of the Order
Heremeticall, a man of great fame among scholars, who flourished at this time
in Paris, in his Commentaries upon the sentences, calls all them that thought
otherwise Semie pelagians, Thomas, Scotus, and others. There backed him in this
his opinion, John Buridanus, and Andreas de Castello, men at that instant of
great renown. This was the first point wherein the Church was likely to have
recovered her former state. And yet Conradus Hager of Wirtzberg, proceeded
somewhat further, and taught, That

59. PROGRESSION.
Clement dying at Auignion, Stephen Albertus, a Lymosine, was chosen, by the
name

CLement dying at Auignion, Stephen Albert, a Lymosine, succeeded him, being
nominated Innocent the sixth. He presently commanded every Bishop to be
resident in his proper diocese: but in stead of retiring himself to his own,
he dispatched a Legate into Italy, Giles de Carilla, a Spaniard, with all
ample commission to confirm upon him absolute authority and power. John de
Vrsini, and Peter Colonna, were both by the Popes and peoples consent ordained
Senators at Francisco Baroncelli inuading the Tribunal with open violence,
enstiled himself, Scribe to the Senate, by the grace of God second Tribune of
the city, and Roman Consul: understanding herein Nicholaus Laurentius,
formerly mentioned, who was the first. When Innocent had notice of this, he
loossed Nicholas out of prison, and gave him authority to suppress
Baroncelli, which by the assistance of the Nobility, and the greatest part of
the people, he easily effected: But afterward exceeding the terms of his
commission, he was enforced privily to slinke away, and being discovered in his
flight, he was slain. Such was the state of the city of Rome, and of the
chair committed, as they say, unto Peter, being abandoned by her Bishops. The
Emperor Charles on Innocent to impose it on him; but expressly upon this
condition, for the adding of somewhat to his predecessors attempts, Blondus
Decad. 2. l. 10. Albertus Argent. in Chronic.
That he should conuocate no assemblies at Rome, nor enact any ordinance in any
thing that concerned the Romans, without the Popes advice and counsel. Item,
That he should neither reside at Rome, nor in Italy. And indeed he presntly
departed; for taking his journey through Tuscan and Lombardie, he returned into
Germany. And hereupon grew that grievous Petrarches, to Nerico de Furli, his
familiar friend: I cannot by any means (says he) conceal thus much, that I
know the Emperors destinies, and that they might reign more happily in the
West, in the South, or any where else, than in the North, all things are there
so cold and frozen: there is no noble vigor, no vital heat of royal Empire.
Fortune, if the Fates deny us Romulean Caesar's, yet send us at least some
Theodosioes out of Spain, or Seueroes out of Afric. Ah, what would then the
great Architect of this Monarchy say, when he should see his successor contend
in humility with a simple Priest, calling to mind that superbious Prince in
times past of the Gauls, who coming He adds further, If ancient examples do
not suffice to testify thus much, I am afraid this late occurrent will
furnish us with too true an one: For as it is reported, the Roman Priest has
forbidden the Roman Emperor to reside at Rome: Petrarch. apud Blondus Decad.
in 2. l. 10.
And the Pope does not only enjoin the Emperor to be content with the mere
Diadem and Title, but further And writing to Charles himself, I know not,
says he, what you have promised and vowed by oath to the Pope, that he should
by the same as by a strong wall and impassable mountain, prohibit you access
to the city; what manner of pride is this, the Roman Prince, being the Patron
of liberty, to be deprived of liberty himself? that he should not be his
own, whose all things else are? Then in his Book De vita solitaria, he cannot
almost moderat himself, Petrarcha de vita solitaria. l. 2. sect. 4. c. 2.
This our Caesar, says he, even snatching, as it were, the Dyadem, presently
departed into Germany, contenting himself with the lurking holes of his own
Country, and with the title of the Empire, whose remotest members he
embraces, and takes no care of the head; In the mean while, Cardinal
Carilla, the Legate, reduced under due subjection Romania, reaping there his
golden harvest, whose whole crop lay at Furli, and was afterward conveyed to
Auignion: I call it an harvest, because these are the very Authors words, He
had at Furli a Treasorie, which might rather be called a barn of gold and
silver, for the Muletters laded it upon their Asses, neither more nor less
than if it had been grain, carrying it daily to Furli. This was the cause
that William Grisan a Lymosine, who was called Urban the fifth, about the year
1362, being successor to Innocent Adrian, Abbot of the Cistercian order, An.
1362.
had not done so painful and industrious service; he resolved once again, to
send the same Carilla into Italy, who made such a way for him, An. 1366.
as he determined in the year 1366 to see Rome again: whether Charles the
Emperor with the Empress came to salute him, and then again to remove all
suspicion, three months after he departed out of Italy. One only thing
Charles performed in this journey, for he caused the Pope to seek for Peter
and Paul's heads amongst the old ruins and rubbish, which, says our Author,
being by Gods favor and furtheraunce found, he put them in an eminent place
in Saint John Laterans Church adorned with much silver, gold, and many gemmes.
Let the Reader but mark Carillaes erecting of cittadels in all the strong
places of Romania, Urban particularly bent his whole study to build palaces at
Oruietto, and Montefiascone, for the Cardinals Transalpines thither to retire
in time of immoderat heat; least, complaining of distemperature of air, they
might make this an occasion to depart far from the city, whither he meant to
have reduced them, but that in his return into France he died at Marselles.
These things occurred in the year 1371, when Peter Beaufort, a Lymosine, and
nephew to Clement the sixth, was created Gregory the eleventh. At which time
Rome was governed by a Senator, who by the Popes order was to be changed every
sixth month: and the guard of the city was committed to certain Banderets,
which is to say, to diverse captains of several wards, or quarters, so
termed of certain Banners or Colors, which every one had. And this order
took place since under Urban the fifth, certain noble strangers being
preferred to the dignity Senatoriall, as Rubeus Tissius, a Florentine, a
Guelph, out of Prato, and Bolsena, and Boniface, and Richard out of Pistoria:
which I deliver to this end, because the Banderets to the year 1400 possessed
the greatest part of the Roman State. Italy moreover was every where
tumultuous with factions, but especially the Florentines made some sign of
affecting liberty, whither many cities from all other parts sent their aid,
and Gregory determed to reduced again at length his See to Rome. Blondus
relates, That a Bishop being admonished by him to repair into his own
diocese, he made this answer, And you, holy Father, why go you not to your
own Church? Others say he did this being persuaded in revelations, by S.
Briget, and Katherine of Sienna. But when he saw this was dipleasing to the
French Cardinals, and also to his near kinsmen, he caused a number of
Tryremes to be privily built upon the Rhodan, and so with such as he made
privy to his resolution, Gregory not long after dying, there began the most
grievous schism that ever was in the Roman Church. And at his first access
Gregory was entertained by the Romans with great applause, they supposing,
that together with him wealth and riches would enter into their city. But when
Gregory seemed to terrify the whole world with his thundrings and
excommunications, that he sent forth near at hand, and among the rest
excommunicating the Florentines, by the means of Bernabo Visconti, they drew
thither one John Haucut, and English captain, a man of great fame for his
Bernabo, whom he held for a friend afar off, coming nearer hand, drove
Gregory into some suspicion and jealousy, least, unlooked for, he might
procure him one disturbance upon another. Now therefore he began to An. 1378.
he advised the Cardinals, that they should no more give any credit to
revelations, seeing he, being deceived by the persuasions of S. Briget, and
Katherine of Sienna, returned into Italy with such disastrous and ominous
success. Amongst other Doctors, Gerson notes this in his treatise De examine
doctrinarum. Machiauel. l. 3. de Historia Florentino.
Machiauel is the Author that writes, how this Cregorie, while he lived in
Auignion, governed Italy by Legates, who through their wonderful avarice and
pride overthrew many cities: one of which had his seat at Bologna, who abusing
to his own purposes the famine and dearth of an hard year, attempted to make
himself Lord of all Tuscan, and namely of Florence, by reducing them to such
an extreme misery and famine. From whence sprung the Gerson. in Tractat. de
examine. doctrinarum.
for Innocent the sixth instituted a feastiuall day in memorial of the lance
and nails wherewith our Lord was pierced: and by the same Theology, I pray
you, why may not Caiphas and Pilate be put into the Legend of Saints? And Pope
Urban the fifth consecrated that Sunday which is called Laetare Rosa, which
hymn was first sent to Joan queen of Sicilia, that famous harlot, who killed
her husband. Then after him all his successors continued the custom every
Lent to gratify one Prince or other with this donatiue, Aurea illa Rosa, With
that golden Rose, which they consecrated in a Mass with wonderful Jerome
foresaw would come to pass. At the same time also came forth those
Sigillaries, certain Formularies in the Roman Church, called Agnus Dei, which
are usually hallowed of the Popes in the first year of their Papacy, and are
also renewed in the seventh year; the prayers by which they are consecrated
being altogether execrable and accursed: By their veneration and honor blot
out the sins of us thy servants, let the spots of our offenses be Of Christ
the true Lamb of God what could be spoken more devoutly, or divinely. We read
that Urban the fifth sent three of these Agnus Deies to the Emperor of Greece,
Ceremoniale Romanum l. 1. p. 32. 33. 37. 38. 39. Jmpress. Venetijs. An. 1516.
with these verses underwritten, which described both their form and
efficacy, as they would have it.

Balsamus and munda cera cum Chrismatis vnda
Conficiunt Agnum, quod munus do tibi magnum
Font velut natum, per mystica sanctificatum,
Fulgura de sursum depellit, omne malignum

Praegnans seruatur, simul and partus liberatur
Dona defert dignis, virtutem destruet ignis
Portatus munde, defluctibus eripit vndae.
Where the Reader hears blasphemy, which can come forth from no other place
but the deep pit of hell, That this little Idol thus framed and enchaunted by
the Pope, does break and wipe away sin like the blood of Christ, the
immaculat Lamb of God. If it be so, what need have we any more of the Lamb
himself? and yet the book of Pontifical ceremonies dedicated to Pope Leo the
tenth, affirms

OPPOSITION.
Neither wanted there in these times such as diversely opposed themselves to the
Popes: Froissart. vol. 1. c. 211. Froissart. vol. 3. c. 24.
Under Innocent the sixth (says Froissart) there was at Auignion a certain
Franciscan Friar, endued with singular wit and learning, called Johannes a
Rupescissa, whom the Pope kept in prison in the castle of Baignoux, for
wonderful things which he affirmed should come to pass, especially upon
Ecclesiastical Prelates and Governors; 1346, he comprehended such admirable
points, as no man could hardly believe them, but the effects of many of them
are now evidently seen come to pass. In another place, after he had deplored
the state and condition of the Church under the schism of Urban the 6, and
Clement the 7, to which the Christian Princes had no eye nor care, he makes
mention of the same Friar John in these words: In my youth (says he) Pope
Innocent reigning in Auignion, he detained in prison a certain Franciscan,
being a marvelous learned man, whose name was Friar John a Rupescissa: this
Friar (as the Pope said, and as I have heard it reported in many places
privately, but not publicly) had and did propound many notable authorities, and
collections, especially of some adverse and ominous events, which came to In
conclusion, That the same happened to the Church which in times past fell out
Froissart himself demands, Why read you not (says he) the life of S.
Syluester Pope of Rome, etc. how and upon what conditions the Emperor
Constantine gave goods to the Church? Out of question S. Syluester ietted not
all over the world, being guarded with two or three hundred horse, but contained
himself humbly at Rome, leading a sober and moderat life only amongst his
Ecclesiastical associats. Then the Friar admonished them, that this change
would not be long a coming: And this in such a manner, as the Cardinals were
greatly amazed, and wondered at him. Feign they would And surely that
Apologicall similitude of his of the bird, by him recited, was most expressly
taken out of the Apocalypse, cap. 17. where it is said, Apoc. 17.13.16.
The Kings gave up their strength and power to the Beast: At length, They shall
hate this Strumpet, this Beast, leave her desolate, naked, and forsaken, her
flesh they shall eat, and consume her with fire. Petrus Premonstratens. in
Chron. quod inscribitur Biblia Pauperum.
This Franciscan writ a prophetical treatise in prison, the title whereof was,
Vade mecum in tribulationem; wherein he auerred, That Antichrist reigned in
the Papacy, and he presaged the Churches reformation. Some there are, who say
he was burnt at last.

Under Urban the fifth lived one master Nicholas Orem, a Doctor of Divinity,
who in the year 1363, on Christmas eve, An. 1363.
before Urban the fifth and his Cardinals Iuxta est salus mea, vt veniat, and
iustitia mea vt reueletur, Esaias the 56: where after he had showed that the
text had reference to Christ's coming in the flesh, he proceeds to his
coming in judgment, when he would punish the corruption of the Christian
Church; whereunto he expressly applied the place of Ezechiel cap. 16. In die qua
natus es, vidi te conculcari in sanguine tuo, understanding martyredome in
this, and multiplicata es and grandis effecta, and mundaui sanguinem tuum ex
te, when persecution came to be somewhat mitigated, Et dedi coronam decoris in
capite tuo, etc. which he applies to the more happy times of the Church under
Christian Et habens fiduciam in pulchritudine tua, fornicata es in nomine meo,
Thou have communicated thy self by all means, by simonie, by abuses, by
sacriledges, forgetting the days of thy youth, thy first and former state:
Where (says he) it seems rather an history, than a prophecy of the Churches
prosperity. Presently after follows the punishment: And behold, says the
Lord, I will yield thee into the hands of them that hate thee, and they shall
destroy thy brothelrie, thy stones shall be demolished; that is to say, the
place where thou did exercise thy unlawful courses: they shall strip thee of
thy garments, and take away the vessels of thy glory, and so they shall leave
thee naked, full of reproach and infamy. Behold (says he) you may easily
discern what shall become of the Church. And the Chapter of the prophecy
adds, saying, Thy sister By the same means he applies to this argument the 23
chapter of the same prophecy, 2. Hosea, 3. of Nahum, and many other places of
Esaias, Jeremy, and the rest of the Prophets. And thus he concludes, Because the
Prelates did not stick for price, entreaties, and depraved actions, to defame
the venerable chastity of the Primitive Church, that therefore God would one
day reveal his primitive judgments upon this Church. It remained to expound
whether the time were near at hand or no, because his text was, Iuxta est,
etc. And although (says he) it belongs not to us to judge of times, yet
peradventure by some infallible signs, which I will demonstrat, some things to
this purpose may justly first of all I collect out of the Apostle to the
Thessal. 2. cap. 2. where he says, Except a departure and falling away first
come, the man of sin, the son of perdition shall not be revealed
(Antichrist he means) which Jerome in the last question, ad inquisitiones
Ianuarij, allegorically expounds of the desolation of the Roman Empire,
between which and the persecution of the Church by the presence of Antichrist,
he makes no interposition. Now what the present state of that Empire is,
especially compared with the original Majesty thereof, let any man judge. The
second sign was, That the Church should be of worser manners and customs than
ever the Synagogue was. Our Savior (says he) reprehended the Pharisees of
avarice, because they permitted doves to be sold in the Temple of God; and
because with their lips they only honored God, and what The third sign is
taken from the proportion of two great inequality, because one hungers and
starues, when another is drunk and full gorged, contrary to all just harmony
and symetrie, etc. Some Priests are greater than the Princes of the world, and
others more abject than the base vulgar. In an humane body, if nourishment
defuse it self superfluously to one member, and the rest pine and wear away
for want of the same, that body cannot long live. And to this purpose he does
produce some other places of the Prophets. The fourth sign is, the pride and
insolency of Prelates, etc. For by a natural right and proportion, it is proper
for Priests to hold and enjoy so much as wherewith to live more liberally than
the popular sort, and that the Prelat should be maintained better than the
parishioner: but yet for all this, they are not The fifth sign was, The
tyranny of rulers and governors, which being a thing violent, could not long
be permanent: Wise. 6. The property of a tyrant, is to seek not the good of
his subjects, but of his own: Such are those shepherds, that feed not the
Lords flock, but themselves, to whom it is said in Ezechiel 24, Mich. 3, You
hate good and love evil, You violently flea the skin over their ears, and
tear the flesh from their bones: and so they have eaten the flesh of my
people, and flead the skins from off their backs: The same says Ezechiel cap.
34, I will cause them to cease from feeding any more my flock, for I will
deliver them from their mouths, and they shall be no longer their bait and
food. The sixth sign The promotion of men unworthy, and contempt of the better
sort: According to Aristotle, these things are the speciallest cause of the
dissolution of any political government: and oftentimes in a secular welfare
it happens, that the dishonor of men famous and meritorious, and the
exaltation of the base and inferior sort, breeds great mutine and sedition:
For both in this respect, and because of some of the premised reasons, we do
not only read in Books, but further have seen with our eyes, diverse
kingdoms to have been almost ruined and defaced, etc. But this has always
been the incredulity of humane obstinacy; that though they do not only
hear, but also see it with their eyes, yet will they not believe others
perished through such and such vices, except they feel it by experience in the
destruction of themselves. The 7 sign was, The tribulation and affliction 3 of
Jeremy, Desolation shall suddenly come in upon desolation, my Tabernacles are
wasted and ruined. In the 7 of Ezechiel, Tumult upon tumult, terror upon
terror: and the Law shall fail in the Priest, and counsel in the Elders. The
eighth sign was, The refusal of correction, and amendment: when that comes to
pass, in the principal Prelates of the Church, which was written by Jeremy,
cap. 7, They would not attend nor harken, but made their hearts 4 of Osee,
Because thou have rejected knowledge, I will reject thee, so as thou shall not
execute thy Priesthood to me, for thou have forgotten the Law of thy God,
therefore I will change the glory of thy sons into reproach and ignominy,
and even as the people are so Iuxta est justicia mea, vt reueletur. He could
not in more plain and express notes, have described the Congregation, that
was to entertain Antichrist. It then remained only for him, to answer
certain objections, which he omits not. There are a sort of men, says he, too
confident, and affirming, that the Prelates are the Church, which the Lord will
always keep and preserve, not leaving the same, even as he promised them in
the persons of his Apostles, he saying in the 28 of Matthew. I remain with you,
even unto the end of the world. But this is to be understood in respect of
faith, which shall remain for ever, continuing always Ierem. 7. Trust not to
the words of lying and untruth, saying, The Temple of the Lord, the Temple of
the Lord, etc. which shall no ways profit you. There is another opinion of
those that prorogue and protract Gods judgments, for they grant, That the
Church indeed shall be disquieted and molested, but not so quickly, because
many reasons have been heretofore touched, and other signs were made
manifest; seeing not long since the Prelates were reprehended by the Doctors,
Gregory and Bernard, for receiving of bribes, for their pomp, for promoting
the unworthy, and for sundry other vices which then reigned in the Church,
nay more than now; and yet by Gods grace it still Ezech. cap. 12. saying, Son
of man, behold the house of Israel, who said, The vision that this man saw, he
has prophesied of long time ago: Thou shall therefore tell them, says the
Lord, My word shall no longer be protracted, but I will perform it in your
days. And in Esaias 3. We have seen things come to pass in our days, which
before seemed incredible: and the like has otherwise happened. Others say,
Come what come will, we will conform our selves to this age, we will temporize
like those which said in Wisdom 2. Let us enjoy those good things that are,
and replenish our selves: Such are very prejudicial, especially to good men in
the Church of God. And if Ecclesiastical Prelates were so base as to retain
these bad cogitations, they could not be too deeply plunged in hell, Proverbs,
You have neglected all my aduertisements and counsels, and therefore I will
return to your destruction, when tribulation and anguish shall even violently
rush in upon you. Some distrust altogether, and it seems that no due remedy
in this case can be applied: but even as other things and former kingdoms have
had their periods, according to that of Matthew, they have a time in the
irreuocable revolution of ages: and so this government of the Church must
likewise have an end, the governors just deserts and obstinacies requiring the
same; as it is in the eighth of Jeremy, There is none that repents, every one
returns to his own course, like an horse that violently presses into the
battle. If an Aethiope can change his skin, or a Leopard his Jonas it is
said, Who knows whether he may be converted, and acknowledge God. It is
therefore said in the 26 of Jeremy, Do not withdraw the word, for it may be
they will hear, and every one may be converted from his evil way. At last he
concludes with a serious exhortation to repentance, conversion, and amendment
of life. This is that Nicholaus Oremus, who by Charles the fifth his Charles
testifies by his own hand writing, That this Bible was translated by his
commandment.

And here we may fitly set down, That Charles the Sage was the Author of a
book written by Alanus Charterius, his Secretary, whose title was, Somnium
Viridarij, The Gardens Dream, printed at Paris above an hundred years since,
against Charles, That the Roman Church, from Constantines days, had obtained
prioritie through a silent and voluntary consent of the Churches, not that it
had any authority properly over them; as also because there did reside in that
place many famous men, who out of their charity were very careful to
admonish brotherly the other faithful, and these men again embraced their
admonitions, as the rules and precepts of learned men: which seemed wonderful
beneficial and profitable. They also were subject to their censures, to
preserve the unity of the faithful: and this their voluntary obedience was
in stead of a formal election, though no ways, by any divine or humane iura
coactiua, laws of constraint, not only over Clerks, but over secular Princes
themselves: the which the Popes take upon them, against the express precepts
and injunctions of Christ and his Apostles. And therefore the Church and
Bishops of Rome obtained prioritie out of the commendable ends above mentioned,
from Constantine the first Christian Emperor, which afterward they persuaded
the world, but most falsely, that they held ex iure diuino, by law divine;
further extending the same over all Kings and Princes, as also, that they are
to govern during a vacancie in the seat Imperial. Which the later Popes have
presumed to ratify by many Decretalls, by which, out of a plenarie power, they
pretend to create or depose kings, and they not obeying Edward the third, king
of England, after he had oftentimes complained in vain to the Popes* of the
exactions wherewith the Churches of England were continually pressed, he at
length determined to free England from that jurisdiction which the Pope usurped
in England: Wherefore in the year 1374 he ordained, An. 1374.
That the Bishops afterward should be created by himself, and so other
inferior Ministers by the Bishops; and thereupon Peter pence which were
yearly paid to Rome, were quite put down. The which when Gregory the
eleventh understood, he was mightily vexed, and exclaimed, That this was
nothing else but to divide the Christian Church, to annihilat Religion, and to
cut off all laws both divine and humane: Wherefore he first dealt with Edward
to revoke this law: but after this Popes death, Polidorus l. 19.
schism arising in the Church (says Polidore) there was no other of his
successors that minded this matter, till Martine the fifth wrote

At this very time S. Bridget and Katherine of Sienna were celebrated for
Saints, both supposed to have received divine revelations from above, and
therefore they were canonized; both of them notwithstanding conceiving very
well what manner of monster the Pope was. And Bridget, being borne in Scotland,
and married in Suethen, came to see Urban the fifth, who was then at
Montefiascone, near a murderer of souls, the disperser and deuourer of
Christ's sheep, more abominable than the Jews, more despightfull than Judas,
more unjust than Pylat, worse than Lucifer, and that his seat should sink like
a weighty stone, (the Apocalypse says, like a millstone) and that his
assistants should burn in a sulphurous and inextinguishable fire. Afterward
she reprehends the Bishops, and other Priests, that through their default the
doctrine of Christ is clean neglected, and almost abolished, the divine
wisdom and knowledge was by the Clergy converted into wicked and vain
sciences; That they were leapers, and dumb men, turning all Gods
commandments into one only saying, Da pecuniam, give she affirms that she
saw the blessed Virgin speaking thus to her son, Rome is a fertile and
plentiful field; when Christ made answer, So indeed it is, but of Cockle and
Darnell. But yet she said, she was admonished in a vision to go to Rome rather
to remove, than confirm the opinion she formerly conceived of it. Katherine
also gave the like censure of the state of the Roman Church, nay, and if we may
believe Antoninus, she presaged, That even then the Churches confusion was at
hand, and that presently a reformation would ensue. When she heard of the
Perugians rebellion against the Pope, Begin not your lamentation (says she) so
soon, for you shall have weeping too much: for this you now see is but milk
and honey This (says Raimond, who writ her Legend) we see accomplished in the
schism that followed upon Gregory's death: For when the schism began, Raymond
told her, That what she had prophesied was now come to pass; and she replied,
Even as then I told you, that the present molestations were but milk and
honey; so I say unto you, That this you now see and behold, is but childrens
sport in comparison of future miseries, especially in adjacent and bordering
Provinces. Which we have seen Raymond again prosecutes: Being curious (says
he) to demand of her what would follow after this wonderful agitation and
revolt (because it manifestly appeared that she entertained celestial
revelations; (she replied, God shall purge his Church from all these
tribulations and miseries, by a means altogether inperceptible and unknown
unto men: and after this shall occur such a wonderful reformation of Gods
Church, and a renouation of sacred and holy Pastors, that through the
cogitation thereof only my spirit even rejoices in the Lord. And as
otherwhiles I have many adds further, What this sacred virgin foretold of
schisms and tribulations, we have seen them clearly and evidently come to
pass: but for that she denounced touching good Pastors, and the Churches
reformation, that has not yet been effected. And yet he wrote in the year
1450, after the schism extinguished, and the dissolution of the Councels of
Constance and Basil; the which, as it seems, he thought had not sufficiently
provided for the reformation of the Church, conformable to this virgins
predictions; neither can it any ways be perceived in the Church of Rome, or in
the Popes, whether you consider doctrine, by a means (as she said)
inperceptible of men, the which was then a preparing before his death.

In Bohemia mention is made of one Militzius, a famous Preacher of Prage, whom
Iacobus Misnensis terms renowned and venerable. This man declared, how
against his will he was enjoined by the holy Ghost to search out of the holy
Scriptures the coming of Antichrist, whom he found to be now already come:
the same spirit conducting him, he was constrained to go to Rome, where he
preached Iacobus Misnensis his treatise, de Aduentis Antichristi, which he wrote
about the year 1410. An. 1410.
We find also a Bull of Gregory the eleventh directed to John Archbishop of
Prage, wherein he is commanded to excommunicat and persecute Militzius and his
auditors,

In these very days, about the year 1460, one John Wickliffe, An. 1460.
a man of singular understanding, began to lift up his head, who was trained up
at Oxford in all learning and science, being both a famous Divine and
Philosoph^^, who was for these parts highly honored and esteemed of all the
Faculties: and Degrees in that University. This man questionless charged the
Roman Church to be an Heres^arch, the Antichrist deciphered in the Scriptures,
the abomination of desolation, in abstracto, in abstract, brought in by
Satan's guile, and their Churches impostume: and that he convinced him to be
the same both by the Scriptures, the course of all histories, diverse preualent
reasons, and his own proper actions; but further he assaileth the inward
points of his doctrine, taxing it with vanity, superstition, and idolatry,
reprehending the service of the creator converted to the creature, to mortal
men, to Saints, to relics, to images: That the Sacrifice of the Redeemers
Passion was turned into the foolish spectacle and mummerie of a Mass; the
benefit of the death and passion of Christ the son Edward the third then
reigning in England, and he drew unto himself the attention of all the great
men in the Land, which then flourished eitheir in letters or arms: obtaining
so far by his divine labor and zeal, that truth from his mouth was harkened
unto, by many embraced and received, and happily preached for many years: so
as that light of the Gospel revived by his operations and endeauours, no puff
or whirlwind could extinguish, but rather it kindled unto us another fire all
Europe over. I forbear to speak of the learning and incomparable soliditie of
his writings, all which Luther seems to have spoken most worthily, The bodies
of the Saints rise again when there is a resurrection of the Gospel of Jesus
our Savior, so as these petty desperate Bishops are able to prevail nothing
at all against them, with their Herod's and Pylats.

All the Clergy out of doubt he wonderfully amazed and astonished: For Thomas
Waldensis, in his Epistle to Martine the fifth, spares not to tell, how he
wondered and admired at his irrefragible assertions, at the perspicuous
authorities, and inconuincible reasons which he produced. Thom. Waldens. in
Epist ad Martin. 5. Thom. Walsingham in Rich. 2. Gulielm. Caxtonius in Chron.
Anno 1171 and 1372. alias fructus temporum
And the Chronologers of those times seem greatly to complain, that both king
Edward and all his chief Counselors gave attentive ear to him: as also, that
the king was won by him to enact by Parliament, That the Bishops from
thenceforth should be confirmed by their Metropolitans, as in times past, and
not be tied upon this occasion to go personally to Rome. But Waldensis
mentions some particular men that in England entertained his doctrine; certain
Divines and Masters of the University of Oxford, Robert Chancellor of the
same University, together with the two Proctors and many others, whom he
severally nominates. In the Court, the king himself and the Prince of Wales
his son, were his auditors, John Duke of Lancaster, Lewis Clifford, William
Neuill, John Klenbow, Richard Struny, Thomas Latimer, John Montacute, who
defaced Images throughout all his jurisdiction, John of Salisburie, who being
at point of death, rejected the Papisticall Sacrament, with diverse others of
the chiefest Nobility. Besides, John of Northampton, the Major of London, and
sundry other notable Citizens and Burgesses, who many times disturbed the
Bishops Wickliff. But so on the other side, he wanted not many potent and
mighty adversaries among the Bishops, Prelates, Monks, but especially the
Mendicants, who after Edwards death, obtained of Richard the second, that
Wickliff should be expelled England: he therefore repairing into Bohemia,
brought a great light to the doctrine of the Waldenses; when John Hus, being
yet but a young man, had diverse conferences with him about divine matters. But
at length being recalled home again from exile, about the year 1387, the
last of December, An. 1387.
he meekely in his Country yielded up his soul to God, and was buried in the
Church of Lutterworth within the County of Leicester: not without a singular
miracle showed Martine the fifths order, An. 1428.
he was by the Prelates in England disinterred and burnt. But God in his good
time will re-demaund the bodies of his Saints of all the elements, to whom, he
will then most graciously communicate his happiness and glory, Amen.

Here we may also adjoyne the principal heads of Wicklifs doctrine, as they
are set down by William Wydford his adversary, who inuents many of them out
of his own brain, the more to stir up envy against him: but in a ward, we
may boldly affirm that they are no other in substance then such as are
received into the confessions of our Churches, as may evidently be seen in
many treatises Priests and Deacons, for other degrees they proceeded from the
pride of the Papacy: That the Pope who counterfeitly professed himself to be
the servant of Gods servants, in the work Evangelical, was of no place or
degree, but Satan's special Attorney and procurator, that he might perpetually
project and practice treason against Christ; also, that he was pointed at
throughout all the Scriptures for Antichrist, not his person simply, but the
chair and Papal dignity, from whence, by means of the creeping in of all
excess and sensuality, confusion has invaded the Church; how it was a most
palpable Caesarian Pope, one that should be both Pope and Emperor at an
instant. And therefore it belonged to Princes seriously to join both their
hearts and hands, for the prohibiting of such a Satan to bear rule in the
church. His principal Disciples in England grew very famous, both by edition
of books and for Martyredome, as Walter Bret, John Aston, John Ashwaly,
Nicholas Herford, John Puruer, Richards Wits, John Oldcastle, Peter Clarke,
William Tailor, William whose works and labors Bale cites out of the ancient
monuments, the seed whereof, brought forth afterward the fruits into England
which we both have and daily see. Thomas Walsingham specially notes, Thomas
Walsingham in Richard 2.
that when the Archbishop of Canterbury had sent Wicklifs condemnation to
Robert Rigg, Chancellor of the University of Oxford, to be diuulged, he
appointed them to preach that day whom he knew to be the most zealous followers
of Wickliff, in contempt (says he) of the Archiepiscopall precept: and among
others, he ordained one Philip Rippinton, a Chanon of Leycester, to preach on
Corpus Christi day, who concluded his Sermon with these words, For speculatiue
doctrine (says he) such as is the point of the Sacrament of the Altar, I will
set a bar on my lips, while God has The same Author says, That in the year
1378 Pope Gregory the eleventh his Bull being presented and read at Oxford,
An. 1378.
and seconded with express letters both to the king, the Archbishop, and all
other the chiefest and principallest Bishops, wherein he used to them great
reprehension for the slight care they had taken in the suppressing of Wicklifs
doctrine: Those of the University were long time in suspense, Whether they
should receive the Popes Bull with honor, or reject it with reproach: and at
last very small account was made of it.

60. PROGRESSION.


THe Church of Rome, as we have seen, is marked in Histories with many
Gregory the eleventh being deceased, the Cardinals enter into the Conclaue at
Rome, and the Romans requested that they would create Pope, if not a Roman, yet
at least an Italian, least if he were a Frenchman, he should withdraw his seat
to Auignion; yea not content with prayers, they make a tumult about S. Peter's,
by the instigation, as it was thought, of Cardinal Vrsino, who affected the
Seat. But the Frenchmen on the other side being desirous to have the Seat with
them, left nothing unattempted to the contrary, though weary of the Lymosine
Popes, who for many years had transported the Myter over from one to another.
Notwithstanding in the end, partly for fear, and partly by bribing, Bartholmew
Archbishop Urban the sixth, the Frenchmen in the mean time complaining that
they had been forced in their suffrages. Theodor. a Nyem. l. 1. de Schism.
inter Urban. 6. and Clement. 7. Platina in Urban. 6. Blondus Decad. 2. l. 10.
And here some Authors note, That Urban had promised by oath to renounce the
Popedom whenever they should require it, though the Cardinals signified by
letters his election to the Christian Princes, as lawful, and themselves
adored him. Three months then being past, and the weather waxing very hot
(for he had been created in March) the French Cardinals, for change of air,
request leave of him to depart to Anagnia, which Urban grants; and they
assign Clement the seventh, against Urban the sixth. It is observed, That when
Urban was requested not to return into France, these words chanced to escape
from him, That he would ever abide at Rome, and that he rebuked the Bishops
openly, for that they resided in Court, whereas they ought to be in their
Diocesses: which the Cardinal of Pampelone took very grievously against him.
Platina adds, That these Cardinals had pilled the former Popes after their
death, and feared to be called in question for it. Urban obeyed all the
Italians, and the Florentines themselves, being absolved from the
excommunication of his predecessor, so that there only wanted to him the Earl
of Fundi, Francis de Vico, who held Viterbe, and Joan Queen of Naples, whom he
had lost only by his peevishness: and of strangers, the Germans, Englishmen,
and Portugals. To Clement obeyed the kings of France and Spain. And some there
were which acknowledged neither the one nor the other, whence they were called
Newters.

Urban: in him was manifestly verified the proverb, Theodor. a Nyem. l. 1. c.
1.
He which makes a Pope knows not what he does. For Theodorie a Nyem, his
Secretary, who wrote this history, tells us, That before his Popedom he was
an humble and devout man, and withheld his hands from all bribes, an enemy and
persecuter of simonie, and zealous of chastity and justice. And out of that
which follows may easily be judged, whether he were an hypocrite, or whether
the infection of the Seat did not change his habitude. This good Queen of
Naples had rejoiced exceedingly at his promotion to the Popedom, and for many
days in Naples had caused bone-fires of joy to be made, to honor him, and
besides other things, had sent unto him in gift 40000 ducats, part in gold, and
part in silver, for his first expenses. Otho also, Duke of Brunswick,
presenting drink unto him in his collation, in presence of many Cardinals, he
out of pride stayed a long time before he would take the cup out of the hand of
so great a Prince kneeling before him, tell one of the Cardinals said unto
him, Holy Father it is time to drink. And some such like actions helped
forward the schism not a little. The Author adds here of his master, That
this saying as then failed not in him, Asperius whilst misere cum surgit in
altum.
None's more proud than the wretch that is high advanced.
Cord stat inflato, pauper honor dato, A poor man advanced to honor, L. 1.
c. 8.
has his heart puffed up with pride: But likewise verified that saying of the
Wise man, His heart shall be hard with evil in his later days.
Notwithstanding Otho, before the schism brake forth, omitted nothing that he
could to reconcile him with the Cardinals, yet receives no better usage from
him; for having requested him to approve the marriage of his cosen, the
Marquess of Mont^errat, with Marie heir of Sicilie, whereunto all the Barons
of the kingdom consented, he flatly refused him, having an intention by any
means to make the kingdom of Sicilie fall into the hands of Francis Pregnan,
L. 1. c. 12.
his brothers son. And this is that humility which Theodorick commended in
him before his Popedom. When he saw the Cardinals fall away from him, he
remained astonished, and would have returned to humility, yet gathering
courage to himself, he thought he should not want some ambitious, to take the
Cardinals hat at his hand: wherefore in one day he created twenty six, three
Romans, the rest Neapolitans, his countrymen. The chief strife was for the
possession of Rome, and already he ruled there: but the Vrsines, that held for
Clement, and the Frenchman captain of the castle S. Angelo, who shot off
thence upon his people, made the city dangerous unto him: therefore with the
forces of his confederats he besieged him, and constrains him through famine
to yield. He won unto him also the favor of the Emperor Charles the Lewis
king of Hungary, by giving them hope of great matters, and by their help got
unto himself the obedience of Lombardie and Sicilie. Hence therefore taking
courage, he seriously bends his thoughts on the promoting of his nephew, and
sends for Charles Duras out of Hungary, against his promise by oath (That he
would never attempt any thing against the daughters of king Lewis) and crowns
him king of Sicilie, on this condition, That he should give the dukedom of
Capua and of Melfe in the realm of Naples, and many noble earledomes in
Sicilie, to his nephew, though he were a man effeminat and unprofitable. And
because this Charles had no money, he sold to the Roman citizens the
proprieties and rights of many churches of Rome, to the sum of eighty
thousand Florins, and more, also gold and silver Chalices, crosses, and other
precious ornaments of the said for to pay wages to the army of Charles. And
here again let the Reader weigh that devotion which our Author had attributed
unto him before his Popedom.

His other conditions were found to be no better. Charles, led by his natural
pride, marches to Naples, and through the treason prepared by Urban, is
received by his partakers into the city; for he had bound unto him the best
families by his Cardinals hats. But Queen Joan was retired into the new
castle, and Otho Duke of Brunswick with his army besieged the city. He then
counterfeited the seal of Queen Joan, and forged a letter as from her to
Otho, whereby she entreated Otho suspecting nothing, takes his journey
thitherwards by night, accompanied with the Marquess of Montferrat his cosen,
Balthazar Duke of Brunswick his brother, son in law of the Earl of Fundi,
and three captains, in whom he greatly trusted: but they fall into a deep pit
prepared for them, with their horses, in which was hid in ambush fifty men,
who kill the Marquess and the three captains, take the Duke Otho and his
brother Balthazar, and carried them prisoners to Charles, who commanded
Balthasars eyes to be put out in the public market place, where the and he
keeps Otho full three years under custody. Queen Joan, when she heard that
her husband was taken, hoped that in yielding the castle, which besides was in
distress for want of victual, she might at least redeem her life; but he sent
her presently prisoner into a certain castle of Abruzzo, in the chapel
whereof, as she was kneeling at prayer before the Altar, by his command she is
strangled by four Hungarian soldiers. All this was done by the counsel of
Urban, whose Legate a latere was ever by him, the Cardinal of Sangro, who
thought he offered to God Joan, as well of the Clergy as Laytie, either
depriving them of their goods, or deposing them of their Ecclesiastical
dignities, without any respect of age, condition, or merit: insomuch that in
one day at their cost, he created thirty and two Archbishops and Bishops, and
many Abbots, all Neapolitans and followers of Charles his part. He adds, that
they used the enchauntments of a certain vagabond, well known to the Author,
who named himself a Knight, and a little after was burned, by commandment of
Lewis Duke of Anjou, whom he would have deceived.

Neither was Clement in the mean time idle, A man (says the Author) of a
whom Gregory the eleventh, by reason he could not otherwise maintain his
prodigality, had appointed Legate in the Marca de Ancona and in Lumbardie, more
perhaps, Jdem. l. 2. c. 21.
that he might by that means have wherewith to live, from the inhabitants of
those regions, under pretense of his Legation, than for any quiet or safety
that he might procure unto them. Of which he brings us some examples.
Nevertheless he is covetous, or rather a greedy griper, by reason of his
prodigality: For Otho, Duke of Brunswick, having taken Verseil and forty
Castles in those parts from Vicount Barnabo, then commander of Milan, who had
delivered them to Gregory; Clement, being at that time Legate, sold them all
to Barnabo for ready money, who exercised against Clement; And being come to
the Popedom, he retained still the same humor, granting in fee for a very
small yearly reuenew without any difficulty, the Lands and demesnes of
Cathedral Churches and Monasteries, for to bind great men unto him; and giving
(says the Author) large things of another man's leather, that he might recover
money at any price whatsoever. And when he saw that Urban had at his pleasure
created a King of Apulia, he resolved to give him a competitour; this was Lewis
Duke of Aniou, whom he crowned and sent into Italy, with an army of sixty
thousand men: so that Urban determined to leave Rome, and to go into the
kingdom of Naples, whom Charles comes to meet not Lib. 1. c. 29. 30. 31. 32.
that many Country people came and kissed the said Vrbans feet, but before
they did so, they had thrice kissed the ground or earth. But Charles, under
color of showing him the Castle of Auersa, kept him prisoner, suspecting some
evil of Vrbans journey into Apulia, and so much the rather, for that he had
not fulfilled his promise in putting Pregnan his Nephew in possession of the
Duchy of Capua and of Mel^e. But soon after, at the entreaties of the
Cardinals, and under certain conditions, he set him at liberty and brings
him to Naples. Lib. 1. c. ^3. ^4.
That Pregnan was a man given to all vices, and of whom notwithstanding he was
so exceeding He is young; and yet was he then forty years old. It happened
among other things, that he violated and ravished by force a certain professed
Nun and recluse of the order of S. Clare of the Monastery of S. Savior at
Naples, and descended from a Noble house; her he kept certain days with him:
The people is moved with that wicked fact, whereupon the guilty person
suddenly saves himself in a Church, under the protection of his uncle; the
king according to Law having convicted him, condemns him to die; the Pope
contesteth against it, that he is a superior Lord, in whose presence the king
cannot punish a nobleman of his kingdom. Thereupon he fortifieth the gates of
his palace, because it so pleased the Pope; yea, which is worse, that peace
might be made between the Pope and the king, it is agreed upon, by the
Cardinals procurement, That Pregnan should marie the daughter of the Lord
chief Justice of the realm, the kings kinswoman; and that the king, for so
long time as the duke of Aniou should remain in the country, should pay unto
Pregnan every year, in stead of the revenues of those dukedomes, seventy
thousand Florins. Of his own accord he gave him also the castle of Lucera,
with the appurtenances, being between Naples and Salerne, Idem c. 40.
whither he with the Pope his uncle retired himself, a place very pleasant,
and safe for their persons, being lodged in the castle; but L. 1. c. 42.
and yet could not make him resolve to depart thence. Wherefore at the instance
of Cardinal Reatine it was treated amongst them, out of the opinion of many
Doctors, If a Pope were too negligent, or unfit to govern, and leaned so much
to his own wit, that he brought thereby the whole Church into danger, or were
so unbridled, that without the advice of the Cardinals he would do things
after his own fantasy and pleasure, Whether it were not lawful to
substitute, by the election of the Cardinals, a Curator, or some fit Curators,
by whose counsel and advice the Pope should be held to dispatch all the
affairs of the Church: which was concluded to be lawful. But Urban Idem l. 1.
c. 45.
His cruelty was such, that he cast them into a dungeon, commonly called the
old Cisterne, and without any respect of age, infirmity, or quality, put them
to the rack, and all manner of tortures, his nephew Pregnan being present, and
urging the tormentors: so that here Theodorick moves all to compassion:
neither yet, whatsoever these do testify and protest, could he ever be Sangr^,
a man broken with old age, and before his Legate in the realm, who, to please
him, had exercised so many cruelties, and now acknowledged that he was justly
punished by himself. But when Pregnan was so proud and audacious as to seize
upon the castle of Scifatti, three leagues distant from Lucera, and was
presently besieged by the kings servants, and forced to yield, Charles resolved
to besiege Urban himself within Lucera, who feeling himself extremely
pressed, Idem l. 2. c. 45. 50. 51. 52. 53. 54. 55. 56.
led by a German called Loter of Swe^e, fled through by-ways of the
mountains, and so saved himself at Salerne, where he is received of certain
galleys of Genua, prepared for him; and caused the captive Cardinals through
these incommodities to accompany him ever by his side, ga^ded Adam, a poor
Monk, whom he gave to Richard king of England, on condition that he should
ever have a certain Clerk of his chamber watching over his actions. At Genua
he receives John Duke of Milan, Perhaps (says the Author) that he should
absolve him from the fault he had committed, for that whilst Urban remained at
Naples, the Duke had taken his uncle Lord Barnabo, the daughter of whose cosen
german he married by dispensation from the Pope, and strangled her in a castle
near Milan: and a while after he impoisoned Barnabo himself. In the end,
being ready to depart from Genua, to rid himself from the cumber of those
five Cardinals, he made them all in one night be beheaded, others say, cast
into the sea, and others, burnt in his stable. Collenucius says distinctly,
Collenuc. l. 5.
That four were sowed up in a sack and cast into the water, and three
beheaded, whose heads dried in an oven, were laid and carried upon his sumpter
moiles; and so by his reckoning there should have Theodorick his Secretary
this at least is clear, That they were never seen more. And yet this is he
whom before his Popedom he describes unto us to be zealous of justice. In the
last year of his Popedom, being mindful of the great gain that the Jubilee
had brought to Clement the sixth in the year 1350, against all reason he
abreuiated the same, namely to every thirty three years, An. 1350. Theodor. a
Nyem. l. 1. c. 68. and 69.
yet so, as that it should begin at Christmas in the year of our Lord 1388,
and should continue a year inclusiuely: but, being prevented by death, he saw
it not, and so left that fruitful field to be reaped by his successor
Boniface. An. 1388.
For being departed from Genua to go to Perouse, by the fall of his mule under
him he was bruised in many parts of his body: and nevertheless having still
an intention to return into Elizabeth Queen of Hungary had caused the head
of Charles Duras, king of Naples, to be cut off, as he was drinking in a
banquet at Buda, whereunto she had invited him (notwithstanding he had yielded
unto her all the rights of the kingdom) and had sent to Urban to gratify him,
the sword, yet bloody, wherewith his head was smitten off: Collenuc. l. 5.
The history tells us, that Urban received it with so great a pleasure, that
he could not satisfy himself with beholding it. And thus much for Urban, him
of the two, which by Platina, Onuphrius, and others, is put in the Catalogue of
Popes, as the more lawful. For full increase of his good deeds, he caused a
book to be written by one John de Therano, his Chamberlain, the beginning
whereof is, Give unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and to God the things
that are Gods: wherein he affirms, That these words of Christ have place
only for a time, namely until his ascension; but that from the time of his
ascension they should be of no moment, seeing that he himself says, Ioh. 12.
When I shall be taken up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me; that is,
all kings and kingdoms under the Empire of the Pope; whom he therefore
concludes to be King of kings, and Lord of lords: not fearing in so weighty a
matter to abuse the sacred word of God, worse than the very Pasquils. As for
Clement, he was the first author (as Gaguin witnesses) of expectatiue graces
and Annates: yet because he is held for an Antipope, whose acts therefore were
Boniface, successor of Urban, by whose care, in his obedience, they were
received. But Nicholas de Clemangis, Archdeacon of Baieux, who lived in the
time of this schism, in his book de Corrupto Ecclesiae statu, of the corrupt
state of the Church, describes Clement unto us in few words: After (says he)
that by the insupportable burden of our sins, the furious evil of schism
has crept into the Church, to omit the mischiefs done through the error of
such as follow the false Pope, a man wholly defiled with all impuritie: Was
there ever man more miserable than our Clement while he lived? Who so made
himself a servant of servants to the Princes of France, that the threatenings
and contumelies daily cast upon him by the Courtiers, were hardly fit to be
spoken against the basest slave? He gave place Moreover there is Schismatike,
Paulus Aemilius in Carolo Sapiente.
Heretic, sower of tares, thief, traitor, tyran, Antichrist, son of Belial.
John de Ligniaco wrote in favor of Urban, and the Abbot of S. Vaast of Arras,
Counselor of king Charles the fifth, in favor of Clement.

After the decease of Urban, the Cardinals that were his followers elected
Pope, Peter de Thomacellis, a Neapolitan, who was called Boniface the ninth,
ignorant (says the Author) of writing and singing; and so unfit for
administration of the affairs of the Court of Rome, Theodor. a Nyem. l. 2. c.
6.
that whilst he lived he hardly understood the propositions made before him by
the Aduocats, in his Consistory, in so much that in his time, Inscitia fere
venalis facta fuit in ipsa Curia, Ignorance was welnigh set to sale in And yet
in all kind of simonie he so far excelled all his predecessors, that he
promoted not any Cardinal or bishop without extorting a great sum of money
from them. And such a one indeed had Urban the sixth found him out to be, who
for his goodly stature, of a vagabond Clerk had made him Cardinal; but after
he discovered him to be so open an arch-simoniack, that it is likely he would
have taken his hat from him, if death had not prevented him. Of his invention
then, as Theodorick his Secretary teaches us, are the Annates, which he
reserved to himself of all the vacant Cathedral Churches and Abbeys; so that
they which were promoted unto them, were forced beforehand to pay all, before
they Usury also, whereby they which came to the Court might find money, at any
rate whatsoever, which was no more accounted a sin, yea rather was often
exacted before their Judges and Officials: that the saying of the Psalm might
be veried, Both usury and guile wants not in their streets. The Dates, as
they call them, to wit, the prioritie of the time of graces, which they sold to
such as gave most; and that with such impudency, that this so open a buing and
selling became a mock among the people. The Expectatiues, which did tread
under feet those graces, commonly Cum clausula Anteferri: And innumerable
subtle deceits, extortions, filthy and dishonest pillages, which the Author
describes in the 7, 8, 9, 10, 11 chapters of his second book, and would be
too long for us here to recite. Urban appointed; Theodor. a Ny. l. 1. c. 68.
For innumerable strangers, out of the diverse kingdoms and Provinces of his
obedience, came to the city, and exceeding great offerings were given to the
Churches and Temples of the city, the greater part of which came to the hands
of Boniface, and of some others. But Boniface himself not content with these
offerings, although they amounted to an exceeding sum (for he was an
insatiable gulf, and in covetousness none like unto him) sent his
money-gatherers, or chapmen, into diverse kingdoms, which he most severely
required of them, and many taken in fraud he put to death. Thus Urban Boniface
reaped. But the testimony of Theodorick shall not be heard alone, though,
without all exception, the greater, because his Secretary: Platina himself
says, Indulgences, yea plenarie, Platina in Bonifacio 9.
were sold every where, in so much that the authority of the keys and
Apostolical letters were in contempt, etc. and many wickednesses were done by
simonie. Krantzius in Metrop. l. 11. c. 10. and 12.
And Krantzius, Under his Popedom were made many and often translations of
Bishops, many and often giuings of Indulgences, even to the breeding of
loathing in men's hearts: He gave graces and Indulgences unheard of; and what
he easily gave he as lightly revoked, stirring up a report throughout all
Christendom, that he could not be filled with gold. The Romans had hitherto
retained the chiefest authority in the city, which was the in alto and basso
(says the Author) high and low, in all and through all: and to maintain the
same, he spared no subsidies nor tributes exacted from the Clergy. He
reedified the castle of S. Angelo, and the Capitol, and therein placed a
garrison: And this truly he obtained by a very notable sacrilege. He greatly
desired the coming of the year 1400, An. 1400.
to celebrat the great Jubilee, notwithstanding the other that Urban had
interserted. Boniface a little before departed to Assisium, making a show to
stay there: Whereupon the people fearing least by reason of his absence who
should give Urban they had not received any Senators from without, but I know
not what Conseruers of the chamber, men insufficient, who had suffered all
things to be done at the pleasure of the Banderets. Wherefore the Romans were
brought to that pass, being desirous of gain by that fair, that they bought
his blessing with the price of their liberty, consented that authority should
be taken away from the Banderets, received from his hand a stranger Senator,
Malatesta de Pisaro, That by the same (says Blondus) he might make the Roman
Bishops, his successors, no less Lords of all Christendom than of Rome; for
in the law set forth he ordained, That it should be lawful for no man promoted
to a benefice, to possess the same before he had paid so much money into the
Popes treasury as the first years revenues thereof might amount unto; and the
Englishmen alone obeyed the law in the Cathedral Churches, but in the smaller
benefices they contemned the Popes command. Now in this Jubilee he sold
Indulgences to the most giver, as he had Theodor. a Nyem. l. 1. c. 28.
Yea for fear least he should lose in the mean time the temporal dominion of
the city, he remained there also in the Summer time; neither gave he any
alms to sick pilgrims in that dangerous season, although he then abounded in
all things, for he was accustomed to catch away, and not to communicate any
thing of his prey to the needy.

Now between the two Iubilies died the Antipope Clement, at Auignion, who in
his obedience was in nothing less diligent than Urban and Boniface: To him
succeeded Peter de Luna, a Spaniard, Benedict the thirteenth: He being urged by
the king of France (who by the advice of the University of Paris had Boniface
and his Cardinals, to request him, That they might meet together in some place
safe to both parties, for to take counsel for the concord of the Church. This
he propounded indeed discreetly and diligently, though (as it thought)
fraudulently. And thus also did the Cardinals of Boniface seem to take it.
But Boniface answered not very gently, affirming, That he was Pope, and the
said Peter an Antipope; and the like words, making little or nothing to the
cause. Whereat the Nuntioes being angry, said in his presence, That their Lord
was not a Simoniack; noting Boniface to be one. At which words being greatly
moved, he commanded them to depart the city; and when they answered, That
they had safeconduct from himself and from the people of Rome, and had some
time yet left vnexpired, which they would enjoy; he was so immoderatly chafed
with anger, that his disease of the stone beginning to torment him, he went to
bed, and the third day after dyed. Krantzius Saxon. l. 10. c. 13.
Yet nevertheless (says Krantzius) that he might obtain by the mediation of
the mother of God, the union of the Church, he published by his Bulls the feast
of the Visitation of Marie, instituted by his predecessor. Let the Reader judge
with what faith, in so wicked an intention. Neither is it here to be omitted,
That Francis Pregnan the nephew of Urban the sixth, for whose advancement he so
much labored, when he had a long time beheld a dancing, entered into his
chamber, and gave himself many blows with a sword, and by them that And so
(says the Author) all the posterity of Urban the sixth was extinguished, the
waves of the sea requiring vengeance, to wit, for the Cardinals whom he so
wretchedly had cast into the sea. And thus are we come to the year 1404, when
Boniface died; for this schism is longer than can be at once declared.

OPPOSITION.
The only history of these Antipopes, described by such as were near about
them, and inward with them, the judgment also which they gave the one against
the other, the one no better nor more lawfully being created or reigning than
the other, might suffice, without seeking any other Opposition: for what can we
have of greater proof than this, That such as were in most eminent place
amongst them, being maliciously bent one against another, have related how
rudely they vexed and annoyed each other? Yet is it worthy our pains, to see
what was the I know, says Froissard, Froissard. vol. 3. c. 24.
that in time to come men will wonder by what means the Church could fall into
such troubles, and to stick in them so long; But this was a wound inflicted by
God, for to admonish the Clergy in what great excess and superfluity they
lived. But no man took heed thereof, being blinded all with pride and
arrogancy, whereby each man would be equal one to another: Wherefore all
things became worse, and if our faith had not been strengthened by the hand
and grace of the holy Ghost, who inlighteneth the hearts of them that go
astray, and confirms them in unity, without all doubt it had fainted and
fallen. Therefore, if we believe Froissard, it is but ill grounded on Popes. He
adds, For the Princes 1390, whereat a very great number of the common people
exceedingly wondered, that so great Princes, especially the Kings of France
and Germany, thought not upon any remedy or counsel. So then after his
opinion, remedy is rather to be expected from the Princes, than from the
Popes, who are themselves the disease of the Church, and the principal peccant
humor in the body thereof. And there he shows at large, that every Prince
took part with the one or the other of them, according as stood best for the
wise governing of their affairs. But he comes to this, that the pride of the
Church is such, that it must of necessity be chastised and John de Rupescissa.
Epistol. Vniuersit. Paris. Oxoniens. Pragens. de tollendo schismate editae per
Huttenum. An. 1520.
The University of Paris had approved Clement; That of Oxford and Prague on
the contrary, Urban the sixth. In this they all agreed, as by their writings on
both sides published does appear, That the Pope and Cardinals exercise a
tyranny over the Church of Christ; That the Emperor has the right of the
patronage over the Pope and Church of Rome; That the Pope with his Cardinals
may err, and very often have erred; That the election of the Pope belongs
not to the Cardinals by divine right, but to the people, as also to the
Emperor the confirmation of the same; And that before Gregory there were no
Cardinals. Moreover there was pulished in Germany an Epistle, from the part
and authority Wenceslaus, though he were but weak, wherein he gravely
exhorted the Church to free themselves from the servitude of the Pope, Epistol.
Wenceceslai. Jmperat. de eodem.
By those Princes (says he) of Priests, the Church is profaned, the
Priesthood defiled, all order confounded, and whatsoever is of religion is
corrupted; what is of the Law, of life, of manners, of faith, of discipline, is
destroyed and confounded: insomuch that although the blessed son of God has
suffered many and grievous things by men of the Sinagogue, yet now he suffers
much more grievous things of princes of Priests. There is also recited there a
vision of a certain holy man, concerning the state of the Church: Seeing her
apparelled as a Queen, he thought she had been the blessed Virgin Marie, but
she expressly told him, I am not her whom thou deemest, but the figure of her
for whom Neither is it to be omitted, that in this Epistle honorable mention
is made of Marsilius of Padua, and John de Iamduno, who (as we have above
seen) had defended the Emperor Lewis of Bauiere against

Johannes Petrus Ferrariens. in Practica vtriusque iuris in forma libelli
actionis confessoriae, si verbo plenam, etc.
With the same mind wrote John Peter of Ferrara, a famous Lawyer of Pauia; That
it is a thing ridiculous to be spoken, and abominable to be heard, that the
Pope has superiority over the the Emperor; That he cannot by any right have
temporal dominion, or possess Provinces and cities, and that he does so is of
mere violence; That the temporal sword must be taken from him, that
otherwise Christendom will never be quiet; That it is by the foolishness of
Princes, that they are made the slaves of the Clergy; That the Pope in
absoluing men from their oath, makes them perjurers; And that Clergymen
carry their consciences in their coules, which being laid aside, their
conscience is no more to be Jdem in forma libelli de substitutione.
And in another place he cries out, That there may arise a good Emperor
against them, which in time past through devotion drew the world after them,
and now by reason of their covetousness and rapine, have destroyed and brought
to nothing the state of the Empire and of all the Laity; Not without cause,
seeing that John Andreas surnamed Speculator, that great interpretour of the
Canon law, was wont to say, That Rome having been first founded by thieves,
has returned to her first estate. Jndex Expurgat. Hispan. fol. 135. and
Antuerpian. p. 116.
But the fathers of the Council of Trent in their Indexes in Spain and
Antuerpe, command these places to be raced out. At the same time was set forth
the Dialogue of Peter and Paul, the title whereof was, The golden Mirror, in
the year 1404. An. 1404.
In the Preface is this, All the Court of Rome, from the sole of the Then he
divides his matter into three points; First, says he, I will discover the
most grievous errors of the Court of Rome; Secondly, I will confute the
writings and sayings thereof as erroneous, and less Catholic; Thirdly, I will
declare out of most true grounds, that the Court of Rome is wholly erroneous
and sick in the state of damnation, etc. And he handles each of these in
order. At last after many complaints, despairing that it would suffer
reformation, and much less, that from it self any were to be expected; The
only son of God, says Paul, vouchsafe to reform his Church himself. And
to show that it was not his opinion All men truly do inwardly murmr, but
none cry out. And the Doctors themselves that sat nere Boniface the ninth,
seeing this so manifest corruption, partly could not dissemble it, and partly
were divided in opinions concerning the remedy thereof. Theodorick a Niem
says, Many also skillful in the Law, Theodor. a Niem. l. 2. c. 32.
by reason of the continuation of Simonie in the Church of Rome, in the time of
the said Boniface, would publicly argue and hold, That the Pope could not
commit Symonie, yea in benefices and goods Ecclesiastical, by interuention of
gain or covenant of money. What will they not say, as that harlot in the
Apocalypse, I sit as Queen, neither can be a widow, I cannot err; And what
readier way is there unto all mischief? The Author adds, Which seemed unto
me very namely in this, says he, that dispensations, which should be done
with great deliberation of his brethren, he did them in his Chamber after the
manner Bullator, scriptor, and forsan numerator, the maker of the Bulls, the
writer, and teller of money; But he also adds, In his life time some Doctors
in Divinity, and others learned in the sciences, grieuing that Symonie was so
commonly and openly committed in the Court, and that many Iurists and others
obstinatly affirmed, that it might be so done, arguing to the contrary,
determined conclusions which they reduced into volumes, yet with great fear;
That the Pope, in selling Ecclesiastical benefices by bargain made, was a
Simmoniack, that is, the successor of Simon Magus not of Simon Peter; because
he is not established for to sell them, but to bestow them freely on persons
worthy. But in all Nations there arose up some that passed further: Vincent at
Venice, about the year 1400, An. 1400.
a great Preacher and famous Prophetiae editae Parisijs in 8. ex varijs
authoribus collectae and ibi Epist. S.V incentij.
affirming That religious persons that ought to be the way of life unto souls,
are throughout the world become unto them the way of perdition; That Priests
fish for honors, but not for manners; That the bishops (none excepted) have no
care of the souls of their Diocese; That they sell the Sacraments for money:
yea he passes so far as to pronounce the Pope to be Antichrist himself. In
a certain Epistle also printed at Paris, entitled The Epistle of S. Vincent,
he says, That Antichrist is already in the world, whom he expected not to
come from the Jews, or from ancient Babylon, but already beheld him reigning
at Rome. In Bohemia, Mathius Parisiensis wrote a great volume de Antichristo,
where he proves that he is come by this, Lo here is Christ, lo there; That
the Monks themselves have left him, and have sought unto themselves other
saviors, in whom they boast, as Frauncis, Dominick and others; The word of God
being neglected, they bring in their Monkish rules; That such like hypocrites
reigning in the Church, are those Locusts of which the Apocalypse speaks;
Neither is it to be doubted but that Antichrist is come, who has seduced all
the Universities and all the Colleges of learned men, so that Elias, both
refuted the errors of Antichrist, and discover him to the world. And he
inferteth in this Book, the opinions of many famous men, nere to those times,
concerning this matter; amongst whom he extolleth the Divines of Paris, who
perceiving the tares of the begging Friars to grow, brought to light again and
published the book of William de S. Amor, Of the perils of the last times,
which before time Alexander the fourth had labored to abolish. These Doctors
(says he, in his Preface) faithful in Christ, etc. Whose multitude was then
the health of the world, acknowledging partly

In England, John Puruey Disciple of Wickliff, wrote many books in defense of
his doctrine, but among others a Commentary upon the Apocalypse, the Title
whereof was Ante centum annos; There he openly says, Seven years are passed,
since generally the Pope of Rome was published to be that great Antichrist, by
the Preachers of the Gospel, namely from the year 1382. And behold how God
works in our infirmities his own glory, I never had written such like
things against Antichrist and his, if they had not imprisoned me, for to make
me hold my peace. An. 1490.
there were taken of them four hundred and more, and examined, who testified,
That this had been the profession of their ancestors, Walsingham in
Hypodeigmate Neustirae, and in Henrico 2. Idem in Richard. 2.
as also does the writer of the English history, in the year 1401, speaking
of the persecution of the Lollards, imputes to them the same doctrines as to
the Waldenses; howsoever others maliciously disguise the same: and by that name
were especially called the disciples of Wickliffe, who had drawn many after
them from the year 1389. Moreover, their Priests (says he) more Pontificum,
after the manner of Bishops, An. 1401.
created new Priests, affirming that every Priest had as much power of binding

61. PROGRESSION.
Of Benedict the thirteenth, and Innocent the seventh, and of the faith they
promised before they entered the Popedom, and how they afterward performed the
same. Of the contentions between the Pope and the Romans The solemn oath
taken by Gregory the twelft, to procure the union of the Church, and how he
performed the same: And of the sundry 23. into the Popedom, and his most
infamous departure.

TO Boniface in his obedience succeeds Cosmarus Cardinal de S. Cruce, named
Innocent the seventh; but before they proceeded to election, the Cardinals
took a solemn oath, That whosoever were chosen Pope, for the better effecting
Peter de Luna, called Benedict the thirteenth, created in Auignion, did yield
to perform the like oath. Thus have we here two riuals, Benedict the
thirteenth, and Innocent the seventh. Benedict when he was Legate in Spain,
before the Kings, Princes, Prelates, Clergy, and people, blamed openly Clement,
to the king of France and University of Paris, protesting in his sermons,
Theodor. a Ny. l. 2. c. 33.
and public acts, That if he came to succeed him, he would leave nothing
undone pertaining to the same: which was the cause that many Princes upon
Boniface, no more resolved to leave the Popedom than the other: Which the
Frenchmen perceiving, set Benedict at liberty, and again acknowledged him.
Innocent the seventh on the other part, Platina in Jnnocent. 7.
successor of Boniface, who before his Popedom was wont to say, That it was
the fault only of the Popes, that this schism so pernicious to all
Christendom, was Benedict at his instance repugned not the same, he sent the
Romans to Lewis his nephew, lodged in the hospital of the holy Ghost, tanquam
ad certum carnificem (says Platina) as to a certain hangman, who cut the
throats of eleven of them, and cast them out at window, saying, That by this
and none other means the schism and seditions were to be taken away. Thus
they performed the faith they promised before their Popedom.

Boniface, as we have seen, had spoiled the Romans of their liberty, with the
hope of profit by the Jubilee, who not long after made them feel his cruel
tyranny. Innocent being come to the Popedom, took the same course. The
chiefest and most honorable of the people, being willing to return to their
ancient liberty, entreat Innocent to restore unto them the state of the
Commonwealth, and namely to put into their hands again the Capitol, Ponte
Miluio, and the castle S. Angelo: and in this they were borne out by the
Colonni. On the contrary the Vrsini, their adversaries, disputed, That it were
better the city should be governed by the Pope; and thereupon arose sedition,
combats, and slaughters, in the midst of the city, and whatsoever violences
are wont to be done in civil dissentions. Colonni bring in Ladislaus king of
Hungary and Naples, into the city: The Pope on the other part one Muschard^,
a great captain of the Church, and both of them with great forces. But when he
saw himself to be the weaker, he fell to capitulation, and released Campania
to Ladislaus for certain years, to the people and the Colonni the Capitol,
and the government of the city, on condition, That the officers should be
approved and allowed by him: and upon this Ladislaus departed the city. And
scarcely is he returned into his kingdom, but the Pope continues his former
cruelty by his nephew, so that the fire increased so much in the city, that
Innocent goes to Viterbe, Theodor. l. 2. c. 34. 35. 39. 41.
whence notwithstanding a while after he is called back by the people, who
were weary of so many and so great Innocent, Ladislaus would take occasion to
invade the city; and having there strengthened his affairs, he sent forth his
thundering Bulls against Ladislaus. But as concerning the union, Benedict being
solicited by the Frenchmen, L. 2. c. 38.
deals with Innocent to grant a safeconduct to some of his, to treat with him
about the union. Innocent suspecting that he went about some guile, refuses to
do it: Whereupon Benedict excusing himself, often says, That there is no
want in him; and in his Epistles published, casting all the fault on Innocent,
who could hardly save himself from blame. Theodorick notes, though very
favorable to him, That he made question of it at Viterbium, Whether he were
held to make the said union, calling (says he) that which, when his election
was in hand in the Conclaue, was said to be altogether expedient; whereby no
little suspicion against Innocent arose among them of the Court, murmuring and
saying one to the other, That indeed he would not make the union. And he could
hardly appease them, but that when he was fallen into a palsy, L. 2. c. 41.
they said it came by the judgment of God upon him. Neither proceeds he any
further in this business, being prevented by death in the year 1406. An. 1406.


Angelus Corrarius, a Venetian, succeeds him, being Cardinal of S. Mark,
named Gregory the twelfth: Theodorick calls him every where Errorium, as
being created by error; Theodor. l. 2. c 42.
Ink, paper, and time (says he) would be wanting to him that should Which he
says he has treated of more particularly in his book entitled Nemus
vnionis, The Forest of union. Notwithstanding (says he) many Kings and Princes
do yet cleave unto them, damnably fostering them in their obstinacy, schism,
and heresy, and uphold them in error by making them their Idols, etc. As if
(proh dolor) these things are so notorious and manifest, that by no
tergiuersation they can be hid; for the Catholic faith is thereby obscured,
all religion suffers shipwreck, Christians are confounded in discords,
wars, and other calamities do grow, the fear of God, and shame of men, and
virtues, are departed far from the rulers, and from inferiors of all
estates, etc. Many Archbishops which governed the people, forsaking for the
most part the love of religion and honesty, conform themselves to Lay men in
their habit, manners, and follies. And here speaks a Popes Nemus abouesaid.
But we will abridge these things in few words, least we should be over tedious
to the Reader.

This Gregory then when his election was in hand, did himself first propound
the solemn oath of the union: neither would he receive the Crown before that
in a most frequent assembly he had ratified the same; Theodor. a Nyem. l. 3.
c. 1. and 2.
and which is more, he had made a sermon concerning this matter, on this text,
Prepare ye the way of the Lord, exhorting the Cardinals to take pains in so
necessary a work; so that he was commonly thought to be the man by whom
salvation should be wrought in Israel. The sum of the oath, made first in the
Conclaue, and after confirmed in the chapel Marie, the holy Apostles Peter
and Paul, and taken upon the holy Gospel, was this, That he that should be
chosen Pope, should, being requested thereto, leave the Popedom, provided that
the Antipope did the same likewise: That he and the Cardinals should presently
after the election admonish all Princes to set to their hands to this
necessary work: That in the mean time they would create no Cardinals, and
would faithfully procure by all means, that within one year this schism
should be ended. These things were so done, that none of them could be
absolved from that. And we shall see by the proceedings, Lib. 3. c. 4. and 5.
Gregory writes to Benedict in this sense, and Benedict the like to him
again; and they seem in these letters to deal in good earnest. But the
Author notes, That whereas it had been decreed, that they should send these
letters by some notable person, Gregogorie sent them, per quendam conuersum
Ordinis Praedicatorum, L. 3. c. 5. 6.
By a certain Friar conuertite of the Order of Preachers: and the letters also
that he wrote to the Princes, he sent per Lollardos seu begardos, By certain
petie Friars whom he loved: When in the mean time this notable hypocrite ever
protested, That he would go to the place assigned, though he should journey
on foot with a staff; neither would he grant any Gregory should send his
Legates into all parts, within three months, and namely to Benedict; but he
stays of purpose till the last day but one, of the three months, and then
made his nephew Anthony chief of the embassage, and committed the business
unto him. There then is concluded with Benedict, That both the Popes should
meet at the feast of S. Michael next, or of all Saints at the furthest, L. 3.
c. 13.
in the city of Sauona, which place, by reason of the commodity of the sea,
seemed fittest. This was approved with great applause of all the Princes: and
the Genowayes, to take away all scruple from Gregory, by their ambassadors
offer unto him their city, and all they had: but then so much the more does
Gregory allege his wily shifts and excuses, first, That the place was for
him unsafe, Genua and Sauona being in the power of the French, and in the
obedience of Benedict: which place nevertheless, when the matter was debated
with his nephew, was chosen, and which without doubt he had accepted of, that
he might reserve this excuse to his uncle: and yet hereupon those cities
yielded for his security whatsoever could any way be demanded. Secondly, He
enters into complot with Ladislaus king of Hungary, that he might defend him
against the pretended union, who had about him a certain Franciscan Friar,
guilty of many wickednesses, Daemonium meridianum, A devil of the midday,
working the work of darkness, who departed was interested in the like cause,
who would defend the kingdom of Sicilie against Lewis of Aniou his competitor,
no less than Gregory would the Popedom against Benedict. Thirdly, Idem ibid.
c. 16.
To uphold his Popedom hereafter, he aduanceth to great dignities his nephews
Paul and Mark, and other his kinsmen, to whom he committed the government of
the Provinces and principal castles of the Church: so that he thought not at
all of giving over his Pontifical robes, as he had promised. Fourthly, C. 17.
He openly professes, That he cannot, neither ought to be at Sauona on the day
assigned, because what diligence soever he made, he could not have till then
the galleys of Venice. And when it was answered him, That he galleys of Genua
were then ready for That he was a Venetian, and that he worthily had the
Genowayes in suspicion, for the ancient hatred that was between the Genowayes
and Venetians: And moreover, to pass by land to Sauona he could not, for want
of commodities necessary; and so, intricatly denied to pass thither by land
or by sea. Wherefore he appointed four and twenty of the best learned Lawyers
of his Court, to give their advice upon this question, Whether by the treaty
of the present instrument celebrated at Marseilles, he ought to go to the
place of Sauona. And when all of them testified by their writing, That he was
bound to go, he was not ashamed to say, this Father of discords, That he
suspected them, as favoring more his Cardinals than him. Fifthly, He
couenanteth secretly with Ladislaus, That Colonni against the people of Rome,
who should enter in by night, with intention that they should besiege himself
in the castle of S. Angelo (into which by complot he retireth;) and his
Cardinals, who knew nothing of the matter, went to Viterbium: this fained siege
serving him for an excuse to exempt him lawfully from performing his promised
appearance. And let the Reader here judge with what conscience he brought in
(for to shift off the union) so great a confusion into the city. But when the
soldiers were dispersed after prey, and spared not the Nuns themselves, the
Vrsini through despair take arms, gather the people together, and set upon
the ambuscado laid for them by the Colonni: in which onset they took them, and
led them ashamed about the castle, Gregory, whose detestable conspiracy
thereby vanished to nothing. Sixthly, He faineth that this victory of the
Vrsini was his, and sends congratulatorie letters thereof to the Cardinals to
Viterbium, and in recompense of his valor gives to Paul of Vrsini the
earldom of Marni, for a number of years; and made them believe by sending
away his carriage before to Viterbium, that he indeed minded to go to Sauona:
But he himself followed a far off, and arrived near unto them about the
month of August; and when they urged him to it, he makes known unto them,
that he would do something for his nephews before he left his charge: and
lastly pleaded, That poverty was the cause he could not undertake so great a
journey. And then to take away L. 3. c. 18, 19.
by a certain day, and that very short, to send every man his sums of
money (he was taxed at) to the chamber. And other exquisit means of extorting
moneys are invented, Ibid. c. 20.
for to satisfy him: whereby in a short time great abundance of money
extorted from many, was continually brought in abyssum camerae, into the
bottomless gulf of the chamber. And as for his nephews Mark, Paul, and
Francis, to them are given with mere and mixed empire, power of the sword, and
all kind of temporal jurisdiction; to the first Faenza, to the second Furli,
and to the third Vobeta, notable cities with their counties; also Corneto, and
certain towns and castles in the country of Rauenna, for a supply, by the
like right, to Gregory brings in the Cardinals beseeching him, That he
would vouchsafe to reward his nephews, for the great pains and sweat they had
employed for the union of the Church: who at their most humble and most instant
request consents to pass over unto them this donation, by which they are
made, if not heirs, Cap. 21.
yet at least Legataries of S. Peter. Seventhly, When he could no longer with
honesty abide at Viterbium, at last in the month of September he comes to
Sienna, and there he delayeth them till January, driving out the time in
receiving of ambassadors which came unto him from all parts: but when he knew
that these delays were undoubtedly suspected, he faineth, that he was
presently before he held in commendam, and the Archbishopric of York in
England, which he said was vacant, although it was not vacant. And to all these
things the Cardinals gave their assent, and thereupon are made their letters
and process. Eighthly, Benedict and his at the feast of S. Michael arrive at
Sauona, for our Frenchmen spurred them forwards. Then he began to say, That he
had no Benedict. Therefore to draw the time in length he sends to the
Marquess, who writes him back, That he should be welcome* and also for the
setting forward of the union promises he will leave nothing undone. But the
wars were so hot in Lombardie, that there was no likelihood he would take his
journey that way. His evil intention also appeared in this, That when the
Bishop of Tudert and Anthony de Butrio, famous Lawyers, whom he had sent to
Benedict and to the king of France, had met him at Whereat this Anthony de
Butrio went home, and overwhelmed with sorrows, within a while after died. L.
3. c. 22.
In the mean time he wholly gave himself to the scraping together of money on
all sides by his deputies whom he had left at Rome, not sparing the demaines of
Churches and Monasteries, neither chalices, crosses, candlesticks, and other
jewels of gold and silver, which were every where sold for the payment of his
tributes. Ninthly, The Archbishop of Bourdeaux, Cardinal of Santiquatro, a
Prelat of great reputation, arrived at Sauona, where he had been honorably
Benedict, and seeing Gregory the twelfth absent, he went to Sienna with
intention to persuade him; he exhorts him morning and evening, and can
nothing prevail. Also the Cardinal de Quinquecclesijs, an Hungarian, though
decrepit with age, went thither likewise in vain: yea falling grievously
sick, word was brought him, That the Pope and his nephews gaped after his
mouables, and cast lots as it were on his horses, money, and jewels: Truly
(says he) he shall neither have me nor my goods; and without delay having
made ready his coach, commanded to be carried in it (though it were the depth
of Winter) so far as to Venice. Yet because among so many delays he must
needs pretend some color of reason to the world, by fair promises he wins
unto him certain begging Friars, L. 3. c. 23.
That if he should give over his Popedom, to the end that the union might
thereupon follow, he should in so doing sin mortally, and should damn his
soul for ever to be tormented in the pains of hell, by reason of the dangers
of souls, and great hurt of bodies that might ensue thereupon. Abusing with
such lies the simple people. That if Gregory and his Cardinals and Courtiers,
had gone, or should go to Sauona, they all had been, or should be the sons
of death. And this in the mean time whilst solemn processions were made at
Sienna for the union, in which he himself was present, covered with the cloak
of hypocrisy, bestows large Indulgences on such as followed them, and on
Beguardis, by certain Monks whom he affected. Tenthly, New counsels seem to
give unto him new causes of delays: He treats with the governor of Luca to
be received into the city, that being nearer to Benedict he may the more
commodiously confer with him, persuading himself that he should be denied,
and so might have a new excuse; whereas he on the contrary willingly yields
to his request. Then Gregory requires fifty of the best families in hostage:
an dishonest request, which nevertheless is granted him, least any thing should
hinder so necessary a work. Yet here he finds out a new subtle shift, That
he would not enter into the city, but would have the castle of Pietra Santa in
his which was the strongest place of the said Governor; which he also
grants him even without hostages. At length having no more pretenses to make,
he enters into Luca, trifling away the time till the beginning of the month of
August, all the times before assigned being long ago past. And when the
ambassadors of Princes were instant with both of them on every side, they have
the same answer from each of them, That the fault is not in him that the union
goes not forward: in which doubtless they both agreed together. Gregory in
the mean time privately with his Chamberlain and his nephews disposed of all
businesses, for money, of Bishoprics, Abbeys, gouernements, and expeditions;
although in public he was ignorant of the things belonging to the Popedom,
and ridiculous in his Benedict was come as far forward as Porto-venere, to
the end that he might seem to perform his duty: whereupon Gregory is by
his followers with greater instance urged. Then being given into a reprobat
sense, against his oath so oftentimes repeated, he resolved to create new
Cardinals, namely his nephews, though his Cardinals persuade him to the
contrary, That this would be to give Benedict some colorable reason to say,
That he was the cause that the union was not made; till at last overcome with
the importunat requests of the ambassadors of Polonia, Prussia, and other
nations, expostulating Laetare Sunday, Nicholas de Luca, a Carmelite Friar,
durst preach against him even in his presence; whom about the evening, in the
sight of all the ambassadors, he commanded to be carried to prison, from
which he was hardly at their earnest requests at length delivered, yet on this
condition, That he should preach no more: Cap. 4. and 25.
neither durst any man thenceforth go up into the pulpet, unless with
resolution to please his ears. Many Bishops also, least they should
communicate with him at Easter, some one way some another withdrew themselves
from him; yea many ambassadors returned into their countries: so that, least
he should altogether lose his dignity, he determined at length for once
Benedict: There he complains, That Benedict had drawn the time out so long,
by being obstinat in retaining still the place of Sauona (so that you would
say, that there were great wrong done him) and offers to meet him, if he
please, at Pisa. Benedict on the contrary, in his answer shows, That he was
proceeded as far as to Porto-venere, that therefore Gregory might come so
far as to Pietra Sancta, a town under his obedience, where the Lord of Luca
promised to give him his only son, some of his near kinsmen, and forty
citizens besides, for hostage: That for his part he had offered to commit
himself to the faith of his countrymen the Venetians, and many other things,
which would have cut off all delay: And that whereas now he makes to Gregory
and the Lord of Luca determine of the whole business. The resolution of
Gregory was at last, after many tergiuersations, That both of them should
request the Florentines by their ambassadors, to assign unto them a safe and
fit place, because that at the request of one of them alone they would not
easily do it. But during these delays Ladislaus king of Hungary, by the
counsel of Gregory, is received into Rome by Paul Vrsini governor of the
city, Gregory therefore takes no more pains for a place to set forward the
union, being now assured to break it off by the assistance of Ladislaus; and
so returning to his nature, against his oath, and notwithstanding any thing
that the Lord of Luca objected against it, he created four new Cardinals, Cap.
31.
and added unto them a kinsman of Anthony his Chamberlain, and Gabriel
Gondemar, his nephews, a protonotarie of Vdena, and one John a Dominicke
Friar, one of them that preached at Siena by his commandment, That with a
good conscience and without the damnation of his soul, he could not consent to
the union. The old Cardinals labored to get away from him, but he charge
them under most grievous pains, that they should not depart; yea, if the
regent of Luca had not by his wisdom provided for them, their persons had bin
in no safety. But the Cardinal of Liege, a man of a great spirit, in disguise
escaped from Luca, and got to Pisa; yet being discovered Gregory, he continued
there not without great danger of his life. In like manner all the rest by
little and little steal away, being moved neither with his promises nor
threats, from which they publicly appeal, and solemnly signify the same
unto him sitting in consistory amiddest his new Cardinals. The Cardinal of
Liege, first makes known to the world by his Letters, Cap. 33. and 34.
That God ought rather to be obeyed; for if (says he) the Pope command or
would constrain to such things as tend to the destruction of souls, it is
most manifest that he ought not be obeyed, neither by divine nor humane right;
yea and that man meriteth, who for not obaying in such a case does suffer his
severe censures. And thus have we now a twofold Schism, of Benedict against
Gregory, and of Gregory against his own

Now upon this departure of the Cardinals from Gregory, Benedict making use of
this occasion, objecteth unto him his crafty sleights, which at length has
burst forth into so evil an issue. Whereupon, he withdrew himself into the
country of Arragon, where he was borne, seeing there was no more hope of the
union. But Gregory, seeing him departed, and being not yet weary of
deceiving, assigns a Council at Aquileia, and to strengthen the same,
creates again new Cardinals; whilst on the other side Benedict appoints
likewise his Council in Arragon: Both of them ever under pretense of union, but
which neither of both desires, both laboring to assure thereby the Popedom to
himself alone: Benedict perceiving, they find means to escape away from him
and come to Pisa. There the Cardinals of both sides joined together, and by the
consent of the Florentines, Lords of Pisa, determined to hold there a Council.
Thither are both after a solemn manner cited, to be present either personally,
or by their proxy, having fit and due commission. Both do testify, That it
belongs not to them to call a Council. The Cardinals on the contrary
maintain, that seeing the Popedom is doubtful and divided, neither of the
striuers for it could call a Council, because it would be a particular and not
an universal one, where a part only should be present. Cap. 36. 37. 38.
Wherefore they pass further, and entreat the Emperor and Princes of the
Empire, the Kings Cap. 44.
they all with one voice pronounce, That Benedict and Gregory damnably
contending for their Popedom, are pronounced truly and notoriously in a
petition presented and exhibited to the sacred and universal Synod, That they
have bin and are very Schismatikes, nourishers, defenders, favorers,
approuers, and obstinat maintainers of an old Schism; heretics strayed from
the faith, ensnared with notorious crimes and enormous periuries, notoriously
scandalizing the universal holy Church of God, with incorrigibilitie,
contumacie, and obstinacy, in notorious, evident and manifest crimes: and for
these and other causes, have made themselves unworthy of all ipso facto cast
away and deprived of God and of the sacred canons, and also cut off from the
Church, etc. Moreover, all Christians of all sorts, yea Emperors, Kings, and
others in any dignity, are declared for ever absolved from their obedience,
forbidding the faithful of Christ in no wise to obey or intend to obey the
foresaid striuers for the Popedom, or either of them; neither shall they yield
them either counsel, help or favor, or receive them, or repair unto them,
under pain of excommunication etc. Moreover all and singular proceedings, and
sentences of excommunication, suspension, or other censure and pain of
privation, also of orders and dignities, etc. given and thundered 1408) have
been and are disadnulled, An. 1408.
revoked and made void. Which when Benedict understood, swelling with choler,
he creates twelve Cardinals in Arragon; Gregory as many in Germany; but some
of the wiser of them refused the hats. And for an vpshot of his deceitful
slights, he fears not to publish, That all difficulties removed, he was
ready to repair to what place the Emperor Robert, Sigismund king of
Hungary, and Ladislaus king of Sicilie should like of. Cap. 46. 47. 48.
But seeing (says the Author) that there were manifestly so many enimities
and rancours, for the causes aforesaid, between Robert, Sigismund, and
Ladislaus, it seems impossible by any reason or humane wisdom, that they
should be able to agree together, how to make a union in the Church. I would we
could have as good a witness of the crafty wiles of Benedict, though this man
does in many places lively enough represent them, whence it is apparent that
they strove to excel each other in wickedness: But it was needful that the
guiles of Gregory should be more exactly showed, as him whom they do rather
approve and enregister in the Catalogue of Popes. Theodor. a Niem. l. 2. c. 33.
Furthermore, he at length, having suffered many troubles from Ladislaus, who
commands him to be obeyed in his jurisdictions. In the mean time the
Cardinals of both obediences, chose Pope, Peter Philargas of Candie, by Nation
a Greek, a Franciscan Friar, and named Alexander the fifth, he that was wont
to say, That he had bin a rich bishop, a poor Cardinal, Cap. 51. 52.
and a beggarly Pope. A man (says the Author) living delicately, and drinking
of strong wines, who wholly governed himself by the counsels Balthazar Cossa
Cardinal Deacon; who was afterward John the three and twentieth, the most
wicked among all the Popes. Therefore, says Theodorick, he was no sooner come
to the Popedom, but that all things brake forth into unbridled
licentiousness, so that in the ten months that he reigned, he brought more
infamy to the seat, than others in so many years: The said Pope also inserted
in the signature of the Roll that he made for the familiars of Cardinals, that
he had made that signature so largely, because that every one of the same Lord
Cardinals in the Conclaue had promised, That if he were chosen Pope, he would
grant all things that their familiars should request; Which he particularly
describes, the Reader may see further there. So hard a thing it was, even in a
matter so long consulted of, after Theodorick finisheth that History. Baptista
Panaetius of Ferrara, a Carmelite, tells us, that Balthazar Cossa,
Monstrelet. vol. 1. cap. 62. Baptista Panaetius Ferrariens. Sermon. 56.
the inward familiar of Alexander (who after was John the three and twentieth,
or as some others say the four and twentieth) nevertheless that he might
succeed him, poisoned him by Marsilius de Parma his Physician, hired with
abundance of money; and that being nere his death, he said to his Cardinals,
that which Christ had to his Apostles, My peace I give unto you, my peace I
leave with you. How could this slave of Satan, Prince of the world, give that
peace which the world cannot Wenceslaus king of Bohemia against the Emperor
Robert in Germany, and in Italy had crowned Lewis of Aniou king of Sicilie,
and sent him against Ladislaus, by his own absolute power, without any form of
law?

But it may be they will be more wise and circumspect in choosing his
successor. Being then at Bononia, where that Balthaser resided as Legate, or
rather ruled as Lord, he commands the Cardinals to elect a Pope that should
be to his liking; And they offered unto him many, of which he thought none fit
enough, Johan. Stella in Pontificibus.
till at last they requested him plainly to express his opinion, Give me
(says he) the cloak of S. Peter, and I will give it to him that is to be
Pope; which done, he put it on his own Papa su^^ego, It is I am Pope. How
far from Christ, whose Vicar he makes himself? I am not come (says he) of
my self. And though the Cardinals did in no sort approve the same, yet none
durst at that time speak against it. But he fearing least in tract of time
they should attempt something against him, dispatcheth Legates presently into
Germany to the Princes, to entreat them that the Emperor Robert being
deceased, they would chose for king of the Romans, Sigis^^nd king of Hungary,
whom to that and he commends for all kind of virtues requisite. Which having
obtained, he assigns a Council at Rome, under color to set the Crown on
his head, but indeed that by his aid, whom thus he had obliged unto him, he
might firmly establish his Nicholas Clemang^^ Archdeacon of Bayeux, a man
famous in those times, has left written in a certain Epistle of his, Almost
four years ago (says he) at the great instance of some, that most
perfidious Balthazar lately deposed from Peter's seat (which he most filth^lie
defiled) had assembled a Council at Rome, in which were very few strangers,
held some sessions with some Italians and courtiers, wearing out the time in
matters superfluous, and nothing belonging to the profit of the Church. And
when before the first meeting of the Council, Mass was celebrated after the
accustomed manner, for to inuocat the holy Ghost; when the Council was set,
and Balthazar himself in a chair provided for him higher than the rest,
behold a direful and deadly Owl, the messenger (as they say) ever of death or
calamity, coming forth of her (says he) I learned from a faithful friend of
mine, who in those days came directly from Rome, and being adjured by me with
all vehemency, when by reason of the rareness I had begun to doubt of the
matter, he confirmed the things he had uttered to be most true. He added also,
That all they that were present there were brought into great contempt and
derision of this Council, and by little and little the whole Council But they
think it sufficiently provided for, when they caused this place and the like
to be quite raced out of books, yea whole books, according to their
accustomed good faith. In the mean time Benedict and Gregory retained still
on both sides the Papal dignity, notwithstanding their condemnation, the one
at Rimino in Romania, the other at Perpignan in the frontire of Spain, each
accompanied with their Cardinals, and vpholden by the Princes above mentioned:
and all Christendom was exceeding weary of so long a schism, whereunto after
so many years they had in vain sought remedy in the Council of Pisa.
Wherefore the Emperor Sigismund undertook to call a Council, and the better
to induce all Christian Princes John seem to be against it, either because he
hoped he should be thereby confirmed, by exclusion of others, through the
requital he expected from Sigismund, or rather for that he foresaw he could
not with their good leave deny a thing so just, Leonard. Aretinus An. 1413.
and so much desired. Yet Leonard Aretine, his Secretary, freely tells us,
That the Pope had secretly communicated his mind and intention with him*
saying, All lies in the place of the Council, neither would I have it in any
place where that is, appointed them. Which notwithstanding he mitigated* when
he sent them away: for after he had told them how great confidence he reposed
in their wisdom and fidelity, he tare before them the catalogue of places
that he had appointed them. Antonin. part. 3. c. 6.. 1.
I had purposed (says he) to name unto you certain places, from which ye
should by no means depart, but at this very instant I change my But he was
exceedingly astonished, when he understood that they had concluded with Sigismund
upon the city Constance, a place depending of the Empire, and situat beyond
Alps. There then do meet in the year 1414, the Emperor, Pope John, the
Cardinal of Raguse, An. 1414.
and others of the obedience of Gregory the twelfth, and in his name, Charles
Malatesta with special commission of renouncing the Popedom; and the
ambassadors moreover of the most part of Christian Princes: But not one man
from the obedience of Benedict, although Sigismund had taken the pains to go
to Perpignan, to persuade him in the presence of the king of Arragon, to
appear himself, or send his John the three and twentieth thoroughly perceived,
that his matters were in an evil place for him, notwithstanding that the
Archbishop of Mentz, and Frederick Duke of Austria, had promised him all
favor. Wherefore, unknown to the Cardinals, in disguised apparel, and with
small company, he escaped away by night to Schaffuze, and from thence he took
his course into Burgondie. Sigismund impatient to be so mocked, and believing
it to be some guile of the Duke of Austria, he commands him under pain of
confiscation of all his goods and honors, to represent or bring John forth ex
protectore proditor factus (says Anthonine) catches him by the way in his
flight, brings him back, and keeps him in safe custody for the Emperor,
at his pleasure to be delivered up at Constance. It remained to proceed against
him according to law, Henry de Pira, and John de Scribanis, Procurators of the
Council, undertook to prove against him innumerable crimes both before and
after his Popedom, and that by the testimony of Cardinals, Archbishops, and
other persons of note, his vices, exceeding voluptuousness, tyranny, Council.
Constant. Session. 11. art. 4. 21, 22.
homicides, empoysonings, simonie, sacrilege, heresy, impiety, infidelity,
notorious Atheism, or contempt of Divine majesty, as in the Acts of this
Council, second Session, are contained in fifty four articles, in which also
he is called Diabolus incarnatus, They specially note, That as a Heathen he
makes not any esteem of any office or service, That he said Mass running,
gave his graces and censures to merchants, to lay men, and married, to be
dispensed for a certain price, who sold them, and rendered to him an account;
and that he was wont to send them with all power into the most remote
Provinces: That he had sold many lands of the patrimony of the Church, yea
the Churches themselves of the city of Rome: That he had wastfully spent the
mouables, jewels, and relikes themselves, sold the head of S. John Baptist for
50000 ducats, which was kept at Rome in a certain Monastery of Nuns of S.
Syluester, which had been delivered if some citizens of Rome had not
discovered it, whom he cast into prison, and condemned and other crimes of
inconstancy, for which the wrath of God comes down on the children of
infidelity: That he had impoysoned Pope Alexander by master Daniel de Sancta
Sophia, his Physician, that he might make way for himself to the Popedom: And
to fill up the measure, by the persuasion of the devil he obstinatly said,
affirmed, and held opinion, That there is no life eternal, Session. 11.
neither any other after this; yea he said, and obstinatly believed, That the
soul of man dies and is extinct together there with the humane body, after
the manner of bruit beasts: and he said, That being Of which crimes being
certain he should be convicted, he has recourse by letters to Sigismund,
putting him in mind of that which he had before time done in his favor; In the
secret of our heart (says he) preferring you before all men living, we have
predestined you to be king of Romans. These are his words, and entreats him
to have his honor and state in recommendation. But the Fathers of the Council
send deputies to Sellas, a place in the Diocese of Constance (where he was
kept by the Duke of Austria) who heard him, and being heard and convicted by
the often confession of his own mouth, they condemn him. A definitive sentence
is pronounced against him, which notwithstanding was mitigated, when in this
despairefull estate he Forty articles (says Platina) and more, Platina in
Johan. 24.
were proved against this man, of which some (which could not be changed in
him) were judged to be against faith, and othersome scandalous to all
Christians. And he himself approved the sentence pronounced against him, for
just. And he is removed away thence to Heidelberg, under the custody of Lewis
of Bauaria Palatine, who kept him prisoner in his castle of Monheim, very
straightly, without any Italian servant, served only by Germans, with whom he
Gregory the twelfth, already decrepit and destitute of the support of
Ladislaus king of Sicilie, Charles Malatesta his Proctor appeared in Council,
having on him the Pontifical robes, which in token of renunciation he put off
before all the assembly. But Benedict having been very oftentimes cited in
vain, by sentence of the Council is declared to be a periurer, Session. 11.
a scandalizer of the Church, a fautor and entermedler of schism, an heretic
straying out of the way of faith; and for these causes is deprived of his
Papal dignity, and cut off from the Church, as a withered and dried member;
forbids all men therefore from obeying him, under pain of excommunication.
And though he were almost of all men forsaken, yet he continued still in
obstinacy, Idolum cum idolis suis Cardinalibus (says Krantzius) An Idol with
the Idols his Cardinals. Krantzius in Metrop. l. 9. c. 1. An. 1414.
Yea being at point of death, in the year 1414, he adiureth the Cardinals
which remained with him in the castle of Paniscola, that they should
incontinently choose him a successor, which was Giles Munion, Canon of Barcelon,
by them called Clement the eighth, who the fourth year after renounced his
charge. Of this Benedict was that saying of Gerson, very often repeated in
Council, There will be no peace to the Churches till Luna be taken away. So
much did Luna darken the Sun; so much also had these good Popes their hearts
set on the union of the Church.

It was meet that impiety of doctrine should grow after the measure of the
abuse Paulus Aemilius in Carolo 6.
Therefore we read, that this Benedict the thirteenth was the first that
instituted, That the Sacrament of the body of Christ should be carried before
him for the safeguard of his body, that so he might seem to have a protector
against his adversaries on earth, whom he believed to be none in heaven: which
without doubt he had invented by the example of the kings of Persia, who made
their god be carried before them. Alexander the fifth also, because he was a
Minorite, that he might gratify the Friars of that Order, Theodor. a Nyem. l.
3. c. vltim.
who wonderfully rejoicing at his creation, ran about the streets every day,
very many in troops together, as if they had been made a law, That all
Christians should be bound to believe the wounds of S. Francis; and in
veneration also of those wounds instituted a feast. These things, as we have
said before, although they are judged doubtful, yet are found in their own
Histories of those times. So John the four and twentieth, Waldensin Fasciculo.
for that Wicklif had translated the holy Scriptures into the English Tongue,
would needs have that translation of the Bible into the vulgar Tongue, to be
heresy in England. But our wise king, Charles the fifth, was of another mind,
when a little before he commanded that the sacred Bible should be translated
into the French Tongue, for his own and his peoples use. And let the Reader
judge of the inventions by the piety and honesty of the deuisors. In the
mean time the Council Council. Constant. Session. 13.
Although Christ after supper has instituted and administered to his Disciples
this venerable Sacrament, under both kinds of bread and wine, yet
notwithstanding, the authority of the sacred Canons, the laudable and approved
custom of the Church, has observed, and does observe, that this Sacrament
ought not to be finished after supper, etc. In which words this clause Non
obstante, notwithstanding, so odious (as we have seen) to the Church in former
ages, for that by it, added to the Popes Bulls, no laws so holy but were
revoked; now by the authority of this Synod manifestly abrogateth not only the
use of the Primitive Church, but the express commandment of the Lord
himself, in instituting a Sacrament of so great moment. And these things
extend to the year 1417. An. 1417.


OPPOSITION.
Theodorick, Theodor. a Nyem. l. 1. c. 7 and 8.
who was successively Secretary to Urban, Boniface, Innocent, Gregory, and
Alexander: Neither does he conceal from us the murmr and distraction of
minds that then was in the whole world, whilst some take part with one,
others, content with the conduct of their own Bishops, hold with neither: from
whence in the mean time this benefit did arise unto us, in this so great
mischief, That by occasion of this schism there was a way made unto the
truth, and the that whenever any schism shall arise in the Church, that the
Emperors Theodoricus the king, taken out of the Decree it self; and is much
offended that the Emperor Robert did so flatter and gently entreat Gregory the
twelfth, who should have compelled both parts to have restored the peace of the
Church. D. 17. C. Consilia Theud. l. 3. c. 9. and 10.
That the power of the Emperor does especially tend to the repressing of a
wicked and incorrigible Pope, scandalizing the Church; as it appears out of
the acts of the Roman Emperors and kings: where he alleges the example of
Otho the first, who came out of Germany to Rome, to chasten the disorderly and
stubborn behauior of John the 13, whom by the authority of the Council,
notwithstanding he were vpheld by his kindred and friends at Rome, he For
(says he) in those days the Pope had not so many temporalties as the Church
of Rome seems now to have, because that great Emperor Otho and his
successors, the second and third of that name, enriched the Church of Rome, and
other Churches in Italy and Germany, with secular dominions. And so it
manifestly appears in those books that were drawn of the donations made unto
the Church by the Emperors and kings of Rome, and are still kept in the
Apostolic treasury, or chamber. That from the pomp of these temporal
dominions sprung the neglect of spiritual things, tyranny gathered strength,
and divisions in one and the same Church increased. Against which Otho quickly
provided a remedy, extinguishing the two schisms at Rome, whereof the one
part had seized upon the Capitol, the other the castle S. Angelo; That the
Popes might not be judged but by God himself. But it were to be wished (says
he) that such an Emperor would arise in our times, that in this Labyrinth
would abolish the multiplicitie of books that are so increased by reason of
the multitude of writers touching this point, that an hundred Camels can hardly
carry them. For it is manifest how much it stands all Christians upon, that
the Pope be a man of pure conversation, no simoniacall or bloody person, no
adulterer, dice-player, drunkard, hunter, leacher, or public whoremaster (he
touches the Popes ulcers of those times) for who, knowing the Gregory the
twelfth, for his many treacheries, thus defended his cause, That we must rather
obey God than man. L. 3. cap. 34.
For if (says he) the Pope command those things, or enforce that to be done
that shall endaunger our souls, or bring them to perdition, it is manifest
that he is not to be obeyed either by the Law of God or man, as Augustine,
Ambrose, Beda, and others do affirm: yea, rather by not obeying, and for that
cause to endure his censures and seuerities, is meritorious. At the last
amongst so many confusions he thus concludes, Cap. 41.
But are these things the preambles to the coming of Antechrist? Truly
according to the opinion of our Savior, the Gospel having been preached
throughout the world, the consummation shall come, before which there shall be a
2. These. 2. Nisi veniat primum (...), except there come a departing first. And
therefore he shows how the Empire departed from Rome; And as for faith, it
was no where to be found. Whereupon he says, Tu portentorum locus es conformis
eorum
Cum Nilo portenta paris, nutris Crocodilos
Iam cum portentis reor exterminia sentis,
Si quid in his possem, facerem steritescere Matrem etc.

And Nilus-like where Crocodiles are fed:
Now like monsters race, thou art rarely seen,
Had I power, barraine had thy mother been.


Which two notes (says he) are evident in the Priesthood, and the kingdom;
Jdem. l. 3. c. 41.43.
And whether these be foretakens of the coming of Antichrist, let th^se judge
and examine that understand the sense and meaning of God himself. He therefore
(as we have said heretofore) looked not for Antichrist out of old Babylon, but
out of the bowels of the Church of Rome: For he that thought here of the
suburbs of Nemus Vnionis, printed at Basil, in the year 1566, where in six
books he sees down all the stratagems of the Popes of his time; the titles
are, of the first Via, the second Inuia, the third Semita, the fourth Inaqu^sa,
the fifth Colles reflex^, the sixth Labyrinthus: A work worthy the reading, and
so much the rather, because the principal acts of this schism are there
produced; especially in the sixth, he delivers his opinion touching the
schism between these two Popes, Behold (says he) that it appears by this
Epistle (that is to say, Theodor. a Nyem. Tract. 6. c. 12.
of the Cardinals) that these two old men contending And briefly he sets
down their subtilties. These two Lords seem to play together like two
Champions or Tilters, who have made an agreement not to hurt one another, and
yet entertain the people with a kind of show or ostentation, as if they would
do wonders. There he likewise produces the conclusions of the Doctors of
Bologne touching this schism, wherein they declare, first, That this schism
by their obstinacy and the long continuance thereof, Tract. 6. c. 16.
is turned to an heresy. Secondly, That in ancient schisms, if the lawful
Pope himself do not his best endeavors to extinguish them, he is to be
accounted a nourisher of them, and consequently of the heresy; and that the
Cardinals ought to forsake him, and to withdraw their Cap. 19.
In the nineteenth chapter Gregory and his adherents, who of the two was
thought to have the better right: It began with these verses, Perfide qui
phrenesi raptus Plutonis
Tartareis inuectus equis, haeresimque secutus.
Ausus es Ecclesiae tentare pericul^ sanctae.
Perfidious wretch carried with Plutoes frenzy
On hellish horses, and following Heresy,
Have dared to attempt the danger of holy Church.


If this man were thought to come from the devil, what shall we think of the
other? As for his Cardinals, they were tainted with all horrible wickedness,
yea Sodomie it self. In the selfsame style is that other written in the eight
and twentieth chapter, whose Author F. writes himself of Verona the faithful
servant of Christ. This sets out the nephews of Gregory and his Cardinals
in their colors, infamous for treachery, hypocrisy, simonie.

Iam Nero, iunque Magus, non vlli gratia gratis Affluxit vestrum, etc.
Now Nero, now Magus, never came grace gratis from you to any, etc.
And let not the Reader think it lost labor to read it out, nor that Epistle
of Theodorick in the four and twentieth chapter. Idem 24. Cap. 29.
In the nine and twentieth chapter he sets down an Epistle written at that
time in the name of Satan Emperor of the kingdoms of Acheron, to John
Dominick of the Order of Preachers, professor in Sixtus, chosen Bishop of
^aguse, whom he calls the scholar of perdition, the worshipper of our works,
to whom he wishes health, and pride everlasting. There he thanks him for his
good endeavors he used to break the union, and to excuse the perjuries of
Gregory, to put in practice his hypocrisy, luxury, simonie: thereby
discovering all the infamies both of the Pope and Cardinals of those times. But
the Author himself in the 39 chapter, in good earnest, and without jesting,
cunningly describes the manners of Ecclesiastical persons in Italy: Cap. 36.
and 37.
They are always careful (says he) to advance their brethren, kindred, and
nephews, honoring them with Ecclesiastical titles, at whose gates there are
seldom or never seen any poor. And if perhaps any poor body beg an alms
of a Bishop or Abbot, Gentes Camerae, the Gentiles of the Camber: and well may
they be so called, for Gentes are barbarous nations, having manners and laws
strange, and different from the laws of men using reason. For as Turks and
Tartarians use those unfortunate Christians that fall into their hands, roughly
and inhumanely, so these Gentes Camerae, Gentiles of the Chamber, being void of
all pity and piety, sp^y^ those new Ecclesiastical Prelates that are promoted
non propter Iesum tantum, not for the love of Jesus only, but for silver, if
there be any remaining for the expense of his journey homeward: so that being
freed from this Chamber, he may well say, Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator.

May boldly before the thief sing or say.


For all pretty, mercy, and clemency, have taken their flight from thence.
And if thou art to pay a thousand Florins in gold, and one of them want but a
halfepenie in weight, except than deliver one more weighty than that, or
supply that in silver which it wants in gold, there is no departing,
notwithstanding that what Florins they receive of others, they pay again to
others without weight and measure. And if a Prelat, within the year wherein he
is bound to pay the remainder, discharge not the Chamber, be he the most
excellent Touching the Popes of his time, well known to himself, he spoke
ingeniously: of Urban the sixth, Before the time of his election to be Pope, so
long as he was conversant in the Court of Rome, he was reputed humble and
devout; but he was no sooner settled in the Popedom, but he was changed into
another man: he began to tyrannize, ill demeaning Secum super hoc, vt aestimo
diabolo dispensante, the devil, as I think, dispensing with him for it, or
atleast wise joining with him in the execution thereof. Of Boniface the ninth.
He was of Of Innocent the seventh. In him virtue and vice was at variance: he
was a great dissembler, fiery in carnal affection: He enriched his kindred
with temporalties, and took no care to confirm the union in the Church, which
he had promised, and sworn to do. Of Gregory the twelfth. How he has and
does carry himself touching his kindred, and that union that is to be made by
him, (...) is apparent enough. And these four gave no alms, which is a sign
of damnation, and though a fault in all, yet worst in And this he writ being
notarie of the Apostolic letters, An. 1408.
in the year 1408. There was likewise an Epistle directed to this Gregory,
which he calls delusorie of the officers of the Church of Rome, wherein he is
called, The damnable forerunner of Antichrist. Neither is Benedict his
competitor forgotten therein. There they protest, That the world from thence
forward will make no account of their excommunications, but rather make a jest
of them, since it manifestly appears, that they both draw men into open
perdition, being the one and the other unworthy of the Popedom; especially
Gregory, to whom they attributed most, was a drunkard, an heretic, a
destroyer Gabriel, who was afterward Eugenius the fourth, whom they call his
first borne, sprung from his raines; and of the Cardinal of Raguse, they say
he was a Demoniacall Monk, an infernal Legate: and the like of diverse others.
The Author in the end concludes, That this schism was come to that pass,
that the Princes of both parts contemned these Popes, and nothing regarding
their Bulls, knit themselves in friendship, alliances, and marriages one with
the other; in such sort that a man might truly say, that all things on both
sides were doubtful, We have neither a true Pope, nor a true king of the
Romans. Behold here again that succession they boast of. He likewise writ a
treatise of the and attributes the right to the Emperor. Henry Token,
Deligat of the Bishop of Magdeburge in the Council of Basil, makes mention of
him in his treatise, That the Council is above the Pope.

Here our France does the rather offer it self to our consideration, because
one of these contendants was then resident at Auignion. Clement therefore being
departed, the Cardinals chose Petrus de Luna, called Benedict. Froissard says,
That the election was made upon condition, If it pleased the king of France and
his Counsel, otherwise he was not to be received: yea, that when he gave the
king to understand of his Popedom, he carelessly answered, That it was
doubtful whether he He sent therefore unto him some of the most learned of
the University of Paris, as master John of Gigencourt, master Peter Playons,
and others, to admonish him, That the Christian faith was much weakened by this
schism, and that the Church could not long continue in that state: In so much
that the University of Paris was not of opinion, that the Clergy seeking
grace and favor, should send their petitions to Auignon, notwithstanding that
Benedict had before opened the fountain of grace to all Clergy men: which the
king likewise forbad by their counsel, until it were otherwise determined.
The Duke of Britain did the like, notwithstanding some Princes of France
favored Benedict, because he denied them nothing. The king therefore without
the knowledge Benedict were less pleasing unto him, they would enter the
Conclaue again to choose another to his own contentment. The Legate being
heard, and withal a Friar Minorite, who resided with the king in behalf of
Boniface Pope of Rome, it was concluded in Council, not without the consent of
the University, That both the riuals should be commanded to resign the
Popedom, Froissard. l. 4. c. 58.
and all the Cardinals their Cardinalships, and that certain Clergiemen, that
were men known to be honest and of a good conscience, should be chosen out of
Germany, France, and other Which sentence of the University the king
approved, and so did the Dukes of Orleance and Burgundy, and their
Counselors. Whereupon he sent embassadous to the kings of Germany, Bohemia,
Hungary, and England (undertaking for the kingdom of Castille, Navarre,
Arragon, Sicilia, Naples, and Scotland) that they should yield their obedience
unto him to whomsoever he and his realm should grant his. There was much time
spent in these embassages, but yet with this fruit, That Richard king of
England agreed to whatsoever the king of France thought convenient: and the
Emperor Wenceslaus, in the year 1398, with many other great Petrus de Alliaco
Bishop of Cambray, should go in their names to Boniface at Rome, and there
should summon him to renounce his Popedom, that a new election might be made;
wherein that right which he had should be still reserved: and having received
his answer, he should likewise do the like to Benedict; the Emperor and king
promising each of them for the kings and Princes their allies and confederats,
to confirm this Boniface to answer, That he would willingly yield to
whatsoever he should be by them advised; provided, that Benedict should
renounce the name of Pope, and then he would be ready wheresoever it should
please them to appoint the Conclaue. And yet the Romans at that time murmuring
hereat, because they feared they should thereby loose that gain they hoped for
by the Jubilee, he answers them ingeniously, My sons, assure your selves I
will continue Pope, and whatsoever these kings shall determine, I will never
stand to their arbitrament. This was concealed from the Bishop of Cambray: He
therefore Benedict to submit himself, since Boniface his obedience depended
thereupon. Whereupon our Nobles and Prelates assembled at Paris, whither
nevertheless the king, out of his wisdom, thought it not good to call the
Archbishops of Rheimes, Rouen, and Sens, because the Pope had many ways bound
them unto him. There, by the council of the University of Paris, it was
determined, That the king should presently send Monsieur Boucicant, his
Marshall, into the parts of Auignon, who either by treaty, or any other
means, should endeavor that Benedict should yield his Popedom to the Counsel
of the king of France; and that the Church to the utmost bounds of the
kingdom, should follow neither part, until by the The Bishop of Cambray
arrived at Auignon, leaving the Marshall at Lions, there to attend the news:
but as he delivered his message, Benedict (says Froissard) changed color, and
with a loud voice said, They will that I yield to renounce my Popedom, whilst
I live I will never do it; And I would have the king of France to understand,
that what he appoints I will not do, but I will retain my name and Popedom
to the death. To which the Bishop answered, I took you to be wiser than I find
you: take a day to consider better of the matter with your brethren. Whereupon
they being assembled together, and the Cardinal of Amiens showing, That
whether they would or no, they must be obedient to the kings, and that the king
of I will not resign (says he) nor submit my Popedom to any treaty, for any
King, Duke, Earl, whosoever. And with those words he dismissed the Bishop,
adding withal, You shall say to our son of France, That hitherto we have
taken him for a good Catholic, whom now we see by a wrong information fallen
into error, but he shall repent him of it. Whereupon the Bishop went presently
to the Marshall Boucicant, who was come as far as Port S. Andrew, nine
leagues distant from Auignon: who presently upon the news sent for the
nobility and men of war from all parts, stopping the passages both by land
and water, and by a Herald denounced war against Benedict who he knew would
come to serve him, being bound thereunto both by propinquitie in blood, and that
obedience which he did owe unto the Pope: and that they were frighted with
small matters. But the Marshall having threatened the inhabitants, That he would
burn all their vines and houses in the field: without the knowledge of the
Pope they resolved, with some of the Cardinals who joined with them (that is to
say, of Amiens, Poictiers, Neufchastel, Viuiers, and diverse others) to receive
him into the city, and to besiege the palace, upon condition that he should
offer no violence Benedict in the mean time defended himself in his palace,
being well furnished with all manner of victual, and still expecting the
coming of the king of Arragon, to whom, if he would now set him at liberty,
he promised by an instrument drawn to that purpose, to keep his residence at
Perpignan: but his answer was this, Does this Priest think, that I, to defend
his subtilties, will undertake a war against the king of France? the world
would think I was ill advised. And the nobility likewise that were about him,
were of opinion, That the king of France was so wise, that he would do Benedict
therefore seeing himself thus forsaken, and his provision to decrease apase,
began to fly unto mercy: The conditions were these, That he would not depart
out of the palace of Auignon, until the union of the Church were restored, a
special guard in the mean time being appointed over him, and some of the
principal Cardinals and citizens bound dead or alive: which being done the
army was dismissed. These are the words of Froissard. Froissard. c. 97. 98. 99.
So the king of France performed that which he had concluded with the Emperor,
whereof he presently gave him to understand by an honorable embassage, the
chief whereof was the Patriarch of Jerusalem, who was to require of the
Emperor, according to promise, the like faith and diligence in this business.
Now there were that had given their consent to this neutralitie, the kings of
Spain, Scotland, Arragon, Navarre, to whom by the authority and endeavor of
the Emperor, there joined the Germans, Hungarians, Bohemians, Italians; so
that England only remained, for whom the king of France had past his word. But
king Richard could not persuade his Clergy That this Richard of Bourdeaux was
wholly French, Cap. 120.
and that they would be advised by some other than a Frenchman. Besides he was
shortly after troubled in such sort with his domestical affairs, that he had
no leisure to think of foreine matters. Yea not so much as the people of Liege
but they resolved to forsake Boniface at Rome, and to embrace this neutralitie,
to whom, the better to retain them in their faith and obedience, he sent a
Legate, but he, not daring to pass any farther, stayed at Cologne, and from
thence by a carrier sent letters; who was forbid to return to the Legate,
except he loved to be cast into the river Mosa. Thus was the miserable state of
the Church known to the whole world. And this brings us to the year 1399. An.
1399.


laying exactions, burdens, and exercising tyranny upon the Churches:
violently exacting likewise certain annuities, brought in by the invention of
Boniface, wheresoever their power did extend. Whereupon there followed a Decree
of our Parliament, assisted by the great Council, dated the eleventh of
September, in the year 1406, An. 1406.
the University of Paris requesting the same: by which it was forbidden to be
paid to the Pope, or any of his Cardinals; and if afterward they shall request
it, not to receive any thing from him, or to have ought to do with him: In the
narration Withdraw your selves from every brother that walks inordinatly;
presently adding that of the Apostle, I know that after my departure shall
grievous Wolves enter in amongst you, Arrestum Curiae an 1406. impressum cum
Nicholao Clemangis.
not sparing the flock; and that of the Prophet, Because my flock was
spoiled, and my sheep were devoured of the beasts of the field, having no
shepherd: neither did my shepherds feed my sheep, but the shepherds feed
themselves, and feed not my sheep, therefore (says the Lord) I will cause them
to cease from feeding the sheep; neither shall the shepherds feed themselves
any more, for I will deliver my sheep from their mouths, and they shall no
more devour them. Which words the University applies to Benedict; showing
likewise, that Rome received the pre-eminence of her See from Constantine, but
yet had Charles the sixth, then reigning, dated the eighteenth of February, in
the year 1406, whereby both his annuities, and his baser services, as they
call them, and innumerable the like grieuances and oppressions, which are there
particularly expressed, are utterly made void, as being dangerous to the Church
and Commonweal, causes of poverty amongst the people, and perdition to a
million of poor souls, that by that means are destitute both of corporal
and spiritual nourishment. The occasion of this Edict was, because the later
modern Popes being often admonished, made no account thereof, but hardened
themselves, and stopped their ears against all complaints: Another cause was,
Innocent the seventh, one of the competitors. Gregory his successor Benedict,
the Patriarch of Alexandria, the Bishops of Cambray and Beauvais, the Abbots of
S. Denis, and Mount S. Michael, and certain Doctors of the University, who
should let him understand, That except he would do his office, and come to
some reason, that the king and the Dolphine would withdraw themselves from his
obedience, and refuse his Bulls. Benedict threatening grievous punishment to
all those that should withdraw themselves from the obedience of himself and
his successors. Monstrelet. vol. 1. c. 33.
And afterward with doubtful speeches sent away the Ambassadors. The king
and his Council began now to perceive, that these Popes abused the world, both
the one and the other, but yet are nothing terrified therewith. But the year
following they sent John de Castro morando, and John de Courseno, Jdem 1. Cap.
^0.
knights, to Benedict, to let him know, That if the union were not restored to
the Church by Ascension day, that he, the Clergy, Nobles, and people of To
whom he answered without delay, That he would send an answer by a special
messenger; who was a certain man, I know not who, that came into the palace of
S. Paul, where the kings Court then was, and entering into the kings Oratorie at
the beginning of Mass, delivered Benedict his letters, and presently departed.
The letters were read, which contained an excommunication against the king and
his subjects: but the messenger vanished. Wherefore the king by the counsel of
his Princes, and the persuasion of the University of Paris, forsook the Pope,
and That the subjects of his kingdom rebel against the Church of Rome, in
appealing from him against the canonical constitutions, and that the king
permitted diverse errors to be sowed therein, contrary to the purity of the
law. So he calls the reprehension of his exactions. Furthermore, that the
union which he dreams of is properly a sin, and a perseverance in a Schism,
and that such as exhort him thereunto do but abuse him: Concluding, that if he
continue in this vain error, besides those punishments and sentences
pronounced in the law, he will send constitutions comprehended in his Bull, by
the tenor whereof both he, and all other that shall offend shall be punished.
These letters nevertheless We excommunicat all those that shall appeal from
us, or our successors the bishops of Rome, entering into the Popedom by the
right way; and all such as shall yield any help or favor to any such
appellants or perturbers etc. or shall affirm them not to be bound and
excommunicated by our sentence, of what degree or dignity soever they be,
whether Cardinals, Patriarchs, Archbishops, Bishops, of authority or majesty
royal or imperial, of whatsoever state or condition ecclesiastical or
civil; from which sentence none can be absolved but by the Pope, except it be
at the point of death, etc. Which excommunication being denounced by us, if he
shall obstinatly bear, for the space of 20 days, if he be a prince we subject
him to the determination of the Church, with all his lands, towns, cities,
castles, etc. If Universities, Now it was in the beginning of the year 1408,
that the university of Paris by the mouth of Master John Courteheuse, a
Norman, in the great hall of the palace of Paris, made their complaint in the
presence of the kings of France and Sicilia, the dukes of Barry, of Bar, and
Brabant, the Earls of Mortaigne, Neuers, S. Paul, and Tancarville, the Rector
of the university and deputies thereof, and a great multitude of the
Nobility, Clergy and people, also the earl of Warwick an Englishman, and
the ambassadors of Scotland and Galicia. The text of this master John was
taken out of the 7. Psalm. v. 16. His mischief shall return upon his own head,
and his cruelty shall fall upon his own pate. From which That Petrus de Luna
(that is Benedict) was an obstinat Schismatike, yea, an heretic, a troubler of
the peace and unity of the Church. The second, That he was not to be called a
Pope, nor a Cardinal, or to be honored with any other title of dignity, nor
obeyed as a Pastor of the Church, upon those pains ordained against such as
favor Schismatikes. The third, That the acts, sayings, collations, provisions,
etc. from the date of the letter made in form of a Bull, and all punishments
Temporal and Spiritual, public or private therein contained, were of no
force. The fourth, That the said letters were wicked, seditious, full of fraud,
troubled the peace, offended his royal Majesty. The fifth, That those letters
are not to be obeyed, and he that does obey them to be censured as a favorer
of Schismatikes. That the said Peter his favorers, and such as received his
letters, were to be proceeded against by a course of law. Whereupon the
University requested his Majesty, First, That due inquisition should be made
of those letters, and their receivers, that such a punishment might be
inflicted upon them, as the University at fit time and place should appoint.
Secondly, That the king nor any of his realm, should any more receive any
letters from Benedict. Thirdly, That the University of Paris might be enjoined
by the command of the king, to preach the truth throughout the whole kingdom.
Fourthly, That the Bishop of S. Flour, Master Peter de Courselles, Sancien de
Leu Deane of S. German d' Auxerre, being apprehended, should be punished
according to their demerits, that is, for joining in Council with the Pope.
Fifthly, That, that pretended Bull (note these words) and to expound them, and
to show them to those to whom it appertayned. All which being granted by the
king to the University, the Popes letters were presently in that honorable
assembly torn by the Rector of the University; the above named apprehended
and cast into prison in the Louvre, and the messinger that brought the Bull by
the diligence of the kings Proctour was taken, not far from Lions, and
brought back bound to Paris. Which Benedict understanding, was so astonished,
that with four of his Cardinals, by Venus gate he secretly stole away, and
went to Perpignan.

There was, in the month of August following, another assembly touching the
same matter, where the Chauncellor of France was president, all these Princes
and great personages assisting as before. There a certain Doctor of
Divinity, famous amongst the Dominicans, took upon him to expound that
Scripture in the 14 of the Romans, verse 19, Let us follow those things that
concern peace, and wherewith one may edify another. In the handling whereof,
he proves Benedict a Schismatike, six ways, his Bulls fraudulent and
injurious, and that the king in that he took part with neither, and had
withdrawn himself from the obedience of both, had done that which was right
and just. But in the mean time (says Monstrelet) Master Sanctien, and the
messenger of Peter de Luna (Benedict) who The day after, there was a Council
held again in the Palace, where Master Vrsinus Taluenda, Doctor of Divinity,
spoke for the University of Paris, and took his Theme out of the 122. Psalm.
v. 7. Peace be within thy walls, etc. In the handling whereof he exhorted the
King and Princes, to provide a remedy for this Schism, proving Peter to be a
Schismatike and alleging many examples of the Popes of Rome that made to that
purpose. Moreover, he did earnestly request that the Bulls might be publicly
torn, with others of that kind brought to Thoulouse; which was presently
granted and put in execution the twentieth of August 1408. Cap. 52.
And all Prelates and other ecclesiastical persons likewise commanded within
the confines of their benefices, with a loud voice to publish this
neutrallitie, etc. And the morrow after, both the Arragonians before named,
were again led through the City, and put to open shame upon a Scaffold, as
formerly they had been. Which vigor and courage is so much the rather worth
the noting, because it fell out in the most perilous divisions of Maxence to
the bishop of Poictiers, who was present at that Council. Cap. 53. and 54.
There, a certain bishop of Arragon, a great Doctor of Divinity, in a
solemn Sermon, chose for his text that of the Apostle, Purge the old leaven
etc. wherein he feared not to say, That they were no more Popes than his old
Whereby, let the Reader judge of those Archbishops and Prelates that he
ordained, and of those things that by them were done whom he ordained. The
selfsame is to be read in the letters of the Ambassadors of the University
of Paris, to their Lords and Masters, That the neutrallitie and subtraction of
obedience was good and lawful, and the process and sentences of the
competitors against those that had withdrawn themselves, justly pronounced to
be of no force: Approving in all respects the sentence of the University. As
there is likewise extant the definitive sentence against both the contendants,
for their horrible sins, and a reuocation of all their acts in the year last
past, with the Epistle of Alexander the fifth to the Bishop of Paris, Cap. 67.
who the enemies of God and his Church for their grievous and horrible
notorious sins.

John the four and twentieth ( alias, the three and twentieth) the successor
of Alexander, in the year 1410, sent his Legates, namely the Archbishop of
Pisa, to demand the Tenthes due in the vacancie, procurations, and mortuaries.
An. 1410. Bochell. l. 2. Decret. Eccles. Gallicanae p. 323.324. Jdem l. 4 p.
51.52.53 54.55.56. ex ijsdem.
The University assembled at the Bernerdins, the three and twentieth of
November, and calling unto them such Prelates as were then at Paris, concluded,
that those Laws and ordinances above mentioned, made in the year 1406, were
to be defended, that is to say, That the Church of France was freed, from all
tenthes, procurations, and other subsidies and annuities whatsoever. And if the
Pope or his which, whomsoever should deny to pay, was no Christian. Let the
Reader here note, the definition of a Christian. The Rector interrupting him
affirmed, That these words were pronounced to the dishonor of the king, and
the University, and consequently of the whole realm. Wherefore, the thirtieth
of November, he called a general congregation, wherein it was agreed to send
Orators to the king, to request that the Legate might be commanded to revoke
his words, and if he should refuse to do it, that then the professors,
graduats of Divinity and Law, should write against him, upon the Articles of
the faith, That both he and his Colleagues might according not only by the
positive law, but also by the law of God. The University withstood by way of
charity would gather this money, then the University would beseech his
Majesty, Monstrelet. vol. 1. c. 67.
So that if a subsidy should be granted, that it might be gathered by some
chosen honest men of the kingdom, for the union of the Greeks and Latins,
the peace of the kingdom of England, the recovery of Palestina, and for the
preaching of the Gospel to all creatures; since these were the ends for which
the Pope (as his own Legates did affirm) did levy this subsidy. In all which
they humbly beseech the Lords of the Parliament, and the kings Proctors, to
yield them their helping hand, and to join with them. Whereupon the Archbishop
of Pisa carried himself more humbly toward the

An. 1416.
Here is fit place to speak of the Council of Constance, wherein, in the year
1416, a bill was exhibited in the name of the Church of France, and the
University of Paris, called Apostoli, because Charles the sixth by a Decree of
the Court of Parliament, and an Edict following thereupon, had forbid annuities
to be paid. It was otherwise called De Annatis non soluendis. Which bill was so
much the more necessary, because the Cardinals going about to put down the
Antipopes, endeavored John the three and twentieth, for an expedition beyond
the sea, whereupon some Popes afterward under other pretenses would have
continued them: but the cause of them ceasing, they were to cease too; neither
could they be any longer tolerated, especially at this time, wherein Italy,
France, Germany, and England, were at peace and amity one with the other. And
here they spent much time in the unfolding of those exactions that were then in
force: Where they prove, That neither the Annuities seem to bind men to fall
Item, He that is so promoted seems to commit simonie and perjury. Which they
prove by that obligation that was required of Patriarchs, Archbishops,
Bishops, etc. You etc. by the Apostolic permission and authority granted to
you in that behalf, do freely offer and promise of your own wills to give for
your common service to the Chamber of your most holy Father and Lord in
Christ, Pope Alexander, and the holy and sacred College of reverend Fathers
and Lords in Christ of the Church of Rome, that is to say, the Cardinals etc.
so many Florins of gold of the Chamber, of good and lawful weight, etc. with
diverse other clauses very strait, which they were to swear upon the
Evangelist, and under

There flourished in these times the Cardinal Zabarella, a famous Lawyer,
Zabarella de schismate circa annum 1406.
who writ of schism: he fears not to say, That the defenders of the Pope had
so corrupted the Canon law with their Glosses, that there was nothing so
unlawful, which they thought not lawful for them to do, in so much that they
extolled him above God himself, making him more than God. From whence sprang
infinite errors, the Pope chalenging unto himself a right over all inferior
Churches, and making small account of all inferior Prelates: in so much (says
he) that if God give not his helping hand to the present state of the Catholic
Church, it is in danger of an utter overthrow. But at the next Council it
shall be necessary to restrain this power, and Acts) wherein, and not in him,
does the fullness of power reside, and in a general Council, which
represents the Church. In so much that the Church neither can, nor ever could
transfer that power in such sort to any one, but that it ever remained wholly
in her self, not in the Pope, whom she had ever power to depose. And therefore
it is vain that they commonly boast of, That he that is judged by the Church
cannot be judged by men, but by God alone. It is in the power of the Emperor
(says he) to call Councels, which plainly appears by the example of
Constantine, Justinian, Charles, who did preside, and were chief Judges over
them, as it appears by the first universal Peter never had it, but that he
was one of the chief Apostles and ministers, to whom, in as much as solutus
legibus, not subject to laws, it is to be understood of his own laws, and
not the law of God, whereunto he is bound as well as others. We must therefore
beware least that honor be done unto him, whereby we may make him equal with
God, nay in any sort to adore him, since S. Peter himself would never endure
it, but utterly refused it, Acts 10. And whereas it is commonly said, That the
Church cannot err, he says, it can no way be understood of the Pope, or of
the Church of

In like manner writ our Clemangis, Archdeacon of Bayeux, in his book Of the
corrupt estate of the Church, which was produced in the Council of Constance:
where he sets down by what degrees the Church rose to her temporal height
and her spiritual declination, at one and the same time; and by what
subtilties the Pope got all to himself, and fatted himself by staruing
others. Afterward coming Nicholaus Clemangis in lib. de corrupto Ecclesiae
flatu.
They bear more patiently (says he) the loss of ten thousand souls, than of
ten shillings; what say I more patiently, yea they bear the ruin and loss of
souls without any motion of the mind: whereof there is with them not only no
care, but no thought at all, whereas for their own private domestical losses
they presently grow furious. He says likewise a little after, The study of
Divinity, and such as make profession thereof, are made a mock and ieasting
stock (which is most monstrous) to the Popes themselves, who prefer their
own traditions far before the commandments of God. Now that worthy and
excellent function of preaching, sometimes attributed to Pastors only, and
proper unto them, is of that base account with them, that they think nothing
more unworthy, or more unbefitting their dignity. The Monks are Paul against
false Prophets in the last times, 2. Timoth. 3. and the like places. The
Monasteries of men and women are so many brothell houses, their divinity
merely scholasticall, and that properly which S. Paul would decipher in these
words, Jdem in Epist. de Theolog. studio.
They dote about questions and strife of words, etc. Their fruits are like
those of the lake of Sodom, outwardly fair, but inwardly smoke and ashes.
Ecclesiastical persons are simoniacall, no man has Orders without argent, no
man put back that brings money, be he never so wicked. To such an excess are
they grown in lascivious wantonness, that their people, the better to defend
their Idem in Tractatu contra Simoniacos.
Notwithstanding (says he) the authority of the Church militant be great,
because founded upon a firm rock, etc. yet we are not to attribute unto it
the titles of the Church triumphant, That it cannot be deceived, That it cannot
sin; for many times it deceives, Idem contra noua Sanctorum festa.
and is deceived, I do not say in matters of faith, etc. but of fact, or And
writing to a scholar of Paris, touching certain ordinances of the Council of
Constance, Truly (says he) it seems not convenient to me to prove the Acts
of the Council by the Council, Jdem ad Scolasticum Parisicus.
etc. but if all the Acts of the Council be definitions of faith, when some
produce many Decrees of the holy Fathers and Synods; on the contrary part,
see what a thing it is (this schism still hanging, and in so great variety of
things and opinions, and controversies of learned men) to ordain so many
articles of faith, whereas it seems unto me to be not only convenient but
necessary, that those other constitutions or determinations which they affirm
to be alleged by if the question be of faith, or matter in controversy, it is
their manner to rest themselves upon reasons especially drawn out of the
Scriptures, or the definitions of the holy Fathers, from whose footsteps they
depart not without great reason, etc. And as for that place of Saint Augustine,
which you allege, etc. I should not believe the Gospel if the authority of
the Church did not compel me. Truly it seems strange at the first view, that
he should seem to prefer the authority of the Church traveling upon the
earth, He therefore answers, That S. Augustine never thought any such thing,
but was to deal with the Maniches, who had their Scriptures proper to
themselves, and received not ours. As if he should say, It is not out of mine
own particular judgment, that I receive the Gospel for Canonical Scripture,
but the authority of the Church which has acknowledged it to be such: That To
be brief (says he) thou art not ignorant, that both Christ our Lawmakers, and
his Apostles preaching the law and faith unto us, alleged many times their
proofs out of the old Testament, and the sayings of the Fathers and Prophets,
to confirm their own: than which we can propose unto our selves no example
more certain for our imitation, since his actions are a most infallible
instruction of our For (says he) of what kind of men for the most part do
Councels consist? doubtless of Lawyers (Canonists) rather than Divines, of
temporal persons, whose care is of the things of this world, not spiritual.
How then can thou hope for a reformation If then (says he) they assemble
themselves for the recovery of the temporal peace of the Church, there is no
necessity that we should presently believe that they are come together in the
name of Christ: First, because they know not whether it be expedient for the
health of the Church, and that Christ has determined by this means to heal
this division. For what else are temporal afflictions wherewith the Church is
oppressed, but bitter potions and medicines, whereby temporal avarice, pride,
and wantonness, is beaten down? And who will say, that they are assembled in
the name of Christ, who with this mind seek the unity of the Church? who
nevertheless are so many that they can hardly be numbered. These carcall sons
of the Church do not only not care for spiritual things, nor have any
feeling of them, but persecute those that are according And here he describe
them at large. But what concludes he hereupon? Truly since the Prophet we
must not look that these Councels should be ruled by the spirit of God, where
the Decrees depend upon voices, where for the most part carnal, ambitious,
contentious persons, puffed up with vain knowledge, where subjects ill
prepared to receive the spirit of God, where the works of the flesh,
contentions, emulations, clamors, bear sway: since it is said quite contrary,
The eyes of the Lord are upon the righteous: Yea since our ancient Fathers
when they went about to celebrat a Council, to the end they might the better
obtain the assistance of Gods spirit therein, prepared themselves, with prayer,
fasting, tears, contrition of heart, humility of spirit, searching and
inquiring into the very inward parts If (says he) they had by experience
found, that they could not be deceived in those matters for which they were
assembled, what need was there of such diligence? etc. Since therefore the
whole congregation assembled does many times depend upon the voice and opinion
of one man, why, as that one man may be deceived in his judgment, may not
likewise the whole multitude; especially if out of humane presumption, or any
other grievous crime, it deserve to be deceived? Is it not only proper unto
God to do all things rightly, and never to be deceived? But thou reply
(says he) That in that the Council cannot err, it proceeds not from humane
infirmity, but the power of the holy Ghost. Do thou tell me again, how thou
know that the holy Ghost will always give his asststance to the greatest
part, etc. especially since the greatest part is commonly the worse, etc. In
the Council of Achab the holy Prophet of the Lord, Micha, was present, who
without fear spoke that which the spirit of God suggested unto him, but yet
could persuade nothing with the king, and the rest of the false Prophets, who
spoke out of their own spirit and understanding, etc. Read in the Prophecy of
Jeremiah what the Lord spoke of his Temple, against those who falsely persuaded
themselves that God would never forsake it for their iniquities. Trust not in
lying words, saying, It is the Temple of the Lord, etc. (says who are his, but
we, how should we know it? The Church by grace may remain in one simple woman,
as it is said to be in the Virgin only at the time of the Passion. Has a
Council of Bishops in these times a greater authority and prerogative than
the congregation of the Apostles, who all declined and went astray? Nay has it
a greater prerogative than the whole militant Church, which S. Augustine says
cannot accomplish that which the Apostle says, Offer it self a glorious
Church, without spot or wrinkle, but only in the celestial Jerusalem, where
that shall be true that is written, They are without spot before the throne of
God. What other cause can we think there was, why those four Councels, the
Nicene, Constantinopolitan, first Ephesine, and that of Chalcedon* are
accounted more holy, and had a greater veneration than the rest, but because
they At the last, to show that such events must not be looked for, from
contrary persons, he recites the history related by us in the former
Progression, of the Owl, that in the Council at Rome, celebrated by John the
four and twentieth, appeared after the invocation of the holy Ghost. Thus did
Clemangis write to this Scholeman, who was present at the Council of
Constance. To conclude, in his Epistles he calls the Church of Rome a house of
thieves, no otherwise to be purged than with a whip, as the Temple once was:
for what does he differ from a thief, who being entered by the breaches and
ruins, meaning the Pope. Truly the Church at this day is made a shop of
ambition, traffic, theft. The Sacraments, Orders, yea the Church it self,
the Mass, the body of Christ, and all are set to sale, etc. Nichol. Clemangis
ad Gersonem.
It is become a public fair, a brothell house, worse than the Synagogue, yea
Babylon it self. For what do thou think (says he) of that prophecy of
the Revelation of S. John? Do thou not think that in some sort it belongs to
thee? Thou art not grown so shameless as to deny it: Jdem de ruina and
reparatione Ecclesiae.
Consider therefore of it, and read the damnation of the great strumpet sitting
upon many waters; there contemplate thy worthy Acts, etc. And a little after,
It is now long since, that this thine arrogancy, not able to endure it self,
began to fall, though slowly and by little and little, and therefore thy ruin
not to be perceived of any; (that is to wit, but now thou fallest down
headlong like a river down a hill. Much more, like unto this, may you read in
this Author, which let it suffice that I have briefly collected. But yet I
cannot omit an Epistle or declamation that he writ to that purpose to Gerard
Market, a Doctor of Paris, the Argument whereof is this, We are not only to
depart from Babylon with our affections, but with our bodily feet. Which
argument, for as much as he handles it excellently, according to that precept
of our Lord in the Revelation, Go out of Babylon my people, etc. Let it not be
troublesome to the Reader if I insert it wholly, and so much the rather,
because our adversaries could be content it were buried in their liberaries.
That we are to fly out of Babylon, according to the admonition given in both
Testaments, seen. If the cry of any place, or of the sins thereof shall
ascend to the ears of God, and 16 of the Prophecy of Esaiah, he says to
Moab, Let my banished dwell with thee Moab, be thou their covert from the face
of the destroyer. To be brief, our Savior himself did fly from the face of
cruel Herod, thirsting for his blood, into Egypt an ancient enemy to his
people, there in a safe corner attending the death of that cruel persecutor;
he confirming by his own example, what he was afterward to give in command
Confusa sunt hic omnia
Spes, metus, moeror, gaudium,
Vix hora vel dimidia
Fit in coelo silentium.
All things are confused here,
Sorrow, joy, hope, and fear,
Scarce for a moment of time
Peace in heaven can we find.


If thou seek here an assured settled rest in all respects, thou seek a knot
in a rush, Gerson. in Tractat. de potestate Ecclesiastica consid. 10. and 11
as one said, and thou shall never find it, either within or without thee. All
things are full of war, confusion, danger, every thing compassed with snares
and subtilties, neither can In Tractat. de Anseribilitate Papae consid.
4.9.10*12.14.15.16.18. Jtem in propositione facta coram Anglicis euntibus ad
Council. consid. 4. Jtem in Tractatu an liceat in causis fidei appellare Papae
Item in Tractatu de examine doctrinarum.
But yet notwithstanding though there be something of Babylon every where, yet
that Babylon is not every where that is the mother of the fornications and
abominations of the earth; whose judgment, as John says, is ascended up to
the heavens, which has made drunken all the nations with the wine of her
whoredom, and constrains all her inhabitants to commit fornication, to
blaspheme, to eat things sacrificed to Idols, to worship the dragon: With which
impieties whosoever is polluted, how can he find peace within himself, except
he hate the fornications of that whore, forsake, condemn, detest them: to
which whosoever shall adhere, is made one body with her, because so long as he
conuerseth with her, he cannot be freed from her manners, being by force and
fury drawn unto them. But if thou fly the habitation Item in propos. vtilib.
ad extirp. schismat.
if thou fear all humane company, there are solitary places wherein thou
may dwell with thy self, and retire thy self to thine own heart, live to
thy self, have only God to be a witness and companion of thy life, Item in
regul. moral.
where at the last thou may more easily and more happily find that peace of
thy mind which thou professest is so much to thy desire.

In the same style writ master John Gerson the Chauncellor of the University,
who was likewise present at that Council: Item de loco Pauli ad Thessal. in
Tractatu de signu ruinae Ecclesiae.
for I leave to speak of his inuectiues Against humane traditions, because we
have spoken thereof elsewhere; and likewise against the corruption of
Ecclesiastical discipline, and the simonies of the Court of Rome, in selling
graces and dignities, which they call spiritual, because all these are covered
under a pretext of the infallibility either of the Church or of the Pope.
Gerson. de vita spirituali aiae. Lect. 2. Corol. 7. to. 3. number. 61.
But this in diverse his treatises he closely, yet elegantly, teaches, That the
Pope can err and abuse that power committed unto him, to the ruin of the
Church: That he can prostitute and oppress it, fall into schism, heresy,
idolatry, in which case he may be corrected by the meanest Layman that
professes the Gospel: That he may be reproved, repressed, deposed, by a
Council representing the Church; Item in Tractatu an liceat in causis fidei a
summo Pontific. appellare propos. 3 tom. 1. number. 14. sub finem.
since the Church (says he) can subsist without (says he) When you are
assembled in the name of Peter, or of the Pope, but, In my name, etc. And this
doctrine has displeased many, but the Counsels of Constance and Basil have
freed the Church from this pernicious heresy which places the Pope above the
Church. So far he proceeds, by reason of those inconveniences he found
thereby, that he alleges some cases wherein it is lawful to make an assault
upon his own person. But because he handles these propositions in whole
Treatises, we will content our selves with the quotations in the margent.
Touching the question, Whether the Pope be above the Council and the Church,
he peremptorily Gerson. de examine doctrinar.
That it is as much as if one should ask, Whether the part be greater than
the whole: That the Pope is subject to the Church: That the keys are properly
given to the Church, and not to Saint Peter, much less to the Pope. The Church
in the mean time subject and bound to the holy Scriptures. Gerson. de examine
doctrinar. consid. 5. tom. 1.
Neither is it (says he) in the power of the Pope or Council to change
traditions given by the Evangelists and Paul, as some do dote: Yea we are to
give more credit in a case of doctrine to the assertion of a simple man,
learned in the Scriptures, than the declaration of the Pope: For it is
manifest, that we are rather to believe the Gospel than the Pope: In so much
that any such learned man being present at the Council, ought to oppose
himself against him, if he shall perceive the greater part against the
Gospel, either by malice And touceing that place of Augustine, I would not
believe the Gospel but that the authority of the Church moves me thereunto:
He means (says he) the Primitive congregation of the faithful, who had
seen and heard Christ, and were witnesses unto him. Neither is it in the power
of Pope or Bishop, of a proposition not heretical or not Catholic, to make it
heretical, or Catholic. All which Theses destroy the tyranny of the Pope and
the Church of Rome, with those inventions likewise, and usurpations, which
under the cloak of his pretended authority they brought into the Church. Let
the Reader here note, Vide Tractatu^ de Ecclesia.
That this was then the doctrine of the University of Paris, yea the
Sorbonists themselves. We have elsewhere quoted many places, Johan. Gerson. in
Tractat. de Indulgentijs.
Christ is the only Pope that can grant those Indulgences for a thousand
thousand days and years, etc. Again, Perhaps such enormous graunts have
been invented by wicked men, who seek their own gain. And again, The
grant of Indulgences will hardly be taken away, etc. since it is most
certain, that Purgatory ends with the world, Idem de absolutione sacramentali.
and consequently the days of their punishments. Again, Those institutions of
Indulgences for twenty thousand years, and the like, to him that shall say
five Pater nosters before such an Image, etc. are sottish and supersitious, and
contrary to the truth, etc. At these fooleries all men in those days began to
bend their brows.

But in this sermon entitled, Of the ruins of the Church, he manifestly
proves the fearful judgment of God to be then at hand. The signs which he
sets down are these, First, 2. Thessalonians 2. The dissipation of the
Roman Empire; betwixt which and the persecutions of Antichrist (following
therein S. Hierome) he sets down no distance of time: And now (says he)
the state of the universal Church is so doubtful, that it knows not on
which side the Sea of Rome is, except perhaps God should reveal it to some
one, or the judgment of Solomon, touching the dividing of the infant into two
parts, give us to understand who is the true mother. Secondly Impudency,
wherein, as touching manners, it is worse than the Synagogue, when the ruin
thereof approached; for that permitted Pigeons to be sold in the Temple, and
this sells Spiritual charges for money; that honored God but with the lips
only, this dishonours God both in word and deed, taking no care at all to
cover her own shame. Thirdly Inequality, or rather Iniquity, the like
whereof was never amongst the ministers of the Church, the unworthy being
exalted, the worthy trod under foot, some set above Princes, others more
contemptible than the basest of the people: And from hence arise schisms in
the Church. Fourthly, The pride of the Prelates, which purchases rather hatred
than reverence: And from hence arise schisms in the Church. Fifthly, The
tyranny of those that bear rule, The troubles of Princes, and commotion of
the people, which we have experience of in so many kingdoms and Provinces.
Seventhly, The refusal of correction in the Principal of the Clergy, who
detest those that reprehend them, hold the Scriptures for a fable, and those
that meditate thereupon for fantastical persons. Eighthly, Novelty of
opinions, from whence arise heresies, schisms are defended, and being defended
take root, etc. And this he applies to those that accommodat the Scriptures to
their own affections, make them speak according to that love or hatred, hope
of advancement, or revenge, wherewith they are carried: And some of them, upon
every light occasion, call them heretics whom they never knew to be All which
signs he rehearses, Gerson. de signis ruinae Ecclesiae.
and compares them with others of former times, which being confirmed by the
examples of his age, and the threats of the ancient Prophets, he applies to
the present state of the Church.

Of the same opinion were diverse others, in diverse parts of the world. In
Germany Theodoricus Vrias, an Augustine, in his work of the consolation of
the Church, especially in his third book, Theodor. Vrias in consolatione
Ecclesiae. lib. 3. Idem apud Paulum Langium in Chron. Citizensi.
where inueying against the wickedness thereof, the whoredom, simonie,
ambition, contempt of the word of God, neglect of the salvation of mankind, he
pronounces the Pope to be the forerunner of Antichrist. Yea we have his
verses recited by Paulus Langius in his Chronicle, not unworthy the reading,
in number eighteen, whereof these are the Papa stupor mundi cecidit secumque
ruere
Coelica templa Dei, membra simulque caput, etc.
The Pope, the worlds astonishment, is dead,
With him are fallen Gods house, members and head, etc.


Wherein he describes how the Pope has drawn the whole Church with himself
into ruin, supplying the place of Simon Magus, not Simon Peter: That the
Churches under his government were fairs of treachery, wherein the Sacraments
Theodor. Minorita in prophetia vna cum pluribus alijs rithmicis impressa.
one Theodoricus a Minorite, Bishop of Croatia, who foretold in a certain
prophecy written in verse, That this See polluted with so much corruption,
should shortly come to naught, and the Pope be utterly overthrown, even by
those that had extolled him: and that contrarily the Church, and in her true
piety, should recover her pristinat beauty more than before. Petrus
Dresdensis Iacobus Misnensis, the Disciples of the ancient Waldenses, were for
this cause banished their country, Theodor. a Nyem. de schismate l. 3.
who repaired to John H^s, who, as Aeneas Siluius says, gave him great light
in many principal points. In Italy it self Nicholas Lucensis, a Carmelite,
and Doctor of Divinity, was not afraid, out of the pulpet at Lucca, in the
presence of Gregory the twelfth, to preach against his and the Papal
tyranny: whereupon he was cast into prison, and hardly got out again,
notwithstanding that favor and help he had from the governor; and from
thence forward he was put to silence. Besides infinite numbers of all estates
and conditions, whom every where with exquisit torments they put to death in
France, England, and elsewhere: some shut up in barrels, some hanged on
gibbets, Thom. Waldens. in Fasciculo Zizoniorum. Baptista Panaetius in Chron.
and in sermon. Thom. Walsing. in Chron. Thom. Walsing. an. 1413. in Henr. 5.
Waldensis, Baptista Panetius, Walsingham, and others: Amongst whom we must not
forget John Oldcastle, a nobleman of England, heir by right of his wife to the
Lord Cobham, A man (says Walsingham) Regi propter probitatem charus and
acceptus, in great favor with king Henry the fifth for his honesty, and
likewise renowned for his valor and great knowledge in feats of arms; who in
the year 1413 is in the history called the Protector and defender of the
Lollards (for that name or title was given to all those who protested against
the corruptions of the Church) who sent into the Diocesses of London,
Rochester, Hereford, some to publish the truth of the Gospel, without the
leave and license of the Ordinaries, Oldcastle being by the authority of the
king committed to the Tower of London, and being brought before the Archbishop
of Canturburie, he took out of his bosom a copy of the confession of his
Faith, and delivered it unto him to read; which the Archbishop having read,
said, That it contained in it much good and Catholic matter, but yet he must
satisfy him touching other points, that is to say, the abouenamed, but
especially that that concerned the power of the Pope and Cardinals, and the
Roman Oldcastle refused not to do, but ingeniously professed withal, That the
Pope was true Antichrist, that is, his head; the Archbishops, Bishops, and
other Prelates, his members; the Friars, his tail. And as touching the other
points, Idem in Ypodigmate Neustriae an. 1413.
They are ordinances (says he) of the Church of Rome, made against the
Scriptures, after that it grew rich, and the poison had dispersed it self
therein, and not before. The place it self is worthy the reading, that we may
acknowledge the agreement of their doctrine with ours, against which no man can
cavil. Wherefore the Archbishop pronounced Oldcastle an heretic, and
excommunicated That the greatest part of them, nec quidem poenitere curabant,
took no care to repent. If we may credit Walsingham, there were not then
less than an hundred thousand, who made public profession of this doctrine.
Another Annalist in few words says, Johannes Capgrauius l. 2 de Nobilibus
Henricis.
That Oldcastle was not afraid in the Parliament to say, That England would
never be at peace until And learned and eloquent as he was, he caused many
books to be scattered in the streets, against the invocation of Saints,
auricular confession, the single life of Priests, Transubstantiation, and other
abuses of the Church of Rome; for which cause being led prisoner to London, at
the last he was burnt.

But there comes now upon the stage, even with open faces, John Hus, and
Hierome of Prage, men, by the testimonies of their adversaries themselves,
renowned for their learning and godly conversation; who being called to
public charge in the Church, did publicly preach against the abuses of the
Church of Rome, even those that we in these days detest and abjure, namely,
against the tyranny Aeneas Siluius in historia Bohemia c. 35.
Aeneas Siluius himself, who was afterward Pope Pius the second, says, With
the sound of their voice, the spirit of God assisting, the word of God
thundering in them, the people were awakened out of their dead sleep, ran by
flocks to this great light, enuiting likewise their neighbors from diverse
parts. And whereas about that very time Pope John the four and twentieth had
granted a full remission of sins to all that would bear arms in defense of
the Church of Rome, against Ladislans king of Naples; Certain mecanicall
persons (says Pius the second) hearing this, published with a loud voice, Pope
John to be Antichrist, bearing the cross against Christians. These good
Fathers in the mean time assembled at the Council of Constance, Sigismond,
who had called that Council, there to give a reason of their doctrine, they
willingly came: but presently they were cast into prison, declared heretics,
and in the end burnt alive, John Hus first, and Hierome about a year after:
Cap. 35.
These Fathers leaving this Decree for an example and law to all posterity,
Haereticis non seruandam fidem, That we are not to keep faith to Heretics.
For such they accounted all those, as we have seen, that withstood their
Siluius tells us, That they were admonished not to think themselves more
wise than the Church; and that it would be easy for them to obtain an
honorable place in the Church, if they would renounce their opinions. In which
means of converting, we may easily note the style of that ancient Doctor
tempting our Savior in the desert. Cap. 36.
But they answer (says Pius) That they teach the truth, being the disciples of
Christ, directing themselves according to his Gospel: That the Church of Rome,
with other Churches in the world, were departed from the traditions of the
Apostles: That they all sought after riches and pleasure, and dominion These
are Pius the second his own words, in which who acknowledges not the voice of
truth? He adds immediately, The principal men of this great Synod perceiving
the obstinacy and immouable courage of these miserable men, gave sentence,
That putrified members of the Church, which could not be healed, were to be
cut off, least they should infect the whole body (putrified members, because
they accuse their putrefaction.) In the assembly therefore it was concluded,
That such were to be burned that rejected the doctrine of the Church. So that
they who held that it belonged not to Ecclesiastical persons to sentence any
man to death, by the Pius himself, were their judges in this case. Touching
the sentence pronounced against Hus, he expressly says, That he appealed from
them to Christ Jesus the sovereign Judge; which was not the least part of
their crime. But as touching their death, Both of them (says Pius) suffered
death with a constant mind, and went joyfully to the fire, as if they had been
invited to a feast; neither of them yielding any one word that might discover
any show of heaviness, or a discontented mind. When they began to burn, they
began to sing a hymn, which hardly the flame and noise of the fire could let
to be heard. Never have we read of any of the Philosophers that suffered death
with better resolution, and greater courage, than these endured the fire.
Poggius a Florentine, an honorable writer of our age, writes an eloquent
Epistle of the death of Hierome, This Poggius whom he here alleges, who was
Secretary to the Council, Poggius Concilij Constantiens. Secretar. in Epist.
ad Leonard Aretinum.
writ an Epistle to Leonard Aretine, which for as much as it is worthy the
reading, I have here thought good to set down at large. Soiourning for many
days at the Bathes (says he) I writ from thence a letter to our friend
Nicholas, which I think you have read: Afterward, some few days after my
return to Constance, the cause of Hierome, whom they term an heretic, was
heard, and that publicly; which I have thought good to relate unto you, both
for the weightinesse of the matter, and especially for the eloquence and
learning of the man. I confess I have never seen any man, that in pleading a
cause, especially that concerned his life, who has (si tamen vera sunt, quae
sibi obijciunt) if nevertheless (note the words of Poggius) the matters
objected against him be true: for it belongs not unto me to judge of so great a
cause; but I refer myself to the opinions of those who are wiser than my
self. Neither would I have you to think, that according to the manner of
Orators, I relate unto you every particular circumstance of this business,
for it were too tedious, and a work of many days: I will only touch some
principal places, whereby placuit, that he should answer publicly to every
point that was objected against him. Being therefore brought before the
assembly, and commanded to answer to such points as were objected; a long
time he refused to do it, alleging that he was first to plead his own
cause, before he answered to the false accusations of his adversaries: but this
condition being denied him, standing in the middle of the assembly, What
injustice is this (says he) that having lain for three hundred and sixty
days in prison, in ordure, (says Poggius) is an admirable argument of his
memory; For three hundred and sixty days together he was in the bottom of a
stinking and deep dungeon, the misery of which punishment himself
complains of, affirming as it became a good and a valiant man, that he was
not therefore grieved therewith, for that he had suffered things so base and
unworthy, but rather wondered at their inhumanitie against him; in which place
he could neither read nor see. I omit the grief of mind wherewith he must
needs be troubled, which a man would think, should have utterly overthrown
his memory; and yet notwithstanding all this, he alleged so many learned
Doctors of the Church, to make good his opinion, that it had been enough, and
more than enough, if he had lived (he speaking still doubtfully) but I admire
his learning, his knowledge in all things, his eloquence, his sweet delivery,
his dexterity in answering. But I fear least all these excellent gifts of
nature have been given him to his own ruin. This is the style of Poggius.
There were in the end two days allowed him to repent. Many men very learned
came unto him, to dissuade him from his opinion, among others the Cardinal of
Florence; but he continuing obstinat in his errors, the Council condemned him
to the fire for And here he repeats the particular circumstances. When the fire
was set unto him he began to sing a certain Hymn, or Psalm, being hardly
interrupted with smoke or flame, which was an excellent token of his constant
courage. When the executioner would have put the fire to him behind his back,
that he might not see it, Come hither (says he) and kindle it in my sight, for
if I had feared it I would never have come to this place, which I had power to
have avoided. In (otherwise it was dangerous to speak) you might have placed
the death of this man among those that came forth of the schole of Philosophy:
For neither Mutius with so constant a resolution endured the burning of one
member, as he the whole body; neither did Socrates so willingly drink poison,
as be embrace the fire. But enough of this. Wherefore Leonard Aretine,
answering to his Epistle, sticks not to tell him that he spoke too freely:
Although (says he) thou many times purge thy judgment, touching the
punishment of Hierome, yet thou bewrayest I know not what, of greater affection
than is fitting: I think such things should be written more advisedly. And
yet he Leonardi Aretini Oration contra hypocritas.
calls the Monks and Clergy of his time, hypocrites, Pharisees, proud,
bloody men, painted sepulchers, couseners, Preachers of dreams, etc.

Our adversaries now adays are somewhat moved, when we tell them, That John
Hus and Hierome of Prage were burnt against public faith, and that in this
Council was made that law of not keeping faith with heretics: for as they
plainly deny that Hierome had any safeconduct, so they cavil that John had
it only of the Emperor, not of the Council; affirming moreover, that that
Decree is fained. Doubtless the Archbishop Antonine, whom they have canonized
for a Saint, Antonin. part. 3. tit. 22. c. 6.
deals better with us: For of John he says, He was condemned in the Council,
Of Hierome, He was burnt publicly. Afterward he adds, And because the
Emperor seemed not to take it well, by reason of the safeconduct given unto
them, the Council answered him, That they could not be accused of breach of
faith, because the Council it self had not given him a safeconduct, and that
the Council is greater than the Emperor, and therefore no such thing could be
granted by him against the will of the Council, especially in matter of faith.
Pius the second says in express terms, Aeneas Siluius historia Bohemia c.
36.
It was thought good by the persuasion of Sigismond the Emperor, that John and
Hierome should be called to the Council. Which confutes those that say, that
Hierome Bonfinius in the history of Hungary, says, Bonfinius Decad. 3. l. 2.
It was thought fit that John Hus and Hierome should be sent for to the Synod,
and being sent for, came. The Fathers of the Council therefore break the
faith of the Emperor, and dispense with the breach of his safeconduct, as
being of no force without theirs; notwithstanding the Emperor had both called
the Council, and in a city of his own, where he only had authority, and
Wenceslaus king of Bohemia, at the request of the Council, sent thither John
Hus, under the safeconduct of the Emperor, as they themselves confess. Full
of fraud and deceit therefore were these Fathers, in demanding him of his
king, and under the safeconduct of the Emperor, which they were resolved to
make void. As for the Decree it self, Naucler. vol. 2. Gener. 48.
it That notwithstanding the safeconduct of the Emperor, of Kings, etc. it is
lawful by a competent Judge to enquire of heretical prauitie: The words
themselves are these, This present holy Synod declares, Concilium
Constantiens. Sess. 19.
That notwithstanding any safeconduct given by the Emperor, or Kings, or other
secular Princes, to heretics, or any suspected of heresy, pretending thereby
to draw them from their errors, by what band soever they be bound, it cannot*
nor ought to be any prejudice or hinderance to the Catholic faith, or
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: and that the said safeconduct can be no let, but
that it shall be lawful for a competent and Ecclesiastical Judge, to make
iniquisition of the errors of such persons, and otherwise to proceed against
them, and to punish them as justice shall require, if they shall obstinatly
refuse to revoke their errors, In the margent this is likewise noted, A
safeconduct can be no defense for an heretic, obstinatly defending his
heresies. So that by this means Princes are discharged of their faith, their
safeconducts in this case are made void: They that appear under this assurance
are delivered to the Inquisition; and they that dispense so absolutely with
other men's consciences, what faith can they make? and being made, how do they
perform it, or who will take it? John Hus therefore died a Martyr of Christ,
in the year 1415, An. 1415.
the people that were present at his What this man has heretofore taught, or
done, we know not, but doubtless these are great tokens of true piety; that
is to say, hearing his ardent prayers unto God touching this point: turning to
the Prelates that were present at this spectacle, he said, After an hundred
years you shall answer to God and to me. Whereupon there was money coined in
Bohemia with this inscription in Latin on the one side, Centu^ reuolutis annis
Deo respondebitis and mihi, and on the other side, Credo vnam esse Ecclesiam
Catholicam, I believe one Catholic Church. It is likewise said, that he should
say, You roast ^e the goose (for that his name Hus signifies in the Bohemian
tongue) but hereafter will a Swan come, who in despite of you shall sing
better, and yet you shall not roast him. Now just an hundred years after
Luther, by whose doctrine the Church of Rome being stricken as it were with
lightning, notwithstanding all their rage and fury, he died peaceable in his
own house.

62. PROGRESSION.
The fortunat proceedings of John de Trosnouie, otherwise called Zischa,
Captain of the distressed Christians, against the Emperor Sigismund. The
practices of Pope Martin to destroy the Christians in Bohemia, after the death
of Zischa. The cunning shifts of Martin the fifth, to avoid the reformation of
the Church, at the Council of Constance. The Council of Basil deposes
Eugenius, and chooses Amades, Duke of Sauoy, for Pope. Of the coming of the
Emperor of Greece and the Patriarch of Constantinople, to the Council at
Florence. Vladislaus king of Hungary makes

Aeneas Syluius in histor. Bohem. c. 35. and 36.
GReat was the authority of John Hus in Bohemia, whose purity also of life
commended him to be powerful in words. The people were filled with his
doctrine, especially at Prage, the capital city, where, upon the exceeding
great Indulgences of John the four and twentieth, they made this outcrie, That
he was Antichrist: and when the magistrate had put many of them to death in
prison, not daring to do it openly, the people seeing their blood running under
the gate of the These are the Saints that have delivered up their bodies for
the testament of God. Moreover, that Epitome of Roman abominations, which was
come so near unto them at Constance, made their stinking savor reach so far as
into Bohemia; the people of Sueuia complaining, That in so very little space of
time they had brought in with them so great a deluge of uncleanness, as could
not be washed away in thirty years, seeing that among the train of those
Prelates are numbered of Historiographers, to be four hundred and fifty common
whores, and three hundred juglers. The report then of the death of John Hus
coming upon this, and above all the infamous treachery used toward him,
exceedingly stirred up the people, yea made them so much the more believe
Sophia, of the house of Bauaria, who governed the kings weakness, show her
self repugnant unto them. But he being deceased of a palsy, the Emperor
Sigismund his brother succeeded, who instigated by the Council, and after by
the Pope, resolves to use all violence against them, and employeth against
them all the ^tes of the Empire, assembling Princes, Monstrelet. vol. 1. c. 257.
Prelates, Knights, Esquires, and common people, out of Liege, Holland, Zeeland,
Henault, and other places, and left nothing unattempted that could be done
either by force of war, or bitterness of torments. There rose up at that
time one John de Trosnouie, called Zischa, because he had but one eye, of a
noble house, but of mean fortunes, yet a valiant man, who gathered together
the wandering and scattered people of every age and sex, into a place of
advantage. It were incredible, but that the adversaries themselves do testify
it, he Sigismund, and ever got the upper hand, and in some of them after he
had lost his eye, blind of both, he was no less fortunat a Leader of this
wretched people; whose murmurings often in that desperate estate, was no less
difficult a matter for him to restrain and appease, than to sustain the
violent force of the enemy: till at length Sigismund seeing all things succeed
well unto him, and that at his only beck all the affairs of Bohemia were
swayed, resolves to overcome and ruin him with fair words; and gives unto
him the Lieutenancie of the kingdom, with chiefest authority, and a great
yearly pension, on condition, That he should acknowledge him king, and cause
all the rest also to acknowledge him. Here the acclamation of Pope Pius is
worthy noting: Surely a great ignominy to the Majesty Royal, shame to the
glory Imperial, and eternal infamy to the Christian Commonweal, Aeneas
Syluius Histor. Bohem. c. 46.
That our age has seen Sigismund (a Prince of good years, borne of
Emperors, and himself an Emperor, whose name Italy, France, Germany, and
all Europe, honored, and whom barbarous nations feared) a suppliant unto this
man, not borne otherwise of any great nobility, an old man, blind, an
heretic, given to sacrilege, and all wickedness, to offer unto him money, and
the greatest honors that he might vouchsafe, to take his part. But the death
of Zischa, partly broken with travels, partly with years, brake off the
treaty. And some write that he dyed of the plague: Whereupon Syluius has
this bitter taunt, Him whom the hand of man was not able to kill, the finger of
God destroyed. Orphans, as shall be seen in his place. The Epitaph written on
his tomb, in the city of Tabor, which he had builded, is memorable: I John
Zischa, rest here, in skill of military affairs not inferior to any of the
Emperors, or Captains, Paralipom. Abbatis Vispergensis.
a severe revenger of the pride and covetousness of the Clergymen, and a
most valiant defender of my country. That which Appius Claudius, being blind,
did for the Romans in well counselling, and Furius Camillus in valiantly
exployting, the same have I done for my Bohemians. etiam insalutato, inuitoque
Papa, Even without having saluted the Pope, and in despite of his teeth. And
underneath was written in Greek, (...), John Zischa, enemy of the Priests
covetous of dishonest gain; but Neither is it to be omitted, That when a
certain Picard came into Bohemia, and had by his illusions enticed after him
some people into an island of the river Lusmik, where he had taught them to go
naked, and promiscuously to couple themselves one with another, whence they
were called Adamites (as it is an ordinary thing with Satan to cast such
mistie clouds over the light of the Gospel, when he sees it begin to shine
forth;) Zischa and his people were the first that set upon them, with open
force invaded the island, and put them all to the edge of the sword, excepting
two only, of whom they might learn the particularities of their impious
superstition: When notwithstanding the Preachers of John Hus with diverse
calumnies, the Fathers of the Council of Constance condemned it for the
opinions of Wickliffe; but they imputed to wickliffe such opinions, after their
own pleasure, as he never thought off, and one monstrous above the rest, That
God ought to obey the devil, although the calumny it self is such as shows
their untrue dealing: and none of them that wrote against Wickliffe, whilst he
was alive, does make mention of any such. And as for John Hus, Pope Pius the
second recounteth in his history the articles of his doctrine, agreeable to
our confessions. And there is extant the confessions of the Bohemians,
exhibited to their kings, when liberty of their religion was permitted them;
in which is nothing which agrees not Martin loses not courage; on the
contrary thinking, as indeed it was, that the union of this people was shaken
by the death of Zischa, determined to contriue against them. They had two
different captains for the war, the great and the little Precop, and thence
their concord seemed to be but ill repaired. He therefore sends the Cardinal
of Winchester, an Englishman, into Germany, to stir up the mind of the
Emperor, and command the Germans to take the Cross against this people; and
so is a threefold army levied, the first out of the circuit of Saxony, and
the towns by the sea coast, commanded by the duke of Saxony; the second out
of the territory of Franconia, by the Marquess of Brandebourg; and the third
out of the Otho Archbishop of Treuer: who by three ways enter into Bohemia,
and join themselves together, jointly to recover the city Mizla, which the
night before the enemies had surprised. That handful of men seemed unable to
stand against so mighty an army, nevertheless having gathered themselves
together in have, they march directly toward their enemies; Aeneas Syluius c.
48.
But they (says Pius the second) fled without seeing the enemy, and coming
to Thaco^ia, left their artillery and booty there. The Cardinal comes to
meet them, admiring at the fearful and shameful flight of so many Captains
and valiant men: He earnestly entreats them again and again, to turn back
their face to the enemy, every way weaker than they: But Pius the second had
not first written it, and in so many words: Scarcely were they entered into the
forest, when the Bohemians coming upon them, began to assail the hindmost
troops: then their flight is made more disorderly and fearful, neither do
the Germans give over sooner to fly, than the Bohemians to follow. Therefore
they take their baggage, win Thacouia by assault, and make themselves masters
of the artillery: Thence they wast Misnia, tax Franconia, Bamberg, Nuremberg,
and other cities, to redeem themselves. Here Sigismund and Pope Martin
bethink themselves of another army stronger than the former, unto which all
Julian Cardinal of S. Angelo commanded for the Pope, and the Elector of
Brandebourg for the Emperor, many Princes accompayning them; there was in the
army forty thousand horse, but the number of the footmen was not so many: And
with these great forces the Cardinal enters into the country, putting all he
can to fire and sword, and sparing neither sex nor age. Yet scarcely have the
feet of all touched the borders, but that, whether there were treason in the
army of the faithful, as many supposed, or that a vain fear had invaded the
minds of men without cause, they trembled throughout all the camp, and before
there was one enemy seen they betook themselves to a most shameful flight.
Julian wondreth whence this fear rose, what reason might persuade such an
army to fly: He went about suing to the Captains, and exhorting them to take
arms, to set themselves in battle array, and courageously to expect the
enemy: That they did not now contend for the glory of the kingdom, or for
the possession of some country, but waged war for their lives, religion, for
the honor of Christ, and salvation of souls: That it was a shameful thing
for the Germans, whose nobility and virtue was famous throughout all the
world, to fly out of battle; that better were it to die, then to give place
to But truly here might Pius have said more to purpose, that from the death of
Zischa, Here is the finger of God. But whatsoever Julian could vpbraid them of,
or set before their eyes, all is in vain; so much had fear overcome sha^^*
The ensigns are suddenly snatched up, and as if there were no General in the
army, every man tumultuously without staying for commandment, without
saluting his fellow, also some casting away their arms, make have to flight
running as fast as they could, no otherwise than if the enemy had been hard at
their backs; and the Cardinal, will he nill he, is feign to accompany them.
Aeneas Syluius Histor. Bohem. c. 48. and 49.
A while after the enemy emboldened by their fear, come and seize upon their
baggage and get a great booty. Wherefore the Emperor and the Pope despairing
that they should ever by force bring Monstrelet, Monstrelet. vol. c. 1.258.
though ill affected toward the Bohemians, says, They feared no martyrdom,
no torments, their very women took arms and fought, and the dead bodies of
many were found among the slain in battles. So that here if we respect the
cause and reason of this war it may seem to be compared to that of the
Machabees; Pope Martin with Antiochus, both in their Councels and in their
successes, warring in time past against the people of God: which Antiochus also
is set forth unto us for a figure of Antichrist.

Sigismund had given hope to the complaints of the people from all parts, That
John Gerson Chancellor of the same, and M. Peter de Aliaco Cardinal, which to
this day are read; yet they were appointed to be examined after order was taken
for the schism. When therefore Sigismund saw all things finished that seemed
should go before, Concilium Constantiens. Sess. 12.14 17.39. Sess. 15. and 21.
That John the four and twentieth was deposed, That Gregory the xij had
renounced, That sentence was given against Benedict the xiij, and order taken
(as it was thought) to prevent schisms to come, and moreover John Hus and
Hierome of Prague condemned Sess. 40.
in which sat chief the Cardinal of Ostia, William Cardinal of S. Mark read
certain Decrees, of which he required the Council to give sentence, that they
might be published by the future Pope Sigismund, who, to some that said
reformation answered, yea rather a matoritis, with the greatest, meaning the
Pope and Cardinals. For he himself had instituted a form of reformation, which
is yet read, printed at Ausbourg in the year 1484. Wherefore, Cardinal
Colonne being elected Pope (called Martin the fifth) on S. Martins day 1417, and
Sigismund urging him earnestly to a reformation, he declares, That this long
sojourning at Constance, had bin a discommoditie to all the Churches; That so
great a business needed mature deliberation; That every Province, as says
Hierome, has their peculiar manners and opinions, which without trouble could
not be soon taken away: and by his cunning devises he prevailed so much, that
he obtained the dissolution of the Council, on condition Concilium
Constantiens. Sess. 45. Platina in Martino 5.
Cardinal Winbald by the Popes commandment, pronounces, Domini^ite in pace,
My Lords depart in peace: with which words they were dismissed, Sublato, says
Platina, omnium consensu maxim vero Imperatoris, without the consent of all,
yea of the Emperor; Who entreating him, that he would yet sojourne but a very
little while longer in Germany, Martin excused himself that the Chapels of
the Saints by the Popes absence went to ruin. Wherefore, says Volateran, he
departed against the will and liking of Sigismund. What fit excuse, when there
were propounded to him the diseases of the Church, fretting away her most
inward bowels, yea threatening an utter ruin at hand? Martin then passes into
Italy, triumphing without doubt, that he had by his diligence escaped this
dangerous rock of reformation, which he so much feared; and now wholly
bends his mind to settle and strengthen himself in the Popedom.

Balihasar Cossa, called John the four and twentieth, or according to some the
three and twentieth, sat near to his heart, who had found means for the price
of Cosma de Medicis, who had all power and authority in the city, though it
were a free city. Martine therefore made him Cardinal of Tusculum, where a
few days after he dyed. Peter de Luna, called Benedist the thirteenth, reigned
yet imaginarily in his rock of Arragon, with some of his Cardinals; and
Alfonsus Martin, for that to his prejudice, he had declared king of Sicilie,
Lewis of Anjou, adopted by Queen Ioane. In the mean season, fell out the time
appointed for the Council of Pauia, which he could not with honesty shift
off, though Alfonsus threatened to oppose Benedict against him. He therefore
sends thither Peter Donatus Archbishop of Candie, with some Cardinals to
begin the Council at Pauia: then after, by reason of the pestilence,
transferreth it to Siena, to which place resorted a greater number of all
Nations than to Pauia. Neither wanted there the Ambassadors of Alfonsus to
prolong the Council, till he might with bountious gifts promote the business
of Benedict. But Martin thinking it good to prevent the worst, suddenly
breaks Antoninus says, it was only held perfunctorie, for fashion sake.
Till at last Martin is delivered of this fear, first by the death of Benedict,
in the year 1424, An. 1424. Antonin. tit. 22. cap. 7.
having surpassed the years of S. Peter for the full measure (says the
Author) of his damnation, but not in the seat of S. Peter: to whom
nevertheless his Cardinals created a successor named Clement the 8. But
afterward the said Clement renouncing the Popedom in the year 1428, An. 1428.
whom Martin compelled so to do (he being forsaken of most of his Cardinals)
and giving him the bishopric of Maiorca, and reserving to the Cardinals that
were about him their dignities: and furthermore, having also before all things
appeased the mind of Alfonsus, when he perceived Lewis had no good success at
Naples: then Martin being received at Rome, bends his care to the re-edifying
and repayring of the buildings; and the Cardinals by his example, every one in
their parishes did the like, and that was said instaurare, to restore or
repair the Church. He gave himself also to the gathering of money on all
sides; For, says Antoninus, this thing common report reproved in him, that he
too greedily labored to heap up money; so that he was in no wise able to say
with the chief Apostle, Silver and Gold have I none. But that his exceeding
great temporal treasure was consumed by the hands of his kinsmen, and chiefly
of his nephew the Prince of Salerne, to whom it fell by his death, in bestowing
it on hired soldiers and enemies against the Church. And in the year 1431 he
dies, Angelus de Clauasio a Friar Minorite, author of the Angelical Summa,
writes on the word Pope, Having communicated the matter with his Doctors, he
gave to a certain man leave to marry with his own sister. And this Angelus
flourished almost about the same time under Sixtus the fourth.

Now he had already assigned this Council at the instance of Sigismund, and
for to hold it, ordained Legate Julian Cardinal of S. Angelo, who had already
Condelmero his successor, called Eugenius the fourth, would continue it, and
so much the rather, for that in the second Session it had been deceed these
words, That the Synod gathered together by the assistance of the holy Ghost,
making a general Council and representing the Church militant, has power
immediately from Christ, Council. Basiliensi Sess. 2.
whereunto all men of what estate or dignity soever, yea be it the Pope
himself, is bound to obey in those things that pertain unto Faith; and he
that shall disdain to obey the statutes, unless he repent, Monstrelet. vol.
1. An. 1431.
let him be duly punished. And indeed he endeavored already Sigismund
fearing delay, wrote unto him very vehemently, That under pretense of the
Greeks, he ought not defer the peace of the Church among the Latins: That
the Bohemians had already accepted of the safe conduct, of whose conversion
there was some good hope, which if it would not be, they would then jointly
take counsel together of the means to destroy them: That seeing they profess
to prove their doctrine by the holy Scripture, if the Council should either
be dismissed, or deferred till another time, they would say that the Fathers
could not answer them; and that the Catholics themselves, to Julian, to
continue the Council, otherwise it were to be doubted, that the delaying of
the Council would provoke the Laity to play the madmen against the Church.
Moreover, That the Council it self would by no means consent to the
dissoluing of it, and in that behalf should be followed and out-borne by the
greatest part of the Kings, Princes, Prelates, and of all in general, who
Eugenius was yet but young in the Popedom, and had not as yet enough tried his
strength: at Rome also was disagreement between him and the Colonni, whom he
had diversely molested, for to recover of them the money of Martin, which (as it
was said) they had craftily gotten into their hands, Therefore thinking it best
for him to rest quiet, he approves the convocation of the Council of Basil,
and confirms the Legation of Cardinal Julian, and that so much the rather,
for that Sigismund came into Italy, whose Colonni, he feared. But this Prince,
otherwise great, either by his own negligence, or more truly, by reason of
poverty, came thither in so poor a manner, that he easily put away from him
all fear. We have seen him (says Valla) with few followers about him, live
but as for a day, and he would have perished for hunger if Eugenius had not fed
him, though not gratis, for he wrested from him the Donation. He coming to
Rome to be crowned Emperor of the Romans, could not be crowned of the Pope,
but on condition that he should ratify the donation of Constantine, and also
give all those things anew. Yea he adds in indignation, What is more
contrary, than to be crowned Roman Emperor, and to renounce Rome? to be
crowned of him, whom he confesses, and (as much Yea and Eugenius adiureth him,
before he set the Crown on his head, presently to depart Rome, and to stay no
longer in Italy: and so he forthwith passed the Alps, Platina in Eugenio 4.
and returned into Germany. And this is it Platina has: In the beginning of
his Popedom, moved by the words of the Emperor, Princes, and Prelates, he
confirmed the Council of Basil, even by his Apostolical letters: for he was so
vexed with wars, that he scarcely had power to breath: but taking heart
again, he constantly Thus spoke he in favor of the Popes.

Whereup Eugenius stoutly takes upon him to dissolve this Council, or to
assign another somewhere else, and he publishes his Bulls, whereby he
reuoketh both the Council and Cardinal Julian, whom he had appointed to
preside there; who speedily returns to him into Italy. The Fathers of the
Council on the contrary, by their ambassadors sundry times beseech him,
That he would come and be there present himself, otherwise by dissoluing the
Council he would give occasion of scandal: yea they decree, That reuocation
can have no place, and set before him the most grievous punishments propounded
in the Council Sess. 10.11.12.26.
he with his is to expect the like judgment of God as in time past fell upon
Core, Dathan, and Abiron, schismatikes. Lastly, they admonish, cite, blame,
accuse, and adjure him, leaving no form requisite unobserved or done, they
abrogat the Cardinals by him created for to hold another Council: Sess. 31.34
35.
they suspend him from the Popedom, depose him, pronounce him a notorious
schismatike, periurer, heretic, scandalous, incorrigible, obstinat, deprived,
deposed, put down; and as such a one they take from him all obedience, and
make a Decree for the choosing another in his room. All which things in their
order reach Sigismund in the mean time was deceased, who had chiefly set
forward the Council; that Eugenius also with his had assigned another Council
first at Ferrara, in the year 1438, An. 1438.
and after by reason of the pestilence there, transferred it in the year 1439
to Florence: An. 1493.
whither came the Emperor Palaeologus of Greece, to entreat the succors of
the Latins against the Turks, and for that cause, as it was thought, was the
more pliable to the pretentions of the Romish Church. But the Fathers of the
Council of Basil proceed farther to the election of a successor, and prescribe
beforehand the form of the oath that he ought to take, namely, To execute and
observe the Decrees of the Counsels of Constance and Basil: Sess. 37.
also They further declare the Council of Ferrara to be unlawful, and none at
all, and term it a Conuenticle: And presently also authorize three Catholic
truths, against certain Inuectiues of Eugenius. The first is, That the power
of a general Council, representing the universal Church, Sess. 38.
is above the Pope and all other whomsoever, is a truth of Catholic Faith.
Secondly, That the Pope can by no means of his own authority dissolve a
general Council, or prorogue it to another time, or transfer it from one
place to another, without the consent thereof. Thirdly, That he which
obstinatly repugneth the foresaid truths, is to be rudged an heretic. And
these they handle in a writing published expressly. In Amades Duke of Sauoy,
absent, by the name of Felix the fourth, who a little before did live an
Hermits life at Ripaille, upon the lake of Lausanne. In the mean time Eugenius
was not idle in Italy. Charles the seventh, king of France, who held for the
Council of Basil, had sent his galleys into the Ionicke sea, for to meet John
Palaeologus, Emperor of the East, and to give him to understand in what place
the lawful Council was held, and to persuade him to take land in France, and
thence to conduct him to Basil. Eugenius having corrupted with money the
General of the French galleys, breaks off his course, and draws him to his
part. Whereupon Eugenius takes occasion not a little to commend his Council,
by the hope of making an Eugenius takes the occasion offered, and wins the
Dolphine of France (who was afterward Lewis the eleventh) who of those broken
troops gathered together to the number of thirty thousand and more, and under
diverse pretenses marches toward Basil, but indeed with a purpose (as the
Historiographers of Italy do testify) to terrify the Fathers of the Felix
and him miserably distracted; yet there were many that acknowledged neither.
And as Felix and his favorers, bold upon the authority of the Council of
Basil, defamed Eugenius in his Bulls: so he likewise spares not Felix in his,
Felix, Duke of Sauoy, borne in a country infamous for witches and sorcerers,
from his youth consulted with them, had this put into his head, That he should
be Pope; and that to this end he had assumed the habit of an Hermit, for to set
a monstrous head on the Church, as a most false hypocrite; and that he might
cover under sheep clothing his woluish cruelty, That he truly was an Image
of Nabuchadnezzar, or rather an Idol of Beelzebub set up in the Church of God, a
Lucifer, who said, I will place my seat in the North, etc. And worse he would
have said if he could: Whilst in the mean time in his letters and Bulls he
styles himself, The true Spouse of the Church. What dare Antichrist do more?
And hence let the Reader judge, what lawful vocation Eugenius dies a
schismatike, an heretic, deposed, his Acts revoked, disanulled, made void, and
never more thenceforth authorized; and consequently all whatsoever ordinations,
consecrations, have proceeded therefrom, and that by the authority of so
famous a Council: when on the other side Felix, in places of his obedience,
reigns Pope nine whole years, by the Council of Florence excommunicated,
anathematized, and his Bulls declared void, and disanulled, and whatsoever
depends of them, if the vocation of the Ministers of the Church proceed only
from the Pope, as from the head.

Synodi Florentinae Acta Graece conscripta ex Bibliotheca Regia. (...), inquit
Graeca Synodus, (...).
Now, as we have said, Eugenius colored his matters with the coming of the
Eugenius. There the Acts of the Council written in Greek, do testify, that
the Pope did the best he could to make himself be seen in his full pride. In
the morning before the first hour of the day we saw Caristinus come running to
us, sent from the Emperor, who told the Patriarch, That the Pope expected,
that his Holiness should go to him and adore him, and kiss his feet: and the
Emperor (says he) has already insisted and contended three days, that he
might not (says he) as we are brethren, let us embrace and kiss each other
brotherly, otherwise I will do nothing. The Patriarch had also other speeches
concerning that matter, unto which they made answer. And the Patriarch, with
all the Bishops that he had brought with him, took counsel together, and with
one voice did decree, That this is neither just nor meet, nor profitable to be
done. The Bishops of the Pope return again in the morning, and instantly urge
that kissing of feet; but the Patriarch declares, this instance is unseemly:
for whence (says he) has (says he) assent unto it, I will never do it; but
if the Pope be pleased that I salute him brotherly, according to our ancient
manner, in that sort I will go to him; but if he accept not of that, I refuse
all, and return back again. At length (says the Greek Synod) it came to
this, That whereas the Pope thought to have made the Patriarch kiss his feet
in a frequent assembly, when he in his privy chamber, and that the Cardinals
only being present. All which things were on each side treated and concluded,
before the Greeks would come forth of their ships. For the order of the
Council, the Pope contended, that the Greek Emperor and the Patriarch, with
the Orientals, should sit on the left side of the Temple, and the Western
peoples on the right hand, and that himself at the higher end of all, in the
midst between both, as head of both, should have an eminent seat: The
Emperor contrariwise debateth, That this place rather belongs to him. At
last they agreed, that the Pope with his Western Eugenius ouerruled so far,
that his throne was placed by the high Altar, the Roman Emperors (though
absent) in the next place, but some degrees lower, and equal with him sat the
Cardinals and Western Prelates: the Emperor of Greece had his throne set right
against the Popes, and on his left hand sat the Patriarch of Constantinople,
but in an inferior degree, and equal with him were the seats of the Legates of
the other Eastern Patriarchs, of the Archbishops and Prelates, every one in
his order. And hence may the Reader discern what the Patriarch might judge of
the pride of the Latin Bishop. But what may we say of Baronius, who in diverse
places contesteth, That the left hand Laetentur coeli, wherein they agree on
both sides, That the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son: That
the Sacrament may be indifferently made of leauened or unleavened bread: That
the souls of the faithful that have not yet satisfied for their sins, go
to Purgatory: That the Pope of Rome is Head of the universal Christian
Church. All which articles the Greek Emperor causes to be approved by the
most part of his, hoping he should have assistance against the Turks. But
Michael Bishop of Ephesus, with some others, does ever withstand the same,
rejecting especially the two later. Joseph Archbishop of Constantinople was
dead, Eugenius would have them proceed before him to the choosing of another,
promising, against his disposition, to ordain him without money, yea to give
them some if need were; and to depose him that did obtain with him the place
of Patriarch: which he would not do if they deferred his election till they
came into their country. The Greeks perceiving whereto he tended, namely,
that he might enter possession of the supreme power in the Church by that
means, and that with their consent, answer him with one accord, That their
Patriarch cannot be, by their laws, chosen any where else than at
Constantinople: That it is their custom he should be chosen and consecrated in
his own Church: That the Emperor, Concisium Florent. Sess. vltim.
though much against his mind, with gracious words he let them depart. Now they
were no sooner returned into their country, but they were rejected of their
Churches, in this especially, that they had admitted the supreme authority of
the Pope of Rome, whose pride being more nearly looked into, they at last
refute it in their writings published, notwithstanding that he had endeavored
to bind unto him some of the best learned, as Isidore Bishop of Russia, and
Bessarion Bishop of Nicea, to whom he had given a Cardinals hat, which he
chose rather to wear in Italy than in Greece. And from that time forth were
by the Popes neglected the affairs of Greece, and abandoned

But it is in no wise here to be omitted, That during the time that Eugenius
held his Council, partly at Ferrara and partly at Florence, he published
diverse writings against that Decree of Basil, That a Council is above the
Pope, in which he did not stick to affirm, That so far was it off that he
ought to obey general Councels, that then he most merited when he contemned
the Decrees of the Council: and which is more, he declares this proposition
to be heretical, The Council is above the Pope, although both then and ever
since it was held and affirmed by all the Universities Eugenius should the
Bishop of Rome be made superior or of higher authority than the Universal
Church, and consequently that pretended infallibility of the Church should be
derived not now to the Romish Church, but to one only man, which is the
highest degree of Antichrist in the Church, according to that of S. Augustine
in his book of the city of God, August. de Ciuitate Dei l. 18. cap. 2.
That Antichrist should not only sit in Templo Dei, in the Temple of God, but
as Saint Paul has it (...) in Templum, into the Temple, as if he himself
were the Temple it self, he alone the Church. In the mean time, let the
Reader judge of that Infallabilitie of

As touching the affairs of the Bohemians, for which particularly the
Empeperour Sigismund had so instantly requested the Council; the most part of
the Churches, terrified with the perfidious treachery used toward John Hus,
and Hierome of Prague, refused to send any one thither: but the principal of
the Nobility ouer-ruled the matter, that some should appear, for to render a
reason of the innovation in religion imputed unto them. So soon as they came
thither, they were received very courteously by Cardinal Julian the Legate, who
was not yet called back. Then in the Council he makes an Oration, wherein he
bringing Oration Julian. Cardinal. Legati in Append. Concilij Basiliens.
notwithstanding that they affirmed nothing but by the holy Sigismund made
upon them, and by the division and backsliding of their companions: Yet do we
see their Churches outliue so many miseries, and until these times consist and
continue most flourishing and largely propagated. As touching the Fathers of
the Council of Basil, they seem to be somewhat ashamed of that Decreee of
Constance, concerning the Communion under both kinds: And whereas they of
Constance said, Although Christ has instituted the holy Supper under both
kinds, etc. Yet notwithstanding, etc. These of Basil say, having well examined
the Divine Scriptures, and the doctrines of the holy Fathers, That the
faithful of the Laity or of the Clergy communicating, are not bound by the
commandment of the Lord, to receive the Sacrament altering and wresting the
decision beside the purpose; whereas indeed the Bohemians complained not, that
they were constrained to a whole Communion by the Romish Church, but that they
were excluded from it: And what greater necessity can there be to a Christian
man, than to stick unto the precept and prescript rule of his Savior? These
are ever their subtle deceits. Lastly, this Council of Basil had forbidden to
exact or pay Annates, under pain of Simonie; Eugenius, who willingly would loose
nothing, complains as of an injury done to the Church, That this could not,
neither ought to have been done, without having first consulted with Eugenius
and his College of Cardinals, Respons. factae per Domin. Anton. Auditorem pro
part Eugenij.
If any pretended abuses in them, they ought to have evidently abusing the
Scriptures. For, said he, whence shall the Apostolic See defray charges, in
providing for the necessities and commodities of the universal Church, and for
those things that belong unto peace, and the extirpation of heresies and
errors? And with the same reason overthrows he that which they had ordained
concerning indulgences, election, causes and vacations of Scribes and
Abbreuiators of the Court of Rome, and other like pillages. And this was not
the least cause why he would dissolve the Council. An Author of those times,
not to be suspected, says, That he was so prodigal of Indulgences, that the
Englishmen, Thomas Gascoigne in Dictionario Theologico.
who perceived it, commonly said, Rome comes now to our gates. The church

We are not to omit that Eugenius, who from the time of Martin his predecessor
had accustomed himself to warfare, and all the time of his Popedom had been
entangled in war, made such a wound in Christendom, as has bled ever since.
Vladislaus king of Hungary, had made peace with the Turk. Eugenius sends
unto him Cardinal Julian, who promising unto him some succors, seeing that it
could not subsist with the enemies of Christ without his commandment:
whereupon, ensues a bloody battle, in which the Turks had the victory;
Aeneas Syluius l. 1. Epist. 81.
for to show us (says Aeneas Siluius, after Pope Pius the second) That oaths
ought to be kept, not only with the domestic friends of faith, but also with
the enemies thereof. In that battle was slain king Vladislaus, a pattern of
singular valor, and of renowned Nobility; Cardinal Julian was wounded, and
in his retiring is slain of the Christians themselves, as Author of this
miserable discomfiture, by the desloyaltie of which he was instrument. And from
this misfortune arose others without end, and without number; so dangerous is
it for any to enterprise Bonfinij Hist. Hungar. Dec. 1. lib. 6.
is that which we read in the Hungarian History: When Amurath beheld his army
put to flight by king Vladislaus, not without great slaughter, pulling forth of
his bosom the Articles of peace solemnly sworn, unfolds it, and lifting up
his eyes steadfastly unto heaven, says, These are, O Jesus Christ, the covenants
of peace which thy Christians have made with me; they have holily sworn by thy
Divine Majesty, and have violated the faith given in thy name; they have
perfidiously denied their God: Now, O Christ, if thou be God, I beseech the
revenge here these thine injuries and mine; and to them that as yet acknowledge
not thy name, show the punishment of violated This happened in the year 1444,
An. 1444.
from which time the state of Christendom could never well recover it self.

More our the Council of Basil, or at leastwise they which in their name wrote
against the Bohemians, on their part set forward the progress of abomination.
For when those Churches had determined not to admit any doctrine that was not
grounded on holy Scripture, Cardinal Cusan was charged by letters to confound
them with this Axiom, which they were not ashamed to maintain, That the
Scriptures can by no means be of the essence of the Church, either begun or
continued, Item, That the Church is not known by the Gospel, but the Gospel
by the Church. Item, That so much the more worthily is the word of God given of
God, by how much the farther off it is from all Scripture, yea and from all
vocal word: That by this reason he might reduce all things to the Church,
which they call Catholic, from the Catholic to the Roman, and at last draw
them from the Roman to their Council. And when those Churches replied, That
that was not the mind nor voice of the ancient Church, which had otherwise
celebrated the holy Eucharist, and had in another sense interpreted the
Scripture, than now in these days it is: Cardinal. Cusanus Epist. 2 and 3. ad
Bohemos.
Let not this move thee (says he) that in diverse times, diverse are the
ceremonies of Priests; and that the Scriptures be found applied to The reason
follows, because the judgment of the Church being changed, the judgment
also of God is changed. And by this account, whether it be their Church or
their Council, it is not only extolled above the holy Scripture, but also
above God himself; who is held, if we believe them, to change his counsel
after their pleasure: of which doctrine truly even the Jews in their Thalmud,
and Eugenius in the Council of Florence, Pius the second in his eloquent bull
on that matter, and others afterward) it follows that the Pope is exalted
above the holy Scriptures, yea above God himself, and is therefore to be
accounted for him, of whom the Apostle speaks, 2. These. 2.
He exalts himself against all that is called God or that is worshipped, so
that he sits in the Temple of God as God; who dare correct God, alter the
sense of his word after his own pleasure and commodity? And thus Reader thou
see, how this Mystery of Iniquity

OPPOSITION.
The precedent progression is intermixed with so many and mighty oppositions,
that there seems to be no need of any other; notwithstanding, as sighs
increase according to the evil, so in this place abounds unto us very
many. The Emperor Sigismund had framed certain Articles of reformation, to
be exhibited to the Council of Constance; diverse others also in diverse Nations
had conceived also some patterns. M. Peter de Alliaco, Cardinal of Cambray, is
particularly commanded to write these things, for to show them to the Council
in An. 1415.
the first of November, four months after that John the four and twentieth
had renounced the Popedom, the Seat being vacant, two years before Martin was
chosen to succeed, during which space this matter of reformation seemed fittest
of all to be thought upon. The Preface of his discourse is by a place of S.
Bernard upon the Canticles, Sermon 33. A rotten ulcer spreads it self at
this day over all the body of the Church, so much the more desperate, by how
much the more it is far and wide extended; and by how much the more it is
inward, so much the more it is dangerous. For if an heretic enemy should
openly arise, he might be cast out, and so wither; if a violent enemy, she
might perhaps hide her self from him: but now whom shall she cast out, or from
whom shall she hide her self? All are friends, and all enemies, etc. they And
this place have we above alleged at length, out of which he draws this
conclusion, Seeing that the Church from henceforth was fallen from evil to
worse, unless betimes it be looked to and prevented, after the horrible
darkness of so many schisms, much more horride things were in very few days
to be expected. He prosecuteth afterward by degrees those things that he
thinks do belong to reformation of the universal body of the Church: First,
That it is necessary there should be eftsoons held general and Provincial
Councels for the correction of abuses, especially general, Many (says he)
suspect that she has dissembled these things, and for this cause has
neglected the holding of Councels, that she might the more fully bear dominion
according to her own lust and pleasure, and usurp the more freely the rights
and prerogatives of other Churches: That before the time of Constantine,
because the Church might not with free liberty hold Councels, it has fallen
into diverse heresies; therefore no marvel if in these later times, through
neglect of Councels, it fall into diverse schisms, and innumerable other evils
ad haereses disponentia, which dispose it to heresies: That general Councels
are first of all necessary Did. 19. C. Anastas. and ibid. Glossa and Archid.
did. 15.
especially of the Roman, which is de arduis pertinentibus ad fidem, difficult
in things pertaining to faith; in as much as that which the Gloss says (That
the Pope ought to require a Council when matters of faith is debated) is not to
be referred only to the articles of faith, but to those things that belong to
the state of the faithful Church: whereas otherwise it would be too dangerous
a thing to commit our faith to the judgment and fancy of one man alone.
Lastly, that now, if ever, was a fit opportunity, either to procure the union
of the Greeks with the Latins, or to repress the designements of the Turks,
who after they have rent and torn in pieces the Empire, will with all violence
rush upon the Church, and so make way for Antichrist: And already (says he)
many very godly devout men, not without cause, do fear praesentialiter,
presently both the one and the other ruin; namely, of the Empire by the Turks,
and of the Church by Antichrist. 2. For the reformation of the Court of Rome:
That for the avoiding of schisms, which proceed from the factions of the
Cardinals, it is sufficient to have of every each Province but one only
Cardinal: Also that the Pope ought to provide remedies, and cut off the
grievous burdens wherewith the Roman Church oppresses other Churhces, seeing
that the Greek Church is alienated from it because of her exactions,
excommunications, and statutes: and that to take away those exactions, it were
meet she should abate of her pomp, of her excess, and They lay burdens on
men's shoulders, which they would not touch with the top of the finger. And this
article reached very far. 3. For the Prelates, That they should be chosen
capable in doctrine, exemplarie in manners, resident in their charges, moderat
in diet and expense, That it was necessary to declare, that many observations
are of that kind, that they are rather counsels than precepts. He brings for
example, Lent, to be moderated out of the circumstances, the Service to be
abridged to a devout and entire brevity, the variety of Images in Churches to
be repressed, a mean and bounds to be set in new Holidayes, Churches, and
Saints; on Sondayes and solemn feasts only to abstain from labor, and out
of the Divine Service to banish and put forth all Apocripha Scriptures, new
prayers, and to be short, all novelties. 4. For religious persons, That their
great number and diversity is altogether pernicious, whilst the one boasts
and is proud in his Rule against the other; above all, the begging dammageable
to spittles and hospitals and to other truly poor and needy wretches,
prejudicial also to the Curats and poor of Parishes, and likewise, if it be
well considered, to all estates of the Church: Those Preaching money-gatherers
above all, because they defile the Church with their lies, and make it
ridiculous, and the office of Preaching contemptible. Monks after the Canon of
Chalcedon, to be restrained in their monasteries to fastings and prayer,
excluded from Ecclesiastical and secular affairs, and to be debarred from all
studies, Divinity excepted, seeing it is evident, That the Court of Rome, in
contemning Divines, have preferred to all Ecclesiastical degrees the students
of gainefull sciences, when nevertheless the Primitive Divines have edified
the Church, which some Neither do they withdraw themselves from the
jurisdiction of Ordinaries against the holy Decrees, by humane privileges
obtained by importunity: For it is not a little to be doubted (says he)
whether such men are in state to be saved. All which things, although they
respect more the circumstance than the substance of Christian religion, yet are
they in no sort touched in that Council. Moreover, Petrus de Alliaco in
Vesperijs.
this same Peter de Alliaco in his Questions, has disputed, Vtrum Petri
Ecclesia lege reguletur, Whether the Church of Peter (meaning the Roman) may be
ruled by a law: where he concludes affirmatively, and John Sarazenus, of the
order of Preachers, durst teach and maintain these same that follow: First,
That all powers and jurisdictions of the Church, which be other than the Papal
power, are from the Pope himself, as touching their institution and collation.
2. Such like powers are not de jure diuino, of divine right, nor immediately
instituted of God. 3. It is not found that Christ has expressed such powers,
to wit, different from the Papal, but only that supreme power to whom he has
committed the foundation of the Church. 4. Whenever any Statuees are made in
any Council, the whole authority giving force to those de jure, by right do
nothing against the chief Priesthood, or Priest, being instituted by him.
(Here after is said, that the Spiritual power is the Pope, as said Hugo de
Sancto Victore 2 De Sacramentis: out of which The professors of Divinity in
Paris, being solemnly assembled on the eighth day of March, and having duly
weighed these positions, condemn them publicly, and compel the said John to
abjure them, and force him to answer unto others contrary, which here do
follow: First, That all powers of jurisdiction of the Church, which are not the
Papal power, are from Christ himself, as touching their primarie institution
and collation, but from the Pope and from the Church, as touching their
limitation and ministerial dispensation. Secondly, Such like powers are de
jure diuino, of divine right, and immediately instituted by God. Thirdly, It is
found in holy Scripture, that Christ has The Acts of all which are solemnly
kept in the Arches of the Sorbone.

The Council of Basil was able perhaps to take in hand a reformation with more
courage than that of Constance; but it had Eugenius to contend with, who, as
before we have seen, defended stoutly even the least articles, so that by
admonitions, gain sayings, and oppositions, he left nothing unattempted.
Notwithstanding Aeneas Syluius, then Clerk of the Ceremonies, who was there
present, and since Pius the second, and therefore a most fit witness, assures
us, that many things were there gravely pronounced according to the truth:
although he plainly shows, that Eugenius had intruded into it many of his,
which were incorporated and had taken oath in the Council, and yet
nevertheless in all things took the part of Eugenius, who were vulgarly named
the Grisean sect. An. 1438.
In the year then 1438, when Eugenius had assigned his Council at Ferrara, to
the prejudice of that of Basil, the Emperor Albert came in between to be a
mediator of peace, and for that intent Eugenius name appeared none in show, yet
very many in deed, who set forward his intention. The Fathers of Basil
consented, that for the commodity of the Greeks the place of the Council
should be changed. Eugenius for to retain his authority, would have the
Council of Basil be dissolved. In the mean between both was the Emperor,
who would have it so to be transferred, that it should be thought dissolved:
Nevertheless he found so much reason in the proceeding of them of Basil, that
he gave them for Protector of the Council Conrade de Windzberg; whereby he
manifested both that he approved the Council, and disliked the wiles of
Eugenius, namely that which the Author notes, The ambassadors requested that
the Fathers would repair and transfer the Council to another place; which
one thing Eugenius seemed to have sought, that so he might either disperse the
Fathers of the Council, or take away the liberty thereof.

During the Parliament of Mentz, was disputed among the Divines in the Council
of Basil, of the person of Eugenius, the one part affirming, That he is an
heretic, others, That he is a relapse, and some denying both: the more
grievous sentence carried it away, That he was an heretic and a relapse both
together. The Divines therefore set down in writing eight Conclusions (which
they call Truths) and send copies of them throughout all the world, which were
such; First, It is a Nevertheless the Fathers would have these yet publicly
be examined by all the Doctors both of the Civil and Canon Law, for the space
of six days, Lewis Cardinal and Archbishop of Arles, sitting President, a man
of great learning and courage, and they would that all should speak their
opinion of them. The Abbot of Palermo, vulgarly called Panormitan, took upon
him the defense of Eugenius, yet durst not deny that he was an relapse, whom
he would rather should be called a Prolapse, because from a relapse is no
return. On the contrary John de Segouio, a Spanish Divine of great fame,
stiffly maintains out of his own sayings, That he is an Infidel rather than
a believer, a member of Satan rather than of Christ; opposing to that singular
Gloss alleged by Panormitan, That the judgment of the Roman Church ought to
be preferred before all the world, the authority of S. Hierome, Orbis mayor
est vrbe, The authority of the whole world is greater than of one only city.
The Bishop of Arges proceeds, That the Pope is only the Minister of the
Church. Panormitan waxing in choler, contendeth, That he is Lord thereof.
Segouia replieth, Take heed what thou say, Panormitane, that is a more
honorable title for the Bishop But the Archbishop of Lions, Ambassador of the
French king, stoutly proved by many reasons, that Eugenius was an heretic, and
detested the lack of courage of them, that had created such a man Bishop of
Rome. The Bishop of Burgos Ambassador for Spain, insisting on the three
former conclusions, concludes out of all the Law divine and humane, That the
Council is above the Pope, that he is an heretic which denies it. But
coming to other things, which properly respected the fact of Eugenius, It
seemed (says the Author) that he somewhat departed (says he) did not then
see the force of the truth, which furnished this man, speaking for it, with
sentence and words; but speaking against it, took away from him that very
eloquence which naturally was ingrafted in him? Yet thus much modesty showed
both he and Panormitan, that they said ingeniously, That the judgment of the
Divines was to be believed, and not their opinion who were not instructed in
the holy Scriptures. What Doctors of the Canon Law are these? what assessours
or assistants of Popes and of Councels, which neglected to read the holy
Scriptures.

The Author proceeds to declare, what was done upon those three conclusions:
upon the first, namely, which has two points, Whether the Council be above
the Pope, and whether Catholic faith commands to believe so; And for the
Popes authority was solemnly cited; Thou art Peter and upon this rock etc.
Item, I have prayed for thee Peter, etc. By conference then of places, and by
the exposition of the Fathers, they manifestly prove, that these things were
promised to the church, not to Peter, much less to the Pope: and indeed, that
many Popes have grievously erred, and of these they produce examples; That the
Church, which is represented by a Council, is the mother of all the faithful,
and by consequent of the Pope, whence of Annacletus and Calixtus it is called
Mother; That the Church Whatsoever ye shall bind on earth, etc. for this power
was given to the Church not unto Peter, for edification not for destruction,
which consequently may be taken away from the Pope, if he abuse it, who is
only Vicar and Steward of the Church; therefore not equal to the Church,
seeing Christ sends Peter himself to the Church, tell it (says he) to the
Church, which if he will not hear, he ought to be accounted an heathen and a
publican: That this Church ought to be heard by the Pope, in a general
Council lawfully assembled: And that all those Canonists, which buzze into his
ear, what or why do thou so; do most shamefully flatter him: That those
decrees are the words of the Popes themseues, laboring to enlarge the fringes
of their garment: That those places also of Scripture, Thou shall be called
Cephas, etc. I will give unto thee the keys, etc. I have prayed for thee, etc.
Feed my sheep, etc. Launch forth into the deep, and the like, are induced
against the true meaning of the holy Scripture; which they prove both by
forcible reasons, Hierome, interpreting the unprofitable salt, That the Prelat
foolish and unsavory in preaching, chiefly in Peter's chair, is to be cast
forth of doors, that is, to be deposed, that he may be trodden under feet of
swine, that is, of Devils, which bear rule over the evil Prelat, as over a
beast of their flock. And this not only for heresy, but for whatsoever crime
whereby the Church is scandalized. But the calling of a Council, does it not
belong to the Pope alone? Yea (says he) if that have place, who sees not that
the ruin of the Church is near at hand, and will presently ensue? For who
knows not that he which will sin, will sin without punishment? And who
will believe that a Pope will assign a Council for to repress and reform
himself? Neither do I find (says he) either by histories, or The first of
all Counsels, where Mathias is substituted in place of Judas, I find to be
gathered not by the commandment of Peter, but of Christ, who commanded his
Apostles, that they should not depart from Jerusalem, but should expect the
promise of the Father. The second for the election of Deacons, was not
assembled by Peter alone, but by the twelve Apostles, for it is written, Then
the twelve called the multitude together. The third for the taking away of
Circumcision, and other legal rites, was gathered by commune inspiration, as
it is written, The Apostles and Elders came together. The fourth for the
permission of certain legal things, seems to be assembled by James the
brother of the Lord. The same was also in the Primitive Church, and since by
the authority Truth, whereon the second depends, That the Pope cannot
dissolve a Council, otherwise, at the first word he should hear of
correction, he would bethink himself of this remedy. There remained the
third, Whether this of Catholic faith is so to be believed: Which they show
affirmatively, because we are held to believe whatsoever is in the Gospel; now
in it, say they, is dic Ecclesiae, on which words the Council of Constance

Now this decision was to be applied against Eugenius, and part of them who had
consented in these Truths, desired that the sentence should be deferred, some
hoping they should have better of him, others, by reason that many Bishops yet
stayed in the Parliament of Mentz, famous men, whose Suffrages might seem to
be expected. And Panormitan took occasion thereupon to infer, That the
Bishops ought to be stayed for, and that inferiors have not in Council a
Suffrage decisiue, but only consultatiue: Unto which added Ludouicus Romanus,
That argument Which speech all wondering at in so great a man, cry out
Blasphemy. Then therefore Lewis Cardinal of Arles, A man of all other most
constant, and borne to the government of general Councels, taking up the
words of all the Orators that had spoken, declares, That all these doubts were
without cause, That these Conclusions had been maturely determined and
weighed, That the ambassadors of all the Princes had given upon these their
sentence, which were the chiefest men in the Church, That the Bishops were in
fault that they were whom they placed in their former state, and have made them
which were not Bishops, but shadows, to be true Bishops: That even they which
now do most draw back, have in their writings avouched the same Truths
(meaning by those words of Panormitan, and Ludouicus Romanus.) But (says he)
the Presbiters are not so to be put down, who in the Council of the Apostles
had a decisiue voice; and in like sort also in the ancient Councels: That in
time past the Bishop and the Presbiter, or Priest, was but one and the same; in
so much that S. Augustine says on these words, I will give unto thee the
keys, etc. That our Lord gave iudiciarie power to Bishops and Priests,
especially seeing they have more done their duty in the Council than the
Bishops; these fearing to lose their dignities and their delights, those for so
just a cause not dreading any loss, nor yet death it self: That the Council
has now sat eight years, so that there cannot be pretended any headlong
proceeding, nor any ignorance. And moreover, the threats of some Princes are
inferred beside the Purpose, who are wiser than to attempt any thing in
prejudice of the Council; and they themselves also being taught by the word of
God, not to fear them that can kill the body only, but him that can cast the
soul into hell. Lastly, That seeing the ambassadors of Eugenius dare preach
every where their new doctrine, That the Pope is above the they ought not
defer the publication of those three Conclusions: yea That they should imitat
the Apostle Paul, who would not for one hour forbear Peter, not walking
according to the truth of the Gospel with a right foot: But that the other
things, which respect his person, might be deferred, least Panormitan exclaim
more than needs. At these words Panormitan, Ludouicus Romanus, and others, made
a great tumult, and greatly vpbraided him, That he had related those
Conclusions at Louaine, and at Colonia; which he himself also denied not. And
very hardly could John de Segouia obtain silence to be made, though all did
take an exceeding great delight to hear him speak: He then strongly confirmed
the sentence of the President, and after many forcible arguments, The followers
of Eugenius (says preach heresy all the world over, neither does any say unto
them that they should surcease: but to you that intend to publish the truth, a
thousand things are whispered in your ears, for to make you be silent, etc.
And to you my Lord President, I say, that you must rather please God than
Princes: If you therefore depart hence without conclusion, know that you shall
render an account thereof in the severe judgment of God. And at length the
Cardinal of Arles pronounces sentence, whereby the minds of the contrary
party were sore troubled. The Council had established eight Conclusions, yet
with intention to retain only the three former: These (says he) in the name
of the This said, he rose up cheerfully, and very many striving, kiss the
skirts of his garments, it being the common opinion, That this was rather a
work of the holy Ghost, than of him. Panormitan being much ashamed, retireth
to his lodging, and in his chamber complains of his king (the king of
Arragon) in that he had compelled him to fight against the truth, and to lose
his reputation, and his soul. And the Author adds, That notwithstanding his
protestation, he had seen him oftentimes in his study complaining of his
Prince, that he was carried away with the counsel of others: and the
Archbishop of Arles vpbraideth him, that none was more eagre in publishing the
errors of Eugenius, none more ready to the Monitories and suspension, and
therefore Te Deum sung according to custom, with the assent of the ambassadors
of the Princes, yea of the Emperor and of the king of France, notwithstanding
the endeavors of the adverse parties to the contrary: and they protested by
the mouth of the Archbishop of Tours, That what they had moved to the
contrary, had not been for that they doubted of the truth and holiness of
those Conclusions (for which they were even ready to suffer martyrdom) but
that they might reserve to themselves some way of treating a peace. The same
Author notes, That the pestilence waxing hot at Basil, many of the Prelates
departed into diverse places, who at the point of death receiving We are within
few hours to appear before the tribunal seat of God: All ye which be
present pray to God to convert them who acknowledge Gabriel (to wit Eugenius)
for Pope, because they cannot be saved in that estate; testifying even to the
last gasp, that they will dye in the faith of the Council of Basil. And
notwithstanding all this danger, the Cardinal of Arles would not depart till
he had fully brought to pass both the deposition of Eugenius, and the election
and coronation of a new Pope, which was Amade Duke of Sauoy, called Felix the
fourth. Then, because he had been married, grew a question whether he might be
chosen; it was determined, That not only he who has had a wife, but he which
yet has one, may be admitted: For why else (say they) do our Doctors
Sacerdores quam-plures vxorari, because many would be saved in a married
Priesthood, which in a barren are damned. Some do note, That the Cardinal of
Arles, to whom the praise of this whole action is referred, being sent from the
Council into lower Germany, in his return, very hardly escaped an ambush
which Eugenius had laid against him; so that he seemed not without cause to
have said in a certain Session of the Council, Christ was sold for thirty

It is worthy remembrance, That when Eugenius had sent Legate Julian Cardinal
of Saint Angelo to the Council of Basil, and presently after sent him
commandment to dissolve it: Julian laid open unto him by letters, how great
an injury he should do himself; and brought many reasons against it, Epist.
Julian. Cardin. Legati in German. ad Eugen. Papam.
among others this, That the Bohemians, who had been called thither, would by
good right say, Is not here the finger of God seen? Behold armies have so
often sled from before them, and now the universal Church also flies. Behold
they can neither be Whereas he alleged his wars, although he most
certainly foresaw, that he should lose Rome and the whole patrimony of the
Church; that he ought rather forgo them than break off the Council, seeing
that the salvation of one soul, for which Christ died, is deerer unto him than
all the temporal demaine of the Church, than the whole world, than heaven it
self. If not (says he) Now is the axe laid to the root, the tree leans
ready to fall, neither can it long persist. For the fear also he was brought
into, least the Council would take away the temporal of the Church; A
wonderful matter (says he) if this Council did not consist of Churchmen, it
might perhaps be doubted: But what Churchman is there, will consent to this
determination, not only To that which at last he replied, That the Council of
Basil was not lawful; Yea rather, answers he, it depends on the Council of
Constance; if that were a true one And let the Reader note the argument of the
Cardinal against the Papists, which call into doubt the authority of these
two Councels, and consequently the universal vocation and succession of Julian
maintains on the contrary, That there hardly is found any, grounded on so
manyfold authority. And therefore he defends the Decree, whereby is
affirmed, That the Council is above the Pope, by the same reasons and
examples, as the Fathers of the Council of Basil.

It was the ordinary question of that time; in which besides the decision of
the Council of Basil, the greatest learned men in particular defend the
sentence of the Council. And Aeneas Syluius before he came to the Popedom, in
the History of the Council of Basil, which we have above abridged, had
plainly declared his mind. Aeneas Syluius Epist. 54. and 55.
In his Epistle also to Gaspar Schlicke the Emperors Chancellor, wherein he
approves the Council of king Charles the seventh, for the It is lawful
(says he) for secular Princes to assemble, whether the Clergy will or no, and
nevertheless an union may be made thereby; for he should be undoubtedly Pope,
whom all the Princes obeyed. I see no Clergymen that will suffer martyrdom
for the one nor for the other party; We all of us have the same faith that
our Princes have, if they did worship Idols, we would worship them also. And
we would not only deny the Pope, but even Christ also, if the secular power
did urge it, because charity is waxed cold, and all faith is perished. How
ever it be we desire peace, be it by another Council, or by an assembly of
Princes, I weigh not, for we are (to wit, of the Romans) the assembling of
this congregation. How far is he from them who acknowledge no Council but
that which the Pope is author of? And not without cause truly considering what
he writes of the Councels of his time to Lupus of Portugal: Jdem Epist. 10.
Now the Church is a play, such as we see of the ball, whilst with the strokes
of the players it is stricken to and fro. But God beholds these things from
on high, and although he seldom inflict But so soon afterward as he sat on
that chair of pestilence, he retracteth, yea when first the Cardinals hat
touched his head, he changes his mind, and declineth to the left hand, as
appears in his last Epistles. In the same manner spoke Laurence Valla, a
Senator of Rome, and wrote a book of purpose against the Donation of
Constantine, at the time when Pope Eugenius caused the Emperor Sigismund to
swear unto it, and otherwise would not crown him: and if you ask what was
the state of the Church in his time, I say, Laurentius Valla de Donatione
Constant.
and exclaim (says he) that in my time there has been none in the Popedom
either a faithful or a wise Steward, so much wants it that he has given
bread and food to the family of God, that the Pope veram illam Romanitatem,
that true Roman heart: If Solomon also for the same cause fell, through the
love of women, into Idolatry, think we that the same is not done in the Pope,
and in the rest of the Clergy? Yea so far is he carried, that he says,
Allege no more unto me thy Dabo tibi claues, etc. I will give thee the keys,
etc. to prove thence thy fullness of power: But will thou know (says he) what
is that Tibi dabo, in virtue of which thou may challenge to thy self that thy
sovereign jurisdiction, read in the Gospel, what Satan says to Christ, Tibi
dabo, I will give thee all these kingdoms, if thou will fall down and worship
me, etc. And as for doctrine he complains, that it is all every where
besprinkled with fables: O wonderful madness of men (says he) which give
credit to these old wives doting tales! But how long is it since this was done?
before the coming of But we had need to set down here the whole book.

Nicholas Cusan, by nation a German, Doctor of Divinity, and afterward a
Cardinal, the most learned of this age, in his books De Concordantia
Catholica, consents to the Council of Basil, Aeneas Syluius l. 1. de Gestis
Basiliensis Concilij.

Nichol. Cusanus de concord. Catholic. lib. 1. c. 11.

Idem. c. 14. 15. Ibid. cap. 15. 16.


though Aeneas Syluius names him that Hercules of Eugenius, and bewaileth,
That so noble a wit had turned aside to defend that schismatike. In the first
book he defends and proves these Positions, That all the promises of Christ
speaking to Peter, I will give thee the keys, etc. The gates of hell, etc. I
have prayed for thee, etc. are to be refered to the universal Church, and not
particularly to S. Peter, or his successor, especially seeing many Popes have
been Peter for their head: but whence does that appear? That otherwise, if
they should hold place according to the holiness of him that first sat there,
or according to the reverence of the place, it is not to be doubted but that
Jerusalem ought to have the Primacie, where our chief Priest washed his Church
with his own blood; but that Ephesus, the seat of S. John, should be preferred
before Alexandria, where S. Mark; and so of the rest: That it belongs to the
duty of L. 2. c. 2.
That this Council depends not on the Head thereof, but on the consent of
all which sit there, who ought to contribute what in them is to the making of
the Decrees; so that no prescription may take place to the contrary, Ibid. c.
8. Ibid. c. 12.
seeing that the authority of the Bishop of Rome, even sitting President, is
not greater there than that of every Metrpoolitan in his Province: That indeed
Peter himself has received in no wise greater authority from Christ, than
the rest of the Apostles; neither was there any thing said unto him, that was
not said Rocks than Peter; so that that which is said, Upon this rock, etc. is
to be referred to his Confession, not to his Person: therefore seeing the power
of binding and loossing is the foundation of all divine jurisdiction, it is
manifest, that all Bishops, and (perhaps) all Priests, Idem l. 2. c. 13.
as touching jurisdiction, have equal power. He restrains afterward, not as
touching the execution, quae sub certis positiuis terminis clauditur, which is
limited with certain positive bounds, that is, ordained by man's law; but he
adds, That the cause thereof ceasing, all degrees also of maioritie and
minority do cease, so that it returns again to natural right, to wit, to
that equality. That That his Primacie is from men, and depends on the
Canons. Wherefore, Idem ibid. c. 17. 18. 19.
as he may be both judged and deposed by a Council, so he cannot abrogat,
change, or contrary the Canons of Councels. For proof whereof we read, Jbid.
c. 20. 21.
That the Popes legates have spoken standing in universal Councels, their
letters were wont to be examined: And his Decretals are inferior to the
Canons; which if the Pope contradict, he is not heard. All which positions he
proves very largely, both by the Decrees, and by the writings of the Fathers
themselves. Jdem l. 3. c. 3. 4.
In the third book he evidently proves by many arguments drawn from out of
Ecclesiastical antiquity, Constantine either gave the Empire of the West to
the Pope, or could give it; That it is nothing truer, that Popes have bestowed
the Empire on Charlemaine, or to any of his successors, or translated it from
the Greeks to the Germans, as they pretend; That it is most false, that the
Electors of the Empire, were instituted by the Pope, and in his name did
proceed in their election: he maintains to the contrary, That the Emperor
does so depend of God alone, that he has no need to be confirmed by the Pope,
and that he can in no wise be deposed by the Pope: That in his charge the
Emperor is the minister and Vicar of Christ, Idem ibid. c. 6. and 7.
appointed by him supreme keeper and preserver of the Faith; by which reason
also he himself ought to be present in Council, Ibid. c. 8. and 9.
and have defended their order, as Kings and Princes have undertaken the care
of National and Provincial, yet nevertheless the Emperor and the Pope
concurring together; this charging the Bishops to be there, and the other
exhorting them to their duty, and commanding the Laymen to be present.
Ibid. c. 15.
And that indeed the Pope chalengeth not the convocation of them to himself
alone, but affirms, that it ought not to be held without his authority; yet
so, as that the Emperor in case the Pope be negligent in it, may and ought to
command and assign a Council, praeceptiue, with authority: That the
Emperor did ever sit chief in Ibid. c. 16. and 20
yea he himself also and his Lieutenants propounded such things as seemed to
make for the peace and profit of the Church: That whatsoever the Church
possesses in temporal things, is come from the benefits of Emperors, Kings,
and Princes, Jbid. c. 21. 28. 30. Did. 63. c. in Synodo.
who to cloth him have stripped themselves. And here he exclaimeth, What do
the temporalties of Churches profit the Commonwealth, what the Empire, what the
subjects? Surely little or nothing. Otho was enjoined to give the inuestitures
of Bishops without money. We have seen whether the Pope has taken away from
the Emperor the sole inuestiture, because the Bishop of Rome has not only
drawn to himself the mere inuestiture without receiving

Of the Cardinal de Alliaco we have seen, what Articles of reformation he
exhibited in the Council of Constance: And in the Preface he says, he has
written more concerning that matter. Petrus de Alliaco in Encomio Theologico.
Jdem in conclusionibus.
But in his Encomium Theologicum, expounding Upon this rock will I build my
Church; upon Christ and his word, says he. As also, in his conclusions, he
tieth the Church to the holy Scripture, maintayneth that the Church of Rome
may err, and takes away the temporal Monarchy from the Pope. Panormitan. de
Electionib. c. signific.
Likewise Panormitan, though the champion of Eugenius in the Council of Basil;
A private faithful man is more to be believed, alleging reason or authority
out of the Scripture, than all a Council, or than the Pope himself, because a
Council may err, as at other times they have erred, etc. Also, he concealeth
not, That the Popes in his age lived in such sort, that they made it evidently
appear, that they believed not there was another life after this,
resurrection, or judgment. Alain Chartier Secretary to king Charles the
seventh, which says, That he expected every day when a thunderbolt would
fall from heaven on the Roman Church. But Thomas of Redon, a Carmelite and
famous Preacher, durst do yet more: Antonin. part 3. Tit. 22. ca. 10.
he had ever in his mouth the abominations of Rome, which had need of great
reformation. He (says Antoninus) when he had for many years preached through
France with very great concourse of people, making good motions unto good,
though not according to knowledge, he comes to Rome with the Ambassadors of
the Venetians, by whom he is recommended to the Pope. But by the Popes command
he was apprehended, at the instigation and instance of William d'Estouteuille
Cardinal an Apostate was solemnly degraded and burned. Monstrelet commends
his piety and holiness. Monstrelet. volu. 1. Baptista Mantuan. lib. de vita
beata. cap. vltimo.
Mantuan also, in his Book De vita beata, so that he brings him in as a true
Martyr of Christ, in whose heart was resident the ancient feruencie of faith,
whom envy by manifest in justice delivered to the cruel fire. I make no doubt
(says he) but that the flames of this man may be compared to the fire, not of
Scaeuola, but of S. Lawrence. There are also read verses in his praise, in
which are celebrated his holiness, miracles, and martyrdom; among which are
these that follow: Nicholaus Harlemens. in Collectaueis.
Lippis Lux oculis nocuit, non substinuere
Viuere tam sanctum, foeda Romana cohors.
Their poor-blind eyes could not endure the light,
Nor filthy Rome that holy man in sight.


Antonin. part. 3. Tit. 22. cap. 7. parag. 8.
And almost the like had happened a little before to Manfred of Verfeil. Manfred
(says Antoninus) a man of venerable life, religious, of the order of
Preachers, was learned and feared God: he preaching in the parts of Lombardie,
led by I know not what spirit, told the people, That the coming of Antichrist
was near, and as if he were to He gathered together therefore about four
hundred persons of every age and sex, and Pope Martin would have dissolved
this assembly, but he could not do it, because their conversation had gained
a good opinion among all men; though he forbad any thing to be given them,
that through need they might be compelled to return home. They come then to
Bononia, Florence, and at last to Rome, where very many of them died,
expecting the manifestation of Antichrist; but (says Antoninus) without seeing
him: he should rather have said without knowing him. And Manfred some time
after died at Rome under Eugenius, Barnardine, that monster of superstition, to
write against him: And Manfred on the other side reproved his superstitious
doctrine in many points.

In our France, Charles the seventh, in the year 1438, Paulus Aemilius in
Carol. 7. Epist. ad Episcop. Lauzanens. in volum. Council. in Appendice Council.
Basiliens.
commanded a Council of the French Church to be held at Bourges, in which,
under the title of the Pragmaticall sanction, was read and approved the acts of
the Council of Basil; and by this the collations of the benefices of France,
and appeals to Rome, were cut off. Whereunto belongs an Epistle which we
have in the Councels directed to the bishop of Lauzanne, with which were sent
unto him the decisions of this Council, by him whom the Council of Bourges had
sent Ambassador to Rome: actum est ne agas. That he has that promise from the
Chancellor of France; that they had heard that the kings Ambassadors,
allured with certain promotions, made great show, that the king would consent
to the dismission of the Council, but that they had resolved to resist him to
his face. And there we have a Treatise concerning that matter, written in the
year 1434, by John Patriarch of Antioch, An. 1434.
which he caused publicly to be pronounced in the great hall of the Covent of
Franciscan Friars in That a general Council is above the Pope: It begins,
Ad ostendendum; Where out of the Fathers and by the Decrees, he brings it to
this, In 3. vol. Council. in Append. Council. Basiliens. ad ostendend.
That the Pope is the servant of the Church, to be chastised by it, if he do
his duty amiss; and confuteth at large whatsoever is alleged to the
contrary. Let the Reader see the book it self in the Councels.

At the same time, whilst the Popes boasted that the Greeks did acknowledge
obedience unto them, are published two books of Nilus Archbishop of
Thessalonica, against the Primacie of the bishop of Rome. In the first book he
shows, Nilus Archiepisc. Thessalon. de Primatu.
That the principal controversies between the Greek and Latin Church proceed
from this, that the Pope will not be judged by an universal Council; but
contrariwise, Peter, nor from the Apostles, but that the Fathers for some
causes have given unto him the first seat, That he is not the successor of S.
Peter, but inasmuch as he is a bishop; by which reason also all other bishops
are his successors, That he Tu es Petrus, because that promise respects the
Church of Christ, and not S. Peter, and much less him whom they would have to
be his successors, That though we yield him to be first in order, yet he is
not therefore to bear domination over others, this Primacie not inferring an
order above others, but a coordination with others. Moreover, he rejected these
presumtions of the Bishop of Rome, That he is the Judge of all, and to be
judged of none, That he is not bishop of a certain place, but absolutely
bishop, That he alone by his own right ought to assign an universal Council,
and the like; seeing that the Primacie, or rather first propter vrbis
principatum, because Rome was the first, or chiefest in order among cities.

We need not here repeat, how openly and, as they speak, formally, the
greatest part of the kingdom of Bohemia opposed themselves, earnestly desiring
reformation of the Church, according to the holy Scriptures; exhibiting to
this end a confession of their Faith to their King, to the Emperor, and to the
Council, and preaching the same publicly in the Temples, which by public
authority were then granted unto them. Also after faith was broken with John
Hus, how stoutly they defended it by just and necessary arms, God from heaven
fighting for the safeguard of that poor people, utterly frustrating all the
endeavors of the Aeneas Syluius: for they have continued without interruption
until these our times. But it is worth the adding, That those Waldenses who
some ages before had brought this light of the Gospel into Bohemia, abode
still in the mountains of Languedoc and Prouence, and in many places within
the Alps, and there kept themselves safe from the persecution of Popes and
Papists. In Lombardie also, as witnesses Antonine, under the name of
Fratricelli, were some known to the time of Eugenius. But in England
especially the seed of Wickliffe was largely propagated, where, without
repeating any thing of Sir John Oldeastle, of whom we have before spoken, we
read of very many to have suffered martyrdom for the William Taylour Priest
and professor of Arts in the University of Oxford, An. 1422. An. 1428.
in the year 1422, and William White in the year 1428, Author of many
Treatises upon matters controuerted in that time, was burned for thirty
articles which by word and writing he had defended: He taught, among other
things, That the Roman Church was that withered fig tree which the Lord had
cursed for barrenness of faith: That the Monks and Friars were the anointed
and shaven soldiers of infernal Lucifer: That against these, the Bridegroom,
when he shall come, will shut the gate, for that their lamps are out. With the
same mind also Alexander Fabritius in his Treatise entitled Destructorium
vitiorum, wrote many excellent things against the corruptions of the Romish
Church, against the antiquity of Cyprian: If Christ alone (says he) ought to
be heard, we are not to attend what men before us have thought fit to be
done, but what Christ first before all has done. If Christ had known, that
man might more easily get eternal life by the laws of Justinian, than by the
law of God, he would have taught them us with his own mouth, and would have
let go the law of God till another time, which notwithstanding he has taught
with great diligence, and wherein is contained all the doctrine requisite to
salvation. Again, He is a betrayer of the truth, who openly speaks a lie for
the truth; and he which does not freely pronounce the truth; the Pastors of the
Church which refuse to pronounce the truth of the Gospel, and by their evil
examples slay And indeed the histories of all nations are full of the cruelty
which in this age was used toward the professors of this truth.

63. PROGRESSION.
Felix the fourth voluntarily deposes himself, and Nicholas the fifth
remains sole Pope. Mahomet Emperor of the Turks takes Constantinople with
the slaughter of many thousand Christians, and the miserable death of the
Emperor Paleologus. Of the pride and corruption of Aeneas Syluius, called Pius
the second,

NOw after the death of Eugenius in the year 1447, Thomas de Sorzana was
created Pope, by the name of Nicholas the fifth, whilst Felix the fourth yet
lived and reigned, upon which occasion many nations remained in neutralitie,
namely, Germany under the Emperor Frederick the third, whose Secretary
Aeneas Syluius was, of whom we have before made mention, one of the most
notable defenders of the Council of Basil. Him had Eugenius, knowing his
excellent wit, endeavored by promises to bind unto him; but being prevented by
death, Nicholas continued the same battery, and that so much the more, for
that he had heard that Frederick had a purpose to come into Italy, to be
crowned at Rome. Frederick then by the persuasion of Aeneas Syluius, who had
gotten into great favor with him, undertakes that purposed business, and
fully finisheth it. And Nicholas to content the Germans, consents to certain
agreements, contained in the Bull which begins, Ad sacram Petri sedem, dated
in April 1447. In which namely are the Annates brought to some order, and
generally are approved and ratified all the provisions and expeditions of
whatsoever kind, as well of the Council of Basil, yet continued at Basil, as
of Felix the fourth; also other censures, excommunications, Anathemaes, and
their releasements, etc. by the Bull which begins, Vt pacis, dated in Iulie
1449. By which means Nicholas remained sole Pope, Felix Monstrelet. vol. 3.
whom he appoints his Legate in Germany: And so was the Council dissolved.
And all this was done by the mediation of the kings of France and England, of
Renat^^ king of Sicilie, and Lewis the Dolphine. The title of this Bull in the
volumes of Councels, is, The approbation of the Acts of the Council of Basil.
Yet because they hardly approve the same, they set before it this other title,
The Council of Basil is of little force, Summa Constitut.
etc. Meaning, though it say nothing, that all the things whatsoever, which are
not expressed in the same Bull, are thereby disallowed, as namely, the sentence
whereby the Council is decreed to be above the Pope; and others more of the
like nature. Nevertheless the force of our argument remains still firm,
That Martin the Eugenius was chosen by the Cardinals whom Martin had made, and
since Nicholas by them which Martin and Eugenius had promoted, and consequently
all their successors after them: Therefore these are not true Popes, nor
lawful Pastors which they have ordained, unless these Councels remain
lawful, unless their sentences keep their authority.

Nicholas hasted to finish this agreement with the Emperor, because of the
year of Jubilee at hand, the market whereof would be much hindered otherwise:
unto which was made from all parts so great a concourse, that Platina
records, Platina in Nichol. 5.
when once out of the Vatican having seen the image of our Savior they
returned to the city, The year following, Frederick arrived in Italy, partly
for to be crowned, and partly for to marry Leonora daughter of the king of
Portugal: Nicholas in the mean time being in great care and doubt, least he
mindful of the ancient authority of Emperors, would take upon him the rule
of the city, fortified the gates and the Towers, the Capitol also, and the
castle of S. Angelo; and to content the people with some show of Frederick
fearing new commotions in Germany, made no show of any such thing. At that
time, Mahomet Emperor of the Turks, prepared himself to besiege
Constantinople chief city of the Christian Empire in the East; and Nicholas
made large promises of aid to Constantine Paleologus, so that he would join
himself to the Catholic faith, that is to say, make him be acknowledged
supreme Bishop by the Greeks: and to this end he sends Ambassador to him
Isidore Bishop of Russia, who after the Council of Florence was ended, had
remained in Italy, for a Cardinals hat to that end given him; but this
business already attempted so many ages in vain, was of greater Antonin.
part. 3. Tit. 22. c. 13.
Antoninus who lived then, When the city of Constantinople (says he) was
besieged by the Turks, the Greeks sent Ambassadors to Pope Nicholas,
imploring his succors of men and money; whom Nicholas would not hear,
thinking it a thing unworthy, to burden Italy with impositions, being
already exhausted of money for expenses of the wars, especially for that he
knew they might help themselves with their money, if they would employ it, for
the leuying of soldiers. A goodly consideration, Antoninus durst say. In the
mean time, that he might turn the destruction of the Greekish Church to his
own commodity, he creates Bessario^ (a Greek bishop of Nice, whom Eugenius
had made Cardinal) Patriarch of Greece, on condition that he should depend
upon him; though the Greeks had chosen Gennadius Scholarius, who in the
midst of those calamities exercised that dignity. Bodin. in Demonomania.
Jacob. Sprenger in malleo maleficorum.
Bodin alleges out of the book of Jacob Sprenger Inquisitour of witches, a
strange dispensation of Nicholas. A certain German bishop was sick, whom
Nicholas greatly loved, he understood by a witch that his sickness came of
witchcraft, from which he could not be delivered but by a contrary charm, by
which the witch herself that had bewitched him must die: He therefore sends
in post to Nicholas, entreating leave of him to be cured by the witch; which
dispensation Nicholas grants, with this clause, Of two evils avoid the
greater. The Bull being received, the witch, under the Popes authority, and at
the Bishops entreatie, sets her hand to the business: about midnight the
Bishop was restored to health, and at the Alphonsus Borgia, who succeeds him
by the name of Calixtus the third, made a show of repairing that fault, and
presently denounced wars against the Turks, saying that he had made a vow
to that end a long time before; knowing (but whence had he this prophecy?)
that he should be Pope: and showed written and subscribed with his own hand in
a I Pope Calixtus make a vow to almighty God, Platina in Calixto 3.
and to the holy indivisible Trinity, That I will persecute the Turks, most
cruel enemies of the Christian name, by war, cursings, interdictions,
execrations, and to conclude, in whatsoever manner I can: and yet was he
already decrepit with age. He imposes therefore a tenth on all the Clergy,
and publishes a Croysado throughout all Europe, according to custom, granting
full remission of sins to all that contributed to it, so that once in his
life, and once at his death, he were confessed: yea and giving authority to
whomsoever would give five ducats, to absolve and dispense in many cases. And
there were set forth to sea only sixteen galleys, under the charge of the
Patriarch of Aquileia. Alphonsus king of Naples, and Philip But as the
business was for a brunt only with great earnestness stirred forwards, so
also it easily rested: And then (says Platina) ad Pontificia negotia animum
adijciens, Applying his mind to the affairs of the Popedom, he began to
canonize Saints, one Edmund in England, one Vincent in Spain, and others.
Which Bessarion seeing, especially how rashly and indirectly the same was done,
These new Saints (says he) make me doubt of the old. Gulielm. Langaeus in
Praefat. suae Hist.
But it behooved them also in this to imitat the chief Bishops of the Pagans.
Moreover, for a supply, in stead of yielding succors to the Greeks, he
ordains a bell to be tolled every day between noone and evening, at the
sound whereof whosoever did Aue-maries, and Pater-nosters, should have three
years, and three fortieth parts of Indulgences. Also he appointed a general
Procession or Letanie every first Sunday of the month, in which whosoever
assisted, should obtain seven years and seven fortieth part of Indulgences:
besides a prayer in the Mass, for victory against the Infidels, which who so
said, should also merit three years of Indulgences. In the mean time, if the
safety and good of Christendom had been seriously thought upon, there was
offered a very notable occasion; Antonin. part. 3. tit. 22. c. 14.
for John Vaiuode in that very time overcame Mahomet in that famous battle
near Belgrade, whom, his forces being diminished, and he left of our men, he
could not follow. But Calixtus howsoever forgot not to Alphonsus king of Naples
being deceased, and Ferdinand his bastard having obtained his place, he
presently provided for the chiefest Bishoprics of the realm, which he durst
not do in the kings lifetime: And which is more (says Antoninus) by Bulls he
declared, Antonin. part. 3. tit. 22. c. 16.
that the realm of Naples vacant pertained to him alone, as a feoffee of the
Church, commanding Ferdinand to forgo it, and that neither he nor any other
whosoever, under pain of excommunication, should call himself king of that
kingdom: but that if any pretended there any right, the business should first
be discussed by him, who dissolueth all oaths of fidelity or homage which any
had yielded unto him. He likewise wrote to the States of the kingdom, That
Ferdinand was not the son of Alphonsus, but one supposed. And I^igni Borgia,
his nephew, or his son. From which sentence Ferdinand, moved with anger,
appealeth. Francis Sforcia, Duke of Milan, his father in law, was also
grievously offended, protesting to leave nothing unattempted, whereby the state
of his son in law may be defended. Pandolf. Colenuc. lib. 5. Donatus Bossius.
But thereupon Calixtus dies, who a little before had framed the office or
service of the Transfiguration, with the like Indulgences as has the feast of
Corpus Christri. For it was meet that the Popish religion, being merely
humane, should from day to day increase with humane inventions.

Aeneas Syluius, called Pius the second, a man of great knowledge, I would he
had been of like conscience, An. 1458.
succeeded this Calixtus in the year 1458: but the Platina in Pio 2.
Register of the Apostolic letters, one of the twelve which were ordained
Censors of the Council; yea had many times sat chief among those that had
been deputed touching matters of faith, and was twice chosen amongst them
which conferred benefices: and if any thing of moment were to be determined by
the nations, he was ever chosen chief for Italy. He was moreover appointed
ambassador in the Councels name, thrice to Strasbourg, once to Trent, twice to
Constance, once to Franckford, and twice into Sauoy: author or furtherer of
all things that were done in this Council, the Acts whereof he writes down
in two books, out of which his opinion thereof is manifest Eugenius was
deposed, and Felix set in his place, he was sent by Felix ambassador to the
Emperor Frederick, to declare unto him the just causes of his election; on
which occasion, admiring the dexterity of his wit, he drew him to his service.
He being sent to Rome by Frederic, to deal with the Pope about his coronation,
was enticed with the delights of the Court of Rome, and in favor of Nicholas,
sold the renunciation of Felix: Whereupon he was first created Bishop of
Trieste, and after Cardinal, by Calixtus; and by degrees, according to the
increase of his dignities, he changed his style, as appears to whomsoever
reads his Epistles, which he himself has distinguished by degree: Till at
length being made Pope, he thought nothing better than to Retractation; and the
things which before he had seemed to detest in other Popes, he himself now
both praised and advanced forward. This is manifest by the Bull which begins
Execrabilis, dated in the second year of his Popedom, whereby he forbids
to appeal from the sentences of the Pope to the future Council; pronounces
all such appeals of Emperors, Kings, Bishops, etc. to be void, vain,
execrable, and pestiferous; excommunicateth such as have appealed, not to be
absolved but at the point of death. He also subiecteth Universities, Colleges,
and other corporations, to the Interdict, and inflicted upon all the
punishments of high treason and heresy, and the In minoribus agentes, directed
to the University of Colonia, An. 1463.
in the year 1463, he professes, That it repented him that he wrote the
Dialogue and other books for the authority of the Council, saying that he
had persecuted the Church of God ignorantly, as did S. Paul: contrariwise
affirming the authority of the Pope to be above the Church, by the same
texts, which before he had expounded in a far other sense. Wherefore he
declared, That the Pope is the sovereign Monarch of the Church, whose sins
are left he reverenced (says he) the Council of Constance, which had decreed
the contrary. But here Bellarmine inuenteth a notable distinction, That the
later Sessions are approved, not the first, because in the first the Council
was placed above the Pope: and yet notwithstanding in that Council Martin the
fifth had been chosen, and what he had caused to be ordained in the later,
took force and vigor only from the first Sessions, whereby it was judged,
That the Council may judge the Pope, arraigne him, condemn, depose, and
punish him, and choose another in his room; all which they had practiced on
John the four and twentieth, Benedict the thirteenth, and Martin the fifth,
deposing the two former, Martin, Eugenius, and others, which has no ground but
on the only decision of this Council and the Council of Basil. And here we
might set before the eyes of Syluius, what he has said of this Council, and
that of Basil, which now he condemns, and that not being a young man, as he
said, but a man of perfect age, and honored with principal dignities: Where
is there in the world such a company of Fathers? Where so great light of
knowledge? Where the wisdom? Where is the goodness that can be equal to the
virtues of these Fathers? So that these things may not honestly now be denied.
But as the eye of reason is other than the eye of passion, so is the judgment
of an upright mind other than of corrupt desire; of Syluius sitting in that
most honorable assembly, which he describes unto us, than of Pius the second
reigning in that contagious chair. And he had cast out a speech of an
expedition into Asia against the Turks, in the assembly of Mantua, Bulla quae
incipit. Quoniam vt proxime in summa Constitution. Johan. 5. Stella in Pio 2.
whither the ambassadors of many Princes were come from all parts, and under
pretense thereof had imposed a tenth on the whole Clergy, yea even upon all
the profits of the Roman Court: but he could not bring it to effect, perhaps
because he arrogated too much to himself with the Princes which were of
greatest power: Stella) for the augmentation of the Papal Majesty, he feared
neither Kings nor Dukes, neither peoples, nor tyrants; but if they saw any
offending, that is to say, not obeying in all points his desire, he persecuted
them so long both by war and by censures, till he perceived them to be
recovered. And for this cause became he an adversary to Lewis King of France,
who went about to diminish the liberty of the Church in his kingdom; to
Borsio d'Este, because he favored Sigismund Malatesta, and the affairs of
France, against Ferdinand; He persecuted with terrible execrations Sigismund
Duke of Austria, for that he had chastised the Cardinal of S. Peter ad
Vincula; He deposed also the Archbishop of Mentz, judging ill of the Roman
Church, and set up another in his room; He deposed likewise the Archbishop of
Beneuent, for attempting new matters against Neither do histories conceal,
that he confirmed the kingdom of Naples to Ferdinand, reuoking the Bull of
Calixtus the third, and that in favor of the marriage of Anthony Picolhuomini,
his nephew, with the sister of the wife of Ferdinand, whose dowry was the
Earledomes of Maldeburg and Celano: Whereby he began to set himself against
the rights of our France. Monstrelet adds, Monstrelet. vol. 3.
That it was commonly thought that Ferdinand had given Pius a very great sum
of gold, partly to be absolved of his crimes, and partly that he might
peaceably enjoy his kingdom. But his ambition cannot not better be known than
in his 396 Epistle, where he offers and promises Mahomet king of the
Turks, if he would become a Christian, and succor the Church, that is to say,
his faction, that he might the more easily rend Christendom, which he vexed
with continual wars, presuming to persuade him that that Empire depended on
him, and was in his gift, and that so his predecessors had given the Empire of
Germany to Charlemaine. It seems that to him also is to be ascribed, that
extraordinary pomp of Corpus Christi day: for that which is commonly boasted
of the Temple of S. Peter, very fitly agrees with the Roman superstition,
which never is brought to his full height. Antoninus Campanus, Bishop of
Arrezzo, in the life of Pius, says, He celebrated at Viterbium the feast of
the Eucharist, with an unaccustomed bravery, the city being under He also
canonized S. Katherine of Sienna. Platina notes this among his Apophthegmes,
That marriage had been for great reason taken away from Priests, but that for
greater reason it should be restored to them. But Onuphrius, according to his
ordinary custom, raced this out of his edition, and others after him: but we
find it in the first edition of Platina, printed by John de Colonia in the
year 1479, and in many others, how he is praised by many. Volateran writes,
That his unmeasurable ambition stained all his virtues. Kliberius his Epitaph
was this: Frigida membra Pij retinet lapis iste loquacis,
Qui pacem moriens attulit Italiae, etc.
Vendider at pretio Gentes and crimina multa
Virtutis specie gesserat ille Pius, etc.
Here do the bones of talking Pius lie,
Who by his death brought peace to Italy, etc.
Nations he sold, and many crimes unfit
He under show of virtue did commit.


And he presently adds the reason, Nam scelus orbis erat, For he was the
wickedness of the world.

Now in the year 1494 Peter Barbo, a Venetian, the sisters son of Pope
Eugenius, is created his successor, by the name of Paul the second. He was no
sooner entered into the Popedom, but in recompense of the benefits he had
received of Pius the second, he puts down all the Abbreuiators by him
created, without hearing them, and under pretense of ignorance, whom Pius for
their Platina, who was one of them, spoke for all: but he answered, Do thou
thus call us unto Judges (says he) as if thou knew not that all laws are
lodged within the closet of our breast: Thus is our sentence, Let them void the
place, let them go whither they will, I pass not for them, I am Pope, and it
is lawful for me to disannull or approve the acts of others according to my
own pleasure. Pius the second, who reduced the Being rejected of thee, Platina
in Paul. 2.
and disgraced with so notable contumely, we will disperse our selves to the
Kings and Princes in all parts, and will exhort them to call a Council,
wherein thou may be constrained to render a reason, why thou have stripped us
of our lawful possession. And this had Platina himself both written and
signed. But he was presently cast into prison, fettered with yrons, and
declared guilty of libell, and made mention of a Council. Platina defends
himself, That a libell has no name set to it, but to this on the contrary he
had set to his name: That he thought not that it was a crime to speak of a
Council, seeing that Councels are in all ages instituted by the holy Fathers,
as in time past the Censorship among the Romans, least injury should be done
to any. But he was so much the more straightly kept, and sharply used, until at
the end of four months, by the entreatie of Cardinal Gonzaga, he was
delivered, on condition that he should not stir out of the city. Paul had
for competitor under Eugenius, whilst he was in minoribus, the Cardinal
Aloisio of Padoua, whose grace and favor did much offend him: he died, leaving
great wealth behind him, which Paul himself, to the Scarampi, his brethren. He
seized upon all for himself, and retained the Scarampi, till the things which
had been transported to Florence were brought back to Rome. Out of these
particular actions may be judged, what was the conscience of this man, on whose
will they will have the commonwealth depend. James Picinin, a famous captain,
retained king Ferdinand, yea and Paul himself, in their duty. Francis
Sforza, Duke of Milan, his father in law, sends him to the king, under faith
given, That whenever he would he should return again safe. Ferdinand casts
him into prison, with his son, and a while after put him to death, saying,
That he falling down in the prison it self, brake his leg, whilst he beheld
at a window, It was thought of some that Paul had a hand in that treachery,
seeing that in those days the Bishop of Milan went very often to and fro
between the Pope and the king, and Paul himself said, when he heard of his
captivity, That the Judge of Appeals was taken out of the way. A while after
he entered into a conceit, That one Callimachus, a Roman, had conspired against
him; whereupon, as his fantasy led him, he takes hold of all that stand in
reach, and commits them to prison, and that so much the more eagrely, for
that it was told him that Lucas Tortius, a gentleman of Rome, banished to
Naples, was seen thereabouts with some troops: And Platina himself came into
his mind, taking a felicity in his suspicions, whom being apprehended, Lucas
had not stirred one foot, and certainly knew that this pretended conspiracy
was altogether vain and without ground, Yet he would needs make show, that
there was some hidden cause, least he should be accused of lightness.
Wherefore many in the midst of their torments died, men of good note, whose
names and dignities the Author sets down: twenty within the space of two
days were called in question, and sifted to the utmost; Platina among others,
Whilst (says he) I did hang in these torments naked, rent as a thief and
murderer, Vianensius handling the bracelets of Sanga de Cioggia, his companion,
asked him what wench had given him that for a favor. He sits as another
Minos on spread carpets, as if he were at a Consider here, in so severe an act,
the gravity of this man, of a Churchman especially, whom the sacred Canons
forbid to be present at such executions, least if death should follow, he
should become irregular and impious. He asks him above all, Whether he had
not written to the Emperor, or to some Prince, either for to raise a schism,
or procure a Council; for this was it that principally stuck to his heart, and
presently again renewed the tortures. At length Paul being weary that he
could wring out nothing with all those exquisit torments, commands
Christopher de Verona, his Physician, to tell the poor men, that they should
be of good That this could not so soon be done, least the Pope should be
argued of lightness and cruelty, so soon to let go as innocent, them whom
he had taken and tortured with so great tumult. Some time therefore passed,
that he might not seem to have done any thing rashly, and without cause. In
the mean time he himself came to visit them in the castle, and when all other
accusations failed him, he charge them with heresy, That they had disputed
of the immortality of the soul out of the opinion of Plato, which Saint
Augustine affirmed to come nearest to the opinion of a Christian; and for that
they praised the ancient Accademie, and condemned the new, he pronounced So
that if Laelius de Valla, a Roman citizen, and an Aduocat in the Consistory,
had not taken their cause in hand, they had undergone the punishment of
heresy. At length wearied with the entreaties of the Cardinals, he sets
them at liberty, but yet in such a sort, as that he ever watched over their
steps, so that they judged not themselves to be free til after his death; Death
which took him by an Apoplexy, when he had ordained that the Jubilee should
be celebrated every twenty five years, which falling in the year 1475,
filled his mind with hope of excessive gain. There be some which say, That he
was in the night by the devil strangled in the very act of venerie. And
Platina notes, Gaspar. Pencerus.
That he hated and contemned so the studies of humanity, that he called the
students thereof by the name of Heretics. For this cause he exhorted the
Romans, not to suffer their sons be any longer at the studies of learning,
that it was enough if they had learned to write and read. Chronic. Genebr.
part. 2.
Therefore Genebrard calls him The enemy of virtue and learning. Fearing
without doubt, that if learning once came to be restored, the abuses lying hid
under the mists of ignorance, would be discovered. And thus much abundantly
suffices to make known both his conscience and his knowledge. Moreover, all
offices generally were set to sale in his time, neither was he wont to bestow
Bishoprics save only on them that possessed other offices, by the sale of
which they might come by money to give to him. As of cases to be reserved to
the Pope, so far as might be, Bulla cuius initium Ineffabilis prouidentia in
Summa Constitut.
reserving to himself thereby so much the larger pretense of drawing money to
himself from all parts. The most memorable thing that he did for the good of
the Church, was, That he bought, at any price whatsoever, all the most exquisit
precious stones he could get, for to enrich the Papal Myter, and took a
pleasure to be looked on and admired of all men in that bravery; for this
cause he sometime retained strangers in the city, omitting the custom of
showing the Sudarium, that he might be seen of more people at once. Moreover,
he commanded that the Church of Rome might at length be brought to the perfect
similitude of that Whore described unto us in the Apocalypse. And Platina, of
this Paul, in the life of Hadrian the first, says, Platina in Hadriano primo,
in Vetustioribus Editionibus. Vide eam quae prima omnium prodijt. Coloniae Ann.
1479. Typis Iohannis de Colonia and Iohannis Martien de Gheretzem.
He was so delighted with these effeminat delicacies, having bought at a high
rate precious stones from all parts, and almost emptied the treasury of the
Roman Church; so that whenever he went forth in public, he seemed some
Phrygian Cybele with turrets on his head, rather than a myter. Hence I think
came, through the sweat of his very fat body, and the weight of the precious
stones, that Apoplexy whereof he so suddenly dyed: Which he Leo Augustus the
son of Constantine Copronymus. But all this has Onuphrius rased out, which
in the oldest editions are read at large. The like things we read also in James
Cardinal of Pauia, in his second book of Commentaries. And here Platina
ends his history of Popes. There is extant an Epigram of him, made by John
Pannonius, Bishop and Poet of those times.

Pontificis Pauli testes ne Roma requiras,
Filia, quam genuit, sat docet esse marem.
Paule's a male, Rome need no further trial,
He gat a daughter makes it past denial.
And indeed Stephen Orichouius, Bishop of Russia, tells us, when she was
known of all men to be his daughter, he often detested single life, whereby
he could not see without shame, her whom he might have lawfully begotten: But
which is worse, there want not some that accuse him both of Magic and
Sodomie, which I here willingly omit.

OPPOSITION.
Pius the second, as we have seen, having overthrown his first and best
writings, was the first that decreed, That the Pope is above a Council, and
that it is not lawful to appeal from him to a Council; against the Decrees
both of Constance and Basil, which had been with so great solemnity both
determined and published: but notwithstanding his retractation, he was not
presently believed. Contrariwise the Universities of Paris, Colonia, Prague,
Cracouia, Oxford, and others, the most famous of Christendom, constantly
retained the Decrees of the said Councels; and not without cause, seeing that
(as Bellarmine witnesses) they had been confirmed by the Suffrages of a
thousand Fathers, among whom, at Pius the second in his Retraction, with the
consent of all the Universities, and with the applause of all which spoke
publicly, of Nicholas Panormitan, and Lewis Pontanus, who (says he) were
accounted the two stars of the world, Aeneas Syluius in Bulla Retract.
or the two chief and most famous lights of the Canon and Civil Law: Yet
nevertheless they approved by words and writings the Acts of the Council,
condemned the doings of Eugenius, neither was there any which either would or
durst confute their sayings; although, as he himself witnesses, they were
well affected toward the person of Eugenius. On the contrary, All (says he)
with one voice preferred the Council before Eugenius, and it was held for a
crime of heresy, once to mutter any thing against the dignity of the
Council.

Now in the time of Nicholas and Calixtus, after the neutralitie of Germany
was taken away by the means of Aeneas Syluius, for which good service he had
been first made Bishop, and after Cardinal, the Germans were offended that
the conditions agreed upon with the Emperor were not observed: Wherefore by
the authority and conduct of Diether Archbishop of Mentz, they had instituted
a certain Pragmaticall sanction, whereby they would provide for themselves
against the grieuances of the Roman Church; and partly decreed of the election
of Prelates, collation of benefices, hearing of causes, granting of Indulgences,
exaction of tenthes, and the like; partly they defended themselves also by way
of Appeal, against the Pope, if he ordained any thing against them; and
moreover, Syluius is so vehemently moved in his Epistle of the manners of
Germany, which he wrote in answer to Martin Mayer, Chancellor of the
Archbishop of Mentz; for note, he was newly made Cardinal of Sienna. This
Mayer was a man famous in that age, even by the testimony of Syluius himself,
and had complained in his Lords behalf, That the Decrees of Constance and of
Basil were not observed: That Calixtus, as if he were not tied to the covenants
of his predecessor, exhausted and soaked Germany, ever and anon rejected the
election of Prelates, and reserved the benefices and dignities of whatsoever
kind, for his Cardinals and Protonotaries: For (said he) expectatiue graces are
granted without number, Annates or first fruits And in conclusion, That the
Princes being awaked out of their sleep, were But it may be (says he) the
mind of God is otherwise, and his sentence will prevail: Giving us in these
few words, more to think of than he expresses. What then does here the new
Cardinal? You may see he has straight changed his style, so that to a friend
writing friendly, at the very beginning in an angry manner, he says, Thou
have mixed amara and rancida, unsavory and bitter things in thy letters: So
much was his taste then already altered; for afterward there was nothing so
unjust which he defended not, nothing so absurd which he uttered not, neither
feared he to establish Ireneus commends for their notable constancy, before
the name of Pope of Rome was once known, when they which ruled the Church were
only called That before the Council of Nice sibi quisque vinebat, every
Bishop lived to himself, that is to say, governed his Church without taking
law from Rome, to the great damage of the Church (says he:) who on the
contrary ought to have added, That by the Decree of that Council, the Bishop
of Rome had no right of superintendencie over any other Churches but only in
suburbicarias, over the neighbor Churches about Rome.

About this very time, flourished Gregory de Heimburg, Aeneas Syluius
commentat. l. 3. Wimphel. in Prostesi ad illustres viros Germ. Trithemij
Antililogia excusa Basiliae an. 1551 vbi appellatio vtraque. Krantzius l. 10.
Wandal. c. 24. Epist. 400. ad Norimbergens. Trithem. Chronic. vol. 2. sub annum
1460.
Doctor of the civil and Canon law, a man of great estimation even at Venice:
Siluius calls him the chiefest of the Germans. When Pius entered into the
Popedom, he excommunicated Sigismund Duke of Austria, for that he could not
endure the sauciness of his Legate, but he by the advice of Gregory de
Heimburg, appealed to the Council, and published his Appeal at Rome; whereof
Pius understanding that Heimburg was the Author, he likewise communicated him.
And because he dwelt at Norimberg, being Syndicke or Aduocat of the city, he
writes an Epistle to the Burg-master and Senate, in which he calls this form
of appealing from the Pope to a Council, A new heresy and inspiration of the
Devil, seeing that men appeal friuolously and by way of mockery to a
Council, or to that which is no where; and which they purpose to avoid and
hinder by all means possible. He therefore signified unto them that he had
excommunicated Heimburg, as guilty of high Heimburg again appealed to a
Council, yet is constrained to depart into Bohemia, where he married a wife
and made his abode; until Diether Archbishop of Mentz of the family of
Heimburg, being vexed by the Pope, called him unto him; whereby we may gather
that Diether did not greatly dislike his doctrine. In the appeal of Sigismund
that he framed, after he had laid open the equity of his cause, against the
unjust proceedings of the Pope, he appealed not from the Pope ill informed, to
the Pope better informed, because he knew his ears to be stopped, Pius the
second had excommunicated him, he protested the very same; but moreover,
examining his Bull and his letters which he had written to them of Norimberg,
Our Savior (said Pius) substituted Peter Prince of the Apostles to the
government of the Church. Who knows not, answered Heimburg, That Jesus
commanded all the Apostles, That they should go to preach faith, baptism and
salvation through the world? Who knows not, That the promise was made to all,
That whatsoever they did bind on earth shuold be in heaven? In which words he
plainly takes away the Popes Primacie, Insomuch that to this day the
Catholic Church prays to be kept by the continual protection of the
Apostles, whom our Savior himself has appointed to rule Pastors and Vicars
of so great a work. And therefore, who doubts but that the holy Councels
represent the place of Christ, which have succeeded the assembly of the
Appostles? seeing that the world is greater than a city. Pius said again,
That it is a vain thing to appeal to a Council, which is not, and which
cannot be above the Pope. To which he replieth, The assembly of the Apostles
was above S. Peter; and like as appeal may be made to the Apostolic seat
vacant, so to a Council not yet gathered, etc. This is a slavish service which
he exacteth of us, and not a filial reverence, etc. He calls me heretic,
because I say, That a Council of all Christendom is above the Pope; but I
say, Lastly, Pius said, That the Church is not assembled: He answers, It is
he that hinders and distrubeth it by his factions; in me is no let, not any
fault, etc. One Theodore bishop of Feltre, answered him in the behalf of the
Pope, heaping together all the places and reasons, whereby the Canonists are
wont to defend that fullness of power, which Popes do arrogate to themselves.
And Gregory de Heimburg confuted from point to point, in an Apology made
expressly against the detractions and blasphemies of Theodore. In this
particularly he reproached him, That Pius after he had exhausted Christendom
by his Jubilee, would in the Council of Mantua wring out the very last drop,
by forging new exactions, under color of making war against the Turks; And
that he and his Cardinals laughed at it, when he propounded unto them, what
great provisions were needful for such a war; because he had another thing
in his mind. And hence is that wrath of Pius, which he now vomiteth forth
against him. Wherefore (says he) Your money under color of a military
expedition against the Turk, shall be converted into a wicked and damnable
use, in succor of Ferdinand, But as touching the question of the Popes
Primacie, I entreat the Reader to peruse the Apology it self. Gregor.
Heimburg. in tractat. de Primatu excuso Magdeburgi and in Antilogia Basil.
1555. Item Francofurti apud Wolfang Richesterum. an. 1607.
In another Treatise of his also against the Primacie he calls the Roman
Babylon and the Harlot. And after he had proved that it has no ground in
sacred Scripture, nor in the writings of the Fathers, yea that all these things
are of mere usurpation, contrary to the institution of Christ, and against
the commodity of the Church, he pronounces that such tyranny is not to be
endured, and exhorts every one, as it is commanded in the Apocalypse, to
depart from it: Which, that it might be more easily be discerned, he framed a
most exquisit antithesis of Christ and the Pope; whereby he manifestly shows
him to be Antichrist. He accuses also the Doctors, who either for hope or
fear not daring to contradict his errors, confirm him the more by their
silence. At last he bursteth forth into this, Thas for these many years it is
more free for a man to dispute and call into doubt the power of God, than of
the Pope. For men (says he) are drunken In this our age there could hardly be
said any thing more clearly. But the controversy of Diether of Mentz troubled
all the Empire: he had been chosen Canonically by the Canons, yea his
election confirmed by Pope Pius himself; but he was not sound very ready in
buying his Pall, or in paying his Annates, but the principal clause was, That
he opposed himself against the Popes exactions of money, under color of the
holy wars: whereupon being vexed by Pius, he appealed to a Council, saying,
he loved better the wealth of the Germans, than the defense of the Faith:
Further, he refused to swear to the Pope, That he should never assemble the
Estates, nor the Electors of the Empire, without Adolfe of Nassau, his
competitor, and excommunicated Diether, and Frederick the Palatine, his
favorer. Hereupon the friends of both parties take arms, Frederick (surnamed
the Victorious) and Lewis Duke of Bauaria, for Diether; Albert Marquess of
Brandeburg, Charles Marquess of Baden, John Bishop of Metz, his brother, Vlric
Earl of Wirtemburg, and Lewis Niger of Bauaria, for Adolfe. The battle was
fought, wherein Diethers part had the victory, most of the Princes being taken
prisoners by the Palatine: whereupon they fell to this agreement, Krantzius in
Saxon. l. 12. c. 1. Naucler. vol. 2. Gener. 49.
That Adolph should possess Diether should peaceably enjoy all the rest, and
also should succeed Adolfe, whenever he should decease, which happened six
years after. And this was the fruit of overthrowing the Pragmaticall sanction,
which Pius said would be so profitable to the Church.

Neither was France better contented with the Decree of Pius the second than
Germany, and so much the less, for that Pius, to gratify Ferdinand bastard
of Alphonsus, had trodden under foot the right of the Frenchmen in the kingdom
of Naples. He therefore sent a Legate into France, for to abolish the
Pragmatical sanction, which was there observed by virtue of the Council of
Basil, and moved the king by letters in these words: If thou be the son of
obedience, wherefore And the king was somewhat moved with these words. But the
Court of Parliament of Paris came to him, and earnestly declares unto him of
how great importance it was for the Christian Commonweal, the want whereof
would most certainly bring four principal inconveniences; First, A confusion
of the whole Order Ecclesiastical: Secondly, The depopulation of the subjects
of the kingdom: Thirdly, An emptying the kingdom of money: Fourthly, The
ruin and total desclation of Churches. All which they at large lay open unto
him from point to point. This their admonition John Cardinal of Arles,
comprehended in 89 Articles in the works of Peter Pithou, which is worthy the
Readers perusing. There, among other things, they declared unto him, out of the
holy Scriptures, the practice of the Primitive Church, Canons of Councels,
Decrees of the Fathers, ordinances of Popes themselves, and by the laws of
Christian Emperors and Kings, especially of ours, That the Election of
Bishops, Abbots, and other Prelates of the Church, does no whit depend, and
never have depended of the Bishop of Rome. That such was never the intention of
Charlemaigne, Lewis the Meek, Philip Augustus, S. Lewis, Charles the Wise, and
others, who have ever ordained and maintained Canonical election: so that
whatsoever things are done Jacob. Cardin. Papiensis in Epistolis.
that (as James Cardinal of Pauia writes to king Lewis) when he heard of a
refusal, he cried out, Guerra vsque ad capillos. But knowing well that this king
was diversely entangled with many affairs, and having found out his easy
disposition, and that he would do all things of his own head, he could warily
observe him; That thus had Constantine the great, the two Theodosius, to wit,
by abolishing the Pragmaticall sanction. And what can be farther off from the
truth, and therefore what more unworthy? But principally because he heard his
humor was in many things to go contrary to his fathers doings, and would be
absolutely obeyed in what he pleased, he there takes hold, Aeneas Syluius
Epist. 387. data Romae 26. October. 1461.
and tickleth him in that: We commend (says he) this, among other things, that
without the assembly and consultation of many, thou have resolved to take away
the Pragmaticall. Surely thou art wise, and show thy self to be a great
king, which art not governed, but do govern, etc. Thou do that which is
meet for thee, knowing that the Pragmaticall sanction is without God, thou have
decreed to banish it out of thy kingdom, Knowing without doubt, if the matter
once had come to deliberation, he should surely have had again the repulse.
And he adds, Neither do we doubt, but that when thou were exiled (namely,
when he was out of his fathers favor) as it were out of the kingdom, thou
would often say with thy self, O, if I one day sit on my fathers throne, I
will do many acceptable services to thee But what does he conclude of this?
Now show thy slefe grateful to his divine goodness, seeing he has made thee
his son king, and has restored the kingdom with great glory, and for so
great benefits do this again for him, take away the Pragmaticall sanction, as
thou have promised our ambassador to do, and that done, which is no hard
thing to do, address thy self wholly to the succouring of Christian religion
against the Turks, etc. Thus to abrogat this law, which respected only the
Canonical election of Bishops, and the restraint of the pillages of Rome, was
a matter of greater importance with him, than the purpose or vow of making
war against the Turks. So then Lewis resolved to disannull it, under color
that it had been published That it had been concluded in a great assembly of
Prelates, and with great deliberation of time, and was now hardened and had
taken firm footing. But to what purpose he so eagrely pursued this business
anon after appeared: whereof we have a show and example in the letters of
James Cardinal of Pauia, to Francis Spinola: William Cardinal of Hostia
(says he) told us a story of an Abbie in France, famous for wealth and
religion, of which there was an Abbot old and decrepit, who seeing himself
unprofitable in his charge, for conscience sake would leave the administration
of the same. I that is, in less than nine years. And yet in his Epitaph among
his triumphs is observed this exploit, Platina in Pio 2
Pragmaticam in Gallia abrogauit, he abolished the Pragmaticall sanction.
Wherefore Pius being dead, who in four years space, had taught France
sufficiently what great damages would ensue thereupon, complaints for the
Pragmaticall sanction are redoubled: whereupon, the king commanded his Court
of Parliament to set down unto him in writing the causes of this complaint,
which it did, and delivered them unto him again in eighty six Articles,
under this Title, For the liberty of the French Church against the Court of
Rome. The principal Articles are the 14, Whereas many things had been decreed
in the holy Councels of Constance and Basil, consonant or agreeable to the
ancient Canons, and to the royal ordinances abouesayd. King Charles the
seventh the king, who then was Dolphin, being present, together with the
Princes of the blood Royal, the Prelates, and the Colleges Ecclesiastical and
Scholasticall, and in the hearing of the Ambassadors both of the Pope of Rome,
and of the holy universal Council; at length he received those Decrees, and
confirmed them by his Edict, which commonly we call Pragmaticall. And these
things were done a Bourges in the year 1438. This sanction therefore was ever
held to be of so much the more authority, because it had the original from
the holy Councels, in which the Pope, or his Legate sat President. For there
had been never any law made 16. From that time forth the kingdom better
prospered, and had greater authority and glory than ever before, and more
plenty and abundance of all things. Guienne and Normandy can witness, what
terror it was to the enemies, out of which places they were expulsed and cast
out. 17. The observation of this sanction dured the space of twenty and three
years, and now since has ceased these four years: When in the mean time
men of excellent probitie and gravity have governed and ruled the Churches
without molestation and disturbance; of which some for the singular sanctity
of their lives, after their decease were had in reputation for miracles, as
Michaell Bishop of Angers, the Archbishop of Arles, and many others. 18.
Contrariwise, of the abrogation of these Canons, Those same which were observed
in the admonition before mentioned. But the king being troubled either with
continual wars, or with suspicions, from time to time put off the business
to a general assembly. Yet (says Monstrelet) in the year 1467, Paul the
second being Pope, Monstrelet es Chronologiques.
the king granted his letters to his Legate being come from Rome, in the month
of September, for the abrogation of the Pragmaticall sanction, which were
exhibited and published in the Chastellet of Paris, without any contradiction
or disturbance. But he adds, on the first day of October following, M. John
Balue (who after was Cardinal) came to the hall of the Palace royal at Paris,
to procure the publication These are the words of Monstrelet: and it is not to
be omitted, That this John Balua, being Bishop of Eureux, was made a Cardinal,
and a little after convicted of treason against the king and kingdom. The
year following, one M. John Loyre, by virtue of certain Bulls from the Pope,
interdicted the city and Diocese of Niuers, using the authority of the
Official of Besanson: But by the sentence of the Court it was decreed the
twelfth of December, at the suit of the kings Attorney general, and of M.
Peter Chartres, Doctor and Professor of Divinity in the University of Paris,
That notwithstanding the Interdict the Divine Service Loire and Official
should be laid hold on, and be held to procure at their own charges the
abrogation of the Bulls.

Neither wanted there in all places some, who in the midst of the tyranny
powered forth their sighs even before the Popes. Dominicus Bishop of Brescia in
Italy, wrote a Treatise which he directed to Pius the second, and entitled it,
The Reformation of the Court of Rome; truly mild enough according to the
times, and yet sometime not without a sting: If (says he) we consider the
former Popes and their Lament. 4.
Oh, how is the gold become so dim! the most fine gold is changed, the stones
of the Sanctuary, that is, the Prelates, are scattered in the corner of every
street, that is, of the broad ways, which lead to destruction, in the corners
whereof they are, as Gregory expounds it. Her Nazarites were purer than
snow, and whiter than milk, more splendent than precious stones, or polished
Saphires; but now their face is blacker than a coal, and they are not known,
to wit, for good, and By this deformation and spot of the Court, and of
Clergymen, especially of the Prelates, Ecclesiastical censure seems to be
weakened, and obedience diminished. Why is this, but for the contemptible life
and De Censi Romans l. ^. Q. 7. Cum Pastoris 6. q. 1. ex merito 1. q. 1. Fertur.
ver. Hinc igitur.
and diligently look to it. But he that would correct others, ought first
look to himself, and them that be about him: Because the life of the Pastor
is an example to others. And if the head languish, the rest of the members are
infected, and when the Pastor is wounded, who will apply the medicine to cure
the sheep? Whereupon, when the Physician is sick, it will be said unto him,
Cure thy self, etc. And to this purpose he brings many Canons. Of
Indulgences: So often as (says he) the De poenis and remiss. c. Cum ex eo. Ad
haec. Out of this consideration it follows, that about giving of expectatiue
graces greater consideration ought to be had, and not thus given every where
on all sides, and indifferently: because by so great a multitude and confusion,
for the most part, benefices are granted to persons unworthy, and great matter
of contention arises thereby. Again, By the evil example and scandal which
they give to Lay men, they seem that they are come to this that S. Bernard
speaks in his sermon upon these words of the Gospel, I am the good
shepherd. And because it is very long, Anthony Rozel, a famous professor of
the Civil Law, who in his book of Monarchy affirms, That the Pope is not
Lord of the world, That he has no power over the Emperor, no temporal sword,
neither any authority above other Bishops. There is extant besides, other
Treatises of the same Author, Of the power of the Emperor and of the Pope, and
of both the swords, and of the authority of Councels, printed at Venice in the
year 1487.

Neither feared also Roderick Sanchio, a Spaniard, Bishop of Zamora, Roderic.
Zamorens in speculo vitae humanae excuso Argetorti apud Johan. Pris. An. 1507.
and Referendarie of Paul the second, to say in his book Of the Myrror of man's
life, That the and yet bind on the backs of poor Christians, diverse
insupportable burdens of traditions, which in the Primitive Church either were
not at all, or were left to men's liberty. In the Primitive Church (says he)
the faithful were not bound with the commandments, censures, and pains of so
many Canons and Decrees. Neither were there then so many snares of laws and
constitutions, of excommunications or censures, from which the faithful,
though never so careful and fearful, can by no means be safe or warrant
themselves. There was not so many fasts commanded, nor vigils, nor silences,
nor (says he) if any of the like things were observed in the Primitive Church,
it was only voluntary, which as then was no sin to transgress, because it
was not then forbidden. And yet notwithstanding this same wretch was not
ashamed to flatter Paul the second in the same book, That the Pope is not
only ordained to humane principality, but to divine; Jdem cap. 1. l. 2.
neither to command only over men, but also over Angels; not for to judge the
quick only, but the dead; not in earth alone, but in heaven also; not to rule
over the faithful only, but (says he) to that very same dignity, to that
same jurisdiction and power, and to the principality over the whole world. So
that he blushed not to apply unto him the places of tha Prophets, and of the
Psalms, which the holy Ghost has only spoke and meant of the only Son of
God; and he most highly extolleth him above that stammering Moses and his
brother Aaron both together. So that truth and flattery, two contraties,
proceed out of one and the same mouth. In Germany Herman Ried wrote a book,
wherein he represented the corrupt manners of the Clergy, by a comparison of
what they ought to be, Herman. Ried. de vita and honestate Clericorum.
and what in his times they then were: There are (says he) many Clergymen,
who follow not the counsel and sentences of the Fathers, receive not the holy
Scripture, but despise Hierome de norma viuendi c. 5.
disturbers of the peace, having corrupt and polluted consciences, etc. And so
is verified of them that saying of S. Hierome, There is not a crueller beast in
the world, than an evil Clergie-man or Priest; for he suffers not himself
to be corrected, neither will he ever hear the truth, etc. Such and the like
are by their Prelates permitted publicly so to live: Provided, that they give
every year a certain sum of money to their Officials. Moreover, how many are
there publicly tainted with Simonie? insomuch, that not being able to conceal
their simonie, to shift if off, they express 72 Psalm, They are the Ministers
of Christ, but serve Antichrist. Which places, because we have above coted
them, in needless here to trouble the Reader withal.

Stephan. Brulifer. de timore seruili de paupertate Christi cum sermonibus
varijs apud Andream Bocord. Paris an. 1500. Jdem in 4. lib. sentent. Bonavent.
Basil. per Jacob. de Pfortzeim 1501
In France, Stephan Brulifer, Doctor of Sorbonne, of the order of Franciscan
John cries, Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the sins of But when
the Sorbonne would not endure him, he committed himself to the protection of
Diether Archbishop of Mentz. And what shall we say, of Platina, Platina in
Marcelino.
that famous Historiographer of Popes, not speaking of Paul the second his
Master, which perhaps might be imputed to some hatred, but of the Popes and
Chruch in his time, plainly without spleen. In the life of Marceline
(speaking of the persecution of Dioclesian) Eusebius (says he) shows, That
God permitted that calamity, which they suffered, because of the manners of
Christians corrupted by too much liberty and indulgence, principally of the
Churchmen, whose perverseness the justice of God would bridle by this
persecution, seeing dissimulation to be in In the life also of Stephen the
third: Piety and religion is now become so cold, Platina in Stephan. 3.
that they will not pray to God, I say not barefooted, but hardly in their
hose and buskins. Speaking of a certain procession from Lateran to S. Peter's:
They weep not as they go, or during the time of Divine Service, as those
holy Fathers, but laugh, and that impudently (I speak even of them whose
scarlet robes makes them more obseruable;) The like we read in many places,
whereby he left inregistred what he judged of his times; not daring so freely
to do it in the lives of them that then reigned, or had left after them their
creatures, as they call them, of whom he might receive injury. Let us add
Anthony de Rosellis, a Tuscan, a famous Doctor both of the Civil and Canon
Index Expurgatorius, they have caused them to be raced out.

It remains to say something of thee that spoke openly, being sequestered from
the Pope. Platina, in the life of Paul the second, tells us, That in the
town of Poli, near Rome, were detected many heretics, and the Lord of the
place with eight men and six women was taken, who being brought to Paul, were
very ignominiously used. And behold the heresy: They were (says he) of that
sect which we say is of a perverse opinion of mind, for that they said, That
none of Let the Reader note here the style of Platina, which shows that he
speaks out of other men's judgment. And as for the Bohemians, in the
beginning of the Popedom of Pius the second they set forth their Apology and
Confession of Faith, against the calumnies wherewith they were traduced among
the people, which were too long here to be inserted: But they are conformable
to the doctrine of the reformed Churches of this kingdom, and are defended by
the same places and reasons both of the holy Scriptures and Fathers. But this
fell out well for them, that after diverse miseries, was chosen king with common
consent of the States, George Prodebraccius, a great captain, Paul the second,
and his Estate exposed to the first inuaders thereof. Matthias king of Hungary
took upon him the conquest of this Province, by the instigation of Rodolfe the
Popes Legate, with the approbation of the Emperor Frederick the third, and by
the favor of many of the great men of the kingdom. But after many battles
fought with variable success, he could not bring his purpose to pass. And in
the mean time this valiant Prince was thereby hindered from the necessary
war, which he had prosperously made against the Turks, being accused of
ingratitude, George, to whom he was very notably obliged, for having
generously set him free out of prison without any ransom, and also given him
his daughter in marriage, when he was chosen king of Hungary. In hatred of
which fact, even after the death of George, when Matthias was declared king by
the Pope, the States of the kingdom of Bohemia would never give their consent
unto it, but preferred before him Vladislaus son of Casimir king of Polonia,
who, although he was oftentimes instigated by the Pope against George, yet
would never be persuaded to take arms against him, judging it a thing
unworthy, under pretense of the Catholic Faith to violat the faith given to
each other. And this brings us to the year 1470.

64. PROGRESSION.
The Atheism of Sixtus the fourth, and his abominable and wicked life, whom
Innocent the eighth succeeded both in the Popedom and in all impiety. Of
Alexander the sixth, by what devilish means he attained the Popedom, and of
his abominable incestuous life, and miserable death. Charles the French king
passes into Italy with a mighty army, and of his valiant proceedings there.

NOw it was thought that the Popes were come to that height of impiety and
Francis de Rouere, borne in Sauoy, General of the Franciscans, got the
Popedom, who was called Sixtus the fourth. Of this man Onuphrius gives this
testimony, That for his great learning, as long as he was Cardinal, all
questions that concerned matter of Faith were committed to him. Where let the
Reader note from that which follows, upon whose faith the Catholic Faith
depended. Frederick desired that it might be in the borders of Germany, and at
the instant request of the Archbishop of Carnie, who gave his best assistance
to forward the Reformation, the Emperor and Princes called an assembly Sixtus
hearing thereof, Stumfius in Histor. Heluetia.
sent Angelus the Bishop of Suesse to the Senate of the city, threatening to
interdict them, if they sent not the Archbishop to Rome bound hand and foot,
and accounted not the rest of the Bishops that were with him for exco^municat
persons. But the Senate of Basil not enduring that so great a wrong should be
offered unto them in a free city, the Legate excommunicating them, departed in
choler. Frederic nevertheless persisted in his purpose, but yet the better to
pacify Sixtus, he desired that the Council might be called at Vtina in Friuli
a country in Italy; but that pleased him not neither. This difficulty, so
soon as he saw he had overcome, and withal established his seat with the
mutual Legations of Princes, he bent all his endeavors to the increase
Volateran. and Onuphr.
Volateran and Onuphrius say in express terms, That he was accounted by the
judgment of all very loving and indulgent toward his kindred, for whose
sakes he had done and granted many things, praeter fas jusque, against all
laws humane and divine. He created therefore two Cardinals, and that not
without a mystery, Peter Riere, whom he had brought up from a child with his
brother Ieronimo, and Julian his brothers son, who was afterward Julius the
second: Peter being in a short time strangely enriched, became so sumptuous,
that he seemed to be borne to spend money; for he consumed in those two years
wherein he lived a Cardinal, two hundred thousand crowns in his ordinary
household expense, left forty thousand crowns in debts, and other infinite But
nevertheless a Legate (a mad choice it was) in Italy: It is he whose
prodigious prodigality Baptista Fulgosius describes to be such, Baptista
Fulg. dict. and factor. memorab. l. 9. Baptista Mantuanus in Alphonso l. 4.
that he usually gave to Tiresia his harlot pantofles wrought all over with
pearl: of whom likewise Baptista Mantua writes these verses, wherein Jupiter
thus saluteth him in hell: At tu implume caput, cui tanta licentia quondam
Foemineos fuit in coitus, tua furta putabas
Hic quoque praetextu mitrae impunita relinquit?
Sic meruit tua foeda Venus, etc.

Glut thy desires with women's company,
Think thou thy Myter can here thy thefts defend?
Such has the desert of thy leacheries been, etc.
To the reproach and ignominy both of Pope Sixtus and himself. Of Julian we
shall speak hereafter in his place. Having provided for these two that were
nearest unto him both in blood and affection, he bent his endeavors to the
promotion of the rest of his kindred. He made therefore his brother Ieronimo,
brought up Catherina the bastard daughter of the Duke of Milan, having first
bestowed a hat upon Ascanius the Dukes son, to get his fathers consent.
Presently after he raised Leonard his brothers son, whom he married to a
bastard of king Ferdinands, and made him Governor of Rome. He made John also,
the son of Cardinal Julian, Prince of Soria and Senogallia, who married Joan
the daughter of Frederick of Montefeltro, Duke of Vrbin, from whom came
Franciscus Maria, who (his uncle dying without heirs male) obtained the
dukedom: and in this manner did he exalt diverse others. He was so liberal
(say the writers of those times) that many times he gave one and the same
thing to Vitellius, the Florentines, the Columni, Ferdinand, and others,
though, for the most part, with bad success. Neither do these writers
conceal, that by reason of a grief he conceived, for that peace that was
concluded betwixt the Venetians and the Duke of Ferrara, he died,
notwithstanding that this war, by reason of the multitude of confederats on
both sides, had set all Italy on fire. Hear what his Epitaphs say: Non potuit
saenum vis vlla extinguere Sixtum:
Audito tandem nomine pacis obit.
All force cruel Sixtus defied,
Yet heard the name of peace, and died.
Again, Dic vnde Alecto pax ista refulsit, and vnde
Tam subito reticent praelia? Sixtus obit.
Tell me Alecto, whence is this our peace?
Pope Sixtus is dead, and therefore wars cease.
Again, Pacis vt hostis eras, pace peremptus obis.
As peace thou defiedst, so by peace thou diedst.


But where he wanted force, there he practiced treachery; and therefore says
the Epitaph, -- Fraudis dolique Magister,
Et sola tantum proditione potens.
-- A Master of fraud and deceits,
And only powerful in working treacherous feats.


For, to advance Ieronimo he endeavored to make himself Lord of Florence; but
Laurence and Julian de Medicis withstood him, against whom he stirred up
Francis Pazzi, a Prince of the contrary faction, to give an attempt against
their lives: And to manage that business with better safety, he sent Raphael
Riere, the Cardinal of S. George, a young man, and nephew to Ieronimo, to
Florence, to give heart to the conspirators; who on a day, in the Church of S.
Reparade, and in the midst of Divine Service, assaulted the Medices, killed
Julian, and wounded Laurence, who being received by the Sextens into the
vesterie, escaped. The rumor hereof Saluiati, Iacobus Poggius, and diverse
others of the conspirators, were apprehended, and presently hanged out at a
window, the Archbishop himself in his Pontifical habit; Pactio, Anthony,
Volateran, and one Stephen a Priest, were likewise executed. The Cardinal of
S. George was taken prisoner, and the whole plot in such sort discovered by
Montesicco, the contriuer thereof, that it easily appeared that Pope Sixtus was
the chief of that conspiracy; to whom nevertheless, least they should
provoke him too far, they redeliuered his Cardinal: Laurence being very
wise, found a means to appease Ferdinand king of Naples, and to alienat him
from the Pope; who, had not the Turk at that time, by the taking of Otranto,
troubled all Italy, had prepared himself for a revenge. At the last being
disappoynted of his enterprise touching Florence, he made peace with the
Venetians, against Hercules Duke of Ferrara, with this purpose: That by his
ruin he might increase the power of Ieronimo: But presently after, watching
his best advantage, he turned his fury against the Venetians themselves. He
spent minoris praesidentiae, Soliciters, Recorders, Ianizaries, Stradiots,
Mameluchi, which he ordained for a certain sum of money. Likewise nine
Notaries of the Apostolic Exchequer, etc. Onuphr. in Sixto 4.
By which means (says Onuphrius) the liberty of the Roman Court being as it
were cast into fetters, all the diligence of industrious and painful wits was
taken away, those offices being now sold for money only, which were wont to
be freely bestowed upon learned and honest men. He was likewise the first that
sold the offices of the Procuratorship of the chamber, of the Notariship
Apostolic, of and all this out of an immoderat desire to enrich his kindred.
He celebrated likewise the Jubilee in the year 1475, An. 1475.
which was reduced by his predecessor to the five and twentieth year, who
prepared for him that harvest of Indulgences. But it shall be necessary at the
last to know what manner of man he was that granted them. Amongst the bawds of
these later times there was none more famous than Sixtus the fourth, who built
at Rome a goodly brothel house, wherein, Agrippa de vanitate Scientiaram c.
64. de Lenonia.
according to the example of Heliogabalus, he nourished multitudes of
strumpets, wherewith he furnished his friends Iulium nummum, a Iule to the
Pope, which yearly rent amounts many times to the sum of twenty thousand
ducats. And in such request is that office with the principal of the Church,
that the rents of the bawds are cast up with the revenues of the Church: For I
have heard them (says he) in this sort cast up their accounts, He has two
benefices, one cure of twenty ducats, a Priorie of forty ducats, and three
whores in the brothel-house. By what better means could he advance the
kingdom of the Whore? Let us add hereunto that which Wesellus of Groaning,
Doctor of Divinity, says in his book of the Papal Indulgences, a man in
those days famous for his knowledge in the three Tongues, and therefore Lux
mundi, The light of the world, who lived in the time of this Sixtus. Wesellus
seu Basilius Groningens. de Indulgentijs Papalib.
At the request of Peter Riere, Cardinal of S. Sixtus, and Patriarch of
Constantinople, and of Ieronimo his brother, and of the Cardinal of S. Luce,
who had had the chiefest place belonging to the hunting under Paul the second,
he permitted Sodomie the three hottest months of the year, June, Iulie, and
August, with this clause, Fiat vt petitur, Let it be done as it is requested.
And therefore Johannes Sapidus in his Epitaph had good reason to say, --
Deflent sua Busta Cinaedi,
Scortaque, lenones, alea, vina, venus.
-- Buggerers bewail his death,
Whores, bawds, dice, wine, and leacherie.
Again, Poedico insignis, praedo, fucosus adulter,
Gaude prisce Nero, etc.
A buggerer, a thief, a false adulterer,
Rejoice old Nero, etc.
And it follows very aptly, according to Saint Paul, Romans 1.

Riserat vt viuens coelestia numina Sixtus,
Sic moriens nullos credidit esse Deos.
As Sixtus when he lived mocked God, so he,
When that he died, believed no God to be.
Trithem. de scriptorib. Eccles.

Fra. Leandro Alberti de vi^is illustribus Ordinis Praedicatorij.

Alani de Rupe Compend. Psalm. terij Mariani and de Myrac. Rozarij liber vnus
An. 1483.


And yet this good man in the mean time writ books of the conception of the
Virgin Marie, authorized that execrable book of Alani de Rupe, a German and
Dominican Friar, forged and preached for Gospel a certain Rosarie, gathered
out of the Virgin Mary's Psalter; and thereupon instituted a new Society, for
the credit whereof James Sprenger, Provincial of Germany, devised certain
Sixtus approved and defended with his Bulls and Indulgences. There was likewise
a book printed, in the beginning whereof we read, That the Virgin Marie
entering into the cell or chamber of this Alani, the doors being locked, and
having wouen a ring with her hair, married her self therewith unto him,
offering her self unto him to be kissed, and her breast to be handled and
sucked, in as familiar manner as a wife to her husband. Many other the like
blasphemies there were in that book; by which let the Reader consider in what
a bottomless gulf of impiety the superstitious minds of men were by these
Atheists overwhelmed.

Innocent the eighth, a Genowais, of the family of Cibo, succeeded in the year
Virginius Vrsinus the government of the Apostolic Palace, to gratify
Cardinal Julian, who then began to show his force; whereby the city was
brought into great danger: Yea he troubled all Italy, by defending the Earls
of Aquila against Ferdinand their King and Lord, Onuphr. in Innocent. 8.
Enforced thereunto (says Onuphrius) by the counsel of men ill advised;
whereby he got nothing but charge, ruin, and dishonor. Seeking therefore a
means to supply his wants, and to fill his Sixtus: He ordained fifty two
Plumbatores Bullarum, Bullists, by which means he got six and twenty thousand
crowns, Certis Ecclesiae prouentibus attributis, As a subsidy out of the
revenues of the Church. He added six and twenty Secretaries, who paid every
one as it were for a fine two thousand five hundred crowns, which came to
sixty thousand crowns. He put to sale the office of the President de Ripa,
and created thirty officers, who paid two hundred crowns apeece: and this
was said to restore the Church. He made peace with Ferdinand because he could
not otherwise choose, whom nevertheless Charles king of France (who had
promised him to come presently with his army) the lawful heir; which he
afterward in his own person performed, grounding himself upon the last will
and testament of Renat king of Sicilie, and of Charles the Earl du Maine his
brother, who transferred all the right they had upon him. But Innocent had no
other purpose but by this means reuersing all the Bulls of his predecessors,
to be revenged upon Ferdinand. As touching his private life, let us give credit
to Volateran, though in terms somewhat too honest, he express his
dishonestie. John Baptista Cibo a Genowais, after the death of Sixtus, sat in
the chair, and was called Innocent the eight: He was heretofore in Contubernio
of Philip Cardinal of Bononia: Afterward he was made Bishop of Sauona, and
then of Melfe, and Dataire of Sixtus, who made him in the end Cardinal, for
his sweet and civil carriage, wherein he exceeded all men, vsque ad vitium,
even in vice it self: For he many times embraced men of basest conditions. Is
the Popedom to be gotten by such means and manners? He had before his
Popedom, sixteen children, eight sons, and eight daughters, of which there
were only two living, when he obtained the Sea, whom he endeavored to raise
to the charge of the Church, distributing (says the History) a great mass of
money, gathered by his Others add, That he was the first of all the Popes, that
openly made his boasts of his bastards, and contemning all ancient discipline,
took care to enrich them. Onuphrius says, That his son Frauncis, and his
daughter Theodorina his bastards, he enriched beyond reason. To Frauncis he
gave certain Towns near the City, and married him to the daughter of
Lawrence de Medices, and Theodorina to Gerard Vsumar of Genoa, a man very
rich. Hereupon says Marullus in an Epitaph, Quid quaeris testes, sit mas an
foemina Cibo,
Respice natorum pignora certa, gregem,
Octo nocens pueros genuit, totidemque puellas;
Hunc merito poterit dicere Roma Patrem.
Why seek thou witness to prove Cibo a man,
Look on his brats, fair gages, deny't if thou can:
Eight bastard sons he got, and as many daughters,
Worthily then may Rome, count this man a Pater.


His Epigrams always alluding to that trial of the sex ordained after the
deceit of Pope Ioane. But he concludes, Spurcities, gula, auaritia, atque
ignauia deses
Hoc octaue iacent, quo tegeris, tumulo.
Uncleanness, avarice, sloth, gluttony,
Are here Octaue intombd, where thou do lie.


And least there should be no place left for superstition, they made men
believe at that time, when Petrus Consaluus de Mendoza repaired the Church of
the holy cross, that there was a fragment of the title of the cross of
Christ written in three Bajazet the Emperor of Turkey, sent unto him for a
present, the point of that spear of Longinus wherewith the side of Christ was
wounded, that he might thereby win him to set a surer guard over his brother
Gemes, whom he had then in his power; of that Longinus whose name they derived
from the word (...) Who knows not these fooleries, and knowing them can endure
them? From hence there sprung a wonderful harvest of indulgences under
Alexander the sixth his successor, Summa constitut. in Bulla cuius initium
admirabile sacrament. Bulla cuius initium Apostolicae camerae in sum. constitut.

Hieron. Marius in Eusebius. cap. Onuphr. in Alexand 6. Volaterran. in
Anthropologia. Guicciard. lib. 1.


who nevertheless gave less credit to these things. But Innocent Rodericus
Borgia (called Alexander the sixth) stayed not here. For, as some report that he
came to the Popedom by a compact with the Devil, so his actions bewrayed the
Devils conditions. Doubtless in this all Authors agree, that there was never
any that ascended to that dignity by worse means. Volateranus and Onuphrius
say, That he obtained so high a dignity by the endeauours of some Cardinals
corrupted with And there they relate how he overthrew them all, some by exile,
some by imprisonment, some by violent death, some he strangled, some he
poisoned. But Guicciardin more exquisitely, He was chosen Pope (says he) by
means of the discord that was betwixt the Cardinals Ascanius Sfortia, and
Julian of S. Peter ad vincula: But add withal thereunto, That by a new example
in the sight and knowledge of all men he bought the Popedom, partly with
money, partly with the promise of his greatest offices according to that of the
Apostle, sitting in the Temple of God, etc. To this abominable negotiation,
many amongst them were drawn by Cardinal Ascanius, not only by persuasion
but example, who being corrupted by an infinite desire of riches, bargained with
the Pope, that for a reward of this his great wickedness, he might have the
Vice-Chauncellorship, which was the principal office of the Court of Rome,
enriched with most precious furniture. But the Pope could not avoid, neither
for the time to come the judgment of God, nor for the time And here let the
Reader again compare these manners with those gifts that are necessary for a
Bishop, remembered by Paul 1. Timoth. 3. The only end therefore of all his
endeavors, was to increase the honor and greatness of his sons, whom he
was not ashamed to acknowledge to be his to the whole world: for he would not
John Borgia, his sisters son, Cardinal: but he was upon the sudden stricken
with a strange fear. Charles the eighth, king of France, attempting the
possession of the kingdom of Naples, came with a great power into Italy,
being invited by Lodouicus Maurus, Duke of Milan, and other Princes of Italy:
against whom Alexander made a league with Alphonsus of Aragon, heir to his
father Ferdinand in the kingdom of Naples: The principal conditions were
these, That Alexander should inuest Alphonsus into the kingdom of Naples, at
the same rate that he did his father, and should send his Apostolical Legate to
put the Crown upon his head: That he should Lodowicke the son of Henry,
who was Alphonsus his bastard brother, Cardinal: Again, That Alphonsus on the
other side should pay to the Pope thirty thousand ducats: That he should give
to the Duke of Candia, the eldest son of Alexander, in the kingdom twelve
thousand ducats of yearly reuenew, and the first of the seven principal
offices that should be void: That he should maintain at his charge three
hundred men at arms, to be always ready when need should be to serve him:
That upon Caesar Borgia, his other son, by him made Cardinal, he should bestow
benefices to a certain yearly value. Here the Author notes, That he made him
Cardinal after that he had proved by false witnesses, that he was the lawful
son of another, because otherwise he could not have been capable of that
What impudency was this, having before commonly called them, and publicly
showed them to be his sons?

In the mean time Charles prepared a great army for this voyage,
notwithstanding that Alexander did sometimes dehort him from it with his
Briefes, sometimes threaten him with his Ecclesiastical censures. Paulus
Iouius l. 2.
But yet finding himself in these straits, it was thought expedient for him
and his confederat Alphonsus, to fly unto Bajazet the Prince of the Turks,
and by ambassadors sent to that purpose, to lay open unto him their imminent
danger. It fell out happily with them at that time, that Gemes the brother of
Bajazet was detained prisoner at Rome, a man famous both for his valor and
wisdom; who being overcome by his brother in the Aubussonius, the Great
Master of the Order, for a sum of money was delivered to Innocent the eighth;
whereupon there was that friendship betwixt Innocent and Bajazet, that Bajazet
paid unto him a yearly pension of forty thousand ducats, which Alexander his
successors did afterward receive, Phil. Comin. in Histor. Carol. 8. c. 19.
Philip de Comines says sixty thousand, to the end that a strong guard might
be set over Gemes, least if he should escape, he should trouble his Empire.
Upon this occasion Alexander and Alphonsus give Bajazet to understand, That it
was the purpose of the king of France, having settled his affairs in Naples, to
pass over into Greece: which was the more easily believed, because he was not
ignorant how many troubles the Charles growing hot, they sent Legates again
unto him, Alphonsus making choice of Camillus Pendon, Alexander of Gregorio
Bucciardo of Genoa, being both skillful in the Turkish language; Bucciardo
being employed before in the like service by Pope Innocent. These promised to
overthrow the forces of Charles, so he would supply them with some great
sums of money: Whereby he should redeem the State of Greece from
destruction, and entertain war in the kingdom of another, and should have
for a bulwark of his Empire the city of Rome and the kingdom of Naples.
These ambassadors were honorably received by Bajazet, and so much the rather,
because he had received the same news from other He therefore gave thanks to
the Pope (speaking to Gregory) that he that had the highest place in
Christendom would be pleased so friendly and lovingly to give him in time
admonition, notwithstanding he were of another belief touching God, and of
different manners touching men. He advised him to return into Italy, his
ambassador Dantius accompanying him, by whom he sent money, and committed
other matters of secrecy unto him to that purpose. Amongst other matters given
unto him in charge (says Iouius) there was a letter written in Greek, wherein
Bajazet with great art persuaded the Pope, That he should provide that by some
means or other his brother might be taken out of the way by poison; which if
he would perform, he promised him upon his faith two hundred thousand ducats,
and freely to bestow upon him the vnfeamed From hence let the Reader judge with
how inward a commerce of wickedness these two were joined, since he durst give
that counsel to the Pope, which the most wicked men of the world, practiced in
all manner of villainy, durst not have done one to another. It fell out in the
mean time, that the ships wherein they passed the seas, were taken near
Ancona by John de la Rouere, brother to Cardinal Julian, an enemy to the
Pope, and a friend to the Frenchmen, who seized upon all the money as due unto
him from the Pope, and so Dantius was enforced to make a journey by land to
Ancona, to save himself. Alexander being very much moved herewith, sought new
means to continue this intercourse and agreement with Bajazet. With which
Papal zeal he likewise diuerted the Croysado, or money gathered in Spain,
under a pretense of bearing the cross against Bajazet, to this use: For (says
Guicciardine) king Ferdinand excusing himself, That his army by sea could not
so speedily be ready, for the defense of the kingdom of Naples, for want of
money, he consented that the money gathered in Spain, in the na^^ of the
Apostolic sea, under a color of making war against the enemies of the
Faith, should be employed to that use.

But Charles nevertheless passed through all Italy without resistance, being
led as it were by the hand of God, opening not only the gates before him, but
the walls too, and coming near Rome, where the Pope had fortified himself
Alphonsus, and other his confederats, he demanded passage, and to be admitted
into the city, commanding his enemies to depart, and not dissembling, That if
Alexander obeyed not, he would make his way through the city with his sword.
Alexander hereupon was much troubled in his mind, Fearing least Charles
presuming upon the title of Most Christian, which the kings of France do much
glory in, should with his people, being a nation renowned for their religion,
turn his mind to the reformation of the Church: a terrible thought to him,
whose conscience told him by what infamous means he had obtained the Popedom,
and how with great Paul Jonij l. 2.
Moreover he feared least he should be persuaded by the Cardinals of Colonna,
Sabelli and others, to require the publication of a Council; with which one
voice, says Iouins, the Popes of Rome are more terrified, than with any other
human accidents whatsoever: But partly restes himself upon that assurance which
Charles had given him, not to attempt any thing against his dignity, and
partly because being in these straits he saw no surer course to be taken, he
retired himself to his castle S. Angelo, suffered the king to enter the city,
and sent away Ferdinand Duke of Calabria, the son of Alphonsus, that he might
not see his ruin before his eyes. Charles therefore entered Rome, the last day
of the year 1494 with his whole army, his ensigns displayed, and his lance
upon his some twenty fadome of the wall fell to the ground, even there where
the King had prepared to enter, and near about the same time, there fell about
fifteen fadome of the antemure or outward wall of the castle S. Angelo, as if
the walls themselves had invited the king to enter. Here there wanted not some
that were very earnest with the king, Philip Comineus in vita Caroli 8. c.
16.17.
to remove Alexander from his seat, a man odious to the whole world, telling
him that it would not be less glorious to him to deliver the Church of God,
from the tyranny of a wicked Pope, than it was to Pipin and Charlemaine to
deliver the good Popes, from such as did unjustly oppress them. But Alexander
being directed by a more devout by presents, and promises corrupted those that
could prevail most with him, they so pacified the king that he came to this
agreement, That Alexander should deliver to the king the castles of Ciuita
vecchia, Tarracina and Spoleto, until he had conquered the kingdom of Naples,
That he should offer no wrong to the Cardinals and Barons that were subject to
the Church, or seek to revenge himself upon those that had taken his part,
That he should inuest Charles into the kingdom, That forasmuch as there might
be good use made of Gemes, Baiazets brother, in the wars against the Turk,
he would deliver him into his hands, That he should pronounce Charles Emperor
of Greece, Lastly, That he should leave with the king, Caesar Borgia his son,
for three months, as Gemes, Guicciard. l. 2.
yet he was very careful to satisfy his brother Baiazets request, who,
says Guicciardine, had long time made good use of the avarice of the Vicars of
Christ, that he might possess his Empire in peace, and therefore he was no
sooner come to Naples, but he dyed, not without manifest tokens of a slow
poison given him to drink to shorten his life. The king had demanded for the
better assurance of this treaty, and the performance thereof, the castle S.
Angelo, the Cardinals openly protesting, That Alexander would not Alexander
received the king, who with bended knee kissing his feet, was presently
admitted to kiss his cheek. And another day celebrating the Mass, he hold
the basin of water to wash his hands; which ceremonies the Pope caused to be
painted in a gallerie of the castle of S. Angelo: As being ever the manner of
the Popes, to take that to be a duty which is done of courtesy.

Charles therefore having continued at Rome three weeks, he took his journey
Alexander prepared new difficulties, joining himself in league with Maximilian
the Emperor, the kings of Spain, the Venetians, and Lodwick Sfortia, who
being terrified with the success of this magnanimious Prince, devise how they
might oppress him in Italy; to which purpose against his return into
France, they raised an army, in the plain of Fornoue of forty thousand men;
which he encountered with eight thousand men or thereabout, which he chose out
of the garrisons of Naples, and with an incredible valor made his way through
the midst of them. But being returned into France, and preparing for a second
expedition, An. 1497. Philip. Comineus in vita Caroli 8. c. 26. 51.
Comineus reports, That Hierome Sauanarola, who was then taken for a Prophet
at Florence, being asked whether the king could pass without the peril of his
life, answered, That some difficulties he should have in his journey, but yet
they should all turn to his glory, yea though he had but a hundred soldiers
with him; for that God by whose conduct he came into Italy, would likewise
return him safely into his country: But forasmuch as he had not procured the
reformation of the Church according to his duty, etc. there hung a scourge
over his head, and God had pronounced a sentence against him which he would
execute elsewhere. Moreover, he adds, That he foretold many things
publicly in his Sermons, that the king That he might reform the Church with
his sword, and expel the tyrans out of Italy, and that therefore this charge
was imposed upon him by God, which if he did not, he would sharply be revenged
on him. Which he had likewise many times by letters signified to the king, and
that not long before his death. The scourge that Sauanarola spoke of, Philip.
Comineus in vita Carol. 8.
Philip de Comines enterpreteth to be the death of the Dolphin, which struck
him to the very heart; and the sentence pronounced by God, to be the sudden
death of Charles, which he describes to be very miserable, and to that end he
repeats this History.

Guicciard. l. 3.
Alexander therefore being freed from so great a fear, bends all his endeavors
domestical misfortunes and tragical examples of whoredom and cruelty,
horrible to the Barbarians themselves. From the first entrance into his
Popedom, he resolved to confer all the temporal power he could upon the
Duke of Candia his eldest son; Caesar Borgia his younger son, Cardinal of
Valentia, wholly alienated from his profession of Priesthood, took it
impatiently that this place of dignity should be taken from him by his
brother, and no less was he moved against him, for that he had a greater part
than himself in the love of Madame Lucretia sister to them both. One evening
therefore having supped together with their mother Zanoccia, walking alone
through the city, he caused him to be murdered, and secretly to be cast into
Tyber. The report went, That in the love of Lucretia not only the two brethren
who being once Pope, took her from her first husband, be being now too base,
and she to great too be his wife, and married her to John Sforza Lord of
Pezaro. Afterward, not enduring her husband to be his corriuall, this second
marriage being consumat, by the sentence of certain Judges chosen by himself,
and witnesses suborned to that purpose, as if John had been unfit for marriage,
he likewise dissolved, or rather brake. It is Guicciardine himself that
speaks it, and therefore we have the less need of the verses of Pontanus.


Thais, Alexandri filia, sponsa, nurus.
Lucrece by name, in deed Thais, lies under this stone,
Alexanders daughter, his sons wife and his own.
Again,
Humana iura, nec minus coelestia,
Ipsosque sustulit Deos,
Scilicet liceret (heu scelus) patri

Gods laws and man's, he God himself denies,
O wickedness that with his daughter lies.
Now so long as Alexander was in doubt of the author of the death of his
son, he was strangely moved therewith, and made a show of changing the course
of his life; but so soon as he was assured of the truth thereof, he returned
to his old vomit, and thought it necessary to dissemble the matter. Onuphrius
speaks more significantly, Winking at that outrageous sin of paricide, he
determined Borgia the paricide. It would be perhaps too long, and to small
purpose, here to relate the deeds of this monster. Coming one morning into the
Consistory, he put off his Cardinals hat, and openly professed that he would
be a man of war. He made a voyage into France, where, with the leave and
good liking of Lewis the twelft, who at that time needed the Popes help for
the conquest of Milan, he married Charlotta of Albret, and was made Duke of
Valentia: by which means Lewis found Alexander more willing to yield to that
divorce, which he pretended. Being returned at the last into Italy, presuming
upon the authority of his father, he attempted the ruin of all the Vicars, or
Lieutenants of the cities of Romania; for the Volateran and Guicciardine are
weary with describing his wickedness. Machiauel himself setting down the
true pourtract of a tyran, preferres the example of Borgia before all others,
as Xenophon in Cyrus described a lawful Prince: And all this impiety (says
Guicciardine) among others, Guicciard. l. 5.
proceeded from the Prince of our Christian religion: the which that he might
the better with money maintain, besides those rapines and robberies he was
wont to commit through the whole country, Alexander found out new at Rome
every day, as Alexander for lucre received into Rome. Add hereunto diverse
Cardinals and Prelates poisoned, whose goods he challenged to himself. Onuphr.
in Alexand. 6.
Doubtless (says Onuphrius) he had a purpose to have put in practice the like
experiments upon the rest that were rich, had he not by the wonderful
providence of God hastened his own death, by the fatal error of the
cup bearer: for he was a man borne to the ruin of all Italy. He had an
infinite number of tale-bearers, and the least ill word that might be was
death. Volateran. in Antropol. l. 22.
Rome (says Volateran) that was wont (says he) Alexander celebrated a
Jubilee, selling it by his Bulls to as many as either could not, or refused to
come. Being told that Caesar Borgia had lost an hundred thousand ducats at
play, his answer was, That these were the sins of the Germans. So good
opinion had he of his own wares. The end at the last crowns the work:
Guicciard. l. 6.
In the greatest height of all their hopes (says Guicciardine) Alexander
supping in a Vine near the Vatican to enjoy the coolness of the air, he was
suddenly carried, (says he) partly because he was young, and partly because
he used present remedies, escaped, though oppressed with a long and a grievous
sickness. He adds, For it is most certain, that both the father and the
son were wont to use poison, not only to be revenged of their enemies, or
to secure themselves against dangers suspected, but also to satisfy their
insatiable desire of riches, and to spoil the richer sort of their goods,
Cardinals and Courtiers that had never offended them. Thus they took out of
the way the Cardinal of S. Angelo, who was very rich, and thus diverse others
of their nearest and most faithful friends and followers, as the Cardinals
(says he) a wonderful concourse of people out of all parts of the city, who
with unspeakable joy came to Saint Peter's Palace to glut their eyes, if they
could, with the sight of the dead carcass of this serpent, who with his
unbridled ambition, perfidious treachery, horrible cruelty, monstrous
luxury, insatiable avarice, selling without difference or respect, things
holy and profane, had infected the whole world. In the selfsame manner
speaks Onuphrius the Popes Historiographer: His treachery was more than
Punicall, his cruelty barbarous, his covetousness and extortion unmeasurable,
his desire to enrich his children, whether by right or by wrong, insatiable.
He was strangely given to women, by whom he had four sons and two
daughters. His principal courtisan was Vannoccia a Roman, Which gives credit
to diverse Epitaphes, which otherwise might have been attributed to Poetical
liberty. We only will respect these few: Vendit Alexander Cruces, Altaria,
Christum,
Emerat ille prius, vendere iure prtest.
Alexander sold Altars, Christ and his Cross,
He bought them, had he not sold, had lived by the loss.
Again,
Tot regna vertit, tot Duces Letho dedit,
Natos vt impleret suos, etc.
Kingdoms he overthrew, Dukes he did kill,
And all this his childrens purses to fill, etc.
Again,
I nunc Nerones vel Caligula nomina.
Speak now no more of Caligula or Nero.


The rest ye may read elsewhere; namely, in the Epigrams of Sanazara, Jacob.
Sanazar. l. 1. and 2. Epigram. Lugd. 1560. Hieron. Marius in Eusebio Captiuo.
an excellent Poet, which he writ of him and his daughter Lucretia; wherein
there is an abridgement of all his wickedness both public and private. But the
Spanish Index Expurgatorius has wisely provided that they shall be rased out
in all future impressions. Marius reports, That by the help of the devil
he got the Popedom, and that without his counsel he did nothing. And he
notes, Petrus Mendosius, a Spaniard, and Cardinal of Valentia, to the end he
might abuse the Marquess of Zaneta, his bastard. What can the devil himself
add to this wickedness? And yet this is that man whom Wicelus affirms to be
always reading, or employed about some holy exercise or other, and ever
meditating how to withdraw the Princes of Christendom from civil wars, to
join against the Turk: That man who granted those goodly Indulgences to as
many as vsited the title of Christ his Cross at Rome, Summa constit. in Bulla
cuius initium inter caetera diuina.
in the Church of the holy Cross of Jerusalem, said to be found in the time
of Innocent the eighth. Can any man doubt but that he hereby mocked the Cross
of Christ? That man who in the year 1494, in his rage, published with his own
Anne, the mother of the blessed Virgin; Benedicta sit sancta Anna matter tua,
ex qua sine macula and peccato processisti, etc. Where were now the Dominicans,
who preached a contrary doctrine? This is that man who divided the world
amongst the Princes, gave to Ferdinand of Aragon, and to Isabel of Castile, the
West Indies, discovered at that time by Colombus. But by what right, if not by
that wherewith he bound himself before to the Prince of the world, even to him
that said unto Christ, All this will I give thee if thou will fall down and
worship me.


Now in the History of these three Popes, described by their own friends and
followers, we have a kind of hidden, or rather public Opposition against
their tyranny: For is there not here a lively picture of Antichrist, whose
name only, as Painters use to do, they have concealed? Al^eric. de Rozate in^
been a Zenon ^^ol. 6. number, 18. c. de Quadrie^^^i praescriptis.
leaving to us not only to divine who he should be, but to pronounce this
very man to be the man of sin, even Antichrist himself. Let us
nevertheless see, amongst other Authors of that age, whether it will not more
manifestly appear. Albericus de Rozate, an excellent Lawyer, defends, as
many had done before, That the Empire depended not Jdem in verbo Romae.
according to the present state of their affairs, have sometimes exalted,
sometimes depressed the Empire, to the end they may get unto themselves a power
both over temporal and spiritual. And these are his verses: Curia Romana non
petit ouem sine lana,
Dantes exaudit, non dantibus ostia claudit.
The Courts of Rome without the wool refuse the sheep,
Giuers they hear, against no giuers the doors they keep.


As likewise that of the Donation of Constantine: I have heard of men of great
credit, that there was then heard a voice from heaven, saying, To day is the
poison of Aspes sowed in the Church of God; and they say that this is to be
found in the ancient authentic writings, and so does the said M. John of
Paris report in his book of the Papal and imperial power, C. 21. Hieronimus
Paulus Catalanus a Canon of Barcelone, and Doctor of both laws, Chamberlain
to Alexander the sixth, in his book of the practice of the Apostolic
Chauncetie, fears not to say, That the Donation of Constantine was not de
facto. Read Laurentius Valla, and Pope Pius in his Dialogue, neither To which
purpose he alleges many places out of the Digests, the Code, and the new
Constitution. And in the life of Phocas the Emperor we read that Pope Boniface
obtained the Panteon of him. Which is that Church that is called Maria retunda.
If therefore you will know from whence the Church Both the one and the other
(the Donation and the Cure) grounded upon one and the same vanity. Hieron.
Marius in Eusebio Captiuo.
Mancinellus was yet more bold, who upon a solemn day, about the hour of
procession, mounting upon a white horse, according to the Alexander the sixth,
openly reprehending his abuses, his scandalous life, and foul abominations;
and having ended his speech, exemplified it before their eyes. Alexander
therefore caused him to be apprehended, and commanded both his hands to be
cut off: which were no sooner healed, but upon another feastiuall day, with the
like boldness he spoke again. But by the commandment of Alexander his
tongue was presently cut out, Machiauellus Historiae Florentin. l. 1.
whereof he died. Machiauel the Secretary of Florence, in his history, says
plainly, That until the time of Theodoricus king of Lombardie Theodoricus king
of the Goths, and in his own time, of all those troubles that were in Italy:
That the Cardinals were but simple Curats of the Parishes in Rome, increasing
afterward by little and little in wealth and honor, and pride and titles, and
habiliments, as the Popedom, and the contention for the Popedom increased.
And in the handling of this subject he concludes the first book of his
Florentine history, which it shall not be amiss for the Reader to take a
view of. Guicciardine also, the Standard Bearer of the Church of Rome, writ the
like discourse in the fourth book of his histories, but the place was
carefully rased out: but it was afterward printed by it self at Basil, in 8o.
in Italian, Latin, Francisci Guicciardini loci duo, etc. which it were not
labor lost to read. Baptista Mantuanus, a Carmelite, a man famous for his
learning in those times, in many places, but especially in his ninth Eclogue,
freely describes the state of the Church of Rome in his time, which he says
was in such sort degenerated, that the shepherds and their dogs were become
ravening wolves, and those whom they should feed and defend, they devoured. But
let that which he has in his third book of Calamities be to us in stead of
the rest.

-- Petrique domus polluta, fluente
Marcescit luxu, nulla hic arcanareuelo
Non ignota loquor, licet vulgata refer,
Sic Vrbes populique ferunt, sic fama per omnem
Iam vetus Europam, mores extirpat honestos
Sanctus ager scurris, venerabilis ara Cynaedis
Seruit, honor andae Divum Ganimedibus Aedes.
Quid miramur opes, recidiuaque surgere tecta?
Thuris odorati globulos and cinnama vendit
Mollis Arabs, Tirij vestes; venalia nobis
Templa, Sacerdotes, Altaria sacra, Coronae,
Ignis, Thura, preces, coelum est venale Deusque.
-- And Peter's house defiled, pines with excess.
I name not things unknown, nor secrets I rehearse,
Things common let me speak, all countries say the same,
Yea, through all the parts of Europe, it is the same,
That honesty from Rome is fled, that holy place
Serves jeasters, buggerers the Altars do disgrace.
The houses of the gods with Ganimedes are filled.
Why do we admire their wealth, the houses they build?
Arabia Frankincense and Cinnamon sells,
The Tirians goodly garments; Rome all things else,
Temples, and Priests, Altars, and Crowns, they fell for pelf,
Fire, Frankincense, prayers, heaven, and God himself.
And all this in Italy.

Neither were they silent in Germany; for it is noted, that about these times
the proverbs were very common, The nearer to Rome the worse Christian: In the
name of God begins all mischief (for this was the beginning of their Bulls) He
that goes once to Rome sees the man of sin, he that goes twice knows him,
he that goes thrice brings him home with him; that is to say, being near the
man of sin, is made like John of Vesalia, a Doctor and Preacher at Worms,
was accused before the Inquisitors for holding these propositions; That Prelates
have no authority to ordain new laws in the Church, but to persuade the
faithful to the observation of the Gospel: That the best interpreters of the
Scriptures expound one place by another, because men obtain not the spirit of
Christ but by the spirit of Christ: That the Doctors, be they never so holy,
are not to be believed for themselves, and the Gloss as little: That the
commandments of the Church bind not to sin: That the elect are saved by the
only mercy of God: That the Popes Indulgences are vain, and so are the
Chrisme, Lent, difference of Thomas, the Frier-Preachers, who were of the
Inquisition, were moved against him. Diether also, Archbishop of Meniz, to
avoid that suspicion of heresy the Pope had of him was enforced to yield unto
them, in so much that without any respect of his years, or his long sickness,
they proceeded against him, whereby he was enforced to revoke his opinions. He
that writ his examination, which bare date the year 1479, says, and takes God
to witness, That he was compelled to that recantation that he made, and the
burning of his books, Examen Magistrate Iohannis de Vesalia Moguntia 1479.
M. Engeline of Brunswic, a great Divine, and M. John Keiserberg, withstanding
it, both men learned and free, addicted to neither part; especially it There
are many books of his extant, and among the rest a Treatise of Indulgences,
where he peremptorily affirms, That the supremacy of the Pope is a humane
invention: That the Church militant may err: That all things necessary to
salvation are contained in the Scriptures. There lived at the same time (but
somewhat younger) Doctor Wesellus of Groaning, called The Light of the world,
who in a certain Epistle of his, says, That he did expect that the
Inquisitors having condemned Vesalius, would have come unto him, having
defended his opinion both at Paris and at Rome, against diverse articles of the
Church Johan. Wesellus de subditis and superioribus.
In his book of Subjects and Superiors he affirms, That the Pope can err,
and that erring we ought to resist him: That by his simonie and wicked
government he made it to appear, that he had no care either of God or the
good of the Church: That his commands bind no farther than they are agreeable
to the word of God: That his excommunications are no more to be feared than
those of any other learned and godly man: for so did the Council of Constance
hearken John Gerson, than John the 24; and all good and godly men to S.
Bernard sometime, than to Pope Eugenius the third. Philip. Melancton. in vita
Rodolfi Agricolae.
His works are to be read printed by pieces at Leipsic, Antuerpe, Basil.
Also, in this country his familiar friend Rodolphus Agricola was very famous,
a man worthily accounted one of the lights of this dark age, who was of the
same opinion. And Iosquin of Groaning, then young, witnesses, That he had often
seen them both send forth many a sigh and groan, to think of the doctrine of
the Church so much deformed. Gocchius Pupperus, a Priest and Curat of Malin in
Brabant, taught the same reformed doctrine, almost in all the Articles,
especially in that of the free justification of a sinner by the blood of
Christ, rejecting all the glosses of Sophisters and Schole men, betaking Paul
teaches us: That those interpretations which they commonly allege, differ
from the word of God, and smell of the heresy of Pelagian: That they have
turned Christianity into Iudaisme and Pharisaisme. His books are Printed in
Germany, namely, Of grace, faith, the dignity of the holy Scriptures, and
others. In the University of Tubingue, Paulus Scriptoris, a Doctor in
Divinity, expounding the fourth book of the Master of sentences, openly
condemned transubstantiation as not being grounded upon the holy Scriptures,
whom the Augustinians, the Disciples of John Stauffich Provincial followed,
with diverse others; amongst whom in the age following, was Conradus Pellicanus,
a man expert in the knowledge Stanffich in the knowledge of the abuses of the
Church of Rome, did afterward good service in the reformation of the Church,
but yet by the diligence of the Franciscans he was banished. In Carnia, Andrew
the Archbishop of whom we have spoken before, importuned the Emperor Frederick
the third for a Council, for the reformation of the Church; who had already
assembled certain Bishops at Basil, with a purpose to proceed farther, had
not Pope Sixtus the fourth (being much moved therewith) compelled Frederick to
break off that assembly, in such sort, that to gratify the Pope, he cast
Andrew in prison; where being for a time kept, and attended with a certain
guard, in a private place (they of Basil denying he died, being found strangled
with a halter, the Pope out of all doubt (says Stumphius) procuring it. Henry
the Agent then Inquisitor, Johan. Stump. in Historiae Holuetica.
writ against him, and accused him for reprehending the Pope, as well in those
things that belonged to matter of faith, as manners, and for that he had
exhorted the Prelates and Universities, by his letters, to a Council (a heinous
offense) for the reformation of the Church. In Rostoc, a city of the lower
Saxony, Nicholas Rus a Priest and Bachelar in Divinity, preached not only
with his tongue, Nicholas Rus in lib. de tripl. funiculo, German. conscripto.
but his pen to, That the power of the Pope was not such as they boasted it
to be, That he that wandereth from the word of God is not to be obeyed: That
the Popes indulgences were mere impostures, and those only true, which Of the
threefold cord, where he expounds the Symbol, the Decalogue, and the Lords
prayer, which he writ in the Saxon Tongue, for the better instruction of the
common people in the purity of religion. There he had his Auditors and his
assemblies, and was sometimes visited by the Pastors of the Waldenses in
Bohemia, from whose company and Ernestus Archbishop of Magdeburg, a man famous
for his piety and justice. Clement Schaw his Chaplain, who was present at his
death, witnesses, That a Minorite using this speech unto him, Take a good
heart, most worthy Prince, we communicate to your Excellency all the good
works not only of our selves, but our whole Order of Friar Minors, and
therefore doubt not but you receiving them, shall appear before the tribunal
seat of God righteous and blessed. His answer was, By no means will I trust
upon my own works, or It is very likely that there were many in all parts of
the world that professed the same faith, since in despite of their adversaries
there remain so many witnesses. It is a strange thing, and doubtless cannot
be attributed to any thing but the good motion of Gods spirit, which we read
very common in this age, and noted almost in the histories of all nations,
That many in their soundest judgment and understanding, and not otherwise
noted of any notable crime, after the consecration of the Priest, carried with
a kind of horror and detestation of that Idolatry, should lay violent hands
upon the Host, and that upon the most solemn feast days, when there was
greatest concourse of people, and with an assured danger John an English man,
that did it in Paris, the day after the feast of Corpus Christi, in the
chapel of S. Crispin, An. 1491. An. 1493. An. 1502.
and in the year 1491; of one Hemon of Picardie, in that which they call the
holy chapel, in the year 1493; of another student in the year 1502, upon
S. Lewis his day, in a chapel on the right hand; all of them continuing
constant, and detesting this Idolatry even to the death; Christoph. Maslaeus
in Chron. Monstrelet. in Additionib.
especially the last, notwitstanding all the admonitions of the Sorbonists, the
tears of his parents, who were brought unto him to persuade, and the horror
of the punishment, which was passing grievous. But there was at this time in
Italy Hieronimus Sauanaruola of Ferrara, by Philip Comineus being sent into
Italy by king Charles the eighth, Philip. Comineus in vita Carol. 8. c. 25.
and 52
reports, That he saw him at Florence, commended of all for his godly
conversation, who did always affirm that Charles should come into Italy,
whatsoever others write to the contrary; and that nothing could withstand him,
or defend it self against his power. Moreover, That whatsoever preparations
and oppositions should be made against his return, were to small purpose, for
he should break through them, and return home with glory; for he that was
his conduct into Italy, would not forsake him at his return. And as touching
his death, he said, That if in that expedition he reformed not the Church,
according to that charge he had received Comineus gives there this testimony
of him, That he was a man of a commendable life, and his sermons very
profitable to win men from vice unto virtue. The Earl likewise Johannes Picus
Mirandulanus, a man admirable both for his profound learning and rare piety,
calls him a Prophet, and writes an Apology in the defense of him against the
Pope. And in like manner Marsilius Fiscinus, that famous Philosopher, in a
certain Epistle spends much time in his commendations, living both at one
Guicciardine says above all the rest, Guicciard. l. 2.
who lived at Florence, and was an eyewitness of his conversation. He
witnesses therefore, that most men that knew him accounted him a Prophet;
Guicciard. l. 3.
Because in Italy at a time when there were greatest tokens of peace, he many
times in his Sermons publicly foretold, That Italy should be invaded by
foraine powers, with so great astonishment, that neither Council, nor walls,
nor arms should be able to resist them. And this he did for fifteen years
together whilst he lived at Florence. But (says he) when Charles was returned
into France, and the Pope freed from his fears, he began to remember
Hieronimus, who having been long before accused unto him for inueying against
the Clergy and Court of Rome, not without the great scandal of them both, for
1479 he was excommunicated. But he still continuing in his preaching, his
adversaries by the authority of the Pope, getting the upper hand, drew him out
of the Monastery of S. Mark where he lived, and cast him into the common
prisonhouse. In which tumult, the kinsfolk of those who the year before lost
their heads, slew Franciscus Valori, an excellent citizen, and his chief
patron. This (says Guicciardine) Sauanarola was examined with tortures; upon
which examination a process was published, which (discharging him of those
calumnies which were imposed upon him, touching his avarice, his dishonest
behavior, his secret practices with foraine Princes) tended Here let the
Reader judge how great a sin it is with them to desire, or to forward the
reformation of the Church by a general Council, and to make it conformable to
that of the Apostles times. Having confirmed this process in the presence of
diverse religious of the same order, he, with two others his fellows, was
deprived of his holy orders, by the sentence of the General of the
Dominicans, and the Bishop Romolin, who was afterward Cardinal of Surrenta,
deputed Commissaries by the Pope. This being done, he was left to the power of
the secular Court, by the judgment whereof, they were first hanged, and then
burnt: which their deaths, forasmuch as they did constantly endure, the
diversity of judgments and opinions of men And hereby are those slanders
sufficiently disproued, which we read in Nauclerus to be imputed unto him,
Naucler. Genar. 50.
Guicciardine charging him with no other crime, but that those predictions
which before he affirmed to proceed from Flaminius, a famous Poet of Italy, in
his Epitaph thought far otherwise.

Dum fera flamma tuos Hieronime pascitur artus,
Religio fleuit dilaniata comas,
Fleuit, and o, dixit, crudeles parcite flammae,
Parcite, sunt isto viscera nostra rogo.
Whilst furious flames, O Jerome, thy body wear,
Religion weeps and teareth her hair,
She weeps and cries, O cruel flames, O stay your ire,
O stay, our bowels burn in this same fire.
Now if any man shall ask what points of Religion he desired to have reformed
in that Council he so much thirsted after, it sufficiently appears in his
books, wherein he overthrows, as much as in him lies all humane traditions;
places all his hope in the free justification by faith in Christ Jesus,
sticks Posseuinus acknowledges to be composed the night before his
punishment. As for his sermons and other books, the Roman Index has purged
them, according to their manner.

But if under that yoke of oppression, to thirst after a reformation were
heresy, and worthy fire and faggot, doubtless he was not only faulty, only
in Wesselus of Groening called the light of the world: John Ostendorp a Canon
of the Church of Deuentrie, visiting that reverend old man, Gerad. Nouiomagus
in Historia.
he said unto him, Young man thou shall live to see the day, wherein the
doctrine of these modern contentious divines, Thomas and Bonauenture and
others of that stamp, shall be contemned and hissed at of all divines that are
truly Christian. Tilemanus Spengerberg speaking to his children and
neighbors, Shortly says he, this religion which now florisheth shall grow
into contempt; a Doctor of divinity in the University of Tubingue, spoke
likewise to that purpose; so did John Keiserberg a preacher at Strasbourg, and
an Author of certain divinity books; There shall one come, says he, raised
by God that shall establish it; wishing very earnestly that he might be his
disciple. A certain ecclesiastical person in the city of Coire a country of
Grisons speaking to his fellows, You have (says he) cast S. Paul under the
bench, but a time shall come, when he shall come forth and put you where ye
placed him. Andreas Proles the Prior of the Augustines at Leipsic in his
Lectures was wont to say; You hear (brethren) the testimony of the
Scriptures, that by grace we are whatsoever we are, and by grace we have
whatsoever we have; From whence then is there so much darkness, such
horrible superstitions? O my brethren the state of Christendom has need of a
great and a severe reformation, which I now see to be near at hand. But his
brethren demanding of him, why he began not this reformation, and opposed
not himself against these errors, his answer was this; You see my brethren
that I am old, and weak of body, and I confess my self, for my learning,
industry, and eloquence insufficient to perform All this is reported by
Heningus an Augustine Monk in the monastery called The gate of heaven, near
Weringherad, whereof this Proles was Prior; whom the Pope afterward
excommunicated, because he opposed himself in the Council of Lateran, against
a certain new feast, alleging that the people of God delivered from bondage
by the blood of Christ, were too much oppressed with multitudes of traditions,
from which opinion he could John Hilten a Monk in Henac of Turingia being
cast into prison for reprehending some Monastical abuses, being very sick
called the Guardian or keeper and said unto him, Philippus Melanthon in Apologia
Cap. de votis Monasiticis.
I have said little or nothing against our Monkish Society, but there will
come one in the year 1516, who shall overthrow them all, whose proceedings
they shall not be able to withstand: And that very year Luther began to
preach: which did far excel any humane divination. Diverse like unto him did
every where appear, who out of the palpable darkness of those times, as if
the dawne of the day did approach, began to discrie the light of the Gospel,
after which all the people of God had a long time longed, in such sort that
Paulus Langius a Monk of Citique, Paulus Langius Citicensis Monachus in in
Chron.
the disciple of the Abbot Trithemius Luthers first appearance) though he had
not yet left his Monastery, gave him this excellent testimony: Martin (says
he) is a perfect divine, profound, incomparable, he endeavors to bring
divinity to her first fundamental dignity and purity, and to her
Evangelical, sincere, and simple innocence, altogether banishing all profane
Philosophy. Again, In imitation of that most Christian Divine Simon de Cassia
(who flourished about the year 1340) contemning all Philosophy, he handled
and taught the Scriptures purely, bringing into the light every day, many
venerable and almost unknown mysteries of the word of God, being for the
greatness and dexterity of his wit famous through the whole world,
notwithstanding with S. Jerome he wanted not the malice of his Competitors,
that is the persecution of Schole-diuines, In an other place about the year
1503, he joined unto him Carolostadius and Melanthon; They handle and teach
the study of Divinity, and the wheat of the word of God purely, without the
mixture of any Chafe, that is, of humane Philosophy, and Syllogismes, tying
themselves wholly to the Gospel of Christ, and to his Apostle S. Paul, whom
they take for their Patron and foundation, with the Study of learning, sowing
by their preaching the seed of all virtue, and by their example, pen in the
hearts of their Disciples the fear of God. And least thou should reply
that this was before Luther began his war with the Pope, hear what he says
about the year 1520, having before discoursed of the abuse and excess of
Indulgences; He (says he) by his admirable And therefore he says again,
Until this time, they have by all means, like another Athanasius, persecuted
him, especially for defending this Thesis, That the Pope by the law of God is
not the head of the Church, and some other rare and high points of doctrine,
which not only the Romans do still impugn, but diverse other learned men,
especially the Thomists. Nevertheless, this Martin, the prince of all the
Divines of this age, fortifying and approving his doctrine, with the
testimonies of the Scripture and of S. Paul, as also with the original
authorities of the ancient fathers, has hitherto continued unconquered: not
wanting in the mean time, in other nations, diverse learned Doctors in
Divinity, who stuck unto him and consented with him; as, that most learned
and eloquent interpreter of the Scriptures, Erasmus And thus much says the
Monk, non assertiue says he, but admiratiue, not by way of affirmation, but
admiration, suspending his judgment, according to the manner of diverse others,
until it were determined by a general Council, what is to be held in a
matter of this difficulty. But it is now time to see what has passed in our
France in these times.

Pius the second, as we have seen before, had shaken the Pragmaticall
sanction under king Lewis the eleventh, which nevertheless partly, he living,
the Court of Paris had maintained, and partly under Paul the second his
successor, by the mediation of the University, did thoroughly restore. Sixtus
Lewis the eleventh being then in his own power, and withal offended with the
wicked carriage of Sixtus, undertaken the defense thereof; insomuch (as the
gloss of the Pragmaticall sanction teaches us) that neither Sixtus, nor his
successors Innocent the eight, nor Alexander the sixth, could ever bring to
effect those decrees which they made in prejudice thereof, which are mentioned
in the first chapter of the Extrauagant de treuga et pace. Pragmat. tit. de
collat. paragr. Quod si cuiuscumque status in verbo quatuor, and ibi Glossa.
But the constitutions of Lewis the eleventh, Pope Sixtus being otherwise to
himself indulgent enough, are worthy the noting. One dated the eight of
January in the year 1475, wherein he shows that by Sixtus to hold a
Council, wherein order may be taken for provision against the invasion of the
Turk, the danger of the Schisms, the abuse of Simonie in Christendom;
wherefore he commands all the nobility of the kingdom, and the Prelates
with other the chief of the Clergy to prepare themselves and to be ready at
hand when they shall be called. This Sanction was read in the Parliament the
same year the five and twentieth of January. He could not have curbed his
fury with a stronger bridle. The very same day, there was another published
with the loss of their temporalties, bridling both the head and the members by
the same authority. There was likewise another the same day, by which all the
Governors of cities, and other the kings magistrates were commanded,
diligently to search and enquire for all such, of what conditions soever that
were returned from Rome, and to cause them to deliver unto them their letters,
Bulls, and other expeditions, and to give knowledge thereof to the king, if
there be cause: If the like should be done in these days, who would not take
it for heresy? There followed besides banishment, the utter extirpation of all
the religious of the order of those who have done the contrary, and that for
this cause, least they should practice any thing with strangers to the hurt of
the Commonwealth. Now I would feign know in what case they are, who have no
Hieronimo, by the command of Sixtus, had in vain attempted Florence, and the
Florentines were interdicted for punishing the traitors: Our holy Father
(says he) has bewrayed his hatred too much against the Commonweales of
Florence and Venice, by which means he fortifieth the Turk, and opens the
gate unto him to invade Christendom; turns those moneys that were destinated
to the service of God, the defense of our faith, the relief of the poor, to
the maintenance of his conspiracies: and that money which he is suffered to
exact in Christendom, he bestows upon men of base condition, to increase
their greatness, etc. But see what he decrees: And therefore (says we forbid
all persons, as well temporal as ecclesiastical, either to go or send to the
Court of Rome, to procure any benefices, to send thither any money, or to take
order by way of exchange, or otherwise to pay it there, upon pain of death,
and loss of goods, etc. And moreover, we give all their mouables,
household stuff, and horses, to whomsoever shall give notice of any that shall
offend in this kind. Our Courts of Parliament therefore, which so gladly
published these constitutions, yea our Sorbonists that approved them, were they
then all heretics? We read likewise, that in the assembblie held at Tours by
Charles the 8, the son of Lewis, M. John Rhely, Doctor in Divinity, and Canon
of the Church of Paris, spoke in the name of the French Clergy, beseeching him
to maintain the Pragmaticall sanction in all points, according to the Council
of Whether it were by reseruations; provisions Apostolical, expected graces, to
the prejudice of elections and provisions of ordinaries, annuities, petie
services, etc. or by Citations of the Court of Rome, Ecclesiastical censures,
which distract the subjects, causing them to wander, and the like: which he
easily obtained without any resistance. But that which is reported by
Monstrelet, Monstrelet vol. 3. in nouis Chron.
touching the authority which this Charles exercised at Rome even to the face of
Alexander the sixth, passes all the rest: He made known (says he) that his
power was so great in Rome, that he caused three or four gallows to be
erected, and did hang and behead certain thieves, murderers, and other
malefactors in Campo florido, and others, according to the quality of their
offense, to be beaten with rods, drowned, Thus says Monstrelet, a writer of
that time.

65 PROGRESSION.
The preposterous election of Julius the second: his treacherous practices and
cruel malicious nature, and how in his own person he marched to the besieging
of Mirandula and Ferrara. Of the pomp and stately coronation of John de
Medicis, called Leo the tenth, and of the monstrous abuse of Indulgences in his
time.

ALexander being dead, a new successor was to be thought upon: Borgia, though
he were very sick, was yet a great stickler in the election, relying himself
upon the help of the Spanish Cardinals. But on the other side the Cardinal of
Ambois, presuming upon the favor of the French Cardinals, and the power of the
army, withstood him; The Cardinals nevertheless (says Guicciardine)
according to their custom, looking ever into their own benefit: for it is
that spirit that properly bears rule in those Conclaues. These therefore
(partly by reason of their own avarice, and partly the one side hindering the
other by reason of this emulation) make choice of neither, but choose Francis
Picolhuomini, called Pius the third, a man very Peter ad Vincula, being
mighty in friends and fame, and power, had gotten so many voices on his part,
that there was not any man that durst so much as mutter against him: Wherefore
by a new example he entered the Conclaue, assured before of the Popedom, and the
doors being never shut, was chosen the first night: who, to signify the
greatness of his designs, even in the first entrance of his Popedom would be
called Julius the second: Whereupon every man (says Guicciardine) was stricken
with a kind of astonishment, for that they had consented upon the But having
noted in him those parts that were best worthy the consideration, That (says
he) which stood him in best stead for the attainment of this dignity, were the
large promises that he made to those Cardinals, Princes, Barons, and others,
whom he knew to be best able to advance and forward that business, thinking
it good policy not to deny them any thing they should ask. Moreover, he gave
much money, and many benefices and Ecclesiastical dignities, as well of his own
as other men's; for that opinion there was of his bounty, that diverse there
were that came unto him, offering unto him what they possessed, to use their
money, their names, their offices, their benefices, at his pleasure: no man
considering And thus much concerning the manner of his election. He had a
daughter which was named Felix, whom he presently married to Iordanus Vrsinus,
and his niece, his sisters daughter, to Antonius Columna. And thus he settled
himself Borgia and others had gotten into their possession: and if any refused
to obey, he was presently excommunicated. Then he shook off that moderation
which in his Cardinalship he retained both in word and deed (says Onuphrius)
in so much that he thought it not enough to be modest himself, but he took a
care to receive none but such into his house. Onuphr. in Iulio 2.
So hard a matter it is, and ever has been, to know the humor of him that
affects a Popedom. His first exploit was to drive the Benteuoli with their
wives and children out of Bononia, and to leave their houses and families to
the fury of the people. Then he turned his mind to the ruin of the Venetians,
whom he excommunicated, and Lewis the twelft, with whom he had first made a
league, after the battle won at Abdua against the Venetians, he greatly
suspected, notwithstanding he had the greatest part in the fruit of that
victory. He attempted all the ways he could to drive him out of Italy, and
wanted no subtle devises to compass it. He incited Lewis and Maximilian the
Emperor against the Venetians, and conspired with the Venetians against them
both. He interdicted Alphonsus Duke of Ferrara, and made open war against him,
because he had taken part with France, and being commanded to depart, did not
obey. Lewis himself having sent certain forces to Alphonsus, Christoph.
Massaeus l. 20. Chron.
under the conduct of Caluimontius, Julius excommunicated Caluimontius, and all
the chief leaders of the Maximilian and Lewis, to the end they might repress
his insolency, entered into consideration by what means they might call him to
a Council: whereupon, in the year 1510, in the beginning of September,
Guicciard. l. 9. An. 1510.
Lewis held a national Council at Tours, wherein it was enquired, Whether it
were lawful for the Pope, without a cause, to make war against a Prince: It
was concluded not lawful: And whether any such Prince defending may not
assault him, and withdraw himself from his obedience: It was concluded
lawful. Moreover, it was resolved to maintain in France the Pragmaticall
sanction, and in all causes to neglect his censures: and that the king before
he should withdraw himself from his obedience, should certify Julius by his
ambassadors of these articles ordained by his Clergy, that if he Julius, if
he should proceed in his determination. It happened in the mean time, that the
Bishop of Gurse arrived in the behalf of the Emperor, who was heard in that
honorable assembly, at what time there came likewise a messenger, who gave
them to understand of the obstinacy of Julius; wereupon, the 27 of September,
a general Council was called, by the consent of all, at Lions, to be
celebrated about the beginning of March following. All this was done by the
advice of five of the chief Cardinals, of S. Cross and Cosentia, Spaniards,
Bayeux and S. Malo, French, Julius should be enforced to the Council; to which
end they were departed from him, Guicciard. l. 9.
notwithstanding (if we may believe Guicciardine) they had as bad minds, and
were as little to be trusted as himself. So universal was the corruption of
that See, how good soever the desires of the king were.

In the mean time Julius is not idle, though he thought of nothing less than
what became a Pope: he agreed, by means of the Cardinal de Medicis, with
Marcus Antonius Columna, and other young men of Florence, to kill Peter
Soderin, the Standard Bearer of the Commonwealth of Florence, because he was
said to be the man that persuadeth the Florentines to take part with France,
which Being resolved to attempt Ferrara, he thought it better first to invade
Mirandula: which forasmuch as it fell out to be a long siege, being much
troubled that things succeeded not according to his expectation, he came to the
siege in his own person, a thing never heard of before, nor ever to be
expected, that the Vicar of Christ on earth (says Guicciardine) should invade
a Christian city, and being old and sickly, should in his own person, set
forward a war against Christian Princes first raised by himself; wherein he
was so earnestly bent, and over hasty, that he never thought any thing done
with speed enough, but ever kindled with fury, cried out to the captains; and
chose his own lodging amongst the ordnance, insomuch that in his kitchen two
of his servants were slain with a shot, Monstrelet to this purpose, He left
the chair of S. Peter, and took upon him the title of Mars the god of war,
displaying in the field his triple crown, and spending his nights in the
watch. How goodly a thing it was to see the Myters, Crosses, and
Crosier-staues flying up and down the field, God he knows. It is not likely
any Devils could be there, where blessings were sold at so base a price.
Mirandula being taken, he set forward with his army against Ferrara, and
neglecting these conditions that the Emperor offered, and the counsel of
Ferdinand of Spain his friend, he persisted in his determination. Whereupon,
Lewis the twelfth being ready by force, and if need were, to march against him
with his army in his own person, notwithstanding he had no assistance from
Maximilian: who having made a truce with the Pope, was therefore by the writers
of that age condemned of inconstancy. It is worthy the noting, that by the
command of Lewis there was money coined in France, which yet remains in the
custody of some, in the one side I will destroy Babylon, and in some, I will
destroy the name of Babylon; that it might seem no new thing to any that Rome
is Babylon to us, having so great an Author, even the Father of France.
Julius therefore created eight new Cardinals, that he might thereby win unto
him other Princes, contrary to that he had promised at his election. Triuultius
therefore, the leader of the French forces, having freed Ferrara from fear,
taken Bononia, publicly fastened his placarts whereby Julius was cited to
Pisa, he retired himself in despair to Rome; no less wounded in his mind,
that the Duke of Vrbin his Nephew had stabbed the Cardinal of Pauia his Legate
and inward friend, in a manner before his eyes, for his many and monstrous
wickedness (says Guicciardine) worthy the greatest Then gathering heart, he
confirmed his truces, mollified the mind of the Emperor, won him from the
alliance of France, and thinking now he had overcome all difficulties, he
applied his thoughts only to Lewis, thundering against him with his
excommunications, and interdicting his kingdom. But our Clergy yielding him
never the more obedience, proceed still in setting forward the Council of
Pisa, which at the last was thought to be more safe and commodious to
transfer to Milan, where again these good Cardinals got no better reputation
than Julius at Rome. At length, Julius with his confederats Lewis seeing
himself alone against so many enemies, either open, or ready shortly to
declare themselves, resolved to win time; and commanded Gaston de Foix, his
Lieutenant general in the Duchy of Milan, to omit no occasion of fighting
with the Popes army, wherein, if he got the victory, he should with all speed
march to Rome, and there assail the Pope without any reverence toward him.
Yet notwithstanding, that it might be esteemed he did it lawfully and by good
right, he does all by the authority of the Council, which appointed A man
(says our Author) more adicted to war, Guicciard. l. 10
than religion. Therefore Gaston, after some notable exploits of arms, for to
draw the Popes army to battle, besieged Rauenna. In the mean time Julius
army came to succor it, under the conduct of John de Medicis (after Leo the
tenth) exiled from Florence, whom he had advanced chiefly in hatred of the
Florentines. But Gaston marched against them, and upon an Easter day gave them
battle, wherein he obtained that so renowned victory of Rauenna. The Legate
taken, and the most part of the commanders of the army; upon the first news
thereof, Julius despairing Gaston interrupted the course of the victory, and
so gave him time to breath and settle himself in his seat. And that so much
the more, for that the Marshall de la Palice, with the French forces, which he
commanded after the death of Gaston, was called back into France, to oppose
themselves against the Switzers, who partly in favor of Julius, partly moved
by their own commodity, had spread themselves over Bourgundie.

Now, he turned this victory obtained by the French men, to his own
commodity, by setting before the eyes of all Princes, of how great moment it
was, that the power of the French men should be repressed. This he does with
the States of Italy, chiefly the Duke of Ferrara and the Florentines, to
withdraw Lewis by name, from whom, by his Bull set forth, be took away the
title of Most-Christian, transferring it to the king of England, whom he
solicited to make war against France, the kingdom whereof, by the Council
of Lateran, and in an express Bull, he exposed to him that would first invade
it. But amidst such and so great thoughts (says Guicciardine) and others
perhaps greater and more secret (for nothing so cruel, nor so great beyond
opinion and belief, which was unfit for his terrible mind) after some days
sickness he was taken away by death, etc. Worthy of great praise, if he had
been a secular Prince and attempted such things, or if he had more care to
exalt the Church in spiritual things by peaceable means, than to make it
great in temporal but note of whom, of them who (the true names of things
being lost, and the distinction of them confused) judge that Popes are more to
be praised in this, That by arms and shedding Christian blood, increase the
domination of the Apostolic See, than labor by good examples of life to amend
corrupt manners, and take care for the salvation of those souls for whom they
boast, that they are ordained of Christ the Lord his Vicars on earth. And did
not the Emperor Maximilian, lifting up his eyes to heaven, Joakimus Cureus
Freistadiensis in Annalibus Gentis Silesiae.

Arnoldus Ferronius in vita Ludouici.

Gilberti Ducerij Epigramma.


worthily exclaim against the naughty life of this Pope, O eternal God, if
thou did not watch, how ill it would be with the world, which we govern, I
poor hunter, and that wicked drunkard Julius?

We read also, that when, a little after his election, he departed from Rome
to Maximilian and Lewis, passing over the bridge, he cast the keys into Tyber,
and holding a naked sword, said with a loud and high voice, That seeing Peter's
keys would not suffice, Paul's sword should not be wanting: Which gave
occasion of many Epigrams, these among others: Hic gladius Pauli nos nunc
defendit ab host,
Quandoquidem clauis niliuvat ista Petri.
Since Peter's keys with foes does naught prevail,
This sword of Paul to save us shall not fail.


And, In Gallum, vt fama est, bellum gesturus acerbum, etc.

And hereupon Wicelius, though a defender of Popes, plainly says of him,
Marti quam Christo propior, That he was fitter for Mars than for Christ: and
indeed it was thought, that in the space of nine years he had been the
occasion of the death of two hundred thousand men. Whereas his predecessors
were wont to grant privileges to begging Friars, he, to the Cantons of the
Switzers (his confederats, the principal executers of his high enterprises)
gave the perpetual title of Defenders of the Ecclesiastical liberty, with
many Bulls, Standards, a Sword, and golden and other gifts, that he might have
them ready at all his commandments. Neither was he for all that negligent in
his Indulgences, whereby he might rake in money; witness the Epigram: Fraud
capit totum mercator Julius orbem,
Vendit enim coelos, non habet ipse tamen, etc.
By fraud the merchant Julius rakes in pelf,
For heaven he sells, yet has it not himself.


And this evidently enough appears unto us by his Bulls, especially by that
dated in the year 1505, whereby, being newly entered his Popedom, he
ordained, That every fifteenth year annuities should be paid for benefices.
And that he might reserve to himself all liberty to do all things by his own
mere authority, Bulla cuius initium Ex debito Pastoral, officij, alia cuius
initium, Suscepti regiminis cura sollicitat.
against the admonitions made unto him from all parts, he renewed the Bull of
Pius the second, against them that appealed from the Pope to a future Council,
in such sort that the Appealants were judged excommunicated, and their Appeals
void; and with these goodly Prefaces, Out of the duty of our Pastoral
office, and the care of But with what face and faithfulness let the Reader
judge, unless it be with that sincerity which this Epigram describes: Genua
cui patrem, genitricem Graecia, Conradus Grebelius in Epigram.
partum
Pontus and vnda dedit, number bonus esse potest?
Fallaces Ligures, mendax est Graecia, Ponto
Nulla fides: in te haec singula Iule tenes.
From Genua and Greece his parents blood,
At sea he had his birth, can he be good?

Trustlesse the sea: all this Julius in thee.


Which truly he verified in effect in the whole course of his life. I would
willingly omit these other verses of the same Author, but that all filthiness
with them is but a play.

Venit in Italiam spectatus indole rara
Germanus, redijt de puero mulier.

But he returned a woman in effect.
Which he speaks of Julius. The same we find written by the Divines of Paris,
of two young gentlemen violated or forced by him, whom Queen Anne, wife of
Lewis the twelft, had recommended to the Cardinal of Nantes to carry with him
into Italy. Let us add this for conclusion, That when he was besieged at
Bononia by the Grand Master de Chaumont, General of the army of Lewis the 12,
under color of entertaining a treaty of peace, brought into the city for his
succors certain companies of Turks, conducted by Chapin Vitelli: and in the
mean full power of Popes, a boisterous tempest, and a diabolical word. And
thus are we come to the year 1513. An. 1513.


The Popedom of Julius was imperious and barbarous. The Cardinals, who had
felt his cruelty, before they would proceed to election, thought by
prescribing conditions to the future Pope, to bridle his authority; but
presently after (says Guicciardine) they themselves did abrogat them almost
all, Guicciard. l. 2.
according as they were led, some with fear, and some with hope of favor, all
incapable of a better State. This same was John de Medicis, Commander as Legate
of the Popes army,

In his first act he made manifest what was to be hoped of the reformation of
the Church in his time; for the pomp of his coronation was so excessive,
Guicciard. l. 2.
as well of them of his house and Court, as of all the Prelates, that no man but
would confess, That from the inundation of the Barbarians there had been
nothing seen more proud and stately; seeing it is certain, that he on that
day had spent an hundred And the wiser sort judged (says he) that such a pomp
was not fit for Popes. Next, he resolved to continue the Council of Lateran,
and to extinguish that of Pisa; which he easily did in reestablishing the five
Cardinals which Julius had forsaken, and by appeasing the mind of king Lewis
the twelfth, whom the other Princes had forsaken, suspecting his power.
Nevertheless the Clergy of France strove against it, cleaving fast to their
propositions, especially of the Pragmaticall sanction, as appears by the Acts
of that Council: till that under king Francis his successor, in the year
1516, notwithstanding the formal Appeal of the Clergy, by means of the
Concordat, the Pragmatical was abolished. And of this Couneell (where a
reformation was expected) came none other Council. Lateranens. Sess. 12.
added this clause, Placuit quo ad Turcas, I am content, so it be for the
Turks, when the expedition shall be begun; the Bishops, namely of Durazzo, of
Salamanca, of Taruisino, of Grasso, of Chio, of Montuert, of Montmaran, of
Seruia, of Licie, of Ferentine, of Perousa, of Sora, of Macerata, of Nabia, of
Algara, and others. And so the Council was concluded, and dismissed;
notwithstanding some Bishops took it hardly, that Christian people should be
so deluded, and pronounced with a loud voice, Non placuit clausura Concilij,
The shutting up of the Council pleases us not; as the Bishops of Trane, of
Salmantica, the General of That the Prelates might go visit and comfort their
Churches: And to the end (says Leo) that they may return with greater joy
home to their own, filled with some spiritual gifts, we bestow upon them and
their families plenarie remission and indulgence of all their sins once in
their life, and at the hour of death. In the mean time let the Reader note
here the height of his impiety and blasphemy. In this Council Anthony
Puccius, in the ninth Session, making an Oration, feared not to attribute unto
him Psalm. 72. All the Kings of the earth shall worship him, all Nations shall
serve him; and therewithal he adds, All the kings of the earth know what
power is given thee in heaven and in earth; which the Lord had spoken of
himself, Math. 11. Iube, impera, manda, Command (says he) whatsoever it
pleases thee at all times. In the same manner also the Archbishop Stephan, in
the tenth Session, All power is given unto thee, etc. He which said all has
excepted nothing: But would you know by what title? the sixth Session will show
you; Because he is Christ himself, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, the root of
David, the Savior and Deliverer: Which names Saint John in the Apocalypse
attributed to Jesus Christ, and to him alone and none other ought it to be The
royal race of the Sovereign Bishops of Rome, The Empire of your Holiness,
Sess. 9. The Pope is the Prince of the Apostles, Sess, 4. He is Prince and
King, Sess. 3. The Prince of the whole world; contending with Satan himself
in blasphemies. Sess. 1. Yea he is made to be God himself, The aspect of your
Divine Majesty, Sess. 9. Most like unto God, and who ought to be adored of all
people, Sess. 3. and 10. and with the same adoration wherewith Christ is
worshipped: for to him they attribute these words of of the Psalm 72. All the
Kings of the earth shall worship him, namely, the eternal son of God. But
Spouse or Bridegroom of the Church, that is his ordinary

But truly in his affairs Leo proceeded very seriously: for he ordained
Laurence (his brother Peter's son) governor of Tuscanie, and established the
Commonwealth of Florence in such sort, that it depended of him alone: hence is
the ground of the sovereign power of the Medices in that city. Alfonsina
also, the mother of Laurence, of the house of the Vrsins, was continually
instant upon him, to do her son yet some further favor: wherefore, for some
light occasions by him (says Onuphriu^) he set upon by arms Frauncis Maria de
Roueria, Duke of Vrbin, whom he suspected and hated, and deprived him of his
whole Dukedom, and set his Nephew up in his place; though his familiars blamed
his ungrateful mind toward that Prince, who had safely received and kept them
of his family in their exile. But (says Guicciardine) when against all faith
and credit he had once begun to offend him, he dissembled not that be supposed
it a thing necessary utterly to ruinat him. With the same mind also, he drove
away Alfonsus Petrucci Cardinal, and his brother from Siena. Whereupon,
Alfonsus a while after, impatient of grief conspired against him, with many
Cardinals, Adrian de Corneto, Raphaell Riario, Bandinello, Saul, and others:
but the conspiracy being discovered, they were deprived Alfonsus, as chief
was strangled by a Moore in the castle S. Angelo, Bandinello condemned to
perpetual imprisonment, and a while after for a great sum of money set at
liberty, yet was it suspected he had first bin poisoned with slow-working
poison. Many others redeemed their lives with money, among which the Cardinal
de Corneto, after reconciliation, departed secretly from Rome, and, howsoever
it happened, was never seem more in any place afterward. Guicciardine
particularly notes, That out of the suspicion that Leo had conceived against
Alfonsus, by reason of certain letters intercepted, he had called him to Rome,
having given him his safe conduct, and passed his word and faith to the
Ambassador of the king of Spain, that he should safely return: But, that,
Guicciard. l. 13.
when the That never any crime against the life of the Pope was assured by any
safe conduct, how ample soever it were and full of pregnant causes, although it
were namely and indiuidually expressed. Now hereby he acknowledged, that
whether he had well or ill proceeded in his business, all the College of
Cardinals was much alienated from him: he therefore resolved to get himself
new friends, and in one Morning, the College consenting to it for fear, not
of free will, he created one and thirty Cardinals, among whom were two of his
sisters sons, and some that had served him before and after his Popedom, Who
for diverse causes were acceptable and obedient both to him and to the Cardinal
de Medicis, but were not for any other respect As likewise (says Langius de
Citica) All the gold and silver by little and little raked and drawn out of
Germany, was carried to Rome as into a broken bag and insatiable gulf: the
government also of Churches was committed not to the best deserving, but to
him that offered most. Moreover, he created thirty Cardinals for the price of
five hundred thousand Ducats. And this is ever the lawful vocation, which they
so much brag of. He adds, that for to satisfy both his own and his
Cardinals greedy desire, he exacted great sums of money throughout all
Europe, by his Legates, under color of making war against the Turks; and no
little sum also by his Commissaries under pretense of building the Temple of
Saint Peter: But (says he) the stones which were hewn by day, were carried
away privily by night to the great Palace of Florence, and the money it self
that was gathered, was not for the use of the building, nor against the
Infidels, but was distributed among the Cardinals and the Popes friends.

Now this his prodigality being joined with want, there was nothing so
abominable which he invented not, or hearkened not unto, for to get in money:
therefore Guicciardine says, He used very licentiously the authority of the
Apostolic See, when he followed the counsel of Laurence Pucci, Cardinal of
the Title of four Saints, he sowed abroad through all the world, without any
difference of times and places, most ample Indulgences, not only to succor
the living, but also to deliver the souls of the departed So that the
Preachers were not ashamed, by suggestion of his ministers, to publish in the
pulpit, That at the sound of the money, as it was cast into the basin, the
souls skipped for joy amidst the flames, and presently flew out of Purgatory.
Yea some also pronounced, That upon the payment of this taxation all sin was
pardoned; not fearing to express particularly the most horrible, which my pen
abhors to utter.

No more modesty was used in France, England, Poland, and other countries,
where the Commissaries were wont to assure the people, That he which gave
Christoph. Massaeus in Chron. An. 1515.
according to that saying, Whatsoever ye shall loosse on earth, etc. But if
there was but one farthing less than ten soulz, they could do nothing. And
this gain (says Langius) displeased the holy children of the Church, seeing
the power of the Vicar began to be called into question, and from whence should
come this new doctrine in these later Prelates, which the ancient Popes had
been ignorant of: and yet he is a Monk that speaks it. Martin Luther among
others then arose, against whom Leo, in stead of reformation, cast forth his
thunderbolts: but of that we will speak more in his place. At last having
kindled war between the Emperor Charles the fifth Francis the first, king of
France, to drive the Frenchmen out of Italy, news was brought unto him to
Maliagno, his place of pleasure, That Milan and Parma were taken from the
French; whereupon he entered into such an excess of joy, that the same night he
fell into a little fever, whereof a few days after he dyed. Pasquil comparing
Leo and Julius together, drew the difference out of their names, and concludes
his Epigram with these verses: Julius est hominis, bruti Leo, Julius egit
Quae suasit ratio, quod libet iste facit.
Julius a man's name, Leo a bruit beasts had,
He did as reason willed, this what his lust him bad.


And Sanazarus yielding a reason, why, being at point of death, he had not
received the Sacrament, says, Sacra sub extrema, si forte requiritis, hora
Cur Leo non poterat sumere, vendiderat.
Leo received not at his last hour
The Sacraments, ask not, they were not in his power.


But more rightly, if he had said, Because he had in him no religion: For
Cardinal Bembo, his Secretary, alleging unto him one day something out of
the Gospel, he feared not to answer him, It is sufficiently known to all
ages, how greatly that fable of Christ has profited us and ours. That man of
sin, the son of perdition, of whom the Church has so long aforehand been
warned, think we he could add any thing to this? Jndex Hispan. fol. 129.
But their Index Expurgatorius has commanded those verses to be rased out of
Sanazarus. The writers of that age do note some signs Alexander the sixth, was
cast down by lightning from heaven. At Rome also on the same day that Leo the
tenth created one and thirty Cardinals, a sudden tempest happened in the very
Temple where they were assembled, which struck and carried away the keys out
of the hands of the Image of S. Peter there. And this was in the year 1517, An.
1517.
at which very time Luther began to thunder out against the Pope.

OPPOSITION.
The Council of Pisa was a manifest opposition against the Popes tyranny,
Guicciardine notes, Guicciard. l. 9.
they of Pisa were no better than the others, but as the Angels of Satan
destroyed each other: And yet by occasion thereof were published many notable
Treatises against the temporal power of the Pope. Philip Decius among others,
a most famous Lawyer of Milan, in his writings publicly set forth, defended
the cause of them of Pisa; That the Pope being hardened in simonie, and
infamous in wicked manners, the power of assembling a Council was come to the
Cardinals, which in so urgent evils are the fittest remedy; especially seeing
their proceedings therein were approved by the authority of the Emperor
elect, by the consent of the Most Christian King, and with the concourse and
assistance of the German and French Clergy, and that Pius the fifth caused all
his works to be gelded by Thomas Manriques, as may be seen in the library of
Posseuin the Jesuit, who gathered those notes. But truly as it was a most
grievous and universal evil, yet in diverse nations there openly showed
themselves both notable men, who acknowledged that tyranny, and also whole
corporations, that rightly and formally opposed themselves against it.

In Germany Bernard de Lublin, writing to Simon of Cracouia in the year 1515,
against the Popes Primacie, maintained, That it cannot be, that any one man
should command the whole world; That it is sufficient to salvation to embrace
the faith of Christ alone; That they which never heard any thing of the
Sebastian Brand, Doctor of Divinity, and Preacher of the Cathedral Church of
Strasbourg, in the year 1508, publicly inueighed against Roman Indulgences,
in these words, Dear friends, we should this Whit-Sunday have opened unto you
our wares, but here is a Merchant-stranger, namely the doctrine of the Gospel
after the sellers of Indulgences were gone. And the same against satisfactions
which are performed by other men's works; We have some which go to church,
which pray, which sing, which mumble over their portueis, which celebrat Masses
for us; but who will go into hell in our stead? This in his Sermon, which, of
many, remains unto us; for it is a wonder that they have left us any: but he
was for this occasion driven away, and retired himself to Magdebourg, chiefly
because he was wont to say to his Auditors, The time will come when the
Gospel shall be read unto you out of the book it self, some of you shall see
it, Ioh. Alman. de domineo naturali, Civilly, and Ecclesiastico.
but I shall not live till then. James Alman, Doctor of Divinity, in of the
Popes power, against Thomas de Vio, after Cardinal Caietan, Legate of Leo for
the collection of Tenths, Of Indulgences by name; It seems not to me that the
power of binding and loosing ought to be extended to them that be in
Purgatory, seeing that wheresoever in the Gospel it is promised or given, it
is said; Whatsoever thou shall bind on earth, and whatsoever thou shall loosse
on earth, super terram, mention is never made of them that are departed out of
this life. And hence it follows, that the souls which are in Purgatory,
cannot be loossed from pain by bestowing of Indulgences, but indeed by
suffrages. What shall then become of all the Iubilies, whereby for so many
thousands of years true remission by Popes is promised for the deceased. And
Ludolfe Castrik, Curat of S. Michaell at Conradus Celtes at Vienna, a most
learned man in his time, many of whose writings yet remain, was
excommunicated, for that he condemned the Roman Hierarchy and doctrine; but
being borne out by the Emperor Maximilian, he made little account of it. We
read likewise, that about this time, in Germany arose one that was held for a
Prophet, who ran about from Church to Church, preaching repentance to
Christians, and that unless they obeyed and repented, they should utterly
perish, Joseph. Grundperg. in specuto Visionis impresso Norimbergae. Anno 1508.
these were his words, Awake, O ye Christians, out of the heavy sleep of
wickedness

James Faber of Estaples, a man of excellent learning and knowledge, but
chiefly in Divinity. Auentine testifies, that he had heard him six hundred
times, together with Iosse Clithou, Doctor of Divinity, his Master, saying,
That Lumbard had confounded and troubled the truth and the most pure fountain
of holy doctrine, with contaminated and muddie questions, and streams of
opinions. But his Psalter, printed in the year 1508, and his Commentaries on
the Gospels and Epistles of S. Paul, do testify what his judgment was in
many principal points of Christian Religion, by occasion of which, he was so
vexed by the Sorbonists and brought to that trouble in his old age (such was
their rage) that king Frauncis, then prisoner Index Expurgat. Hispanic. fol.
110. vsque ad 111. and 120.
That the Divines of Spain, in their Index Expurgatorius, in our time,
commanded many places and whole Pages to be raced out in the later editions;
above all, that his Commentary upon S. John, should be wholly abolished,
because it could not be well amended: That is to say, because all of it wholly
repugned against their corruptions, traditions, inventions, presumptions of men
and imaginary authorities. About the same time, grew into reputation William
Bude of Paris, Master of requests to king Frauncis the first, who in many
places of that famous book de Ass, describes the state of the Church in his
time; The Clergy men in all sorts of vices, except only (says he) in one
kind of men, who must in no wise be excepted: These are the Priests, whom now
almost alone next after Kings and Princes, we see to be the richest and most
given to riches. Here must I needs exclaim, O wretched as well as fortunat
France; Is it possible, a majorum gentium Pontificibus, from those Bishops of
the Primitive Church? And with what face then alledgest thou that peculiar
Sanction, whereof thou so much boastest, as of a certain honor of Religion?
Whence have thou the liberty or confidence to call thy self Most Christian,
unless thou will keep it by the same Religion, whereby thou have gotten a
glorious name And he leaves not for us to guess whom he means: For of
these things (says he) public consent lays the blame on the Head of
Christendom, who if he be not well conditioned, the inferior members draw
from him the causes of diseases; Wherefore we see (says he) am I ignorant
that the Church is builded upon a most firm Rock by a cunning hand, so that
it cannot be overthrown by any force, neither ayrie, nor earthly, etc. But
now piety and religion the gardians of this house, complain with a loud cry,
that the proportion which the hands of the Architect did model forth at first,
is not now kept; which is a notable dishonor for the head. The cause of this
unseemly disproportion they lay upon the Merchant Mercury, (to wit the Pope)
who since the time he governed the light of the world and began to be the
chief coachman, he did not burn the world as Phaeton is said to have done,
but rather over shadowed it (that is, in the Church) is nothing done rightly
nor in order. And here he puts himself forth to speak of the abuses of
the Church, namely them that proceeded from sale, whence he showed that the
present government was nothing like to the institution of Christ; that if any
man cast his eyes on the universal face of the Clergy, on their pompous
provision and their designs, he is presently constrained to say, that the
Spouse has renounced her bridegroom, and denounced unto him, that he is to
keep household by himself. And there again he makes a comparison of Christ
and the Apostles with the Pope and Court of Rome: And then he passes to the
discipline of the Church, violated Who will believe (says he) that these men,
that do thus, know what is the good and right faith? And who knows not that
the chosen stones of the Sanctuary not long ago, have been so dispersed and
cast down, that the Majesty of the Church is decayed, and now the Spouse of
God herself, as forgetful of her conjugal faith, has not only turned aside
from her bridegroom, but even without any respect of modesty, licentiously
wandered about by the highwaies, and by the streets, and prostituted herself
for money in every Province? Who remembers not, that the Pastors as
fugitives, are become not only forsakers of the flock, but driuers and
stealers of it away? And have we not seen the chief Heads of Prelates behave
themselves so preposterously and impurely, as in steed of ordering things in
(he means Julius.) They which should be the chief annointers of the
Champions for the holy Combats, and who ought to be the Authors of waging
godly war for their altars and bounds against profane peoples and Infidels,
are not they themselves the butchers of Christian forces, setting them at
wars one against the other to the destruction of that sacred name? And there
he declares the wrath of God fallen both upon Alexander and him. What hope
(says he) of salvation can these men have, who being chief Priests,
governing the stern of the Ship, at noone day run it against the rocks of
impiety? And when they which ought by (as Judas did) nevertheless make no
account of his Precepts and Institutions, and embrace things directly opposite
and contrary? etc. And what man is there (I pray you) who if he consider the
state, motion, course, habitude, inward and outward affections, and the very
Sessions of the Church, such as we have seen them of late, can judge that
they make any account at all of the sacred Oracles and monuments? For we see
that the Pontifical jurisdiction has so degenerated from the ancient
charity, that there where was wont to be the bosom of equity and
benignity, is now found to be a shop of contentions, and of impious snares to
entrap. Thence are those pit-falls of Processes, and cautions of Pontifical
rites, of purpose set forth for to deceive the Lords family. There are the
profits of amerciaments on Prelates, which plainly augment the pages of
receipts. Thence again the sacrilegious faires of those things which cannot
without impiety be in humane commerce. I omit now to speak of tesseras non
modo veniales, sed etiam vaenales, Indulgences set to sale, which give largely
by a sordid or filthy bounty, impunitie of wickedness, and absolution for
breach of sacred laws. Therefore who sees not, that the sacred Canons, But
the Jesuits thought they had found out a fit remedy, when by their Spanish
Index Expurgatorius, Index Expurgat. Hispan. fol. 97. Budaeus de Tranlat.
Hellenismi. l. 2.
they commanded all these places to be rased out. But we will add yet this
over and above, The auncientnesse, or rather worme-eatennesse of the Canons, is
now of no more use, but as a doting old woman is cast out of the pleading
place, and rejected to the deskes of Libraries; for the Canonical discipline
of the holy Ghost is long ago cast down from the bridge of our assemblies
(he alludeth to the Latin proverb) being more than sixty, yea than six
hundred years old, etc. Would to God that of this faith, now almost buried, we
held at least but the relics and ashes, in regard of which faith God called
the dispensers and disposers thereof his faithful; who inspired of God, full
of godly zeal, of the spirit, and of God himself, in times past were the
pillars, honor, and ornament of the Church: now, and of a long time, hardly
retains it tectorium inane Ecclesiae, a slight plaistering over of the
Church, the color and image of And he had told us a little before the reason:
The ship of sociable and civil discipline has been left unto us by Christ
the builder of the Church, which has been furnished by him, or by his
authority and direction, with all manner of necessary provision: and he has
promised us wind in the poupe, to bring the passengers to their wished haven,
if the Church had continued to hold the rudder upright, and to receive into her
sails the blowing of the spirit, namely, consulted the Scriptures, which
proceeded from the holy spirit.

Among the Italians was then admirable, John Picus Earl of Mirandula, whose
works were printed in the year 1504: An. 1504. Joh. Picus in Conclus. secund.
Thom. 14 and 20 Secund. Scotum 15. Picus in Apologia cap 3.
Among the nine hundred Propositions The true body of Christ is locally in
heaven, sacramentally on the Altar: By the power of God one same body cannot
be in diverse places at one time; to wit, because there would be implication of
contradiction; which he maintained out of Thomas Aquinas. Also according to
Scotus, By these words precisely, This is my body, without expressing the
words going before, to wit, The day before he suffered, consecration cannot be
made; because consecration depends not of certain words, but on Christ's
institution. And when the Doctors of Paris had reprehended this his
Proposition, Neither the Cross, nor any Image, is to be worshipped with the
worship of Latria, also in that manner that Thomas sets down; In his
Apology he maintains, that the same is Catholic, and the contrary false.
Maximilian, in the year 1500, Alexander the sixth reigning Pope, he shows
indeed with what feruentnesse he was carried to a reformation: I beseech thee
(says he) by the faith and piety I possibly can, that thou accomplish that
thy most holy purpose, of setting the Christian Commonwealth into her ancient
liberty, so soon as possibly may be: It is shaken by But the event answered
not his prediction. Ioh. Franc. fide ordine crede^di.
John Francis also, his brothers son, degenerated not from him. In that
conflict between the Council of Pisa, and of Lateran, handling this question,
In matters of Faith, which is to be preferred, the Pope or the Council, he
answers out of the Decree it self, It is written in the Gloss of the 19.
The Pope is bound to require a Council of Bishops when matters of faith are
treated of, and then the Council is greater than the Pope. Whereupon the
Archdeacon of Bononia approving this Gloss, says, It were a dangerous thing
to commit our faith to the judgment of one man. And S. Bernard speaks in the
same sense, saying, What greater pride can there be, than that one man should
prefer his judgment before a whole congregation, as if he alone had the
holy Spirit? And after he had said that the greater number ought to carry it
away from the lesser, caeteris paribus: But (says he) if the greater part
would decree any thing against the divine Scriptures, and against those things
that cannot be violated without grievous sin, the rest (which are the lesser
part) holding the contrary, the lesser number ought to be stuck unto, as it
happened in the Handling also this question, Theorem. 4.
Whether Councels or Popes may err, out of him is easily decided, seeing he
presupposes that they might err from the holy Scriptures, he shows, that
many Councels have erred, many Popes fallen into heresy; and it has often
fallen out, that he which was accounted chief President of the Church, either
did not preside or govern by right, or else could not preside at all: For
(says he) History teaches us, that a woman has been believed, and taken
for Pope; and in our age I remember, that a certain learned man of approved
manners, and that had obtained And what then became of his ordinations, and
missions of his Bishops? which he seems to have spoken of Julius the second.
We remember (says he) also another, believed and adored for Pope, whom
excellent men thought, that he neither was, nor could be Pope; for he believing
not any In which words, by all likelihood, he means Leo the tenth, for that
he speaks as an eye witness of it. He adds, I have heard of another Pope,
who in his life time had declared to a familiar friend of his, That he believed
not the Immortality of souls: but his friend being dead, appeared unto him as
he watched, manifesting that by the judgment of God his soul which he had
believed to be mortal, he should prove to be immortal, to his exceeding
torment in eternal fire. And here he preuenteth Oraui pro te Petre, etc. I
have prayed for thee Peter, etc. And he resolved with the best interpreters,
That they are to be referred to the faith which Peter had confessed, Thou art
Christ the son of the living God, not of his successors, nor of the Church of
Rome it self; according to the Cardinal de Alliaco, the Abbot Panormitan,
Nicholas de Lyra, Cardinal. de Alliaco in quest. Vesperiarum. Abbas Panormit.
extra de sentent. Excom. Nichol. de Lyra in Math. c. 16.
and others. So much the nearer reformation of the Church, and consequently to
the kingdom of God, by how much the more nearly he had known either the
infirmity or error thereof.

In the Oration that he made to Leo the tenth, and in the Council of Lateran,
for reformation, he concealed nothing from them; the corrupt manners in all
Pietas in superstitionem pene procubuit, etc. Piety is almost turned into
superstition, etc. These are the diseases, Orat. Ioh. Francisci Pici ad Leonem
in Council, Lateran.
these the wounds which thou must heal and cure, O Sovereign Bishop,
otherewise if thou refuse to cure them, I fear least he whose place thou
hold on earth, will not now use fomentation, but will dry up and consume
the diseased members with fire and sword. I certainly believe, that he has
already given signs of his future medicine, etc. Are not the virgins,
dedicated to God in Brixia, ravished from out the most religious Temples, and
become a prey to soldiers? Are not the Priests in Rauenna slaughtered? Are not
the Nuns, famous in times past for holiness, prostituted in the discomfiture
at Prato? What other thing do Catamitis; That the flocks of Christ the good
shepherd, have been delivered to detestable wolves; that the Couents of
virgins in most cities, have been converted into obscene lurking holes and
houses of harlots? etc. Why make I mention of light matters, and pass over the
multitudes of harlots, and troops of prostituted boys, exoletarum greges, the
Priests office bought and sold one of another, etc. And after he had thus
vehemently inueyed, Neither is there any marvel (says he) for all this evil,
as John Chrysostom notes, proceeds from the Temple; And S. Hierome says,
That he found none that seduced the people but the Priests, etc. Bear in mind,
I pray you, that old High Priest Heli, punished for not punishing the
wickedness of his sons; for it is needful that and meritorij pueri a
parentibus commodantur, the parents for money let out their sons to be
abused; and they are pardoned, which ought to keep themselves undefiled, even
from all lawful pleasure And yet we have seen what little care this good Pope
had of it, whether we consider his Decrees, or his example. But because this
excellent man knew, that not only the manners, but the doctrine also wanted
reformation: The holy Sriptures (says he) of the old and new Testament, are
to be reuiewed and conferred (to wit, Hebrew and Greek) that they may be
altogether purged from the errors, which by the injury of time, and
carelessness of the Booke-writers, have crept into them: The solemn
ceremonies, of which have been a long time some difficulties, represented to
the former Synods, are to be determined of and confirmed; the daily prayers to
be reduced to a settled and approved order; and the true Histories severed from
Apocryphal fables; to principal men are to be prescribed their duties, to
the end that this wicked opinion, the ruin of our Commonwealth, That
whatsoever pleases is lawful, may be wholly removed and utterly banished from
the minds of men. How far is he from them, that will have the vulgar
translation of the Bible only to be authentical; and preposterously require
Leo the tenth, than from others; who only differed from others in this, that
his poison being sweeter, so much the more daungerously insinuated into the
bowels of the Church.

We have above spoken of Baptista Mantuan Carmelite, and we bring him again
here, because he lived till the year 1516 in such reputation, that many made
him Augustus: He dissembled not, that many things displeased him in the Church
of Rome, their cold sacrifices and services, sluttish altars, and many vain
toys and curious, of which he says, Baptista Mantuan. Fastor. 12.
Et licet his olim nugis iuveniliter aures
Praebuerim; tamen vt melius cum tempore factum
Iudicium, lis haec mihi perniciosa videri
Coepit, and ex grauium cuneis abigenda virorum.

To these vain toys, yet better as by years
My judgment grew, this question began to seem
Pernicious to be doomed, as grave men deem.
Detesting being old, that which he embraced being young. But in his ninth
Eclogue he ingeniously says, That there is no beast so wild and fierce, that
has not his den; no man so vicious which has not honor given unto him in
the Court of Rome, where the air is pestilent, and withal wonderful, so that
it suddenly Mill lupi, Ecloga 9.
totidem vulpes in vallibus istis
Lustra tenent: Et quod diram ac mirabile dictu,
Ipse homines (huius tanta est violentia coeli)
Saepe lupi effigiem, morosque assumere vidi,
Inque suum saeuire gregem, multaque madere
Caede suipecoris: factum vicinia ridet;
Nec scelus exhorret, nec talibus obuiat ausis:
Saepe etiam miris apparent monstra figuris,
Quae tellus affecta malis influxibus edit:
Saepe Canes tantum in rabiem vertantur, vt ipsos
Vincant caede lupos, and qui tutela fuerunt,
Hostiles ineunt animos, and ouilia mactant.
A thousand Wolves, as many Foxes hold
Their holes in those dales (grievous to be told,
And wondrous*) I have seen (so strong's that air)

And forage their own flocks, enoyl'd with fat
Of their slain sheep. The neighbors laugh thereat,
Yet not detest, nor such attempts withstand.
Often of strange forms come monsters, which that land,
With grievous influences plagued, does breed.
The dogs are often so mad, as they exceed
The Wolves in slaughter: and who Warders were
Are werriers, and fierce foes, their flocks to tear.


For covetousness and deceit.

Si quid Roma dabit, nugas dabit, accipit aurum, Ecloga 5.

Verba dat, heu Romae nunc sola pecunia regnat:
Exilium virtus patitur, etc.
If Rome give aught, it is toys, it takes your gold,
Gives vain false words: now only coin does hold
The sway at Rome alas: virtue does exiled pass.
For cruelty and tyranny.

Exprimo libro Syluarum.
Roma quid insanis toties? quid sanguine gaudes?
Quid geris imbelli spicula tanta manu? etc.
Tu similis colubro, quoties grauis ira venenum
Suscitat, and mota lumina bile rubent.
Sic fremis vt frendens cum ferrea vincula mandit
Cerberus, and stygias murmr turbat aquas.
Tu fratres in bella vocas, in pignora fratres,
Nec Iouis imperium, nec Phlegetonta times, etc.
Rome why so rauest thou, in blood delighting?
Why bear thou arms in hands not fit for fighting?
Thou like a serpent art, when rage does rise,
And raise thy venom in thy bloud-shot eyes;
So fretst thou, as when Cerberus does bite
His iron chains, and Stix with noise affright.
Thou brothers setst at war, against sons their sires:
Thou fear not heavens commandment, nor hell fires.
Again, Viuere qui sancte cupitis, discedit Roma:
Omnia cum liceant, non licet esse bonum.
Who would live holily, from Rome away,
You may not there be good, all else you may.


And in another place, I pudor in villas, si non patiuntur easdem
Et villae vomicas; Vrbs est iam tota lupanar.
Pack modesty to towns, unless (no news)
Towns have some sores, the citie's now all stews.


In so much that he seems, describing that monster, which would have devoured
the woman's infant in the Apocalypse, constrained to save her self in the
desert, to show that it signified the Papal Seat: Monstrum immane, potens,
hominum tot milia, aperta
Absorbere gula, quot sanguinolenta volebat
Saeuities. Monstrum illud erat seu bellua partum
Virginis extento cupiens extinguere collo,
Cuius ab aspectu, sumptis diuinitus alis,
(Vt sacer Aegeae vates canit incola Patmi)
Fugit ad extremae loca virgo incognita terrae:
Virgo fuit primo fruticans Ecclesia saeclo,
Christigenae soboles eius, quos bellua adegit
Quaerere desertis aliena penatibus arua.
A mighty mankind monster to englut
So many thousand men with greedy gut,

The blessed Virgins child to kill addressed;
From whose foul sight she taking heavenly wings
(As the holy Prophet, Pathmos inmate sings)
Of the utmost earth to unknown places fled.
The Church at first a virgin was, and bred,
The Christians were her offspring, whom the Beast
To seek strange lands, leaving their home-gods, pressed.


Tha^ Rome is that horrible beast which by devouring innumerable Christians Leo
to provide especially for three things, The peace of Italy, The discipline of
the Court of Rome, and the reformation of Faith, sick even to death: which he
better expresses in these verses; Led tria praesertim restant cura atque labor
Digna tuo; bellum est primum, quo fessa laborat
Italia, and pleni humano iam sanguine campi:
Est aliud, Romana graui maculata veneno
Curia, quae spargit terras contagia in omnes:
Postremum est oppressa fides, exposta rapinis
Vndique, and in praedam populis proiecta cruentis.
A te haec subsidium magnis clamoribus orant,
Sancte Pater, succurre Leo, Respublica Christi
Labitur, aegrotatque fides iam proxima morti.
Three chief things rest worthy thy pain and care,
The War is first, wherewith Italians are
All tired, and fields with humane blood are filled:

With venom, which to all lands is conuaid:
Last is the Faith, oppressed, and open laid
To rapine, made to bloud-succours a prey.
These of thee with loud cries for help do pray,
Help holy Father Leo, Christ's estate
Does fall, and Faith lies sick now at deaths gate.


And in all these things we have seen that Leo followed a quite contrary
course, as appears by the judgment of many great men that lived under the
Popedom

But now we come to that which was done by whole corporations. Grauamina
nationis Germanicae.
There was not any nation under Leo, which presented not up their grieuances
against the unlawful proceedings of the Court of Rome, which violated all
Concordats, refused elections, reserved the principal dignities for the
Cardinals, unmeasurable in distributing expectatiue graces, unmerciful in
exacting annuities, which measured Indulgences according to the quantity of
money, redoubled the tenthes under pretense of making war against the Turks,
bestowed benefices and Ecclesiastical offices to the unworthy, yea to
Mule-keepers, and drew all causes, without difference to Rome. Of which things
are extant whole books presented to Emperors John Maioris, an excellent
professor of Divinity; whose Theses we have, of the power Royal and Papal,
Remedium contra grauamina nationis Germanicae. Ioh. Maioris did. 24. q. 3.
handled at large Did. 24. q. 3. First, The Pope has not any temporal
domination over Kings, etc. 2. For if thou say he succeeds Christ, and Christ
is Lord of all: On the contrary, thou can not prove that Christ, according
to his humanity, is Lord of all, seeing he said to Pylat, My kingdom is not
of this world. And that being granted, yet the consequence is of no force, and
impossible to be proved; for oftentimes the Lieutenant has not so great
authority as his superior, whose Lieutenant he is: For 3. If the contrary
should be granted, then would follow this conclusion, Constantine gave nothing
to Syluester, but only restored unto him his due; the contrary whereof is
said 96 D. C. Constantinus, and 12. Q. 1. C. Futurum. 4. The Popes themselves
confess that temporal jurisdiction pertains not unto them, and that they
will take nothing from the right of Kings. Innoc. 3. in C. Nouit de judicijs,
and Alexand. in C. Causam. Qui filii sint legitimi. And in that famous chapter,
Per venerabilem, in the same title, where Innocent the third says, That the
king of France acknowledges not any superior in temporal things, and
therefore may dispense with his son, as with his inferior. But if thou say
with the Gloss, he acknowledges not any de facto, in deed, but yet he ought
de jure, by right; I hold this to be a Gloss of Orleans, de facto, his answer
had been none; for the gentleman might have answered him, I acknowledge not,
or will not acknowledge a superior de facto. 5. Many devout kings have been
canonized by Popes, that never acknowledged the Bishops of Rome to be above
them in temporal things, and in this have died. Therefore it is a sign that
the Bishops of Rome have not domination over all in temporal things. Item,
Kings have not their powers immediately from the And these were the Maxims of
the French Church at that time.

But of the same time we have two notable instruments, one of Germany, the
other of France: as for the first, Leo had sent his Legates into Germany to
exact tenthes, under color of making war against the Turks; and they had
prepared Exhortatio viri cuiusd. doctissimi ad Principes ne in Decimae
praestationem consentiant.
Will you (says he) destroy the Turk? I praise your purpose: but I greatly
fear, least ye err in the name; seek him in Italy, not in Asia: Against
him of Asia, every of our kings is strong enough of himself to defend his
own limits; But for to tame the other, all Christendom is not sufficient.
That other, who has elsewhere enough to do with his bordering neighbors, has
yet done us no harm; but this man rages every where, and thirsts after the
blood of the miserable. Ye can by no means appease this Cerberus, but with a
golden river; there is no need of arms, nor armies; the Tenths will be of more
force, than troops of horsemen, and regiments of footmen. It seems unto me,
when I diligently consider the matter, that a two fold way is (to wit, of the
Pope) by means of superstition, robbing your very bowels. And this was then
the judgment of Germany.

The other follows, A solemn Appeal of the University of Paris, assembled
been consults, well counseled, they declared, That by this power he (the Pope)
is not made impeccabilis, exempt from sin: So that, if he command any thing
to be done that is unjust, which has bin suggested unto him by naughty
insinuation, he ought to bear it patiently if it be not done; and if he decree
any thing against the commandments of God, he must not be obeyed; yea he may
be by right resisted. But if he be so aided by the power of the Prince, upon
the false suggestion or evil counsel of flatterers or deceivers, that he
cannot be resisted, and the remedies of resisting be taken away, yet by
natural right there remains one thing, which no Prince can take And there
they approve the Councels of Constance and Basil, and urge the reformations
there ordained, which they specify in particular; as the remedies against
Simony, a prohibition not to raise or pay Annuities, and other statutes,
confirmed by the national Council of France, held at Bourges; and
consequently strenghthened by the perpetual Edict of Charles the seventh. In
prejudice of which things notwithstanding, say they, Leo the tenth, in a
certain assembly held at Rome, which is against us, conuocated we know not
how, but not in the spirit of the Lord, with which And for proof, that this
Council (to wit, of Lateran) is unlawful, they allege, That against the
Catholic Faith, it condemned the Council of Basil, and particularly the
pragmaticall Sanction; and in this deed, king Frauncis by cunning means was
deceived, who then was in Italy, amidst the noise of arms, and that under
pretense of certain Concordats, which he commanded to be published; not
sufficiently considering, how great damage it would bring Out of which, they
conclude, We the Rector and University of Paris, feeling our selves grieved,
endammaged, and oppressed, do appeal from our Lord the Pope not well
counseled, and from the abrogation of the said sacred Council of Basil, and
of the Statutes of the pragmaticall Sanction depending upon it, and from the
edition of the new Statutes, and yielding consent thereto, Unto a future
Council lawfully assembled, etc. Protesting instanter, instantius,
instantissime, most instantly, to prosecute this Appeal by way of nullitie, of
abuse, of iniquity or injustice, and otherwise the best we may to reserve the
election and choice unto our selves, etc. And moreover, all the principalls
there present, vnder-signed the same in solemn manner, with all the formalities
requisite thereunto.

Professio fidei fratrum Waldensium Regi Vladislao in Hungarian missa.

An. 1508. Responsio excusatoria Fratrum Waldensium contra binas literas R.P.
Angustani sacrae Theologiae doctoris ad eundem, data Anno 1508.


But besides these oppositions among themselves, in the kingdom of Bohemia
Vladistaus king of Hungary, together with an Apology, wherein they vehemently
confuted the Calumnies usually laid against their doctrine, and plainly laid
open the reasons, for which they had justly and lawfully departed from the
Church of Rome, which are longer than can be here inserted; such
notwithstanding, as that the Reader may judge worthy the reading, wherein he
shall find the same doctrine which we Lewis the twelf by some Cardinals and
Prelates, of most enormous vices, and of most wicked opinions, and thereupon
That if he were to make war against the Turk, he would first of all hear
him. Caroli Molinaeus de Monarch. Francorum.
Upon the declarations therefore of the said deputies, he sent into the
places, namely of Merindol and Cabrieres, M. Adam Fumee, his Master of
Requests, and one Doctor Parui, a Iacobine Friar, his Confessor, to search and
enquire both into their life and religion; who related in that whole discourse,
which they made That they were better than himself and the rest of his
subjects. And the same testimony of their innocence, even at the same time,
Claudius Seisselius, Archbishop of Turin, yields of them, albeit he writ
against their doctrine. To conclude, there were not wanting in all places, such
as for this profession constantly offered themselves to the fire, as in England
Thomas of Bongay, N. of Eccles, John Frith, William Tindall, Martin Luther,
who, as ye shall hereafter hear, being stirred by the spirit of God, caused
at this very time the sound of the Gospel to ring through all Europe.


THese are the Progressions of that Mystery of Iniquity whereof the Apostle
Saint Paul foretold, 2 Thessalonians. 2. Apoc. 17.5.
That it began to work even in his time, that it did insensibly creep into
the Church by secret and indirect passages, by fraud and wicked means, till at
length it should be as a frontlet unto her, covering her countenance, and
taking from her all shame, until her pride ascend to that height wherein the
Apostle Saint John in his Revelation describes the Roman Church; in whose
forehead is written, A Mystery, Great Babylon, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
the mother of whoredoms and abominations of the earth: and all this (says
S. Paul) (...), according to the operation or efficacy of Satan, working and
exercising his power in his ministers with signs and lying wonders. Add also,
that God did send (...). strong delusions to those who received not the love of
the truth, and pleased themselves in iniquity, not obeying those Admonitions
and Oppositions which from time to time were iterated unto them by his
servants, that they should believe lies; because it was foretold that an
Antichrist should come, that there should be a Apoc. 17.
(...), to give their power to the Beast; for so does the Apostle call her: yea
rather, says he, because the counsel of God (which works all things to his
glory) would have it so: That they should conspire together, and give their
kingdoms to the Beast, until the word of God should be fulfilled: That the
whole world may the rather know, that the endeavors and counsels of the world,
or the Princes thereof, are able to do nothing against God; and how far
soever they seem to wander from his providence, yet, will they nill they, must
they submit themselves to his jurisdiction, and all their endeavors tend to his
glory; when he shall see the conspiracy of the son of perdition with his
kings, as that of Judas the Peter says to the Jews, Act. 2. v. 23.
Him have you taken (that is Christ) by the hands of the wicked, and have
crucified and slain him; But being delivered by the determinat counsel and
foreknowledge of God, (...): No otherwise than as S. John speaks here of
Antichrist, or the man of sin, God has put into their hearts to do his will
and pleasure, (...): But what is that? that they should give their kingdom to
the Beast, to consent to his exaltation against the Lamb: To the end it may
not seem Paul says; because it was necessary he should ascend to that
height, it was as necessary, as S. John says, That the word of God might be
fulfilled. And God by that self same power which remoueth all impediments,
shall with the like facility end the remainder of his work in his time.

Now then we have declared the Progressions, or proceedings, and that by the
degrees observed in history, or out of the books and instruments common to us
both, or from their own Authors, and especially the writings of Monks, of
them for the most part which applied their ministry to this Mystery: for
there were 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 8.
to the spirit of his mouth, to the brightness of his coming. Which things
are of so much the more greater weight, in as much as our adversaries, the
ministers of Antichrist, having gotten the upper hand of all, have with all
diligence and industry left nothing undone whereby they might with continual
care and craft extinguish and deface Balaams Ass to speak, the very beast
that carries them; to utter their Histories, Councels, and Decrees, to the
rebuke and reproof of themselves and their doings.

As touching therefore their spiritual function, the Bishops of Rome in those
first ages, as we have seen, were indifferently called Bishops and Priests,
behauing themselves as brethren toward others, yea by their nearest neighbors
were named Brethren and Colleagues; they were consulted withal, and did
themselves also consult with others about the affairs of the Church,
controversies, schisms, and heresies, living simply in their profession, and
dying virtuously in the confession of the name of Christ: they glittered not in
any other purple or scarlet than with Paul's time wrought, which under pretense
of the dignity of the city, drew unto it self the cause of the neighbors,
would have their counsels accounted for Decrees, and turned the honor
voluntarily offered them into right of homage, seemelinesse into servitude.
That sting notwithstanding of ambition was oftentimes beaten back by the
persecutions, and many times also blunted by the virtuous Oppositions of the
ancient Fathers. But when, after that by Constantine peace was restored to the
Churches, through the favor of Princes, they increased in honors and riches,
behold this spirit continually watching over the work, and not loosing any
moment of time, gathers Phocas, the murderer of the Emperor Mauritius, his
Lord, was the Bishop of Rome declared Universal Bishop: he labored to be so
declared, so far was he off from blushing day increasing, of which the
Archbishops from time to time complained. After the Lords lot (says he) and
inheritance, should be exempt and free from all temporal jurisdiction;
whereupon followed license of all vices, impunitie of all crimes, and so by
little and little withdrew from their lawful and natural Lords, them whom he
had marked with his character, by voluntary servitude, yea and liege homage
bound them unto himself. By their ministry and means (and not without
mystery) he sits and presideth in the Councels of Kings, exercises his
kingdom in their realms, and his tyranny in the consciences of kings and
their people, whilst he binds them to his pleasures by his censures and
excommunications, and as he will loses them from all duty and obedience. He
sets Princes one Cerem. Roman. l. 3. Charta 6. and 7.
he commanded the Epistle and Gospel to be read in Latin and in Greek,
signifying both Churches; but in Latin first, all power was given him from the
Father in heaven and in earth: In so much that in the Mass, which, the Seat
being vacant, is celebrated for obtaining a new Pope, Cerem. Roman. l. 1. Sect.
15. de officio Missae Astol. sede vaca^te.
this Tractus of the Prophet is sung, The Head thereof shall proceed out of it
(to wit, of Israel) and a Prince shall come from the midst of it: which was
spoken of our Lord Jesus Christ. There is also that of Saint John in the
Gospel, applied to the future election, I will not leave you orphans, I will
ask the which was spoken of the holy Ghost; so that now there is nothing so
blasphemous that they are ashamed or dare not use. Further, so soon as he is
elected, and has put on red hose and shoes, he is carried and set upon an
Altar, the seat of their God, and there worshipped; consequently with religious
worship due to God. What need more? Cerem. Romans l. 1. sect. 1. c. 6. Erasm. in
1. ad Tim. c. 1.
In the very Schools; Leo the tenth being Pope, they feared not to dispute
(Note Reader, how far they extended his Vicarship:) Whether the Pope might
abrogate that which is decreed in the writings of the Apostles; Whether he
might ordain any thing contrary to the doctrine of the Gospel; Whether he
might add to the Creed a new article of Faith; Whether he have greater power
than S. Peter, or but equal; Whether How many enormities are committed in
these words, yea in the least of them? How manifoldly they offend the Divine
Majesty? When therefore we call to mind all these things, how can we
otherwise apply or expound that prophetical place of S. Paul, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
v. 4.
He exalts himself against all that is called God, (...) or that is
worshipped? For let them show us in all these sixteen ages any other: so that
he sits as God in the Temple of God, showing himself that he is God: In the
Church it self; so that we must not seek him among the Turks in Assyria:
yea, if we believe him, he himself is the whole John, Of the beast ascending
out of the earth, Apocal. c. 13. v. 11. and 17. v. 3.
which had two horns like the Lamb, but spoke like the Dragon; of the woman
sitting upon a Scarlet colored beast, full of names of blasphemy? For where
is there more speech of Christ, and less believing him? where more giving him
kisses together with buffetings? where so monstrous, so outrageous blasphemies,
under that most holy name? Is not this properly to put on Jesus a purple
garment, to put a reed in his hand, and to say unto him in mockery (as if he
saw nothing in humane affairs, especially in the government of the Church)
Which of us was it that smote thee? And thus much

Now of the temporal. We found the Bishops of Rome under persecution had
learned by the Testament of our Savior, not to affect worldly power, but to
be ready contrariwise to suffer cruelties from earthly Princes: By the
Epistles of S. Paul and S. Peter, and also by their examples, to honor the
kings and powers of the world, to obey the froward and those that were hard to
be pleased; not to rule as Lords, ne quidem in Domini cleros, from whence came
the name of Clergy. And surely till the time of Constantine and some time
after, they had not any temporal jurisdiction: yea and after that by the gifts
of Christian Princes they were enriched, for many ages they spoke and lived
submissiuely after the manner be withheld to the manifest damage of S. Peter,
to be prescribed, and to be usurped Cerem. Roman. Charta 21. ad quaecunque
fidelitatis iuramenta. Cerem. Roman. Charta 21. l. 5.
which they were wont to yield to the emperors: And at length constrained the
Emperors themselves before they were received into Rome, that is, into their
house, and ancient seat of the Empire, in conceived words to swear unto them
quamcunque fidelitatem, all kind of fidelity, and truly and openly to
declare, that they had no right in Rome, and that they would stay there at Rome
but so many days as it pleased the Pope; and to ratify and confirm all their
pretended donations, merely frivolous. Yea moreover, they compelled in all
humility to request that they might be crowned by them. Insomuch that they
maintained and affirmed both by the authority of their Decrees, and by open
force of arms, That they were superious to the Emperors, who were their
vassals and held their Empire by fealty and liege homage from them; That they
were Monarchs of the whole Universe, and direct Lords of all the world. By
which right, so soon as any countries of the new found world were discovered,
they blushed not to give them in feoffe, and divide them among kings, as the
patrimony of S. Peter; As witness also these words, which they are wont to
use in the inuestiture of Popes, Cerem. Roman. l. 1. c. 2.
I inuest thee with the Popedom, vt praesis vrbi and orbi, to command over
the City, and the whole world. Lastly, Cerem. Romans l. 1. Charta 21. 22. 26.
65. 59. 87.
and in sign of tribute, the suitor to cast a mass of gold at his feet. What
remains there more, but as the Wise men to Christ, Incence and Myrrh?
Moreover, in all Acts both Ecclesiastical and Civil, he is seated in a
degree higher and more eminent, and Cerem. Romans l 1. charta 21. 22. 26. 54 59
87.
that the place where the Emperor sits is no higher than where the Pope
sets his feet; his chair also not so high, nor so large, and a less
footstool, whether it be in Church, or in Chapel, or in Council: And he
gives him water when he washes his hands, and in the Mass bears up his
train, and in collation presents unto him the napkin: For this is with him a
general Maxim, Nemini omnino mortalium reuerentiam facit, Cerem. Romans l. 3.
sect. 1. fol. 120.
The Pope does no reverence to any man in the world, neither by rising
manifestly, nor by bowing of the head, nor by uncovering himself: only to the
Emperor of the Romans, the Pope being set, after he has kissed his foot and
his hand, he rises a little, and receives him to kiss with the mutual
embracement of charity. Yea the greatest Kings ought by to lead the Popes
horse by the bridle, or if the Pope be carried in a chair, to put his
shoulders underneath to carry it, Sellam subire, Others of the chiefest of his
Nobles afterward submitting their necks thereunto, to ease him. The
Cardinals which come to meet him, presently, so soon as they epsy him, must
light down from their horses afar off, and run to kiss his foot and his
hand; and presently a little ladder, prepared of purpose, is set, whereby they
are admitted to kiss his mouth. What is an Idol, or Idolatry, if this be
not? And yet of these rules is made an art, digested as it were into a Codex of
Laws, which without crime of high treason against God and man it is not
lawful to omit or transgress: Whereas Christ our Lord, whose being in the
form of God, made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a
servant, etc. Phil. 2. v. 6.7.8 9.
Wherefore God has also highly exalted him. But what kind of servant is this,
who arrogateth to himself the title of the Master and Prince? and what do we
else expect, but that in his appointed time he cast him headlong from that
height of pride? And seeing Christ, for to bring us unto him into heaven,
humbled himself, Phil. 2. v. 8.
became obedient even unto the death of the Cross, whither does this man,
(...), which exalts himself above God, draw with him his followers and
obeyers, but into hell? And for as much as we see him arise of the declining of
the Roman Empire, and from the ruins thereof raised to that height, does it
not put us in mind of the 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 6.7
and now ye know what withholdeth that he might be revealed, which should be
after his coming, (...), only he which now withholdeth, shall let till he be
taken out of the way; that is, the Roman Empire must needs be abolished before
he be revealed. We may remember also these words of S. John, Apoc. 13. v. 12.
The second Beast, the Papacy, did all that the first Beast, the Roman State,
could do before him; that is, to his teeth, and in his sight: and he caused
the earth, and them that dwell therein to worship the first Beast (Rome) whose
deadly wound was healed, being restored by the substitution of the Popes
authority in it, so that as many as would (that is, the glory of this Empire
renewed in him) should be killed. 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 9.10.11.
And this in the mean time says Saint Paul, (...), not so much by open
force, as by the effectual working of Satan, etc. and in all deceiuablenesse
of unrighteousness: or as Saint John says, Apoc. 13. v. 12.15.
by the enchauntment and cup of that Harlot, of that Roman Courtisan, who has
so made drunk the Kings and Princes of the earth with her flatteries and
enticements, that they strive who shall most be set on fire with her love, and
ruinat each other to get highest into her favor; so drunken are the
inhabitants of the earth with the wine of her fornication: miserable people
whose Princes, for to win her favor, made them drink down all her
inventions, abuses,

Now is also this Antichrist (...), surnamed The man of sin, not without
mystery, not without a notable emphasis. And truly in this Seat, more than in
any other State, we may easily observe very many Neros, Caligulas,
Heliogabales, monsters of all kind injustice, of tyranny, of impiety,
profane Necromancers, Atheists, and worse, if may be; and of which their own
Histories do every where testify: For which cause it was believed by many,
That so great was the pestilent infection of this Chair, that with the
contagion thereof Paul to call him the man of sin, and to Saint John to
term him the Whore, (...), by excellency: In which sense the Evangelists
sometimes, a prostituted woman, a sinner, because she makes a continual
trade of sinning. But let us yet enter a little further: Antichrist is properly
called The man of sin, not only because he daily practices sin, but
because he seeks gain by sin, because he sows, planteth, produces, and
multiplieth sin, by innumerable cunning practices. In a word, if we believe
him, he abolisheth all sins of omission and commission, be they never so
heinous and horrible: Yea which is more, for to get in greater the Taxes of the
Apostolical Chauncerie, and sacred Penitentiaries, which yet are sold at Rome,
printed at this very time in Paris, at the sign of the Golden Sun in Saint
Jacques street; and these books are no less commonly used among his brokers,
than Kalenders with husbandmen, or the book of Customs and Entries among
merchants. In which books are sold and taxed at a dear rate, dispensations
and absolutions of all kinds, of consanguinitie carnal, spiritual, in regard
of degrees, or for want of age, for imperfection of members, natural lapsu
carnis, These kind of graces are not given to the poor, because they are
destitute of goods and means, and therefore for them there is no comfort. And
it is to be noted, That in our time they censured by their Index
Expurgatorius, made by the commandment of the Pope, and of the Council of
Trent, that famous man amongst them, Claudius d' Espense, because he had said,
Claud. Espensaeus in Epist. ad Tit. c. 1.
writing upon the Epistle to Titus, That it was a great opprobrie to the
Church, that those books came to the hands of men, but much more, that they
were put in execution; in which more impunitie and wickedness might be
learned in a moment, than in all the Summists together. Let the Reader
vouchsafe to see the place it self, so he take heed it be not an edition
corrupted by their falsifyings. But let us prosecute, seeing the matter so
requires, both the merchandise and the merchants: They sell dispensations for
oaths, for commutation of vows, for Offices, Breuiaries, Prayers, Psalters
for appointed hours, for to say them after an other manner than is used in
their Diocese or after the Roman fashion, or also for to say them backwards:
(What inventions to get money!) Also for reducing Masses to the Corpus Domini
(which they call here, to carry God to play) once, twice, thrice a year or
oftener: to change his name, surname, and sign; Cui bono? to pass from one
Monastery to an other, to visit the holy Sepulcher, to use Traffic with
Infidels, by carrying unto them Merchandise lawful and unlawful; for the Jews
to have their Synagogues public, or private; for the Christians to eat of a
beast killed by a Saracen: When in the mean time these good Bishops, as we
have seen have made no conscience to take a yearly pention from the Turk; So
that in them than in the knowledge of all the liberal sciences, than in
Philosophy, or in Man of sin, who at so easy a rate and so lightly gives
leave and indulgence for all sins, and also gives way to all crimes without
difference, against the law of God and against Nature: Seeing it is manifest by
the Tables of his Mart, to every man, how much each sin will cost, that he
may know at what rate to free himself from punishment. Seeing he would
persuade the world, that whosoever has satisfied this his Table of Rates,
Paul, when he said, That sin has abounded that grace might superabound, who
by the justice of God, and by the holiness of the law, represents unto us
the horror and filthiness of sin, and the wrath of God kindled against it,
yea against those sins that seem unto us more light; which wrath cannot be
quenched, and is not to be appeased by any humane merit, by any price, but by
the blood alone of the only begotten Son of God shed for sinners, unto whom
alone, by a right and perfect faith, and earnest repentance, we ought to have
recourse: Dan. 7. v. 20. Apocal. 13. v. 5.6.
Of whom it is said, Os loquens grandia, A mouth speaking presumptuous things,
etc. A mouth opened unto blasphemy against God, etc. In this shameful
traffike (I say) in this infamous selling of sin, whereby the Harlot
prostituted under every green tree has engaged all sorts of men, Apocal. 13.
v. 16.17.
do we not perceive it by these words of Saint John, He made all, both small
and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right
hand or in their foreheads, and that no man might buy and sell, save he that
had the mark. For indeed, what condition of men are exempted therefrom; for
dispensation, John speaks, Apoc. 18.3.
The Merchants of the earth are waxen rich of the abundance of her pleasure,
which distilled from the gulf of her excess, and from her sacrileges? And
when we more nearer consider, that this Babylon, this heap of confusion, this
lofty building, has none other foundation than absurdities, none other matter
than iniquities, none other mortar than impieties, may we not necessarily
conclude strong delusion, 2 Thessalonians. 2.10.11.
that they should receive that Man of sin, that Antichrist, that they should
believe lies, because they would not receive the love of the truth, that they
might be saved? Whilst that man of sin therein applaudeth them, applying as
it were Narcotickes unto them, whereby his pleasing allurements stupefie them,
without all sense or feeling of conscience or remorse of sin.

I omit his other doctrines, of the merits of men, whereby the merit of
Christ's passion is brought to nothing; his daily sacrifice of the altar,
whereby that only and perpetual sacrifice of our Lord Jesus on the Cross, is
abolished Christian Religion swallowed up and converted into Ceremonies, into
superstition, Cerem. Roman Chart. 140. 141. and 150.
But surely if we list to observe his seat, and his furniture: he sits at
Rome, on the City of seven hills; there ye may see him ride in sollemne manner
about the City, mounted on a white Horse sumptuously caparassoned, the Horse
led by the hand of an Emperor or a King, if any be present, if not, by the
greatest person there, he himself gorgeously apparelled in scarlet, wears a
Tiara or Diadem on his head, adorned with a triple Crown, which they commonly
call Regnum, Kingdom, in token, of supreme dignity, both Sacerdotall and
Imperial, enriched with most rare gemmes and precious stones. There follows
him a troop of Cardinals, glittering also in scarlet. But if he go forth of
the City, he has his port-mantues, ladder, covered with red cloth, twelve red
standards, then follow Noblemen carrying the standards of the City, a Barber,
and a Tailor; then four Noblemen carrying four Caps of crimson velvet on the
ends of staves, some of the measure of three or four hand-breadth, who are
called Scutiferi honoris. Thus this whole furniture is of scarlet color. When
therefore S. John says in the Apocalypse, Come, I will show thee the damnation
of the great whore, with whom the Kings of the earth have committed
fornication; then presently after he describes a woman sitting (...), Apocal
17. v. 1.2.3.4.5. etc.
upon a skarlet commanding an Empire, adorned merely with scarlet: she
herself, (...), arrayed in purple and scarlet, and gilded with gold, and
precious stones and pearls, and in her forehead, in titulo in title, (these
words) a name written, a Mystery, that great Babylon, not really that ancient
Babylon, but in a Mystery that mother of whoredoms and abominations of the
earth, carnal above all measure, spiritual beyond all shame, What shall I
need to name him, seeing he manifests himself and speaks here
sufficiently? And does it not seem, that Satan has taken pleasure to perform
this work, that he might show unto the world a Master-peice of his art, and as
it were reproach unto as our blindness, when he brought forth as it were on a
Theater this Man? that of Leo the tenth.

Now at that very time, Martin Luther, after many others, being impatient of
Augustine Monk, Doctor of Divinity, of mean parentage, of no authority, in
the end of the world, accompanied with some few men of the same condition,
carried with the same zeal, and moved with the same spirit, at whose voice
(the voice certainly of almighty God, thundering by them) innumerable people
throughout all Europe were stirred up, who either being made drunken slept the
sleep of death, or being yet half asleep had need of these instruments to
awake and animate them. These men durst amidst so great splendour of his
Babylonish pomp and pride, and so great painted bravery, call the Beast by
his proper name, in the midst of swords, waters, and fires, of the rigor of
magistrates, fury of 2 Thessalonians. 2. v. 8.
Is not this according to that of S. Paul, And then shall the wicked man be
revealed, whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth? Of Saint
John also, Apocal. 17. v. 16
Those Kings shall hate the Whore, and shall make her desolat and naked, and
shall eat her flesh, and burn her with fire. Yet this Whore endeavors to
take courage, Apocal. 18.7.
and set an impudent face on the matter, She says in her heart, I sit being a
Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no mourning. I cannot err, whatsoever
they say, my filthiness is elegancie, and the blaines budding forth from my
unchastity, pearls and precious stones. She multiplieth so much the more her
blasphemies against Christ the Son of God, she rages against his sacred
word, she adiudgeth insufficiency, of imperfection, of ambiguitie, dangerous
and deceitful, and worse if may be, making it wonderful inferior to the Roman
Church, the same Church, in the mean time, of which the Pope makes himself
superior, and alone, greater than is represented in general Councels; How much
superior and higher will he have it above the holy Scripture, the word of
God, and consequently God himself? And thereby he appears the more evidently
to be the same whom we seek, the Antichrist poynted out by the Apostles:
Therefore, after we would have applied Balm for her sore, if she might perhaps
be healed, which she obstinatly refused, we have labored to procure a holy
reformation in the Church, against which the Papacy is so much the more
enuenomed with rage, the infallibitie of traditions, and the vprofitablenesse
of the word written with the finger of God, and inspired into his Prophets and
Apostles. May we not lawfully now say with the Prophet, Ierem. 51. v. 9.10.11.
We would have cured Babel, but she would not be healed: forsake her, and let
us go every one to his own country. Let us now wash our hands of her, and
expect what God has determined of her, especially seeing her judgment is come
up unto heaven; on the contrary, the Lord has set forth our righteousness.
Apoc. 17. v. 17
who will put into their hearts to fulfill his will and his pleasure, to
execute his sentence? And let not the present state of things astonish us, in
one day, in one hour, Apoc. 18. v. 8.
in a moment are his works performed, and this work without doubt must be
performed. And long ago, as of a thing already done, near at hand, and most
certain, the Angel cried out and redoubled it, It is fallen, it is fallen,
Babylon: Apocal. 18.2.4.
But God forbid also that we should neglect that other cry that follows,
Go out of her my people, we to whom God has given to know her, ye which know
her but too well, take heed it be That ye be not partakers of her sins, and
that ye receive not of her plagues, least being defiled by the contagion of her
Idolatry and enchauntments, ye be made partakers of the sentence long ago
pronounced against her, of eternal fire, which remains for her. But, because
we are for the most part incredulous and stupide, let us pray unto God, of his
mere mercy to draw us, as a Lot, out of this spiritual Sodom, as S. John
calls it, to pull us to himself by the hand of his Angels, to grant unto us
that we look not back again, and that we may, before he power down his
judgments on Babylon, get to his holy mountain, to that little Segar, his
Church, how small and contemptible soever it be in the eyes of the world; Is it
not a little one (says Lot) and my soul shall live? Now to him Father, Son,
and holy Ghost, for the bottomless depths of his judgments, and of his
graces, be praise and glory world without end, Amen.

Errata.
Fol. Lin. Fol. Lin. 214 25 more pernicious traditions. 474 42 succeed to. 263
37 Tarracina. 473 18 in his own presence. 272 1 imploreth his help. 475 3 he
that would but know. 278 4 night of my. 481 3 spittle of their. 309 24 give
thee his. 506 16 (as it was thought.) 311 3 acknowledged. 545 38 concourse of
people. 378 2 at Dover. 559 45 decreed in these words. 378 47 a longer day. 586
8 Corpus Christi. 388 42 after riches. 593 14 excommunicated. 401 18 to waver.
594 36 might more easily be discerned. 401 39 Abbot of S. Albons. 609 45 his
successor. 417 vlt. not so much. 612 43 he being. 441 vlt. and by their
digressing. 615 21 as visited. 446 40 of the eternal judgment. 629 vlt. or if
he had had more care.

FINIS.

