THE ANATOMY OF POPISH TYRANNY: Wherein is contained a plain declaration and
Christian censure, of all the principal parts, of the Libels, Letters,
Edictes, Pamphlets, and Books, lately published by the Secular priests and
English hispanized Jesuits, with their Iesuited Archpriest; both pleasant and
profitable, to all well affected readers.

Esdr. verse. 42. Magna est veritas, and praeualet* LONDON, Printed by John
Harison, for Richard Bankworth, dwelling in Paul's Churchyard at the sign of
the Sun. 1603.

To the Reverend father the ornament of learning and religion, TOBIE, the wise,
grave, zealous, and worthy Bishop of Durham.
THat excellent sentence worthy to be written in golden letters (Right
Reverend father,) which the good Jew and man of God Zorobabel, Esd. 3. verse. 42.
pronounced confidently before the mighty king Darius; viz. Magna est veritas,
and praeualet;) is this day verified (God be blessed for it,) even in the
public writings of the Jesuits, against the secular priests, their own dear
Popish brethren. And reciprocally of the secular priests against the Jesuits,
their religious fathers and holy friars. The deep and serious consideration
whereof, has possessed mine heart with such unspeakable solace, as I can not
easily with pen and ynke express the same. Such is the force of truth, (my
good Lord,) that it has enforced the professed enemies of truth, (a thing
very rare and to be admired,) to testify the truth against themselves, and to
publish the same in printed books, to the view of the whole world. God (say the
popish priests) has most straungely, Quodl 8. art. 9. Page. 267.
and in very deed (as it may be termed,) miraculously, revealed the truth,
which long has been hidden. Thus them selves write of themselves. Hence
proceeds that rare conceived joy, Phil. 3. verse. 15.
which has environed me on every side. And which (I am well assured,) cannot
but bring great contentment to your Lordship, and to all true hearted English
subjects. For as the Apostle says: Some preach Christ through envy and
strife; and some of good will. The one sort preaches Christ of contention, and
not purely: but the others preach him of love. What then? yet Christ is
preached all manner ways, whether it be under pretense, or syncerely; and I
therein joy, yea, and will joy. Thus wrteth the chosen vessel, of our Lord
Jesus. The Jesuits puffed up with envy and malice against the secular
priests, do unwittingly and unwillingly bolt out many important truths; not
only against themselves, and to their own great prejudice; but also to the
everlasting scandal, and utter ruin, of theit patched hotch-potch late Romish
religion. The Secular priests turmoyled with the unjust vexations of the cruel
Jesuits, seek by all as well indirect as direct means, to redeeeme their
iniust molestations, and to defend themselves from their villainous and
diabolical dealing. The while they are thus busied; they cannot invent or
devise, how to find out any end of their miseries; but by laying open to the
world, the badde and irreligious conversation of the Jesuits; and by imputing
to them those disloyal treacheries, and most bloody complots, wherewith their
own hearts and hands had sometime been imbrewed. And consequently, while they
are encombred to disgrace and gall the malepeart and traiterous Jesuits; they
do unawares grievously wound themselves, even with their own chosen weapons.
They freely grant, and can it not deny; that all papists were kindly dealt
withal, until such time as themselves gave just cause, by their disloyal
plots and bloody practices against her Majesty, See quodl. 7. art. 8. page.
199.
of greater restraint and sharper proceeding against them. For first, they
grant, that the Earls of Northumberland and Westmerla^d with their adhere^ts,
were rebels, and their insurrectio^ flat treason; that the pope joined with
the^; that he excommunicated her Majesty; that he assoyled her subjects from
their allegiance to her; that he sent two popish priests, Morton and VVebbe,
(my self knew them both right well,) to bring the excommunication into
England, The Duke of Norfolk.
which they effected accordingly; that the Pope assigned the Duke of Norfolk,
to be the head of the rebellion; that he gave order to Ridolphi the Florentine,
to take 150000* crowns to set forward the said rebellion. That the King of
Spain at the Popes instance, The duke of Alua.
determined to send the Duke of Alua into England, that with all his forces he
might assist the Duke of Norfolk. Secondly, they grant that the pope plotted
with Stuckeley, Fitzmo. rize, and others both English, Irish, and Italian, (my
self was even then in Rome,) for enterprise by force into Ireland, ann. 1578.
under pretense of religion; to further which cruel attempt, ann. 1579.
Sanders did afterward thrust himself personally into the like action.
Thirdly, they confess, that Parsons, Campian, Sherwin, and others, were sent
disloyally into this land from pope Gregory the 13. (my self was then in
Rome,) and that Parsons presently upon their arrival, ann. 1580.
fell to his traiterous Jesuitical courses, and bestirred himself with tooth
and nail, 1581.
how he might set her majesty's crown upon an others head. Fourthly, they
confess, that the Jesuit Heywood was sent into England from the Pope, and
that he took upon him to call a synod, and to abrogate ancient customs, to
the great scandal of many. Fifthly, they confess, that the Pope plotted with
the King of Spain, for the assistance of the Duke of Guise, 1583.
to enter upon the sudden, and to advance the Queen of Scotland to the crown
of England. For the better effecting whereof, Mendoza a Jesuit (as they
write,) then ledger in this land for the king of Spain, The Jesuits sludie
nothing but treason.
set on work Frances Throcmorton, and many others. They add there unto, that
about the same time Arden, and Somervile had conspired, how they might lay
violent hands upon her Majesty's sacred person. Sixthly, they write, that about
the same time Parrie was also plotting with the Jesuits beyond the sea, how he
might have effected the like villainy. Seventhly, 1586.
they confess freely, that the earl of Northumberland was drawn into the
plot of the Duke of Guise; and that Parsons the bloody Jesuit, was him self
an actor therein. Eighthly, they write plainly, that Babington and his
accomplices committed such notorious treason against her majesty, 1587.
as it was shameless boldness to deny or qualify the same. Ninthly, they
confess roundly, that Sir William Stanley committed notable treachery, and
falsified his faith to her majesty. Tenthly, 1588.
they write plainly, that in the year 1588. the King of Spain made a most
cruel and bloody attempt, not only against her Majesty, (to use the
priests-words,) and their common enemies; but also against themselves, all
catholics, 1592.
and their own native country. The memory of which attempt (as the priests
write,) will be an everlasting monument of Jesuitical treason, and brutish
cruelty. Eleuenthly, they grant, that Richard Hesket was set on by the
Jesuits, in the year 1592. or their abouts, to have stirred up the Earl of
Darbye, to rebel against her majesty. Where I may not omit, to deliver mine
own knowledge in this behalf. This Hesket I knew very well; in his life,
conversation, and profession, I ever deemed him to be of all religions; that it
to say, of none at all, and so the event did declare. He could temporize
egregiously and frame his religion in all places, Lo, all traitors are welco^e
to our Jesuits.
after the humors of the company. In the end his creditors came so roundly
upon him, for his manifold and huge debts; that he was in forced secretly to
depart, and to take England on his back. Not long after, he became so deeply
Iesuited, that he must needs be a glorious popish martyr; viz. an arrant and
most bloody traitor. he thought and sought by murdering his natural
sovereign, to have gotten gold, money, 1592.
and large possessions; and so perhaps to have paid his creditors, or at the
least to have cut them short at his pleasure. But in stead of a popish
imaginary charter, he found an english real halter; according to his
co^digne deserts. Twelftly, they grant, 1592.
that shortly after this stratageme, the Jesuit Holt and others with him,
persuaded one Patricke Collen an Irishman, to attempt the laying of his
violent and villainous hands, upon her majesty's person. Thirteenthly, they
freely confess, that doctor Lopez the Queens physician, was stirred up to
have poisoned her Majesty. and the like they affirm, of York, Williams, and
Edward Squire, animated and drawn thereunto, by VValpole that pernicious
Jesuit. All these notorious treasons (right reverend father,) damnable in
nature, intolerable in state, and almost incredible in relation, are plainly
confessed of the Secular-priests; and the same together with many other, bad,
licentious, barbarous, savage, and plain brutish practices of Iesuited
papists, are compendiously comprised in this small volume. Which I have
therefore endeavored to reduce to certain heads, distinct books, and
chapters, with some profitable annotations annexed to the same; because I am
verily persuaded, that whosoever shall seriously pervse them with
indifferency, cannot but loath and detest cursed Iesuitisme and all popish
Iesuited faction. For, though it be necessary to all true hearted English
subjects, to know thoroughly the matters discovered by the Secular Priests; yet
because many for lack of money, are not able to buy the books; and others
because they are tedious and confusely written, will either abstain wholly from
the reading thereof; or lightly and slenderly run them over, and so never
attain to the full knowledge thereof; I have employed my industry and my
wits, to couch in a small volume and portable manual, the sum and effect of
all their books, pamphelets, libells, edicts, and letters; so as every one may
easily compass the price, and no one be wearied in pervsing the discourse. My
desire was to profit all; to confirm the strong; to strenghthen the weak; to
stay the staggerer; to rowze up the drowsy; to instruct the ignorant; to
gratify the thankful; to persuade the doubtful; and to confound the proud,
malepeart and disloyal hearts, 1. Cor. 3. ^. 6.
Paul planted, Apollo watered, but God gave the increase. If therefore any good
be wrought by these my labors, let such as shall reap that good, be thankful
to God for the same. The disloyal papists and blood thirsty Jesuits, have
already kicked against my former labors, and whet their malicious tongues
against me. Their holy father the bishop of Rome, (whom they term the
Pope,) has thundered out his curse against me. But neither secular priests, nor
religious Jesuits, will or can make any sound answer to any of my books.
They have often been buzzing about the matter; yet never durst they publish so
much, as but one colorable answer, either to all, or to any one of my books.
so as I must needs think, that maledictio^, cursing, and railing, will be
their morning and evening song against me; by reason of this my friendly posie,
which I present as a most redolent odor to their noses-grauitie; so often as
they shall kiss the shoe of their Pope, and with him commit idolatry. the
usual manner (most reverend and worthy prelate,) in all such kind of
exercises, both is and always has been, to make choice of some worthy and
mighty personage, to protect, defend, and patronize the cause. and doubtless,
never did any book or pamphlet stand in more need of a stout and resolute
patron, then this present volume. For the traytorous Jesuits and Iesuited
papists, that cannot endure their own brethren the secular priests, to publish
in their honest defense, their known practices and imperfections; will no
doubt become stark mad, and fetch al their Romish friscols against me poor
soul; who have as it were anatomized, and painted them out in their best
beseeming colors. After mature deliberation had herein, (most christian patron
of learning and learned men,) I have resolved to dedicate this work to your
most reverend name; as to that virtuous Tobi^, who is able with the perfumes of
the heart and liver of a fish; that is to say, with the redolent harmony of
christian divinity, (which continually flows most pleasantly form his
mouth,) to vanquish all the Asmodean-Iesuites upon earth, and to strike such
terrors into their hearts; as they shall not once dare to grunt or bark,
against my true dealing and sincere proceeding in this behalf. Sundry other
motives do occur, which might most justly incite me to this dedication of
these my late studies, if they were better then in deed they are; amongst
which, many large bounties from time to time received at your Lordships hand,
do well deserve to have a place. So praying the almighty to increase your
godly zeal, against all traytorous Jesuits, and disloyal popish vassales;
and to bless your good Lordshippe with many happy years, to his glory, your
own souls health, and the common good of his Church, I humbly take my leave.

From my study, this 23. of January 1602. Your Lordships most bounden, Thomas
Bell.

The Elogie of the author, in sign of his loyal affection, both toward his
late Sovereign, and now regnant.
The cursed crew of Jesuits,
A change did long desire;
A change they have, but to their grief,
Both Pope and Spain admire.
Our noble Queen Elizabeth
From hence to heaven is gone;
King James the first given us of God,
By right sits in her throne.
She forty years and four complete,
did Pope and Spain withstand;
And maugree all their bloody plots,
In peace did rule this land.
Gods word and his true worship ever,
With zeal she did defend;
For which cause God did her protect,
Until her life did end.
Her death perforce we must lament,
Who dearly loved us all;
Her bounty great, her mercy rare,
The world to witness call.
Yet English hearts be not dismaide,
King James is our regent;
Hence Popery certes he will supplant,
All falsehood must relent.
He will do justice every where,
And poor men's cause respect;
The mighty must not them annoy,
He will their right protect.
Poor men to him must have access,
Their own cause there to tell;
No bribes can have place in his court,
Thence vice he will expel.
The richer sort with lingringe suites,
Must not the poor oppress;
Our noble King the man of God,
Their wrongs will soon redress.
Christ's Gospel still he will maintain,
Our true peace to prolonge;
Both Spaniard, Pope, and Jesuit,
May sing a doolefull song.
They sought by treason Scotlands crown,
On Spanish head to bind;
Crichton was actor chief, who may
in then'd an halter find.
Most traytorous parts and bloody plots,
To Jesuits are dear;
To all that will this book peruse,
This truth must needs appear.
Disloyal papists still presume,
A tolerate to crave;
But God preserve our gracious King,
No such sport must they have.
Their combs are cut, their crests are fallen,
They stand amazed with fear;
Their spirits rampant are made couchant,
Their doom will soon appear.
For this rare blessing yield him thanks,
That sits in heaven above;
And let our faith and Godly life,
Make known to him our love.
The Preface to the gentle Reader.
THis Anatomy of popish Tyranny, (gentle Reader,) was compiled and made
ready for the press before the tenth of October, in the year of our lord God
1602. but by reason of casual accidents, and other circumstances concurring,
it was not printed until this present year 1603. before which time, it
pleased the Almighty to call hence to his mercy, our most gracious Sovereign
the mighty Princess Elizabeth, late Queen of England, France, and Ireland.
Against whose sacred person, the Pope, the Spaniards, and Englist Spaniolized
Jesuits with all Iesuited popelings, devised, contrived, and practiced, many
most cruel stratagems and bloody complottes. All which were effected, for
this sole and only purpose, because forsooth her most excellent Majesty of
holy memory, did ever with singular Christian zeal and rare magnanimity,
protect, patronize, and stoutly maintain, Christ's holy gospel and his divine
worship, throughout her Realms and Dominions. These treacheries and most
villainous conspiracies against her royal person, with innumerable indignities
against her Realms and most loving subjects, contrived and put into actual
execution, by the cursed crew of English Jesuits, and Iesuited papists, are
compendiously, distinctly, and pithily, comprised in this present volume. By
reason whereof it comes, that though this present work be published, after
that the imperial Diadem of the Realms before named, came and descended wholly
and lawfully to the high and renowned prince now our undoubted Sovereign lord,
James the first, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, yet must all
the chiefest parts thereof, be referred principally to our late Sovereign
lady Queen Elizabeth. I say (principally) for that the same do in some sort
concern his royal person and regal prerogatives, who this day most happily
reigns over us. For, the cursed and traiterous Jesuits, who for their
manifold treasons against their Sovereign lords, the late king of France and
the king now regnant, are justly banished out of the whole kingdom of France,
even by public decree of Parliament, (as the French papists tell us,) and who
also (as the Secular priests their own brethren write of them,) have
endeavored with tooth and nail to stir up sedition in the kingdom of
Scotland, so to set the imperial Crown thereof upon a Spaniards head, will
not now doubtless surcease, from their inueterate and wonted bloody
treacheries, (seeing their profession is linked inseperably with treason, as
the priests affirm against them,) if our liege lord king James the first,
shall grant them any footing and resting place, within any of his kingdoms,
territories, or dominions. God for his mercy sake, (which has no end,) either
convert them soundly, or confound them utterly, for the peace of his Church,
the safety of our gracious King, and the comfort of all his true hearted
subjects, English, Scottish, and Irish. Amen.

The names of the Secular priests, that subscribed to the supplication sent to
the Pope.
Thomas Bluet. Christopher Bagshaw. Christopher Thules. James Tailor. John
Thules. Edward Caluerley. William Coxe. James Cope. John Collington. George
Potter. John Mush. William Watson. William Clarke. John Clinsh. Oswald Nedeme.
Roger Strickland. Robert Drurie. Francis Munford. Anthony Heburne. Anthony
Champney. John Lingley. John Boswell. Robert Thules. Edward Bennet. Robert
Benson. Cuthbert Trolope. John Bennet. William Mush. Richard Button. Francis
Foster.
Note here gentle Reader, that though these thirty only, (who make a number
sufficient,) did subscribe to the appeal, and to the petition sent to the
Pope, yet were there, and are there many others, as the priests write, which
would willingly have set to their hands, but that they were in fear to deal
against the proud tyrannizing Jesuits. Yea, as the Jesuits write, there are
this day in England 300. priests. God either convert them speedily, or confound
them utterly. Amen.

A memorable caveat to the gentle Reader.
I Have employed my whole industry and best endeavor (gentle Reader) to do
thee good, and to confirm thee in the truth of Christ's gospel, who, if I
shall understand, that my paineful labors for thy sake, shall be accepted in
good part, and be an instrument under God, to direct thee the ready way to
eternal life; shall doubtless attain my desire, and hold my self fully
satisfied for my pains. Now, for the better accomplishment of mine expectation
herein, I have thought very expedient and necessary, to instruct thee in some
general points, without the knowledge whereof, neither can thou fruitfully
read this discourse, nor fully and perfectly understand the same.

Primo principaliter. Peruse the second book, the fifth chapter in the first
section, and note it well: see also the second section and forget it not.
First therefore, the gentle Reader must observe seriously, (though some,
otherwise learned, be of an other opinion,) that the discontented secular
Priests, are in truth and without all doubt, at utter defiance with the
Archpriest and the Jesuits; that they condemn the proceeding and dealing of
the Archpriest; that they utterly abhor and derest, the licentious living,
the unchristian coozening, and the treacherous practices, with infinite other
badde dealing of the Jesuits; as also that they write nothing of or against
the Archpriest or the Jesuits, but that only, which they think themselves
bound in conscience to write, and to make the same known unto the world. I my
self am thus persuaded of them doubtless, and I prove the same many ways.

with their favorites, and rough dealing against such, as would not bow and
bend to their designs at a beck: this my self know to be so, as also that it
has ever been their usual practice every where.



See the second book, fourth chapter, and sixth Paragraph.
but the French papists have in effect and substance made the same known unto
the world; affirming generally, that for their seditious and treacherous
dealing, they are wholly banished out of the kingdom of France; and that by a
public decree of Parliament. Hereof none be ignorant, that shall thoroughly and
duly peruse the Jesuits Catechism, and the Frank discourse, lately set
forth by the Catholic Frenchmen in the french tongue, and since translated
into English, by some of the Secular priests.







Again, the gentle reader must observe seriously, that though I do charge the
seculars with treasonable practices, and dissimulation in state affairs, and
have proved the same out of their own books and writings in rigor of words;
yet will I not deny, but they may have a better meaning toward the state, then
their bare words externally seem to insinuate and purport. For albeit they
profess themselves wholly devoted to the Pope, and do submit their books,
their writings, their opinions, and their own selves also to his censure; yet
do they seem utterly to dislike of many of his proceedings; yet do they flatly
condemn all English popish treasons; yet do they renounce the doctrine of
Sanders, Allen, and Jesuits, in state-matters of wars, and kingdoms: yet do
they write plainly and resolutely, that the Pope has no power to deprive kings
of their royal scepters and regalities, nor to give away their kingdoms to
another. In which opinion likewise, the French papists do concur and iump
with them. For though Cardinal Allen affirmed roundly, that all papists were
bound in conscience to join with the Pope, and his power, in all manner of wars
for religion; and though also the secular priests do highly commend him for
many respects; yet does it not follow of necessity, but the seculars may take
part with our sovereign against the Pope, and fight on her side in defense of
their native country, as they profess; to do in their books. The reason
hereof is this; because the Seculars, though they acknowledge the Popes power
supereminent in spiritualibus, yet do they disclaim from it in temporalibus,
when he takes upon him to dispose kings of their Empires, and to translate
their kingdoms.

Thirdly, the gentle reader must observe seriously, that howsoever the seculars
may be doubted and suspected, to dissemble or equivocate in state-affaires,
which are not articles of popish faith; yet may we safely believe them, and
securely give credit to their words and writings, whenever, and how often
soever, they speak, write, or deliver their opinions, in matters of popish
faith and doctrine. For to make equivocation lawful, even in popish manner of
proceeding; these three things must all concur, or else it may not stand.
First, the matter must not be an article of popish faith. Secondly, it must be
before an incompetent judge. Thirdly, it must be in a matter of moment, as to
redeem ones unjust vexation, and the like.

Fourthly, Quodl. 1. art. 4. p. ^^. 9.
the gentle Reader must observe seriously, that the secular priests acknowledge
themselves bound in conscience, to detect the Jesuits to the uttermost. For
these are their own words; all priests and others, that are not of that
seditious Jesuitical and Spanish faction, are bound in charity, as now the
case stands, to detect them to the uttermost. First, for a caveat to the
ignorant multitude seduced by them, hereafter to beware of them. Secondly, per
legemtalionis, returning their malice, detraction, defamation, calumniation,
obloquie, and what not invented by them against the innocent, upon their own
heads: thus it is written verbatim. Quodl. 1. art. 4. page 9. the Reader must
likewise observe, Quodl. 9. art. 4. p. 304
that the seculars confess treason to be now by Jesuitical proceeding, linked
inseperably with Priesthood. For these are their own words; The execution of
Priesthood and treason are now so linked together by the Jesuits in England;
as they cannot exhort any to the Catholic faith, but Dogmatizando, in so doing
they draw him in effect to rebellion; thus it is written, quodl. 9. art. 4. p.
304. The Reader must further observe, that the Secular priests know where the
Jesuits usually reside, where their walks are, and with whom they do
converse. For these are their own words; which of the Jesuits has hitherto
been in danger of apprehension by our means, and yet we know all, or most of
their residences in England, and their walks? I am sure he will say, that if
we were so lewdly disposed, we would begin with them first. Thus is it
written verbatim, in the reply to Parsons libell. fol. 57. a. in fine. The
reader must yet further observe, that the English penal laws are justly made
against the Jesuits. For these are their own words; until at last they were
entangled by penal laws, which were justly made against them equally, as
against the Jesuits: thus it is written, verbatim, in the Preface to the
Quodlibets, toward the end of the sixth page. And when the gentle reader has
well observed all these four points; first, that the Secular priests are bound
in conscience, to detect the Jesuits to the uttermost; secondly, that treason
is inseparable to Iesuitical practices, and can no way be severed from them;
thirdly, that the Seculars, know the walks of the Jesuits, the persons with
whom they converse, and the houses where they reside; Fourthly, that the
seculars acknowledge and willingly confess, the penal laws of this Realm to
be justly made against the Jesuits; then may he rightly inform himself
therewith, and constantly hold this opinion, as built upon a sure and sound
foundation; viz. that if the secular priests be indeed as they write,
sincerely and loyally affected to her majesty, and fully resolved to spend
their lives and best blood in their bodies, in defense of her sacred person,
and of their native country, against the King of Spain, the Pope, and the
Jesuits; then doubtless they will make known those disloyal persons, who have
co^spired with the Jesuits in their bloody treacheries; the persons who have
and still do, harbor, aid, and releive them; the persons that have devoted
and consecrated themselves, to the king of Spain, the Pope, and the Jesuits,
against their natural sovereign and dear country. Then doubtless they will
disclose to her majesty, the howses where the traytorous Jesuits reside, and
the walks which they frequent. That so her majesty's person may be secured,
and their native country preserved, form the treasonable practices of those
traiterous villains. For if they say, they may not this do, least so they
become the cause of their imprisonment, exile, or death; that cannot serve
there turn, nor be a sufficient excuse for them in this behalf. I prove it.

First, for that they shall no otherwise become such a cause, the^ they have
been the same already, by revealing their tresonable plots and bloody
treacheries. Secondly, because thereby they shall do nothing else then that;
which (as themselves write,) they are bound in conscience to perform. Thirdly,
because in so doing they shall only effect that, which the law of justice
requires at their hands, as themselves do grant. Fourthly, because how
often soever two evils do so concur, that both can not be avoided, but that
of necessity the one must happen; then it is not only charity, but every
man is also bound to prevent the greater evil, with the permission of the
less, For the clearing hereof, I will here recount the priests their own
express words; which though they be long, yet do I with the reader to mark
them attentively, because they are very important, and plainly convince so
much as I intend.

First, you know, (say the Priests,) it is a general received ground by all,
that when the actions of any particular man or men, (be they of what degree
they will be, secular or religious, ecclesiastical or lay,) do tend to any
general or common huit of a community; (as for example, the actions of some
particular servant in a family, to the ruin or overthrow of the family; the
actions of some particular scholars in a college, to the subversion of the
college; or the actions of some particular men in a common weal, to the
destruction of a common weal;) It is then not only lawful to disclose these
particular men, and their particular actions, though otherwise private and
diffamatorie to the said particular parties, (as all such actions of their own
nature must needs be) but also every honest servant, every faithful
servant, every true scholar, and loyal subject, is bound in conscience upon
his duty to his master, faith to his college, loyalty to his Prince, and
love to his country; to disclose such persons, and their facts or intentions,
without regard or respect unto the hurt or damage, that may redound to the
said particular parties so offending. The reason hereof is this, because a
general good is always to be preferred before a particular, and a greater
hurt to be eschewed before the less. As for example, when two evils concur
so, that both cannot be avoided, but that necessarily the one must happen; it
is not only charity, but every man is also bound to prevent the greater
evil, with permission of the less rather then the contrary. These words are
set down at large in this manner, in the reply to Parsons libell. Fol. 28. a.
This is a goodly foundation which the Priests have laid, as which indeed is
grounded upon the very law of nature. And out of this ground may so much
fitly be deduced, as is sufficient to conclude my scope and purpose. If
therefore the secular priests do* in deed mean truly to their Prince and
country, as they pretend in outward show of words; then no doubt they will do
as is already said. But if they refuse thus to deal against the traytorous
crew of Jesuits, for the common good of their native country; then do they
but dissemble and equivocate, when they tell us they will take part with our
Queen and country, against the Pope and king of Spain. Thus much I thought
good to set down for a caveat to the reader. For these observations being well
remembered, the reader shall be more able to judge of the discourse following.
This caveat must be well perused, thoroughly understood, and faithfully
remembered; or else the reader cannot possibly be able, to yield a sound
censure upon the whole work. First therefore read it; then understand it;
that done, give thy judgment, as indifferency and right reason shall
prescribe.

An admonition to the Reader.
Many books are lately written, by the Jesuits and secular Priests; viz the
Relation; the Sparing discovery; the Important considerations; the Hope of
peace the Copies of discourse; the Quodlibets; the Dialogue; the answer to the
Iesuited gentleman; the Letters of A. C; the Apology; the reply to the libell
of Parsons the Jesuit; the answer to the Apology, compiled by Master D. Ely;
M. Colletons defense; the manifestation of folly; the Reply to the Apology;
the Frank discourse; the Jesuits catechism. Which two last books, the
learned Papists of France have lately published. All these books I have
perused very seriously, and drawn the summarie and chief points of them all,
unto certain heads, distinct books, and chapters. So as the indifferent
reader may in a few hours, understand the effect of the whole proceeding,
between the Jesuits and the secular priests. I have like wise compiled an
Alphabeticall table, in which the reader may easily find out at his pleasure,
any principal matter handled in this discourse. To read all the said books,
is a labor both tedious and painful. To buy them, is too chargeable for
many. To understand them, as they are co^fusely published, is a thing not
easy for the greater part. The defect herein, my annotations and compendious
observations will supply. The argument of the book is so necessary for all
true hearted English subjects, that I wish every one to be well acquainted
therewith. The reader may at his pleasure, and that with all facility, turn
to the original in every book by me named, and by the help of my
quotations, find out roundly the very words which I put down. For I always
name both the book and the page, and do ever allege their own words. That
done, I have inserted some special notes and obseruatio^s, as I deemed it
expedient for the good of the reader. Paul planted, and Apollo watered, but the
God of heaven gave the increase. The same God I most humbly desire, so to
water the hearts of the readers with the dew of his heavenly blessing, that
they may thereby learn to detest all Jesuitical treasons, and seditious
Popish factions. Farewell.

The first Book, containing certain Preambles, for the better instruction of
the Reader; as also that the books following may be read more seriously, and
with greater perspicuitie.
Preamble. I.
Of the sincere and true dealing of the Author, throughout this discourse.
THe Jesuits are thought of the simply seduced Papists, to be holy men, to have
familiarity with God, to have received extraordinary graces from heaven, and
to be saints upon earth. So then, if my self should of my self speak any
thing against them, I might perhaps get small or no credit on that behalf. But
when I shall write nothing of them, but even that which their own brethren in
Religion, their fellow laborers, the Secular-priestes, have published to the
world in printed books, and sent the same to the Pope himself in his sacred
palace at Rome; they cannot but believe me, whosoever they be y^ shall read
my writings, howsoever they like or accept of my labors. For I will ever set
down their own words, as themselves have in printed books published them, to
the view of the whole world. That done, I will quote the book and the place,
where the reader shall roundly find the same. Which being truly performed, I
will insert mine own glosses and annotations; so often as it shall seem
expedient for the common good, and for the help of the indifferent reader.

Preamble. II.
Of Jesuitical dealing in state-affaires.
THe old saying was, let the shomaker meddle with his slipper, the smith with
his anuill, and the priests with their prayers; but the Iesuiteslike frank
gamsters, are in at all. He is not worth a rush amongst them, that is not able
to manage a kingdom. Matters of state, The Jesuits are courtiers.
titles of princes, genealogies of kings, right of succession, disposing of
scepters, and such affairs, are their chief studies. Some fear they are more
cunning in Aretine, Lucian, and Machiuell; then in their breuiaries, diurnals,
or Portiuse, assuredly they do not behave them selves, like any other
religious men. He that should tell them of living in a cloister, were as good
go a mileabout, as fall into their fingers. There are few kings courts in
Europe, The Jesuits love nothing worse then a cloister.
where some of their maisterships do not reside, of purpose to give
intelligence to their general at Rome, of all the occurrents in these parts of
the world, which they dispatch to and fro by secret ciphers, having either a
Jesuit, or some one Iesuited, in the most of those kings counsels, who propter
bonum societatis, must without scruple deliver to them, the secrets of their
sovereigns to their uttermost knowledge. These words are set down in the
sparing discovery, The Jesuits have an oar in every man's boat.
page. 7. quodlibet. 3. art. 4. p. 65.

Preamble. III.
Of the inuentor of the Jesuitical profession, now become a most seditious
faction.
THe inuentor of the Jesuitical order was a Spaniard and a soldier, and
therefore, all his disciples of what country soever they be by birth, are in
their hearts and practices altogether Spanish, A notable epithet for the
Jesuits.
breathing little, but cruelties, garboyls, and troubles. They have by their
writings, their sermons, and by all their endeavors, labored to persuade all
catholics, that the king of Spain and our faith are so linked together, as
it is become a point of necessity in the catholic faith, to put all Europe
into his hands; or otherwise, that the catholic religion will utterly perish.
These words are set down in the discovery, page. 7. see quodlibet 2. art.
7. p. 42.

Note here gentle reader, these points with me. First, that the priests do
always understand the papists, when they speak of catholics; which I note
here once for all. Secondly, that the catholic faith, that is to say,
popery, will utterly perish out of Rome, (notwithstanding their Popes
prerogative) unless the Spanish king do patronize the same, and consequently
(a thing to be admired) that the catholic Popish faith testeth only in the
king of Spain. Thirdly, that popish religion consists of troubles,
cruelties, and garboyles.

Preamble. IIII.
Of the excellency of Jesuitical religion, which is the Popish catholic
religion in deed.
THese erroneous, temerarious, and heretical assertions, contrary to the
catholic faith, See the Second book and the 4. chapter in the 6. parag
have been defended with great egernes and vehemency, amongst our Iesuited
breathren in Wisbish. The stews, are in Rome cum approbatione, the Stews are
in Rome as lawful as any citizen; as lawful as any Maiestrate; as lawful as
any order of religion. The Stews are at Rome cum approbatione, as lawful as
the Pope himself. The Stews are very good, and very necessary. That a priest
is made by traditions of the chalice, patten, and host into his hands, they
say, it is but a toy. They hold that the ancient fathers, rem
transubstantiationis ne attigerunt. These words are set down in the
discovery, page 13. quodlibet. 2. art. 4. p. 31.

Note here gentle reader, these important points with me. First, that the Pope
is not a lawful Bishop at Rome, because he is no more lawful then the Stews,
which doubtless are most unlawful, as all the world knows. Secondly, that
the manner of making Popish priests is but a toy. This is a point to be
marked, and never to be forgotten. Thirdly, that popish transubstantiation
(which is the maine point in popish religion,) is not once named of the
ancient fathers; and consequently, popish religion, even by confession of the
Popes Jesuits, is a new ^oe religion, never heard of amongst the ancient
fathers. see the 11. aduiso in the third book, and note it well.

Preamble. V.
Of the distinction of Popish religious orders.
AL religious men, are indifferently called monks or friars, for these names
are not proper to any in particular, but common to all Popish religious orders
in general. The Carthusians, the Dominicans, the Benedictines, the
Franciscans, the Carmelites, the Capuchines y^ Theatines, the Iesuates and the
Jesuits, with ye rest, are all generally called monks or Friars, the Jesuits
being the last vpstart of them all. All these and the rest, generally are
cowled, and distinguished by there very habits; but the Jesuits being newly
hatched and punies to all, must needs ouerrule all, The Jesuits are poor
monks by profession, but lordly fellows in all their conversation.
and be like to none at all. I have spoken more at large of them, both in my
book of motives, and in my book of survey. Which mine assertions in those
books, the secular Priests have now justified and made good, in their late
printed books; so as my sincere dealing therein, is by indirect means made
apparent to the world. The Jesuits have vowed these three things, poverty,
chastity, and obedience, as all other religious papists have done. Of these
Jesuits some be Priests, and some lay-brothers; which lay-brothers make also
the said triple vow, and thereupon they are called religious fathers, though
they be but porters or door keepers; and they will take upon them I warrant
you, and so forth. Of these good fellows you shall here mirabilia, before the
end of this discourse. The other priests in England, though brought by in the
seminaries, do not make this triple bow before named, and therefore are they
called seculars, or secular and not religious priests. The persons that are
called Iesuited, are those men and women, as well priests as lay-persons; which
are foolishly so denoted to the Jesuits, that they will do at a beck,
whatsoever the Jesuits shall appoint to be done; even as if they had made the
selfsame vow. This preamble I have put down, because I have understood, that
many are ignorant of these things. See the second book the fourth chapter,
and seventh Paragraph.

Preamble. VI.
Of the intended conquest of this land.
THe Jesuits having laid this ground, that England is not likely to be won
to the catholic religion by the word, at least not so hastily as behoues for
their advantages, do daily solicit a conquest thereof from Spain; and
withal they labor to persuade us, that it is both vtill and honorable. These
words are put down, in the answer to the Iesuited gentleman; page. 93.

Note here gentle reader, that nothing can please these bloud-thirstie
traitors, the Jesuits; save only the conquest, of this their native country.

Preamble. VII.
Of going to the Church in time of common prayer.
THe wise Jesuits prevented all dangers; they freely permitted Catholics to
go to Church with protestants, and made no sin nor scruple thereof. Yea, the
Jesuits, father Bosgraue, and father Langdale, went to the Church themselves.
These words are in the Dialogue. Page 97. 98.

Note here gentle Reader, that by Jesuitical both grant and practice, the
Papists may freely go to the Church with the Protestants, and thereby not
sin at all. This is a point worthy to be remembered.

Preamble. VIII.
Of eating of flesh in time of Lent.
A Famous Jesuit now in England made offer to a Gentleman, that if he would
become Catholic, he should have license to eat flesh in Lent, and on all
fasting days, among Lollards and Protestants; that by so doing he might live
without suspicion, and escape danger of the laws. Thus it is written in their
Dialogue. Page. 99.

Note here gentle Reader, these important points with me. First, that the
Jesuits are right Machiuels, and make Religion a nose of wax, which they use
as a servile instrument, to bring to pass all their bloody, tragical, and
traitorous attempts. Secondly, that those traiterous persons in high authority
under her Majesty (whereof I have spoken in the third book in the second
reason of the 12. advise) who have entered closely into league with the
Spaniard, do (as it may seem) enjoy these kinds of popish dispensation.
Thirdly, that Jesuits and Seminaries are both most dangerous to the state, and
unfit persons to live in this land: unless they will join in Sacraments and
common prayer, with the rest of her Majesty's faithful subjects. For to no
other symbol or sign, can credit be safely given.

Preamble. IX.
Of winning and redeeming of time.
THe Jesuits have an axiom of winning of redeeming of time; which is in
effect to run with the time, in altering their positions so, as they may best
serve to win their desires. The practice of which ground, is in no one of their
affairs so manifest, as in laboring to set up, now this man, now that man, to
attempt the Crown; furnishing every one with sufficient authority, that of
right it belongs unto him. And true it is, that rather then they fail, they
care not who he is, or of what raze, nor of what nation, that will step in for
the kingdom, so he be a Catholic. These words are set down in the discovery
Page. 64. quodl. 2. art. 8. page 43. quodl. 9. art. 3. page 293.

Note here with me, that the Jesuits are most errant traitors, as who desire
so vehemently the conquest of this land, that they care not who have it, so he
be a papist.

Preamble. X.
Of the fasting and penance, which the Jesuits use.
THe Jesuits have a merry life, in not being tied to rising up to the quire
at midnight, but to lie in bed after the sun, to fair well, to be well clad,
and all this exprofesso; not to fast so much as the Frydaies, to be a liar when
they will, and yet be believed, a detractor, a cheater. a courtier, a soldier,
a kil-prince, See the reply to Parsons libell. Fol. 8. b.
and what not. And all without control, nay with allowance and commendation.
Brief, it is a merry life for a Jesuit, to trowle up and down the country
from house to house, from good cheer to good cheer, in a gallant coach,
accompanied with fair gentlewomen, attended with neat serving men, his chamber
to be decked and perfumed against his coming: yea, a gentlewoman to pluck of
his boots, by his iniunction forsooth, for mortification sake. Oh monstrous
irreligion, so to forget good manners, and so to make the lay religious, and
themselves lay. These words are let down, in the answer to the Iesuited
gentleman. Page. 93. 94. See the second book, and third Chapter.

Now I beseech thee gentle reader, are not those men and women void of all
sense and reason, that do so admire these Jesuits, and so depend upon them,
that rather then they do not all their dissignements, they will be at defiance
with their sovereign, and native country? Let wise men judge, and give their
indifferent censure herein. Not I, but their fellow-laborers the Secular
priests, who with tooth and nail labor to defend the Pope and popish
religion, do bitterly exclaim against them as you see. I put down their own
words, I add nothing, I substract nothing, alter nothing. Let the reader
therefore remember well what I write, and ponder deeply the whole discourse.

Preamble. XI.
Of the dependence of the Jesuits, and Iesuited persons, upon the foul fiend
the devil.
BY Parsons platformes, Secular priests must depend upon Blackwell, and
Blackwell upon Garnet, and Garnet upon Parsons, and Parsons the priests bastard
upon the Devil: and therefore do the Secular priests pray thus; when they say
the Letanie; a machinationibus Parsoni, libera not domine. These words are set
down in the Discovery. Page 70. quodl. 5. art. 8. page 151. See the second
book and fourth Chapter.

Note here gentle reader, that to depend upon the Jesuits, is to depend upon
the devil; and consequently, that to follow the Jesuits and their bloody,
tragical, and traitorous designments, is nothing else indeed, but to forsake
God; to abandon his true fear and worship; to be traitors to your prince; to
be enemies to your native country; and to make shipwreck of your own souls.
I say not so. If I should have said so, none would have believed me. But the
Seminary priests, the Popes own darlings say so, and therefore it must needs
be so* the truth cannot but prevail.

Preamble. XII.
Of the Cardinalship of the traitorous Jesuit Robert Parsons.
THe Jesuit Hole, and Doctor Worthington, drew aformal letter supplicatiue,
in the names of all the English soldiers, laborers, artizans, pensioners,
as well men as women, (yea very serving maids and laundresses were not omi^ted)
the same to be presented to the king of Spain, most humbly beseeching his
Majesty, in regard of his great affection and care of England, and the
afflicted English; that he would deal earnestly with the Pope, to prefer the
worthy Father and Prelate, Father Parsons, to the dignity of a Cardinal;
affirming it to be the only way, to bind and unite the English to his
Majesty. These words are set down in the discovery. Page. 61. quodlib. 4.
art. 6. page 121.

Note here gentle Reader, that this arrogant Jesuit has quite forgotten his
vow of poverty and obedience, and must needs be a Cardinal. For we may be
assured, that this motion was never made to the King without his knowledge.
Behold here the final end, scope, and intendment, of all his travel, lying,
cogging, slaundering; of all his treasons, cruel tragedies, and most bloody
designements. He must forsooth be a Cardinal; then the Popes Legate in
England; and so rule the king and all. God save my Lord Cardinal, bastard
Cowbucke of Stockgersee, for so is his right name, as shall be seen hereafter.
Yea, he is termed King Cardinal. quodl. 5. art. 8. he is said to have a vile,
bloody, and bastardly mind, quodl. 5. art. 8. and to be the bastardly vicar
of hell. quodl. 5. art. 9. page 157.

Preamble. XIII.
Of the pomp and pride of our traitorous Jesuits.
THe Jesuit Heywood kept many men, horses, and coaches, as the Jesuit Garnet
does at this present. By means whereof, the usual contributions to the
Secular priests, were and are greatly diminished. These words are set down in
the Discovery. Page. 48.

Note here gentle Reader, that by this and many other the like proceedings, it
appears eudiently, that the Jesuits seek for nothing else, but honor,
preserment, case, delicate fair, sumptuous apparel, horses, coaches, and
their own sensual pleasures. To which may be added, that both they and the
Seminaries, have money and worldly wealth at their pleasures; unless the four
score and ten Seculars, which of late are bent against the Jesuits, be lately
by that means, bereaved of their former golden banks. But questionless their
having as yet, is far above their dese^ts. See the tenth Preamble.

Preamble. XIIII.
Of the dissension amongst the Jesuits.
THe Jesuit Heywood, was against the Jesuit Parsons; neither would Parsons be
under Heywood, nor Heywood under Parsons. Parsons alleged, that their general
had appointed him to be the provincial all over all the Jesuit, in England,
and consequently over Heywood. But Heywood replied, that his mission was
immediately from the Pope, and that he thereby was exempted from all submission
to him. This quarrel gr^w to be hot, and had many partakers on either side. In
the end the said Heywood loathing and abhorring many enormities amongst the
Jesuits wrote sundry letters to the Pope, instantly desiring his h^lin^s,
that the Jesuits might be reformed; affirming that otherwise he should see
their ruin (he feared,) in his own dates. These words are to be found in the
discovery. Pag^. 48. 46.

Behold here gentle Reader, the sweet unity between these Jesuits; mark
the arrogancy of them both; call to mind their vows of pou^rty and
obedience; forget not, See the Apology. Page. 22.
how the priests were divided, touching this Jesuitical quarrel: and putting
all together, thou shall easily perceive, and behold as in a glass of
Crystal; that God who is the author of peace, and not of dissension, 1. Cor.
14. verse. 33. did never send them into this land; but is highly displeased,
with their disloyal and tre^cherous dealing. God grant, that all simply
seduced papists, may in due time consider the same.

Preamble. XV.
Of the Duke of Medina.
IT is known right well, both from the Duke of Medina his own mouth, and by
other certain intelligence, that all the Catholics in England, as well as
others, and perhaps rather were designed to ye slaughter. For the said duke
being told, that there were (...) Catholics in England, made answer, that he
cared not. I will make (quoth he,) the best Protestants in England, as good
Catholics as they, if I have them once under my sword. I respect neither the
one nor the other, I mean to make room there for my m^ster. This he has
spoken diverse times, and the Jesuits themselves have so reported. yea, the
Jesuit Southwell did confess no less at (...), in the hearing of diverse
priests their prisoners. These words are set down, quodl. 6. art. 10. page
177. and the same is affirmed, in the important considerations. Page 25 verse.
18. as also in the reply to Parsons libell. sol. 65. a. verse. 24. fol. 29. a.

Note here gentle Reader, this important point with me. Viz. That if the
Spaniards should make a conquest of this land, as the Papists do disloyally
expect, whose expectation God of his mercy has hitherto confounded, and will
I trust still confound the same; then doubtless, they would make a most
tragical and bloody massacre of all promiscue, neither respecting one nor
other: for their intendment is, to advance and entich themselves; to have a
kingdom, not to reform religion. No, no, neither they, nor yet the Jesuits,
have any such meaning.

Preamble. XVI.
Of the title of Isabella the Spanish Lady.
THe Jesuit Parsons caused the students in Spain to subscribe to the Lady
Infantaes title to the Crown of England, and to what else he would having
gotten their names to three several blanks. These words are set down in the
hope of peace. Page. 22. See the next Preamble, and note it well.

Note here gentle Reader, that every allegation one after another, iumpeth
upon this settled and constant position; Viz. that the scope and whole
intendment of the Jesuits, is flat auowed rebellion, and does nothing at all
concern religion. See the fourth Chapter, in the sixth Paragraph.

Preamble. XVII.
Of most notorious and intolerable treason, intended against her Majesty's
sacred person, and the royal Crown of England.
THe Jesuits are so desirous to set the Diadem of England, O tray^e^^^s
(...), and cursed brood (...) the devil.
upon the head of the princess Isabella the Insanta of Spain, that they have
set forth a book to this purpose, and in that book they give her such an
interest, as they make the kings of this land for many years to have been
usurpers: they have also procured men by indirect means, to subscribe to this
Ladies sovereignty over us. Yea, offers have been made to one of the secular
priests, that if he could have eaten gold, and would but have given his
countenance and assistance that way, he should have had it. In brief, some of
the Jesuits have conspired among themselves, and with sundry other most
wicked persons at diverse times, to have laid violent hands upon the queen, and
to have bereued her of her life. It cannot be denied, but that they have done
so; the circumstances have showed it; the parties themselves with whom they
practiced, have confessed it; yea, sundry Catholics beyond the seas do very
well know it, and have charged in their writings some of them with it. These
words are set down in the Discovery. Page. 9. see the 16. Preamble.

Note here gentle reader, these important points with me. First, that the
Jesuits labor with tooth and nail, with gold and money, with threats and
fair promises, to cause others both domestical and foreign to join with
them, in setting the royal diadem of England, upon the Spanish Infantaes head.
Secondly, that they affirm in a most traytorous, and execrable book published
for that end, that the kings of England have been usurpers, and not lawful
princes, for many years together. Where I must needs put them in mind of
this one thing, that their Cardinal Bellarmine tells them with their Popes
good liking; that if the Popes had sometimes been usurpers, yet prescription
would justify the Popes title in these days. So then by their own doctrine,
if their supposall were granted, (Which they disloyally avouch, like arrant
traitors as their fellow priests rightly term them,) yet were prescription
sufficient in that behalf. Thirdly, that they have offered huge masses of gold
and money, so to allure men domestical or foreign, to the cruel murder and
bloody massacre of our gracious sovereign, most noble Queen Elizabeth. If
papists themselves had not thus written, my self could hardly have believed
it.

Preamble. XVIII.
Of Obedience which must be given to the Pope, against all kings, Princes, and
monarchs of the world.
IN all wars which may happen for religion, every Catholic man is bound in
conscience, to employ his person and forces by the Popes direction; viz. how
far, when, and where, either at home or abroad, he may and must break with
his temporal sovereign. This doctrine was laid down for a ground, in
justifying Sir William Stanleyes disloyal treachery, against his natural and
anointed Sovereign, in the year, 1587. These words are set down in the
important considerations, Page. 23. 24. and they are granted of the Jesuits,
Apol. 172. See the fourth book and fifth chapter, and note the words.

Note here gentle Reader, these important points with me. First, that all
Kings, Queens, and Monarchs of the Christian world, are by this popish Maxim
and Jesuitical ground, brought into the bondage and slavery of the Bishop of
Rome, See the compleme^t of the third book, and note it well.
and must be his slaves and underlings to do what pleases him. Secondly, that
the Secular priests (who unwittingly have delivered this doctrine against
themselves,) are guilty of the same treachery with the Jesuits, though not
perhaps in the same degree. For seeing the seculars do profess their
obedience to the Pope in every thing, and do withal submit both themselves
and all their writings to his holy censure, (as is to be seen at large in this
discourse;) they must needs approve and like well of this most traitorous
doctrine, because the Pope likes and approoueth the same. Thirdly, that all
the Papist, in England which join with the Jesuits, who are very many,) do
obstin^tely embrace this Jesuitical doctrine, and so are guilty of high
treason.

Preamble. XIX.
Of the King of Spain his purpose, and intent against England.
THat the new king regnant in Spain plotteth by Jesuitical faction, and
resolves to proceed where his father left against England, it is most apparent
by the present action in Ireland; as also by sundry of father Parsons
subjects, sent hither to be agents on the Spanish behalf, for that purpose.
All which do convince the Jesuitical hispanized faction, of falshoode,
hypocrisy, sedition, and treason; and that it is not religion, which the king
present cares for, more then his father did before him; but makes that only
a pretense, to seduce all Catholics and to draw them to rebellion, hoping
thereby to have their speedier aid and assistance, making them and you all
(dear Catholics,) to cut one another throat. These words are set down, in
the preface to the important considerations; in the fourth leaf thereof.

Note here gentle Reader, that the Jesuits bend all their thoughts, words,
and actions, to stir up rebellion and bloody treachery every where: as also
that the king of Spain now regnant, is as ready as was his father before him,
to effect both in Ireland and in England all bloody practices, which the high
counsel of Jesuitical reformation, shall design and appoint to be done.

Preamble. XX.
Of the Jesuitical hotch-potch Religion.
IT is a plain testimony of no religion in the Jesuits, but flat Atheism,
making religious piety, but only amutter of mere policy, by sending forth
trumpetters to sound out their and Blackwels virtues. quodl. 6. art. 4. page
168. The Jesuits have made religion, but an art of such as live by their wits,
and a very hotch-potch of em^^m g^^herum quodlibet. 2. art. 8. page 42. The
Jesuits are to be marked out for the most malicious, traitorous, and
irreligious calumniators that ever lived on earth, unworthy that ever the
earth should hear them; and it is an intolerable indignity to the whole
Church of GOD, that ever such wicked members should live unpunished in her, as
they do. Quodlibet. 4. art 2. page. 99.

Note here gentle Reader, these important points with me. First, that these
good fellows, who pretend to be sent of God from Heaven, to reform the
English Church and State, are men of no religion, but men that make religion a
matter of mere policy. Secondly, that they are so wicked, so irreligious, and
so traiterous, as the like were never heard of. Thirdly, that it is a great
shame for the whole Church of God, that such badde fellows do live
unpunished. These things well considered, he that will think them or the
Seculars to be Gods ambassadors, may justly be deemed as wise, as he that
has no wit at all. For God is so highly offended, with their traiterous
dealings and damnable practices; that he has enforced themselves, to discover
their own bad proceedings against themselves; that so all the world may know
their abominations, and detest them with all their traitorous and cursed
machinations.

The second Book, containing the treacheries and tyranny of the Pope and his
Jesuitical faction, breathed out against the sacred Majesty of Gods anointed.
CHAP. I.
Of the swarms of Jesuits, and Seminaries, or Secular priests, in this Realm
of England.
THe number of Jesuits, and secular priests in England, is exceeding great, as
by this discourse will be made apparent; and the said cursed brood, 90. priest
do hold against the Jesuits. Quod l. 2. art. 6. pa. 39. in fine. Ergo, their
number is great in England. The Jesuits affirm in their apology, Page. 118.
That 300. seminar^e priests are on their side. Irgo the number of all is very
great.
is increased every day. Three hundred seminary priests besides the Jesuits,
have been sent from the Pope into England. And because many do not understand
fully, the difference between Jesuits, Seminaries, and Secular priests: it
shall not be amiss, briefly to instruct them in that behalf. Every Jesuit,
even he that is but a laybrother, makes a solemn vow of three special and
important points, whereof many of them, (I dare not say the greater part,)
seem not truly to keep any one. And I do not barely say it, but the
Seminarists shall contest the same with me. The three essential points of
Jesuitical profession, are these in express terms; viz. poverty, chastity,
and obedience. Which triple vow is common to the Jesuits, with all their
popish sects. And for this triple vow it is, that they are called religious.
But how truly they enjoy and deserve that name; let the indifferent reader
judge, when he shall have perused this discourse. For albeit religious
profession, be a separating of men from the actions of the world, yet do they
deal altogether with the world.

The Secular priests, are all manner of priests which make not the said triple
vow; viz. All priests, which are not (...) or friars. For our lordly Jesuits,
are by profession and solemn vow, poor munkes and lowly friars. They are
called secular for distinction sake, and because they (...) have propriety in
secular prossessions of the world; (...) which the others are by vow abandoned,
but will by (...) now and then be intermedling a little therewithal. shall.
(...). I say, for distinction sake, be^^^^^ the word (secular) both fitly
distinguish them, from the Dominicans, Carthusians, Benedictines, Carmelites,
Jesuits, and the rest. All which are called religious, because they make a
more strict profession of religion, then other Christians do; howsoever they
keep the same.

The seminary priests are mere secular, ^ee the ^^d Preamble of the first
book.
as well as they that never were out of this land. They are called seminaries,
because they study and are maintained in the Colleges or seminaries; and some
of them, never are made priests at all. I say (some,) because very few are in
that predicament.

CHAP. II.
Of the unspeakable dissension, between the Jesuits and Secular priests.
THe malice of the new vpstart Jesuits, is exceeding great, and the with
plainly; that they are badde fell^^^s, licent^^^s, proud, hautie, cruel,
covetous, ambitious, (...)
(...) deceitful irreligious; nothing less then that, which they would seem
and profess to be. All this to be tree, shall evidently appear out of
printed books, (...) even by the Jesuits themselves and the secular priests,
to the judgment of all the world: yea, the Pope himself in his sacred
Palla^^, (...). For of Weston the Jesuit th^s write the priests; a man as
impatient, as some of his fellows, and of as hautie a spirit as any man can
be. It was wonderful to consider, what humblenes and simplicity he would
pretend (in the time of his prouincialship.) His sighs and zeal seemed to be
extraordinary as though the perteetion of true mortification, had been the
only thing he aimed at. Marry, with all his hypocrisy he deceived none, but
such as did not look narrowly into his proceedings. A righter Pharisee, cannot
easily be found. In the most of his humility, nothing did trouble him more;
then that Master Bagshaw being a Doctor of Divinity, Lo, the Jesuits are
flat hipocrites.
should have place before him at the table. insomuch as the better to content
him, we were driven to place him at the tables end with him. Thus write the
secular priests, in their relation. Page. 5.

Paragraph. I.
Of the outcries of the Jesuits, against the secular priests.
LIster the Jesuit has written a book, The Jesuits are charged with theft.
chap. 3.
in which he charge all the priests that appealed to the Pope, to be flat
schismatikes. To which book, Blackwell the Archpriest, and Garnet the
provincial in England, did both subscribe. In this book, the Jesuits charge
the priests to have fallen from the Church, and the spouse of Christ; to have
trodden under their feet, their obedience due to the Pope; to have lost their
faculties and authority; to be irregular; to have incurred the sentence of
excommunication; to be in all men's mouths, as infamous persons. To be as
publicans and sinners. and to be nothing better, thou are soothsayers and
idolaters. These words are set down in their relation. Page. 60.

The Archpriest by Jesuitical appointment affirmed audaciouslie, that he had
received a resolution from the mother City (of Rome,) that the refusers of his
authority were schismatikes, Behold here (...) me^ to guide men's souls.
and that he would not give absolution to any who should make no conscience
thereof; and gave direction that they should make account thereof, and make
satisfaction, before they received absolution. He denied to give any faculties
to Master Benson, unless he would renounce the schismatic conuenticle (of
the secular priests,) He declared also, that M. Moore had written in prejudice
of the faith, when he wrote in the behalf of the priests, concerning the
matter of schism; whereupon, neither his ordinary ghostly father would
administer the sacraments to him, nor his ghostly children receive any of him,
or be present when he said mass. These words are set down in the hope of
peace. Page. 31.

Our Archpriest chafeth, the provincial his good master clappes him on the
back, and eggs him forward; the rest of the Jesuits what their tongues, Lo,
the Jesuits are malicious slandere 15.
and prepare their pens to speak and write, what they can falsely devise to
make us odious; so as presently we are become a byword in their mouths, and
are nothing with them, but rebels. Apostates, and what they list to report of
us. These word^ are set down in the relation. Page. 60.

The Jesuits caused a libell to be cast out against doctor. Lewis a secular
priest, and for that they loved the man, in the course of their hot charity,
they made this devout prayer for him; vel Turca, velmors, vel demon, even
eripiat a nobis. Either the Turk, A godly Ies^^^^call prayer.
or death, or the devil, take him away from us. And indeed not long after he
died; we leave it to Gods judgment, whether they were the causers of it or
not. Thus write the priests in their discovery. Page. 32. quodl. 4. art. 2.
page 97.

The Jesuits triumphed openly, upon the death of an other English priest,
Cardinal Allen by name, The Iesu^^^ seem to be most worked and hypocritical
men. Yet, they a^^ ac^^ted of that theft chap. 3.
and amongst other their calumniations against him, they said that God had
taken him away in good time; for if he had l^^ed longer, he would have
disgraced himself, and lost the credit which he had got. These men have the
best fortune in the world; for no man, if once they begin to hate him, does
live any long time after it. These words are set down in the discovery. Page.
34.

In the same place the priests write, that the said Cardinal was thought to be
poisoned, by Jesuitical means and procurement.

Paragraph. II.
Of the outcries, which the Secular priests make against the Jesuits.
THe priests exclaim against the Jesuits, for their Machiuilian practices and
diabolical plots, in their concurrence, incitements, and execrable
persuasions, which they used and practiced with the Spaniards, and with other
foreign and domestical powers; for the invasion, conquest, and utter
subucrsion of most noble England, of her sacred Majesty, and of all her loyal
and faithful subjects.

This is true Catholic religion, in this case, Mark well this lesson.
and true English nature and valor, true faith, and true charity; and what
the Jesuits persuade us toward a conquest of our dear country, upon pretense
of never so much piety, were abominable disloyalty in us to our prince.
These words are set down, in the answer to the Iesuited gentleman. Page. 70.

The Jesuits affect rule over the secular clergy, so to bring arms and
conquest into the Church, The Jesuits are disloyal wretches. They are charged
with theft. chap. 3.
contrary to all scriptures; and to that end, they do manage matters of state
more machiuilianly, then Machiuell himself; as appears by their erection of
the Archpriest, and all his carriages according to them and it. These words
are set down, in the answer to the Iesuited gentleman. Page. 79.

We all of the Secular Clergy vna voce, do utterly disclayme and renounce
from our hearts, Lo, the Jesuits are seditious and arrant traitors.
both Archpriest and Jesuits, as arrant traitors unto their prince and
country, whom to death we will never obey; no, if the Popes holiness should
charge us to obey in this sense, to advance an enemy to the English Crown, we
would never yield to it; as by no law of nature, of nations, or of man, to be
compelled thereunto. These words with many more to the like effect, are put
down in the Preface, to the important considerations. Fol. 9. page. 2.

Note here gentle Reader, that this sweet harmony, between the Pope, the
Jesuits, and the Secular priests, were able to make an horse to break his
halter. And doubtless, the Pope, yea, many Popes successively, have thus
commanded them, as shall appear in the due place of this discourse.

The Jesuits hold this position for a constant doctrine, that the people may
depose their princes, and choose others at their pleasures; have they any or no
right to the Crown, that is not material, so it be done ad Deum; that is (by
our interpretation,) as the Jesuits shall appoint it. Here we would have you,
to note an other rule of our english Jesuits, which must concur with that of
ordine ad De^m. and it is this, Oh bloody, (...) Jesuit.
that all things must be wrought and framed, as the times and occasions
require. For example, if the king of Spain or the Infanta, can by no other
practice obtain the Crown of England, then in that case, the people are to
have a right to do what they list, so they will choose one of them for their
sovereign. These express words are set down by the priests, in their sparing
Discovery. Page. 14. and 15. quodl. 3. art. 4. page 68.

Note here gentle reader, that the Jesuits and their complicies, are not
imprisoned, or put to death for religion, as they would leave the world to
think; but for ^^at treason and purposely intended rebellion. For so much
their own pens, (by Gods providence,) do here testify, as you see. And
consequently, politic, godly, and very necessary, are the (...) in that case
provided.

While the invasion was talked of, and in preparation in Spain, Richard Hesket
was set on by the Jesuits 1592. or there abouts, with father Parsons consent
and knowledge, to have stirred up the Earl of Darbie to rebellion against her
highness. Not long after, father Holt the Jesuit and others with him,
persuaded an Irish man one Patri^cke Collen (as he himself confessed,) to
attempt the laying of his violent and villainous hands upon her Majesty.
Shortly after, 1593. that notable stratag^me was plotted, for Doctor Lopez the
Queens physician, to have poisoned her. This wicked designement being thus
prevented, Holt, and other Jesuits are traitors, even by the confession of se
minarie priests.
by Gods providence, the said traitorous Jesuit Holt and others, did allure
and animate one York and Williams, to have accomplished that with their
bloody hands, that the other purposed to have done with his poison; we mean
her Majesty's destruction. Heereunto we may add, the late villainous attempt,
1599. of Edward Squire, animated and drawn thereunto, as he confessed, by
Walpole that pernicious Jesuit. These words are set down, in the important
considerations; Page. 33 see chap. 4. paragraph. 6. of Walpoole the Jesuit.

The Jesuits labored in France, (even the french Jesuits themselves,) to
have lifted the Spaniard into the throne of that kingdom, The Jesuits are
wholly bent, to traitorous practices every where.
with the consequent overthrow of their own native country. All Christendom
to their perpetual shame, ring loudly of it. They made great stir in Spain,
to persuade the king to invade England, yielding to him many reasons, why he
was bound to undertake that enterprise, and assuring him of great assistance,
if once his forces were landed. Hereunto may be added, how many they have
entitled to the Crown of England, as the Duke of Parma the Earl of Darbie,
and others, exciting some of them by force of arms to assail her Majesty,
and buzzing into their ears, how easily the scepter might be wrung out of her
hands, and they obtain it. But most pertinent to the purpose, is that their
plotting and compassing, how to set the Diadem of this Realm, upon the head
of the princess Isabella the Infanta of Spain. To this purpose they have
written a book, wherein they gave her such an interest, as they make the kings
of this land for many years to have been usurpers. These words are to be read
in their discovery. Page. 8. quodl. 9. art. 2. page 288.

The Jesuits take pleasure to scatter rumors, The Jesuits are commonly
judged, to be great liar.
and to suggest certain novelties in the ears of Catholics; yea, to forge
and invent things that are not. insomuch as they are commonly held now a days
great liars, and it is come to pass, that though they swear men will not
believe them. These words are set down in the Relation. Page. 73. quodlibet.
2. art. 6. page 39.

CHAP. III.
Of the excessive expenses, and great gallantrie of the Jesuits.
THe Jesuits endeavor by all means possible, that both those alms which are
given for the relief of them that are in prison, Money taken for dispensations.
or any other poor afflicted whatsoever; as also whatsoever is paid in cases
of dispensation, may come to their hands. Now what is done with this money, we
know not. Prisons and Colleges are deprived of the great sums; the banished
have them not; the priests see them not; but there are hired here with
seditious persons; deuisers of fables, The priests are saints, in their own
judgment.
slaunderers of their brethren, and scorners of the saints are herewith
enriched; these and such as these, receive large stipends of their labors. And
yet so great a mass of moneys cannot be consumed, but that the fathers bestow
much upon themselves. For they go in deed in great gallantrie; no Jesuit
goes to visit any one, or trauelleth from one place to another, Oh brave
religious friars? where is the poverty ye profess?
but he is richly apparrelled, and is attended on with a great train of
servants, as if he were a Baron, or an Earl. They wrangle, and reprove the
priests garments, and spendings; whereas the expenses of one Jesuit* were able
to maintain twenty priests richly. Neither by this means also, could so
great a quantity of alms be wasted, but that (as the report goes,) much
treasure is conveyed beyond the seas, The Jesuits are very honest men, and
faithful collectors.
but to what purpose, we know not, unless it be bestowed upon their body,
their corporation, or society. These words are to be found in the Relation,
Page. 70. See the tenth Preamble, and note it well.

The Jesuits became our collectors, or rather not ours, but their own; to
whom for their accounts, the false Steward in the gospel may give place. One
Jesuit has taken at times above 500 pound, that was given to the imprisoned
priests then at W^^^^, 500. li.
and employed the same at his own pleasure. Percie the Jesuit escaping from
Wisbish, took fraudulently from benefactors abroad, Who will not hang their
souls upon such religious fathers? 2200. li. Page. 19. 20
57. pound, 17. shillings, and the year after stole 27. pound of the common
money, by the consent of the other his fellow Jesuits. They have so fleeced
their favorers, as over and above their own expenses, (which are exceeding
great,) they have been able to send out long since, 2200. pound toward the
Low countries. To scrape together so much money, they have many sleights,
besides their apparent consenages, frauds, and thefts before mentioned. Thus
they write in their discovery. Page. 19.

First, My self (...) able to testify this to be true.
I will but refer you unto all the priests and Catholics that lived in
England in father Haywoods time of liberty, and knew him and his manners, and
fashions well, and if they do not assure you, that his port and carriage was
more Baronlike, then priestlike, all the world will condemn them for most
partial, and impudent deniers of the truth. Was he not wont to ride up and
down the country in his coach? had he not both servants and priests
attendants in great numbers? was not his pomp such as the places where he came
seemed petie-courts, by his presence, train, and followers? again, for
present I refer you to father Garnets pomp and expenses, of which I have
heard some honest priests (who have been much with him,) report, that he
cannot spend less then 500. pound by the year. The mighty and extraordinary
excess of master John Gerard, has been such and so notorious, that I suppose
few priests (besides our cath.) to be ignorant thereof. His apparel at one
time has been valued at an higher rate, then I will for shame speak of. His
horses were many, and of no small price. My self have known him to have two
geldings in a gentleman's stable, at 30. pound a gelding, besides others
elsewhere, and horses of good use. During his imprisonment in the Clinke, he
kept a private table continually, with great store of dainties, and much resort
daily. Besides, he paid his ordinary commons at the common table, and chamber
rent. Let them which have lived in the Clinke, but judge what this would come
unto in the year. But that you may not think this to have been the uttermost
of his excess, you shall understand, that he ordinarily kept his geldings in
the town, O faithful (...) Imprisonment of Jesuits, is (...) become great
liberty: This year would be looked into.
and his man, which I suppose to be some round charge unto him. He also so
wrought the matter, that he rode into the country at his pleasure, and
returned. Which I think you will suppose cost his purse well, in bribes to
such as were his keepers, if to no other. He also maintained two houses in the
town, with servants in them, and not this without great expenses I ween. Sure
I am, that such as lived with him in the Clinke, were of opinion, that he could
not maintain all this I have spoken of, under 400. or 500. pounds by the
year. I may not omit master Oldcorm, though but a petty Jesuit in this
kind. I know, that his apparel is seldom less worth, then 30. or 40.
pound. He is always extraordinarily well provided for horses, and those of the
best. An honest gentleman, and one whom I think you will judge to be no liar,
(besides that he is not evil affected toward the Jesuits,) told me, that he
had eight good geldings at one time. Such as have heretofore been secular
priests, and were wont to go on foot sometimes, to visit poor people
willingly, becoming afterward Jesuits, have been so a cockhorse, that it
must be thought no small favor to be worthy of their presence, and that not
without their attendants, and other ceremonies. Witness this master Banks,
master Blunt, and others now Jesuits. This long story of the Jesuits, their
expenses, and gallantrie, is set down in the reply to Parsons libell. Fol.
14. and fol. 15.

Neither was it ever yet my hap to be made a rich man's executor, whereby to
better my estate that way, and to brave it in girdle and hangers of thirty
pound price, Oh poor begging Friar?
as a Jesuit has done, neither bear I so Jesuitical a conscience. These
words are put down, in the third letter of A. C. P. 65. 5.

Nothing is more familiar to the Jesuits, by their bulls and constitutions: and
then beggary, yet never had any men better skill to scrape up coin, that they
might live at their ease. In this occupation they played more tricks of
legerdemaine, then master Peter Patelin, or Frances de Villon, or Panurge de
Rabelais. For all that these three worshipful Doctors did, was but in matters
of trifles. But to do as our reverend fathers, the Jesuits do: is to fish for
Whales, not for Goodgins: for which purpose they have first the instructing of
youth, which is their first hook: Viz. The allurements they use to them, their
auriculer confessions, which they know how to employ to the benefit of their
house: the visiting of the sick, the waiting upon them to the very last gasp,
that they may never be out of sight; the extraordinary absolutions, which they
say they can give them, wherewith they feed their humor, that they may draw
some rich legacy from them: the devises of their simple vow, and a thousand
other hypocritical shifts, which they call charity, but with this condition,
that their charity begin at themselves: because the predicament ad aliquid, is
not an accident to them, but wholly the substance of their sect. So that one may
justly call them, not the order of the Jesuits, but the ordure of the
Jesuits. For although they make show, not to meddle with retayling, yet they
sell by whole sale, the administration of the holy Sacrament, dearer then
Giezie Elizaeus man, would have sold the spiritual gifts of Naaman. At once,
so it is, that within these threescore years, they have raked together more
treasure by this their sophistical beggerie, then all the Monasteries of
France, have done two or three hundred years. These words are set down in
the Jesuits Catchisme, in the second book, and fourteen chapter. But you
perhaps will demand, how such sums should come to their hands? I answer,
that it is well known, that the Jesuits have had disposition of the common
purse for many years, and the receipts of almost all legacies in pios vsus,
yearly alms, extraordinary gifts, besides restitutions de bonis meritis,
much for dispensations in diverse cases, and for Alienations, Aduowsons, and
such like. All which receipts rise to no small sum. There has fallen by way of
legacies within these few years of my knowledge, (besides what other men can
say,) 2000. pound, The Jesuits cannot be but rich, though they profess
poverty.
some affirm 3000. pound, from one of worth, 500. pounds, from another private
gentleman: 800. pound from another, and some 100. pound, yearly in lands and
rents. Master John Gerard for his part, got by one gentleman 200. pound at one
time, and 700. pound at another time, besides the disposition of 100. pound by
the year. The said Jesuit had in another place by a priests procurement who
told me of it, 160. pound, of another he received 500. pound in a matter of
restitution, certa pro incertis, the party having compounded before the advice
of another priest, for 300. pound, which he should have given to the prisoners
of Wisbish. But this young father Jesuit coming to the party, hoysed the
sum unto 500. pound, and took it unto himself. These words are set down,
in the reply to Parsons libell. Fol. 24.

Note here gentle Reader for Christ's sake, what impostors, and coozners these
Jesuits be, whom for all that, so many silly and simple souls, do repute
for saints and men of God. First, you see, that they will sell their holy so
supposed sacraments for money, and that at a dearer rate, then Giezie Elizaus
man would have sold the spiritual gifts to Naaman. Secondly, that by their
sophistical and deceitful beggerie, they daily scrape gold and money into
their hands. Thirdly, that too proudly, and too too sumptuously, (which is
abominable in Gods sight, and all good men's,) they bestow 30. pound upon one
gelding, (of which sort they have many at once,) and 30. pound upon one girdle
and hangers. Fourthly, that so soon as they become Jesuits, (that is to say,
poor begging friars,) they are upon their cockhorse, and think their betters
to be enworthie of their presence. Fifthly, that they feed the humor of the
sick, with fair promises of extraordinary absolations, so to draw some rich
legacies from them. Sixthly, that they apply their simple vow and auriculer
confession, to enrich themselves, and to fill their cofers. Seventhly, that
they receive great sums of money for dispensations. Eighthly, that they cause
men to make restitution for goods unjustly gotten, and convert the money to
their own proper uses. Wherefore I must needs conclude, that they are as blind
as beetles, that do not see there irrelegious dealing, but will yield their
souls to their unchristian guiding.

Among many other means, which the holy Jesuits have to enrich themselves,
this is not the least, to wit, The Jesuits are good hunters, in seeking gold
and money. See book third, aduiso. 9.
the drawing of men into their holy exercise. A young gentleman not long since,
entering into this exercise under a young Jesuit here in England, was found by
his meditations to have lands yet unsold, worth one hundredth marks a year,
which hindered his journey to heaven. Whereupon he offering the same to the said
young Jesuit, the good father allowing the offer, said, that if he should
receive the land her majesty would take it from him, but (quoth he) sell it,
and then I am capable of the money. By which Ghostly counsel, the Gentleman
set his land to sale, and was offered 900. pound for it; but the holy father
insisting upon a 1000. pound, the Gentleman died before a chap-man could be
gotten, and so the good father lost all. I omit, how many poor young men,
falling into these good Fathers hands to be exercised, have fallen into sundry
inconveniences, and grown to be broken-brayned ever after. these words are set
down in the discovery, See more therefore in the third book, and 9. aduiso.
page 27. quodlibet. 5. art. 10. page 99. See more to this purpose in the
third book, in the ninth aduiso. chap. 4. Of the quality, nature, and
religion of the Jesuits.

Paragraph. I.
Of there equivocations.
A An other thing is to be generally misliked in the Jesuits, and it is their
equiuocating, The Jesuits are given to lying and cogging.
which you may term in plain english, lying and cogging. For this amongst
others is one of their rules, that a man framing to him self a true
proposition, when he is asked a question, he may conceal thereof, as much as
he thinks good. For example; one demanding of you, whether if the Pope
should come in warlike manner, to invade this land by force of arms, you
would take his part, or y^ Queens; you framing this answer in your mind; we
will take the Queens ^t, That they use equivocations, it is granted in the
Apology, page. 205.
if the Pope will command us so to do; may by their doctrine give this answer
lawfully; viz. we will take the Queens part, and conceal the rest; whereby he
that asked the question is plainly deluded. these words he shall find in the
sparing discovery, Page 11. quodlib. 2. art. 4. page. 66. See chapter second
in fine.

Standish, that honest man, must have access to the Popes holiness,
accompanied with two runnagates both of them priests, doctor Haddocke, and M.
Martin Array. These must take upon them, This Stands is a Iesuited priest.
that they were men deputed from the secular priests in England, etc. His
holiness hearing and marking well their suite, demanded of them in express
terms, if that which they had said unto him, proceeded from the desire and
consent of his loving priests in England; affirming, that otherwise he would
in no sort give any ear unto them.

Whereunto Master Standish, very well instructed before by father Parsons, ^oe,
the Pope (...) deceived by his holy priests.
and sufficiently assisted by the said two lying priests, answered, that what
he had presumed to deliver to his holiness, he had done it most assuredly by
their consent. The said Standish after his return into England, being asked by
certane priests, how he durst presume so impudently to abuse his holiness,
with so intolerable an untruth, he excused himself in this sort. Viz. that
when he said, he had the consent of the secular priests in England to make that
motion, his answer therein was made by him caute, that is, subtly, or by
equivocation, meaning to himself, Viz. as he supposed or presumed; which words
he kept in his mind and vttred not. These words are set down in the relation,
Page. 55. and 56.

Note here gentle reader, two things out of this present Paragraph. First,
that the Jesuits are indifferent men, and make no more conscience to deceive
their holy father the pope at Rome; then they do to deceive our sovereign
Lady the Queen here in this land. Secondly, that the most essential point
in all the Jesuitical religion, consists in lying and cogginge.

Paragraph. II.
Of the cruelty and tyranny of the Jesuits.
THe Jesuits give it out, that the most unlearned Jesuit, What great cruelty
or tyranny can be used?
does far excel the most learned secular priest, both in faculties and
privileges. And it is noysed about, as it were by the common crier, that they
have power from his holiness, to grant to all, and every one, all and singular
their faculties; in so much as it shall not be lawful and safe, for any to use
there privileges, though granted to them from his holiness many years before,
but with the leave and consent of these Jesuits. And when they give out their
faculties, they do not bestow them, on learned, godly, or holy men; but on
unlearned, ungodly, and irreligious; nay, seditious persons, such as follow
their humor, stowpe at their beck, and stand bound ever after to them. These
words are set down in the relation, page. 69. and 70.

The Jesuits so rule in all gentlemen's houses where they reside, that no lease
must be let, but by their advise; the tenants must either please them, or
repent at leisure. Such fines must be taken, Lo, the Jesuits have vowed to
forsake the world, and yet are wholly occupied, in worldly affairs,
as they think connenient, and some part of them must be employed, as they
shall prescribe ordine ad deum. in effect they do so rule and over rule, as
scarsely can the master or mistres of the house, give a piece of bread at their
doors, but it must be done with their approbation. And for the servants, they
are much more at their commandment, the^ at there is whom they serve. We would
be loath to tell you, how all this comes to pass. These words are to be red
in the discovery, page 15. and 16 quodlib. 3. art. 4. page. 68.

Note here, that disloyal subjects, go and do at every traitors beck; but
are as dulle as snailes to go or do at the command, of their anointed
Princess.

The Jesuits desire, that England should be converted of none, but Jesuits
only. for they will admit no fellow-laborers, and they have labored by all
means, utterly to dissolve the college at Doway. They also challeng to
themselves, a spiritual monarchy over all England. Thus I find written in the
relation, page 71.

A famous Father of the Jesuits, said in plain words to a gentlewoman of good
calling, Behold here tyran ny and ambition, in Jesuitical proceedinge.
which was charitablie affected to the disgraced priests, in this manner; now
is the time of trial, they that are not with us, are against us. If you
forsake them not now, you will overthrow your self and all your posterity for
ever. This he said to affright the charitable gentlewoman, as though the state
of her posterity should be utterly overthrown, unless she adhered to the
Jesuit. What more? was it not an other Jesuit with his assistant, O cruel
tyranny, o tyranous cruelty.
which caused a gentleman either to promise or to swear, that he should stand
fast unto them, and inform whatsoever he saw or heard by priests and others,
done against them and the archpriest his proceedings? they made the lay gentle
man their spy, (as they have every where many such, Lo the Jesuits proudly
do promise a conquest.
as well laymen, as women, and priests,) upon promise on their side again to
him yt he should be restored to al his lands forfeited by his ancestors, in a
conuictio^ by an attainder, when the world should fall on their side. The silly
Gentleman moved with this hope, undertook y^ disgraceful office, and said to
his friends, that he wrought a good days work, John Gerard the Jesuit said
to the Lady Markha^ of Notinghame shire that the Jesuits would make the
seculars leap at a crust, ere it be long. quodlib. 3. art. 10. p. 83.
when he entered this covenant. These words are set down in the dialogue,
between the secular priest and lay-gentleman, page. 66. page. 66.

Note hear gentle reader, what traytorous and dangerous people our Romish
Jesuits be. They do not only confidently expect a conquest of this noble
land, but they also proudly and malapertly promise the same to others, and
besides this, they use all cogging and lying, to allure and stir up her
majesty's subjects, to arms and open rebellion. Let the world judge, upon how
just and necessary cause, capital penal statutes are made, to abandon and
bridle the proud and disloyal attempts, of these traytorous Jesuits, these
most damnable villains. If their power were correspondent to their wills,
they would most cruelly murder her sacred and loving person together with all
their nobles and faithful subjects. God no doubt, who hitherto has so
miraculously protected her most excellent majesty, from their villainous and
bloody hands; has also caused many of their own coat (the secular priests I
mean,) to contest and publish to the world in there printed books; their bad
demeanor, their hypocritical dealing; their contentious garboyles; their
seditious conspiracies; their disloyal confederacies; their tumultuous
courses; their unnatural practices, and most bloody complottes; yea, their
vehement and continual persuasions; their allurements and almost compulsions,
to lay violent and bloody hands, upon their natural, and undoubted
sovereign, most noble Queen Elizabeth. So that hence forth, there can be no
d^niall made, either by themselves or by their favorites, of their profane and
mere brutish proceedings; of their cursed and diabolical purposes; of their
horrible and bloody attempts; and their long desired conquest of this land.

Paragraph. III.
Of the malepeart sauciness, and intolerable pride of the Jesuits.
THe Jesuits that are in England desirous either to bring under bondage, What
a malepeart ^aucinesse is this? what greater pride can be found?
or utterly to bear down the clergy of England, have attempted the same by
a wonderful stratageme. First, their will is, that in every catholics house.
(which houses are insteede of the Church,) either themselves may be pastors, or
others deputed by them in their rooms. And if happily their be any, that do
deny the faculties granted by them; or will not take notice, that such
assemblies or companies of catholics depend on them; or will not obediently
(as it were at a beck,) execute those things, y^ they have commanded; such
shall be censured either as apostataes, or heretics or tainted at least with
some infection of heresy. so holy, so godly, so religious would they seem to
be; as nothing is holy, that they have not sanctified; no doctrine catholic
and sound, that comes not from them; no dispensation available, that is not
granted by them; and which is worse, they have bea^e^ into the heads of the
most, that the mass is not rightly and orderly celebrated of any, but of the
Jesuit. These words are set down, in the abstracte of the memorial, in the
end of the declaration page. 69.

The Jesuits scorn to come to any one, but where they may be vaintily
entertained; they look not after the cottages of the poor, nor minister their
help to them, (...)
be there never so much need. Thus it is set down in the memorial. page. 72.

No Jesuit goes to visit any one, or trauelleth from one place to another,
but he is richly apparrelled, and attended on with a great train of servants,
as if he were a baron, or an Earl. They wrangle, and reprove the priests
garments, O brave gallan^^ O humble le Jesuits ^ O poor (...).
and spendings; and yet y^ expenses of one Jesuit, is able to maintain
twenty priests, plentifully and richly. These words are to be found in the
abstract, page. 70.

Note here gentle reader, that it is more then time, to cut short these bad
fellows, these traiterous new vpstart Jesuits. For otherwise, as you may see,
they will reign as tyrants over this land.

Paragraph. IIII.
Of the covetousness, and deceitful dealing of the Jesuits.
THe Jesuit Holt and his companions gathered, O Jesuits where is your vow
(...) poverty?
such an infinite mass of money from the catholics in England, for
dispensations, or under color of expending it to their uses, as many credibly
affirmed it, to exceed the sum of 50000. pounds English, which make two
hundredth millions of Italian scutes. These words are set down in the abstract,
page. 75. See thee third chapter.

The Jesuit Percie when he escaped from Wisbish, Lo, I pray you, the Jesuits
ca^ steal.
took fra^dulently from benefactors abroad, 57. pounds 17. shillings, and y^
year after, he stole 27. pound of the common money, even by the consent of the
other his fellow Jesuits. These words are set down in the discovery, page.
19. quodlibet. 3. art. 4. page. 7.

Another Jesuit took at times above 500. pounds, that was given to the
priests imprisoned then at Wisbish, The Jesuits surpass the false steward in
the gospel.
and employed the same at his own pleasure. They have so fleeced there
favorers, that they have been able to send not long since. 2200. pounds
toward the low countries. These words are to be found in the discovery,
page. 20. quodlibet. 3. art. 4. page. 70.

The Jesuits take pleasure to forge and invent things that are not, so y^ now
a days they are commonly holden for great liars; and it is come to pass, that
though they swear, Lo, the Jesuits are men of good credit.
men will not believe them. These words are set down in the abstract, Page.
73. quodlibet. 2. art. 6. page. 39.

The Jesuits of Rome, do use to intercept all manner of letters of all men
whosoever, All is fish, that come to the Jesuits hands, see the next paragraph.
not forbearing the packets neither of the Cardinals, nor of Princes. These
words are to be seen in the abstract of the memorial, page. 77. See book. 3.
aduiso. 9.

Note here gentle reader, the wealth, pride, and saucie deceitful dealing of
the Jesuits, to be such and so great, that if they remain a while unpunished,
they will not only ouerrule the priests, but our noble Queen and all.

Paragraph. V.
Of the peremptory and seditious dealing of Jesuits.
THe Jesuits by cunning have gotten into their hands, all authority, good
estimation, The Jesuits are seditious.
and all the treasure of money; and so do what they list at home, and abroad.
They thrust out, and let in, hire and buy, and maintain factions, All
religious men hate the Jesuits.
at their pleasure. These words are to be found in the memorial. page. 75.

The Jesuits have purchased them, an hard opinion of all religious orders; even
so far forth as to be written against, by some of them in most parts of
christendom, ex professo; and in particular are banished for such, out of all
the most christian kingdom of France, as also for their Spanish faction there.
where for all their great means, and flattering ballads of late made and
exhibited to the king, The Jesuits are banished out of ^^ance, for their
seditious dealing.
they are not like to get in again this year, nor yet the next. only they
hold in here and there with the good Capuchines, which they may easily do;
for that (as one of those good Friars on a time confessed,) they covet to have
all, and these covet nothing. Upon this ground, the excellent good bishop of
Bamberge in Germany, when he was labored for their admittance into his
reformed diocese, answered thus; no, I brook no such Quiddits. These words
are to be found, in the answer to the Iesuited gentleman; page. 16.

If any priest have a convenient place of residence, O what a cursed crew is
this?
the Jesuits will not cease, until they have cast him out, and that by wicked
means, by defaming him, and bringing him into suspicion. These words are set
down, in the abstract of the memorial, Page. 74.

The Jesuits are the firebrands, of all seditions. The Jesuits by right or
wrong, ^^eke simply and absolutely, the monarchy of all England. These words
are set down in the memorial. page. 74.

The ambition of Jesuits, has taken footing not only in provinces and cities,
but also in private families; it seperateth breathren one from an other, and the
husband from the wife, O deep gulf of sedition?
inflaming them with rancour and envy one against an other. These words are to
be seen, in the abstract of the memorial, page. 76.

Note here gentle reader, that whosoever love charity, christian peace and
unity; they must abhor, detest, and eschew, all Jesuitical society. For
the end as you see, which that cursed broad aymeth at; is nothing else, but to
dissolve peace and unity, and to maintain sedition, and rebellion every
where.

Paragraph. VI.
Of the murders committed by Jesuits.
IKnow there be diverse, that will think this history strange, and
incredible; but if it chance, that master Charles Paget do but set down the
actions of father Holt, especially concerning master Godfrey Foulgeam, (the
very cause of whose death he was,) you shall see more strange matters then
this. These words are in the reply unto Parsons libell, Fol. 70. page 1. in
fine. See the fifth chapter, the first and second sections, and note them well.

Note here gentle reader, that the Jesuit Holt is flatly charged to have
been the cause of the death of master Godfrey Foulgeam. Note also that the
Rector of the College of the Jesuits in Vallidolid, with some of his
accomplices, dealt most cruelly with one Barkworth a priest then student in the
English College there, after that the minister of the College had deceitfully
enticed him being sick in his bed, to go abroad to shake off his fever. They
conveyed the said Barkworth into the College of the Jesuits, and there
commanded him to put of his scholars robes, and to put on a suit of rags,
which they offered him. And because he refused so to do, the Rector called in
certain of his lay brethren strong fellows, to deal with him by violence.
Whereof two coming to him, catched him by the legs, and pulling them from under
him upon a sudden, threw him backward flat upon the pauement with such
violence (being then sick and weak with a fever,) that he was much bruised
therewith. The rest of the lay brethren, apprehended some a leg, some an
arm, haling and beating him most outragiously, and would as it seemed, have
murdered him in his bed, if a casual good hap had not hindered them. The story
is long, and therefore I refer the reader to the place.

They procured Henry the third to be excommunicated, and then by degrees they
murdered him. These words are set down, quodl. 8. art. 8. page 261.

Perhaps they will pretend, that this fruitless increase of of their number,
is an argument of Gods blessing upon their society, but this were both a
dangerous, and an absurd consequence. For it will be a long time, ere they
come to equal the number of the Arsacides, (who were sent into France by their
king a Pagan, to murder S. Jews,) or Assasins (murderers) men of their own
stamp. These words are to be found, in the frank discourse. Page. 88.

Let not A Jesuit become a censor of other men's writings, or doing, as
temerarius; till he have amended and satisfied for his own temeritie, both in
his doctrine of prince-killing, and other disloyalty to ones prince and
country. A. C. in his second letter, Page. 8. in fine.

If your majesty please ^o read, but the oration of the Polonian gentleman,
made in their senate, there you shall see an Iliade of tumults and civil
wars. amongst the Christians which inhabit those large and wast countries,
stirred and excited by the only means of the Jesuits; who have there caused
of late more battles to be fought, then had been in five hundred years
before. These words are put down, in the frank discourse. Page. 89.

This is wonderful, that in the whole troop of the Jesuits, there was not
one found (one is a small number,) and yet I say again, there was not one,
that from 89. to 94. was heard to let fall one word, that might be strained to
the good of his prince, or country: but evermore vehement in behalf of the
Spaniard, and to qualify the hard conceit of his government. These words are
in the frank discourse. Page. 95. verse. 17.

A due religion of the Jesuits: for to speak truth, to deal in
State-matters, and to practice the death of princes; are as essential parts of
their function, as their confession it self. These words are set down, in the
Jesuits Catechism. Liber. 3. cap. 13. fol. 168.

Lo here gentle Reader, it is an essential point of Jesuitical function, to
cause sedition, and to murder princes. From such religious men, good Lord
deliver us.

The first breaking out of our troubles, was in the year 1585. at which time
all that resorted to the Jesuits to be confessed, if they affirmed themselves
to be good subjects, and loyal seruitors to the king, (for they were questioned
upon that article,) they were sent back by the Jesuits, without receiving
absolution. Sequitur; Our kings represent the true image of God, against whom
this year there happened three strange and unusual accidents; first, the
rebellion against the late king, which they colored with the pretext and title
of tyranny; secondly, the parricidie committed upon his person by a Monk: and
lastly, the continuance of that rebellion against the king that now is, for his
religion. Sequitur; their confessions were instructions, or rather
destructions, to teach rebellion; refusing to absolve them, which either were
not in their consciences fully confirmed, in their revolt from the two kings,
or had any inclination to acknowledge them for their sovereigns. And (which is
full of horror and detestation,) their ordinary conrse was, before they would
absolve them, to make them swear by the holy gospel contained in their
breuiaries, never to take these two kings for their lawful sovereigns. That
which I speak, I have by good information from many, that were feign to pass
through that strait; and I know one amongst the rest, more near me then the
rest, who rather then he would give credit to their doctrine, departed from his
confessor, without receiving absolution. These words are set down by a
Catholic papist a French man, in the book called the Jesuits Catechism.
Lib. 3. cap. 12. fol. 165. fol. 166.

Note here gentle Reader, these important points with me. First, that not
only our English papists, but even the French also, do write the same argument
in substance; against the Jesuits, and their damnable doctrine. Secondly, that
they use confession, as an instrument of patricidie, even of Gods anointed
princes. Thirdly, that they would absolve none, which acknowledged true
loyalty to their sovereigns. Fourthly, that they caused all those whom they
did absolve, to swear by the holy gospel, never to take the king now regnant
nor king Henry his predecessor, for their lawful sovereigns. It therefore is
high time for all kings, to abandon and expel all this cursed crew out of
their kingdoms, territories, and dominions.

Jesuitisme agrees with the Anabaptists opinion, in two propositions, in
meddling with state matters, and in causing princes and kings to be murdered,
accordingly to the conueniencie of their affairs. I will add, that in the
carriage of this Jesuitical war within France, there was some conformity of
names between this, and that the Anabaptists undertook in Germany the year
1535. for they had one John Matthew their chief prophet, under John Leydon
their king: and one Bernard Rotman, and Bernard Cniperdolin, principal actors
in their faction for the seducing of s^mple people; even as our Jesuits had
their father Claudius Matthew, and Bernard Rouellet. I will not here recite the
other particulars of our troubles, being contented plainly to have showed unto
you, that our Jesuits were the first seminaries thereof. These words are set
down in the Jesuits Catechism. Lib. 3. cap. 11. fol. 164.

Note here gentle Reader, that the French papists write as sharply against
the Jesuits, as do our secular popish priests. And consequently, the priests
assertions and reports of them, are of more credit in that behalf.

The Jesuits having set foot in Portugal, solicited the king Sebastian by
all manner of illusions, to make an universal law, that none might be called
to the Crown, unless he were of their society; and moreover, elected by the
consent and suffrages of the same. Whereunto they could not attain, albeit
they met with the most devout and superstitious prince that could be. They were
the men, that kindled the first coals of that accursed league, which has
been the utter ruin and subversion of France. In favor of the Spaniard, they
set on work (to kill the king,) one Peter Barriere, whom they caused to be
confessed in their College at Paris, afterward to receive the Sacrament, and
having confirmed him by an assured promise of Paradise, as a true martyr, if he
died in that quarrel, they set forward this valiant champion, who was thrice
at the very point to execute his accursed enterprise; and God as often
miraculously stayed his hand, until at length being apprehended at Melun, he
receuied y^ just hyre of his traitorous intention in the year 1593. I speak
nothing, but what mine eyes can witness, and what I had from his own mouth,
when he was prisoner. View and peruse all the iniquities, that you will, you
shall find none so barbarous as this. To persuade an impiety (to kill a
king,) and then to cover it with such a seeming mask of piety. In a word, to
destroy a soul, a king, paradise, and our Church all at a blow; to make way
for their Spanish, and halfe-pagan designments. Thus is it written in the
Jesuits Catechism. Lib.3. cap. 18. fol. 185.

Note here gentle Reader, these material points with me. First, that the
Jesuits labor with might and maine, (as our Secular priests truly write of
them,) to ouerrule the whole world. For they would have had a general law
made, that none should be made king of Portugal, unless he were a Jesuit,
and also elected by their consent and suffrages. Secondly, that they suborned
Peter Barriere, to kill his and their liegelord the king of France. Thirdly,
that they abused the Sacrament, to that end and purpose. Fourthly, that they
promised him Paradise and to be canonized for a martyr, if he should kill his
sovereign and die in that quartell. Fifthly, that all this was done, in the
honor and behalf of the Spanish king. Put all these together, and see if the
same be not the Jesuitical practice here in England, as the Secular priests
have told us.

It happened upon Saint John Enangelists day in the year 1594. after the
reducing of Paris under obedience to their sovereign, that the king going to
his chamber, accompanied with many princes and lords, found himself unlooked
for suddenly stroke^ in the mouth with a knife, so that neither he, nor those
that were with him, could perceive it. For as soon as John Chastell who was the
traitor, and but nineteen years of age, had given the stroke, he dropped
down the knife, and set himself in the midst of the prease. Every one was in
a maze, and busy to think who had done that traiterous deed, and it wanted
not much, but that this young y^uth had made an escape. Notwithstanding God
would not permit that this detestable act should remain unpunished. By chance
it was, John Chaste^'l ^as brought up in the Jesuits school.
that some ore casting his eyes upon him, he became as one sore affrighted and
appald with fear. But as he promised himself to have the paradise of
Jesuits, if he died one of their martyrs, so also he confessed this fact more
readily and promptly, then was looked for at his hands. Whereby by decree of
the Court of Parliament in Paris, he was condemned to die. I have no greater
argument then this, to show that the trade of murdering was lodged within
their Colleges. For where there was any exercise of good education and study,
no scholar would have undertaken such a damnable determination, but such a one
as was brought up under them. In other Colleges, they know not what it meant
to instruct scholars how to murder kings, and specially in ours. But in the
Jesuits Colleges, it is contrary and preached in their own assemblies
nothing so much as that alone. Of the which indeed, they were but too prodigal
in their sermons. These words are set down, in the Jesuits Catechism. Lib.
3. cap. 8. fol. 155.

When our Jesuits saw themselves removed from their princes favor, they began
to lay a snare to intrappe him. And as their society is composed of all sorts
of people, some for the pen, others for practice; so had they amongst them,
one father Henry Sammier of Luxenburge, a man disposed for all affairs, and
resolved to any hazard. This fellow was sent by them in the year 1581. toward
diners Catholic princes to sound the fourd. And to say truly, they could not
have chosen one more fit. For he disguised himself, into as many forms as
objects; one while attired like a soldier, an other while like a priest, by
and by a country swain. Dice, cards, and women, were as ordinary with him,
as his presired hours of prayer, saying, he did not think he sinned in this,
because it was done to Gods glory. and that he mi^^t not be discovered,
changing his name together with his habit, according to the countries where he
purposed to negotiate. These words are to be read in the Catechism. Lib. 3.
cap. 11. Fol 162.

William Crichton the Jesuit, went into Spain by the license of his general.
Whither he is no sooner come, but he practices to infinuate himself into the
kings favor. And to that effect, draws a tree of the descent, and pedigree of
the Infanta his daughter, showing therein that the Crowns of England and
Scotland, did by right appertain to her; and so incite him the rather to take
arms against the Scottish king, he scattered abroad diffamatorie libels
against him. Whereunto the king of Spain giving no ear, Crichton determined
with himself, by letters to solicit the Catholic Nobility of Scotland to
the same purpose; and to that end wrote letters in the year 1592. to Gourdon,
and other Jesuits remaining in Scotland; whereby he gave them to understand,
in what grace he was with the king, who by his incitement was resolved, as well
for the invasion of England, as for the restoring of the ancient Religion in
Scotland. These words are in the Jesuits Catechism. Lib. 3. cap. 16. fol. 173.

Certain young divines infected with the poison of the Jesuits, loosed the
reins to subjects against their king, in the year 1589. and Commolet the
Jesuit with his adherents, sounded the trumpet of war in their pulpets,
against the king deceased. Whereupon insued those outrageous disorders, which
we have seen in France since that time. These words are in y^ Catechism. Li.
3. c. 14. fol. 169.

Walpole the Jesuit in the year 1597. delivered a poisonous confection to
Squire, therewith to make away the Queen of England his Sovereign. The
Jesuits at Doway in the year 1598. sent the Cooper of Iper to kill Grave
Maurice of Nassaw. These words are set down, in the Jesuits Catechism. Lib.
3. cap. 13. fol. 168.

It is well known (O Jesuits,) that your College was the fountain and
seminary, of all those calamities, which we endured during the last troubles.
There was the rebellion plotted and contrived; there was it fully and wholly
nourished and maintained. Your prouincials, your rectors, your devout
superiors, were the first that troade that path, they that first and last
dealt with this merchandise. Your College was the retreat or Randeuous, of all
such as had vowed and sold themselves, as well to the destruction of the State,
as to the murder of the king. In which your doings, you at that time gloried
and triumphed, both in your sermons and lectures. Sequitur; this was the hour
of Gods wrath, who having long temporized with your sins, thought it good to
make Chastell a spur in the hearts of the judges, to incite them to do
justice as well upon you, as upon him, that you might all serve for an example,
for posterity to wonder at. To the accomplishment of this work, he permitted
that Chastell, (who had been nurtured and brought up in your school,) should
assay to put in practice your devout lectures, and exhortations against the
king; not in the country, but in the city of Paris, and that his dwelling
house should be, not in any obscure corner of the town, but in the very heart
of the city, in a house right opposite to the gate of the palace, the ancient
habitation of our kings, and of the supreme and sovereign justice of Fra^nce.
This house belonged to the father, who was so unfortunate, as not to reveal to
the Magistrate, the damnable intention of his son, whereof he had knowledge,
as himself confessed. God made special choice of that place, of purpose to
make the punishment more notorious. For which cause this house was r^^nated,
and raced by order, and in the place thereof a Py^amis or pillar raised,
bearing the memorial not only of Chastels offense, but of the Jesuits also,
and this to stand in opposite view of this great royal Palace. To the end,
that our posterity may know hereafter, how highly France is beholden to
this holy society of Jesus. These words are set down, in the Jesuits
Catechism. Lib. 3. cap. 19. fol. 191.

Note here gentle reader with me, these important observations. First, that
John Chastell but 19. years of age, went about traitorously with a knife
prepared for that purpose, to murder his natural Sovereign. Secondly, that
he the said youth was fully persuaded by Jesuitical education and doctrine,
that to murder his liege Lord the King was the ready way to heaven. Thirdly,
that nothing was more freely taught in the schools of the Jesuits, then the
doctrine of the killing of lawefull kings. Fourthly, that their sermons
abounded, with this kind of malady. Fifthly, that the Jesuits employed in this
kind of merchandise, one Henry Sammier a most licentious and dissolute
villain, given to all vices under heaven. Sixthly, that he reputed all his
vices for virtues, in respect of his godly intents and purpose; viz. Of killing
Kings. Seventhly, that the Jesuit Crichton solicited the Spanish King, to
invade both England and Scotland; affirming that the crowns of both the
kingdoms, did by right pertain unto him. Eighthly, that the Jesuit Commolet
and his adherents, sounded the trumpet of war against their king, even out of
the pulpets; ^s if it had been an high point of divinity, and most fit for
edification. Ninthly, that the Jesuit Walpoole endeavored by poison, to take
away the life of his Sovereign. Tenthly, that the Jesuits at Doway, sent the
Cooper of Iper, to kill Grave Maurice of Nassaw. Eleuently, that the college
of the Jesuits, was the fountain and seminary of the calamities in France.
That in their college was all rebellion plotted, co^triued, nourished, and
maintained. Twelftly, that the prouincials, rectors, and other superiors of
the Jesuits, gloried and triumphed in their rebellious dealing. Thirteenthly,
that a Pya^it is set up in Paris, bearing the everlasting memorial, not only
of the traitor Chastell, but of the Jesuits also; that all posterities may
know, what a kind of seditious and traiterous people they are. I might here
add many other most cruel and traiterous murders, plotted and contrived by
the Jesuits. But in regard of brevity, I refer the reader, that shall
desire more of this kind of their hellish divinity, to that worthy book
which the French papists have put forth, (entitled the Jesuits catechism,)
A golden book indeed.

Paragraph. VII.
Of the vows of the Jesuits.
Touching the vows of the Jesuits. it is not amiss to put down this
corrolarie, as a fit preamble to the discourse following. To conclude, as long
as we mingle the bringing up of our youth, with this munkerie (of Jesuits,) we
shall never be able to save our selves from this unhappy confusion, whereof
the city of Paris (thanks be to God.) is at this day discharged. But I speak
to them, who being coozened, protecte as yet, this new monster with their
authority. These words are put down, in the Jesuits catechism. libr. 2.
cap. 8. fol. 97.

I will begin with the simple vow of Jesuitical order, which I may say is new
and monstrous, and which can not be tolerated in our Church, without the
overthrowing thereof, at the least in regard of religious orders and
monasteries. The first vow of their order, is that which they call the simple
vow, by which he that will vow himself to their society, makes at the first
the three ordinary vows of all other religious orders; namely, of chastity,
poverty, and obedience. And although in respect of himself, he may not after
this vow give over his profession, yet it is in the power of the general, to
dismiss him when he will, though he have been a Jesuit.25. years. And which
is more, as long as he goes no farther then this simple vow, he is capable of
all inheritances direct and collateral, notwithstanding the vow of poverty
which he has made. These words are set down, in the Jesuits catechism. lib.
5. cap. 9. fol. 97.

It is a new law, as also the simple vow of chastity is, which this society
makes; which hinders marriage to be contracted, and disannuls it after it is
contracted. Ibid. fol. 98.

What new monster then is that, which our Jesuits bring from the Church, that
he which becomes one of their order, may break of his marriage, without
sinning thereby against his wife? So that upon a bare coffeehouse of the
husband, the poor desolate wife shall remain unmarried, according to the laws
of Iesuitisme; and yet may not marry an other husband, because the laws of
christianity forbids it. These words are put down in the Jesuits catechism.
lib. 2. cap. 15. fol. 113.

Note here gentle reader, that the religion of Jesuits, is nothing else in
deed, but an hotch-potch of omnium githerum, as the seculars rightly term it.
For first, they vow poverty, and so they abandon all wordly possessions; and
yet are they capable of all inheritances direct, and collateral, after the
making of their simple vow. Secondly, though gods Law forbid the separation of
husband and wife, saving the case of fornication; yet they roundly dissolve
wedlock, upon the sole and only making of their simple vow. So as we may
truly say of these Jesuits, as do the french papists else where in these
words; the Jesuits would say, that their simple vow is a vow of a petty
dissimulation, and that they think to deceive God by the same sophistry,
which the old pagan used, when he said, iuraui lingua, mentem iniuratam habeo;
which protestation was condemned by the^ of the time, though they were not
christians. So says the Jesuit, I vowed poverty with my tongue, but in my
mind I had a bird that sung an other song. And thinking by this shift to make
us like to their new doctrine, he plays three parts at once, the Jesuit, the
heretic, and the Machiuelist. These words are put down, in the Jesuits
catechism, libr. 2. cap. 10. fol. 100.

This reserving of the goods (say the Jesuits,) is not for them, who have
renounced this right, but to help them afterward, if happily they should be
dismissed. Therefore if they be not dismissed, these goods appertain to their
order. Was there ever more notorious coozenage, then this? Alas, I wonder not
indeed, that they very seldom dismiss their disorderly Jesuit; for in so
doing, this fat morsel would fall out of their mouth. But why is yt Jesuit
during this simple vow, kept away from his kin^ed? Why is he sent out of one
country into another? But to the end that if any new inheritance should fall
unto him, no man might certainly know what his condition is, nor know how to
call in question, ye right he pretends. Well, in the end he is freed from his
vow, that he may be out of danger of all impeachments, and hindrances. Which
done, he shall prove himself to be the right heir, and yet by a watchword
betwixt him and them, he shall return afterward to the Jesuits, to bestow his
goods in alms upon them. Add hereunto, that this is a point that touches the
estate; that by this means, it is easy for the Jesuit to make him self in
time, master and head of many cities, towns, villages, and castles, according
to the quality of them, whom he has drawn unto him. Let us put the case,
that their are a doozen gentlemen of good houses, (for such they labor to
bring into their society,) that have made themselves Jesuits, and that some
civil or foreign wars, has taken away all their brethren; who now, but the
Jesuits of the simple vow shall succeed in their inheritance, and so being
admitted to their first solemn vow, shall enrich their order there with all?
And in time they will become monarchs. These words are set down in the
catichisme libr. 5. cap. 15. fol. 9.

The Jesuits after their simple vow make a solemn vow, by which they add
nothing to the former; but only that by making this second, they cannot any
more inherit, nor be dismissed by their general. There remains now the third,
which is the vow of three steps, by which besides poverty, chastity, and
obedience, vowed by them; they make a particular vow of mission to our holy
father the Pope, which is to go to ye Indies and Turkey, for y^ winning of the
souls, if they be commanded by his holi^sse. But above all, I make great
account of that precise poverty, which is enjoined them by their
constitutions. run through all the orders of religion, there is not one of
them in which poverty is so recommended, as among the Capuch^nes which live
from hand to mouth, and put over the care for to morrow, to the only goodness
of God The foundation of the professed, which are the Jesuits of the great vow,
is to vow poverty, as well in general, as in particular, as it is in all the
orders of begging Friars. But because their poverty had need to be expounded,
let us see the commentaries they bring us by their constitutions. They have
three sorts of houses; one for their nouices; an other for their religious
bound by their solemn vows, which they call the house where there Church is;
and an other, which they call a college, for the religious, that are bound
only by the simple vow; whereof some are scholars probationers, others
coadiutors, some spiritual, some temporal. In domibus vel ecclesiis, quae a
societate etc. That is to say, in those houses and Churches, which the society
shall except of, for the salvation of souls, there shall be no revenues
proper, either to be applied to the vestrie, or to the frame and buildinges, or
for any other purpose whatsoever. That the society may have nothing to dispose
of, but only to depend upon God, whom by his grace they serve, trusting that
without revenues he will provide things necessary for us, to his praise and
honor. They that are professed, (that is, men of the last, great, and solemn
vow,) shall live by alms in their houses, when they are not sent forth to any
country, nor to take the ordinary charge of Rectors of Colleges, or
Universities, except it be upon necessity, or urgent vtilitiy require it,
neither shall they use the Colleges revenues in their houses. they shall be
ready to beg from door to door, when obedience or necessity requires it.
And to this purpose let there be one or two, or more appointed, to crave alms
for the sustenance of the society, which shall beg the alms simply, for the
love of our Savior Jesus. The houses and churches of the society, shall not
only have no rents, or revenues, but no possessions or inheritance, in
general or particular.

Gather all these particulars together, was there ever poverty more
obstinately vowed, then this? And therefore it was, yt first Pius. 5. and after
that Gregory. the 13. ordained that this society should be placed among the
orders of the mendicants. If they would observe that, which here is enjoined
them; I would excuse them with all my heart of the herefie of their first vow.
And that, because that after they had a long time enjoyed goods, during the
time of their simple vow, at the last to make satisfaction to God for it, they
are come to the periode of their great vow, by reason whereof, they have the
name of fathers above the other religious, yet not only they vow from thence
forwards, a beggerie, but also themselves to become treasurers thereof. I would
honor them* as the true followers of Saint Peter's repentance, after he had
denied his master, and would esteem them above all the other orders of
mendicants. But when saw you them go with a wallet up and down the town?
For all this they live richly and plentifully, not with the manna of God (for
they are not children of Israel,) but by a notable point of Sophistry, and
see how. The houses where these holy fathers dwell, O w^he Fox? O religious
Jesuits.
are not permitted to have any goods, but only their colleges are. Now so it
is, that under their generals authority, they have all there care and
government of their colleges. These are the old Cincinnati of Rome, that
boasted they had no gold, but commanded them that had. In like sort these
masters, though they may have noe proper revenues but their wallet (which they
scorn,) yet do they govern them, yt have good store.

This foundation presupposed, you may easily judge what will follow. For it is
reason, that being fathers, they should be sed and maintained by their
children; and it is more honesty for the^, to ask alms of their colleges
where they command, then to stragle up and down the towns to crave it. See
how carefully they make sheaues off carne for God, as Caine did, and yet
herein they are the true and lawful children of their good father Ignatius,
who in all his actions, reserved for himself the principal care of his
kitchen. Nothing is more familiar to them by their bulls and constitutions, then
beggerie; and yet never had any men better skill to scrape up coin, that they
may live at their ease. These words are put down in the Jesuits catechism.
libr. 2. cap. 14. fol. 10. fol. 11.

Note here gentle reader, the poverty of the Jesuits, which is wonderful. For
first, they profess and vow beggerie, and yet they never beg. Secondly, they
can have no possessions, no inheritance, no lands, no goods; and yet they
abound in wealth, lands, and goods, and have the world at will. Oh, who would
not be a begging Jesuit F^ier? Thirdly, they renounce all possessions, (except
their bare wallet, which they sreone and will not use,) and yet they command
both the possessions and the possessours, to come and go at a beck. Fourthly,
the professed Jesuits abandon and forsake all; but the other Jesuits, (who
stand at their command,) shall refuse nothing that may be had. The fathers can
teach them to fish for whales, and not for Gudgins. This then is a goodly
religious poverty.

Paragraph. VIII.
Of the miracles of the Jesuits.
Ignace the founder of the Jesuits, left a writing in a little coffer, in
manner of a iornall, how things passed between the holy Ghost and him, and
the visions set down, wherewith he was inspired when he made his constitutions.
These remembrances were found after his death, and with great wonderment
presented to the general congregation held at Rome, in the year 1558. Where
all that he had ordered was considered of, and then passed through the hands of
their printers and stationers. You blame Ignace in your discourse for all his
apparitions, and say they were impostures contrived by him, upon which ground
his society has coined many fables. Pardon me I pray you, for you judge of
these matters like a punie, not like a states man. I tell you again, I doubt
not but that Ignace has told you all his visions, whereof he himself alone
was witness. But when? not in the flower of his age, when he was in action,
but when sickness and age had broken him, and he saw himself at the graves
brinke; persuading himself there could be no better mean, to stablish his
order after his death and confirm his statutes, the^ to feed them not with
these holy, but rather fained illu^^i. nations. These words are set down, in
the Jesuits catechism. lib. 1. cap. 18. fol. 64.

One Justinian a Jesuit in Rome, calle^ father Justinian, counterfeicted
himself to be Leaprous, to make his cure miraculous. Again he would have men
believe, that being shot with a pistol through his garment, the bullet
rebounded back again from his body without hurt, and so by the wonderful
grace of God, he was not wounded. These matters were believed by the simple
people at the first, but after they were found to be false, this marred the
whole roast of the Jesuits cookerie in Rome. For when they did speak of a
facer out of matters, and an imposter, they were wont to call him. a second
Justinian the Jesuit. It may be you will judge it strange I tell you, we
need not look into Spain, nor the Indies for their forgeries, since of late
years they bruted it abroad in France, that Theodore Beza was dead, and that
at his death, he was converted to our catholic apostolic roman religion, by
one of their company: by whose example, many citizens of Geneua had done the
like, through the travels of the Jesuits. We took it to be true a while, but
after that Beza was known to be risen again, he wrote certain french and
latin letters by which he convinced their impuden^ie. What a mint of fables
will they have in strange countries, which even in the midst of us, fear not
to feed us with such bables? Thus is it written in the Jesuits catechism.
lib. 1. cap. 17. fol. 62.

The kingdom (of Portugal) being fallen to Sebastian, the holy Apostles (the
Jesuits) conceived a hope, that by this means it might descend unto their
family, and dealt with him many times, that no man might from thence forward,
be capable of the crown of Portugal, except he were a Jesuit, and chosen by
their society, What a (...) is here?
as at Rome, the Pope is chosen by the college of Cardinals. and for as much
as he (although as superstious, as superstition it self,) could not, or rather
durst not condescend thereunto, they persuaded him, that God had appointed it
should be so, as himself should understand by a voice from heaven near the
sea side. Insomuch as this poor prince thus carried away, resorted to the
place two or three several times, but they could not play their parts so well,
as to make him hear this voice. These words are set down in the Jesuits
Catechism. Lib. 3. cap. 16. fol. 174.

Zauier the Jesuit departing this life at Siuet, Zauier or Xauier.
his body was rolde up in quick lime, that being speedily consumed, it might
not putrify. Nevertheless, being six months after carried to the town of
Goa, where he lies, he was found to look as fresh and sound, as when he
lived. After he was brought to this town, there was a wax candle of a cubit
long, placed at the foot of his tomb, which burnt two and twenty days, and
as many nights, and was not wasted. A man that never saw further then the
length of his own nose, having got so much favor of the priests, as to open
him Zauiers tomb, took the dead man's hand and rubbed his eyes with it, and
presently recovered his sight. Many other miracles were done by his dead corpse,
but I find none so famous as these two; one of his disciples having stolen
away the whippe wherewith he beat himself, and a woman called Marie Sarra
having cut of a piece of his girdle, which she wrought into silver, and wore it
about her neck, cured an infinite number of all sorts of diseases, by the bare
touch of these two relics. All these miracles were done in the Indies, and
many other more, if you believe Tursellin. But all these stories, are in very
deed such, as by common proverb we call old wives fables, that is to say, fit
to be told to simple women, when they sit spinning by the fire side. These
words are to be found, in the Jesuits Catechism. Lib. 1. cap. 17. fol. 62.

Note here gentle reader, that the Jesuits would very gladly have their first
founder Ignatius the Spaniard, to be reputed and canonized for a Saint. And for
this end and purpose, they have devised to publish many counterfeit and feined
miracles, which they affirm in printed books, to have been done by men of
their society. But the bare rehearsal with the circumstances, may suffice for
the confutation thereof. They are you see, but their own mere inventions, and
old wives fables.

Paragraph. IX.
Of the perfidiousnes, lying, cooznage, mutabilitie, and temporizing, which the
Jesuits use in all their proceedings and constitutions.
IN Rome the Jesuits acknowledge the Pope to be Lord spiritual and temporal
over all Christian princes, else must they directly contradict all the
extrauagant decretals, which impose the same upon all Monarchies. It is a
proposition, very familiar in the court of Rome. And in the Bulls appointed for
the publication of the Iubily, in the year 1600. Saint Peter and Sant Paul are
called princes of the earth. In France the Jesuits are of another opinion. For
in their pleading in the year 1594. they give out, that the Pope has no
temporalities, but such as he has by long succession of time gotten in Italy.
The Jesuits are statesmen and temporisers, who hold all things honest and
lawful, which serve their turn. As in former times, when they spoke of a
perfidious people, they named the Carthagenians, whereof the common proverb
grew, Fides punica; the like we may now say of the Jesuits, Fides Iesuitica,
They privately among their friends, make a jest of perfidiousnes, and
treachery. For if you ask them, what is a Jesuit? their answer is, every
man. Implying, that they are creatures which vary their colors like the
Camelion, according to the object. A very fit comparison for them; for no more
then the Camelion, can they borrow the color of white, which in holy scripture
figureth virtue and innocence. A little before the king entered Paris, father
Alexander Hays a Scot, seeing the affairs of that league very much decline,
it was his chance to disgorge out of the abundance of his heart, these words in
a great audience, in the College Clairmont, where he read the principal
lecture. Hitherto (says he,) we have been Spayniards, but now we are
constrained to be french. It is all one, we must formalize until a fitter
season. Cedendum erit tempori. These were the words he used. And that you may
not think that this maxim proceeds from the pliantnes of their consciences,
which they restrain or extend, as best fitteth their profit; their good father
Ignace first taught them this dispensation, whereof they have since made a
particular constitution. The other holy fathers founders of religion,
established diverse ordinances, which they fastened, if I may so speak, with
nails of diamond in tombs of brass, which should perpetually be observed by
munks and other religions. In the sect of Jesuits, there is nothing so
certain as their uncertainty, as I said of late. In the Bull of Pope Paul the
third, it is written as follows. That they may make (says the Pope,)
particular ordinances, which they shall indge fit for the society, to the
glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the profit of their neighbor. And that
such as are already made, or shall be made hereafter, they may change, alter,
or abolish, according to the variety of place, time, and occasions, and in
steed of them, make new; the which so changed, revoked, or made new, we will
that they be confirmed by the foresaid authority of the Apostolic sea, and by
the same authority, of our specall grace and favor we confirm them.

Out of this general constitution, they have drawn one particular, which is
worthy to be known, in the 16. part of their constitutions, chap. 5. The title
beginning thus. That the constitutions may not bind any man in conscience,
since the society desires, that all their constitutions, declarations, and
order of life, should be without evasion, conformable to our direction; and
also nevertheless wishes to be secured, or at least succored, that they be
not snared in any sin, which may grow by their constitutions or ordinances;
we have thought good in the Lord, (exception taken to the express bow,
wherewith the society is bound to the Pope for the time being, and the three
other essential vows, of poverty, chastity, and obedience,) that no
constitutions, declarations, or any order of life, shall impose any yoke of
mortal or venial sin upon them; unless their superior command those
things, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, or in the virtue of obedience.
And again; in stead of fear of offending, let love and desire of all
perfection come in place, and let the glory and praise of Christ our Lord and
maker, be the more exalted. By the first article, it is lawful for them to
change and rechange their constitutions at their own pleasure, for their own
good. By the second, their constitutions are held (in regard of the soul,)
indifferent; so that the Jesuit may break them, without committing mortal or
venial sin. A law which their great lawgiver gave them, to the end, that to
Gods honor and glory there might he fewer sinners in their society.

Oh holy souls? oh pure consciences? who restrayning their inferiors from
sin, take themselves the reins. committing all manner of sin uncontrolled,
Let us examine these points without passion, and let let us consider the scope
of these two propositions. By the first, no prince shall be assured of his
estate; and by the second, no prince shall be secure of his person in his own
kingdom. Concerning the first point, call to mind how matters have been
carried for these 25. or 30. years. There has been no nation, where they be
fostered, but they would be tempering with their affairs of state. I think
they are such honest men, as what herein they have done, they have undertaken
to do it, by virtue of their silent constitutions; for if they did it by their
own private authority, the general were unworthy of his place, should he
suffer it. Further, this was forbiden them in the year, 1593. when they saw
all their plots were frustrate. Admit new troubles should arise, these
gallants will cassiere and disanull this last ordinance, suffering their
companions to intermeddle as before. But what are their rules in such affairs?
Marry, that is it lawful to kill a tyrant; that a king breaking the common
laws of the land, may be deprived of his Crown by the people. That there are
other causes, for the which princes and great personages may be slain. In what
a miserable condition shall princes live, if the assurance of their estate,
shall depend upon these fellows? Let us see their new constitutions of 1593. I
will that they meddle not at all in affairs of state in general terms. And
that particularly, they practice not upon the person of princes. Are they bound
to obey this? Nothing less. For their lawgiver charge not their
consciences, but in express terms; he would otherwise have charged them, by
virtue of their blind obedience. And this is the cause, that Commolet preaching
since this new statute, that there wanted a new Ehud to kill our king. and
Walpoole furnishing Squire with poison and instructions, to kill the Queen of
England his mistress, thought they sinned not therein. These words are set
down in the Jesuits Catechism. Lib. 3. cap. 26. fol. 234. fol. 236.

It is not christian charity (O Jesuits,) that leads you to that course, but
Iesuitish charity. Your whole profession is nothing else, but a particular
coozning of our private families, and a general villainy of all the countries,
where you inhabit. These words are put down in the Catechism. Lib. 2. cap.
12. fol. 106.

The Jesuits make ostentation of a solemn decree concluded among them, that
they shall no more intermeddle in matters of estate. But let us see, what date
this decree bears? They say of an. 1593. has your Majesty then already
forgotten, that since that time they have practiced twice against your life?
Behold the performance of this glorious decree. Do not we know the general
exception of all their statutes? unless it be for the good of the Church; an
exception that extends as far, as they list to strain it. The Jesuits never
harbored in their hearts any other project, but the subversion of states,
disauthorizing of magistrates, and seducing of subjects from their
allegiance. These words are set down, in the frank discourse. Page. 98.

Ribadiner wrote his history, only upon report of the country, as the
further a Jesuit goes, the louder he lies. These words are in the Jesuits
Catechism. Lib. 2. cap. 17. fol. 61.

Such iuglings and shiftings of late have been used by the Jesuits, The
Jesuits are iuglers.
that not only protestants, but also catholics, yea priests can scarce tell,
when they speak sincerely, when otherwise. These words are set down, in the
reply to Parsons libell. Page. 23. 1. verse. 2.

These are ordinary iugling tricks, which are too too familiar with our good
fathers the Jesuits. In the reply to Parsons libell. Page. 19. 2. verse. 14.

Concerning the imputation of lying, so famous and notorious are their equiuo
cations, and so scandalous, that the very protestants take notice thereof, to
the great prejudice of our profession, always heretofore famous, for our truth
and sincerity. In the reply to Parsons libell. Page. 23. 1. verse. 1.

Note here gentle Reader, these important points with me. first, that the
Jesuits are notorious liars, and that their own fellows can not tell when to
trust them. Secondly, that they are notorious coozners, and full of iugling
tricks. Thirdly, that the Jesuits acknowledge the Pope to be Lord spiritual
and temporal, over all christian princes. Fourthly, that the Jesuits are
notable temporizers, as who account all things lawful that will serve their
turn. Fifthly, that the Jesuits are so perfidious a people, as their faith is
become Fides panica, the Carthagenians faith, that is, a false and detestable
faith. Sixthly, that the Jesuits will be Spaniards, or Frenchmen, or whatsoever
else, if opportunity be offered thereunto. Seventhly, that no estate is free,
from the villainy of the Jesuits. Eighthly, that the Jesuits make havoc of
the Popes Bulls and constitutions. Ninthly, that the Jesuits change and
rechange their rules and laws, at their own good will and pleasure. The
Jesuits therefore are good fellows, fit for all times, all places, and all
companies.

Paragraph. X.
Of the profession and Religion of the Jesuits, in general.
THe Jesuits never harbored in their hearts any other project, but the
subversion of states, disauthorizing of Magistrates, and seducing of subjects
from their allegiance. These words are set down, in the frank discourse.
Page. 98. 1.

Vanitas vanitatum, that religious men who should spend their time in study
and contemplation, do take their greatest pleasure, delight, and contentment,
in writing and receiving packets of news from all coasts and countries,
making that their whole study and travail. These words are set down, in D.
Elies notes upon the Apology. Page. 264. verse. 20.

The whole profession of the Jesuits is nothing else, but a particular
coozning of our private families, and a general villainy of all the countries,
where they make their aboade. Thus it is written, in the Jesuits Catechism.
Lib. 2. cap. 12. fol. 106.

This is not to stand long hammering about the matter; this is to make short
work, and to tell you in a word, that look how many clergy men your
Majesty has, so many subjects has the Pope in France; and so kings
concerning the clergy, are not sovereign princes. This is (my liege) in good
french, to erect another state within your state, and another kingdom within
your kingdom. These words are in the frank discourse. Page. 24. verse. 1.

If it please you to consider, what is now in practice among our Jesuits, you
shall find they follow the same steps in christianisme, which Ismael first
trod in Mahumetisme. Their Prophet Ismael is the great Ignatius, who with his
fabulous visions, would bear the world in hand, that sometimes he spoke with
God, sometimes with Christ, sometimes with our Lady, or S. Peter. And as Ismael
fetched out of Hali, the pretended brother of Mahomet, a new branch of religion
taken from the old stock; so Ignatius christening himself with the new name
of a Jesuit, in steed of the name of a Christian authorized from the Apostles,
builded up a religion never anciently observed by our Church. Ismael under a
new vow, changed the ancient Turban; Ignatius inducing a new monachisme amongst
us, yet retains not the ancient habit of munks. Ismael first assembled a
handful of people after raised millions; Ignatius does the like Ismael to make
himself great, mingled policy and religion together; Ignatius followed him.
Ismael and his successors, were adorned and magnified by their followers;
Ignatius has been so idolatrized, and the rest of the successors in the
generalship. Ismael made himself be called the Prophet of God; the general of
the Jesuits terms himself Gods Vicar. In these proceedings and practices,
Ismael troubled and turmoyled the Mahometicall state; and shall not we mistrust
in Rome, this same new Iesuited Sophi? whosoever suspecteth them not, is no
true and legitimate child of the holy sea. These words are set down, in the
Jesuits catechism Lib. 3. cap. fol. 230.

Note heee Gentle Reader, these points of great moment with me. First, that the
Jesuits harbor no other project in their hearts, but the subversion of
kingdoms, and the withdrawing of subjects from their allegiance. Secondly,
that they employ their whole time and study, in hunting after news. Thirdly,
that their profession is nothing else indeed, but a particular coozning of your
families, and a plain villainy of all countries. Fourthly, that Jesuitical
religion, is a semimonarchicall dominion, and a flat diminution of all royal
regiment. Fifthly, that Jesus itisme is a new late vpstart Mahumetisme. And thus
much of Jesuitical religion in general; let us now see what it is in
special,

Paragraph. XI.
Of the religion and profession of Jesuits in special.
FIrst, the Jesuits hold and defend this proposition; hominem non christian^
posse esse Romanum pontificem. Thus in English; one that is not a christian,
may be the Bishop of Rome. Thus it is written in the discovery. page 37. quodl
4. art. 2. page. 100.

Let us admit this proposition gentle reader, with our Jesuits; persuading our
selves, that the holy Ghost who made Balaams ass to speak, has enforced them
to speak the truth unawares against themselves. For. as I have proved at
large, in my Survey of popery; Their own renowned popish writers freely
grant, that dame Johan, a woman not a man, was once Pope of Rome. And certes,
if a woman may be Pope, who by Saint Paul's doctrine may not be permitted to
speak in the Church: a Fortiori, an Ethnicke, Pagan, Turk, or Jew, who is no
christian, may well be the Bishop of Rome.

Secondly, Archer the Jesuit defended this proposition; the Stews are as
lawful at Rome, as the Pope himself, or any order of religious men. the
Jesuit Weston also did defend the same, against D. Bagshaw. These words are
set down in the relation. page 47.

Note here gentle reader, that the force of truth, and true christian religion
is such, that the very enemies thereof, do often unwittingly and unwillingly
acknowledge the same. for by this Jesuitical doctrine, it follows of
necessity, that the Popes authority and his being at Rome, is altogether
vnalwfull; as also that all the religious there, that is, munkes, Friars,
Jesuits, and Nuns, are unlawful, wicked, and most execrable, which
conclusion (by Gods assistance) shall be made more evident, when I come to
speak of the Pope and his authority in particular.

Thirdly, the Jesuits hold, teach, and practice this doctrine that a
malefactor being condemned so die, after he has once made confession of his
sins to his ghostly Father, is not tied to reveal it to his judge; nay, it
is lawful for him to stand in stiff denial thereof, at the time of his
execution, as being clear before God, after he has discharged the depth of
his conscience to his confessor. Thus is it written in the Jesuits catechism,
libr. 3. cap. 12. fol. 166.

Note here gentle reader, with what strange docrine our Jesuits use to feed,
the humors of their devoted vassals. And for the better clearing of the
falsehood thereof, thou must duly observe with me, that if it were true, (as the
Jesuits suppose, and take pro confesso,) that the malefactor were washed and
wholly purged from his offense, by his confession and absolution received at the
priests hands; yet would it not follow by good consequution, that he might
lawfully deny, his former committed offenses to the judge; and that for these
two insoluble reasons. First, because he does formallietell a lie, which he
ought not to do, as Saint Austine affirms, if he might thereby save the whole
world. For to lie is ever a sin, as all learned divines do teach. But that
he lies, in saying he did not commit such a fact, all the world knows. The
reason hereof is evident, because a murder committed not to have been
committed, is a thing so impossible, that God himself cannot perform it.
Neither does this argue any imperfection in God, but contradiction in the
thing that should be done. God is truly called omnipotent, because he can do
indeed, whatsouer is dowable or can be done. Yet, whatsoever implies
imperfection or contradiction, that can he not do; not for any defect or
impotencie in himself, God forbid; But for the contradiction or imperfection
of that, which man requires to be done. For this cause, God cannot bring to
pass, that Lazarus was not once dead; albeit he could and de facto did, ma^ke
well my discourse.
raise him up from death to life again. For this cause, God cannot make
another God equal to himself. For this cause, God cannot sin. Yet,
whatsoever neither implies contradiction, nor imperfection, that God can do
without all peradventure, because he is omnipotent. Now then, the malefactor
that has killed a man, and is by a popish priest absolved from the guilt of
that fact; must perforce tell a leasing to the judge, when he says he killed
not the man; though we suppose it true, that at that time he be freed from the
sin. For it is one thing, to have killed the man; an other thing, to be
freede from the crime; even as it was one thing, for Lazarus to be restored to
life; an other thing, to have been dead. And as it can never be true, to say
Lazarus was not once dead; so can it never be true, to say the malefactor did
not once kill the man.

Again, the papists teach generally and uniformly, that none without a
special revelation from heaven, can know that he is in the state of salvation,
and freede from his mortal sins. The malefactor therefore cannot assure
himself, that he is purged from the murder by virtue of his absolution. And so
we see, or at lest may see, the fondnes of Jesuitical doctrine. Fie upon it.
See the end of y^ fifth chapter, how they bind men and women unto the^.
Fourthly, the Jesuits in Rome, acknowledge the Pope to be Lord spiritual and
temporal, over all christian princes. All the extrauagant decretals, impose
the same upon all monarchies. it is a proposition very familiar in the court
of Rome, and in the bulls appointed for the publication of the Iubily, in the
year 1600. Saint Peter, and Saint Paul are called princes of the earth. These
words are set down, in the Jesuits catechism. Libr. 3. cap. 26. fol. 233.

The Jesuits teach, that the Pope has authority to excommunicate Kings, and
to transfer their kingdoms to others; as also to free subjects, from their
allegance to their sovereigns. this is proved as well in my Survey, as in
sundry places of this discourse. yet the absurdity hereof, both the English
priests and French Papists do acknowledge, and most evidently confute the same.
mark their proofs, which now follow in order.

Again, where Master A. C. says, that power was not given to Saint Peter by
Christ, to transfer gentem in gentem, it is both catholic, and true
doctrine; and in vain shall father Parsons, go about to infring it. These
words are set down, in the reply to Parsons. libell. Fol. 97. b. 17.

Neither can any law, or necessity in the world, contradict or impeach the
law of nature, See the (...) and (...), and note them well.
borne with man, and always remaining in himself. Thus it is written in the
reply to Parsons libell. Fol. 42. b. 18. And in an other place of the said
reply, viz. fol. 35. b. It is plainly and flatly avouched, that the law of
Praemunire against the Pope and Romish mischiefs, was enacted, and published
with the free and full consent, of all the clergy and temporaltie.

This we have said, and do say, y^ religious men and priests, have not to do
with kingdoms; and those of our own nation, which have dealt in such affairs
against their Prince and country, we do therein condemn their actions, and
disclaim from them, as undutiful and unpleasant to all true English natures,
these words are in the reply to Parsons libell. fol. 38. b.

Jesuit, learn this lesson of me; for I will not suffer, either our
countrie-men to be infected with thy poisonous propositions, or strangers that
shall read this book of thine, to conceive, that the majesty of our King is
by thy coming any whit empayred. First, we maintain, and uphold it for an
article inviolable in France, Lo, the Pope cannot depose kings, nor translate
their kingdoms.
that the Pope has no authority to be liberal of our Realm, for any man's
advantage whatsoever, what fault soever our King shall be found capable of,
none excepted, the Pope has no power, but what is given him by commission from
God. He is neither that Samuel, nor that Iehoiada, who were commanded by God to
do, what they did under the old law. For under the new, which we call the new
testament, there is no mention of any such matter. The Pope cannot by the power
of his spiritual sword, control the temporal.

We hold it for an article firm and indubitable in this Realm of France, that
our kings are not subject to the Popes excommunication. A thing which we
have received from all antiquity. Lothaire king of Austracia decea^^^ lest
Jews his brother, who was Emperor and King of (...) to be his successor.
king Charles the Balde uncle to them both seized on it by right of occupation,
as lying fit for his hand. Jews had recourse to Pope Adrian, The Pope is
ready to curse, slow to bless.
who undertook the quarrel for him, and summoned Charles to do his nephew
right. But Charles gave no ear to him. So the Pope went on, to interpose his
censures with bitter curses and comminations. He enjoined Hingmare arch bishop
of Rhemcs, not to admit the King to communicate with him, upon pain himself
to be deprived of his holiness his communion. ^^gmare advised by diverse
prelates and barons of France, wrote back to the Pope, that all of them were
of^ended, and grieved with his decree, and would not obey him. These words are
set down in the Jesuits catechism libr. 3. cap. 17. fol. 179.

Boniface the eight felling at variance with king Phillippe The fair, would
needs excommunicate him, but there was never excommunication cost pope so
dear, as that did him. For his Nancios were committed prisoners, his Bulls
burnt, and Boniface himself being taken by Nangeret chancellor of France,
presently after died for very sorrow and despite, that he had received so
foul a disgrace at the hands of his enemy. Wherein King Phillippe did
nothing, but by the counsel and consent of the whole clergy of France. So
far was his excommunication, from ^alling to the prejudice of the king and
his Realm; that contrariwise, it turned to his shame and confusion, by whom
it was decreed.

Bennet the 13. Otherwise called Peter De luna, interdicted Charles the sixth
and his Realm. The King sitting in the throne of justice in the parliament,
Lo, the bearers of the Pope bull, were set upon the pillory.
or high court of Paris, the 21. of May, 1408. gave sentence that the bull
should be rent in pieces, and that Gonsalue and Conseloux the bearers thereof,
should be set upon a pillorie, and publicly notified and traduced in the
Pulpit. The meaning whereof was, that the people should be taught and informed,
that the king was not liable to any excommunication. Which decree was
accordingly put in execution in the month of August, with the greatest scorn
that could be devised, the two nuncios or legates having this inscription upon
their miters; these men are disloyal to the Church, and to the king. These
words are put down in the Jesuits catechism, lib. 3. cap. 17. fol. 182.

He has forgot belike the notorious fact at Louain where the Jesuits by the
power and authority of the King of Spain, forbad the publishing of the Popes
order for the university against the Jesuits. This fact belike this good
father thought to have been so secret, as it was unknown to the world, or at
the least forgotten. These words are in y^ reply, to Parlons libell. fol. 20.
b. 21. In an other place of the said reply, viz. fol. 42. b. 5. it is flatly
set down, that Pope Paul the fourth sent Caraffe with force of arms, to
invade Naples; to whom the King of Spain would not yield, albeit as it is
there affirmed, the Pope has more right thereto, then the Spaniard.

Note here gentle reader, these points of great importance with me. first,
that by Jesuitical doctrine, a Pagan or Jew may be the Pope of Rome. Secondly,
that neither Pope, Munke, Jesuit, or Nun, are or can be lawful at Rome;
unless the Stews be also lawful there. Thirdly, that one may deny the fact
which he has done, and that before a competent judge; and yet neither sin,
nor lie at all. Fourthlie, that both the Jesuits and the Pope himself tell
us, that the Pope is both Lord spiritual and temporal over all christian
princes; as also, that he can deprive christian princes of their royal
scepters and regalities. But withal forget not, that not only the english
priests, but the French Papists also, tell us the flat contrary. viz. That the
Pope has no authority to depose Kings, or to translate their kingdoms; that
the Pope cannot excommunicate kings; that Charles the Bald contemned Pope
Adrian, and derided his curses and comminations; that King Philip the fair
resisted Boniface the eight, burnt his bulls, and imprisoned his legates; and
that all this was done, by the counsel and consent of the whole clergy of
France; that Charles the sixth despised pope Benedicts interdict; burnt his
Bulls; caused the bringers thereof to be set on the pillorie; and that to be
done in most reproachful manner, that could be devised by the wit of man.
Fifthly, that the King of Spain does withstand the Pope, and his forces; and
will not yield Naples, which (his right, as the Priests write,) unto him.

The secular priests give this commendation, to the religion of the Jesuits.
We desire you say they, by the mercies of God, to take heed of n^uelties and
Iesuitisme. for it is nothing, but treachery, dissimulation, ambition, and a
very vizard of most deep hypocrisy. When other kingdoms begin to loath them,
why should you so far debate your selves, as to admire them? give us not
occasion to say with the blessed Apostle; ye foolish Galathians, who has
bewitched you? These words are set down, in the important considerations. page
39. see quodl. 8. art. 7. page 247.

Lo gentle reader, the religion of our Jesuits is nothing else in deed, but
treachery, ambition, dissimulation, and flat hypocrisy.

The Jesuits have provided that all who come out of Spain, must swear, vow,
profess, or at least acknowledge an obedience to M. Blackwell in all things;
yea, even to become rank traitors against their Prince and country; for that
is principally intended. These words are to be found in the sparing
discovery, Pervse the fi^t chapter in the first section, ^ note it well.
in the end almost of the epi^^le, in the last page save one.

Now then, the actions of the Jesuits, tending so euidenly as they do and
have done, to the ruin, subversion, and overthrow, of our Prince and country,
both by secret practices, and open incursions of Spanish invasions, (as is
manifest both by their own books, letters, and other dealinges, as well in
Ireland as England,) what good subject or true hearted English man, can do
less the^ disclame with his mouth, resist with his blood, and open with his
tongue, all such unnatural and treacherous attempts? We are too much
acquainted therewith, and therefore bound to reveal what we know therein, when
it shall be necessary for the preservation of our Prince and contry. These
words are to be found, in the reply to Parsons libell. fol. 28. b.

All Catholics must hereafter depend upon Blackwell, and Blackewell upon
Garnet, and Garnet upon Parsons, and Parsons upon the Devil. These words are
set down in the discovery, Page. 70. quodlibet. 6. art. 7. page. 173.

But for the Jesuits they are so headlong and violent in these courses, that
they seem no more to regard the good of our country or estate thereof, then
the Spaniardes themselves. For notwithstanding the manifest intentions of
conquest, and subversion by the Spaniards intended: yet do they so concur
with them, as where as the Spaniard of himself seems slow, they prick him
on continually with plots and suggestions. Witness father Parsons actions,
concerning two several nauies which miscarried; in one of which, Master Doctor
Stillington took his death; of the other he speaks since, in a letter writ
from Rome to Master Thomas Fitzherbert. Witness this the late attempt in
Irelande, in which father Archer an Irish Jesuit was a great actor. These
words are set down in the reply to Parsons libell. fol. 33. b.

The Jesuits dispose of the last wills of the sick; they love to intermedle
with the marriages of many, with their temporal goods, and in deed with all
things, they always take that course with all men, that some thing happen to
their own share, having mind indeed of nothing, but their own gain. These
words are set down in the abstract, page 75.

Note here Gentle reader, these important observations. First, that all
Iesuited persons must vow to become traitors. Secondly, that all Jesuits seek
nothing else indeed out their own lucre and gain. Thirdly, that all Iesuited
persons must depend upon the devil, who as you see here, inspireth guides,
directs, and rules the Jesuits. From such religion, good Lord deliver us.
Amen.

CHAP. V.
Of the birth, parentage, quality, disposition, and demeanor, of Robert
Parsons the Jesuit.
The first Section, of his birth and bastardie.
RObert Parsons the Jesuit, is by birth a bastard, begotten upon the body of
a very base woman, by the Parson of the parish where he was borne; (to wit, at
Stockgersee:) and his right name is not Parsons, but Cowbucke. The said Parson
of Stockgersee which begat him, did afterward foster him, and having brought
him up at the school, sent him to Oxford, and placed him in Balioll College.
From whence being master of arts, he was expelled; not for religion as he has
vanted, but for his basterdie, factious conversation, libelling, and other
misdemeanors. But thereof ye need no further information, then the said
declaration; where you shall find, that there was such lamentation at his
departure from the College, as for joy he was rung thence with bells. Doctor
Bagshaw being then fellow of the said College, was his stifle adversary in
his matters objected against him; which the good father of his Jesuitical
charity, does not when occasion serves, forget. These words are set down in ye
discovery. Page 42. and page 29. quodlibet. 7. art. 10. page 217. quodl. 4.
art. 2. in fine.

Concerning father Parsons illegitimation, I have often wished it had not been
urged, being not much to the purpose. But since it have been urged, and that he
denies it, I will but ask him, why he was expelled Balioll College in
Oxford, and whether the chiefest matter objected was not perjury, in taking
the oath of the house to the statutes, amongst the which this was one; Volumus,
vt omnes huius collegij alumni sint legitimo thoro nati; which was urged
against him, and offered to be proved openly. For the avoiding of which public
infamy, he made his own resignation, writing it with his own hand, as is yet
to be seen. This is more, then I meant to have said in this matter, being a
personal touch; had no father Parsons over much urged the objection, not only
as an untruth, but also invented and framed by us. Hereby you may see, that
the matter was not coined by any of us, nor so void of verity, as he affirms.
These words are let down, in the reply to Parsons libell. Fol. 91. b. 6.

Now then for our credits with father Parsons, for his rising by practices, Lo,
the Jesuits use to prefer factious heads.
or factious disposition, I will say no more, but what is iusti^able a part
rei, viz. that the most stirring, meddling, and practicing heads amongst all of
our English nation, (to go no further,) have always come to credit and
pre-eminence amongst them. Witness this per inductionem father Parsons, whose
factious dispesition has been every where sufficiently displayed, with
proofs suf^cient. Witness father Heywood, and his busy inclination at his
coming into England, of which father Parsons can bear witness, being at
variance with him; and many other priests yet living in England, some of them
having been present at his synodes, where he made himself president in the
Popes name. Witness father Holt, of whose disposition you may read in master
Charles Pagets answer to the Apology. Witness father Creswell, as you may see
in Doctor Elies answer to the Apology. Witness father Garnet, the only chief
actor, in all our stirs here in England. I might add father Crichton the
Scot, with therest; and father Holt, (if he were alive,) would take my part.
These then are pretty inducements, to think father Parsons rose in his order,
by his factious disposition.

But for the other point concerning master Blackwell, let him be examined upon
his oath, The Archpriest must be a witness, against his good master.
whether he came not to master Bluet then prisoner in the Marshalsies, using
these or the like words; what meant Doctor Allen to send this man over, he will
undo us all. And being asked why; he answered, that his expulsio^ ^ut of
Oxford was so infamous, that it would be objected by the protestants, to the
disgrace of the cause. Let master Blackwell I say, be urged with this. and I
adjure him, as he will answer it before almighty God at the latter day, to
say the truth; and then father Parsons shall see we have won our credits even
in both these points, besides an hundred more already proved. These words are
put down in the reply to Parsons libell. Fol. 93. a. 30.

Out of this spirit it is, that father Cowbucke (alias Parsons,) for all the
disparage of his birth (which not his baptism could wash away,) and other his
scandalous carriages, as well since his Iesuitisme, as formerly when he was an
heretic in Oxford, ambitioneth the Cardinalate, forgetting how that to be a
bare priest (though no such peer,) he being a known bastard, is against the
canons of y^ Church; although to be a Jesuit (being such,) well and good he
may. These words are put down, in master A. C. his second letter, page. 23.
and more at large, page 38.

What name of his, (he speaks of the Jesuit Robert Parsons,) or but two
letters of his name, find ye to this his manifestation of folly and bad spirit,
whereby he not to deserve to be burned in the hand for a vagabond? not any. No
nor any durst he show, manifesting so badde spirit, and so much folly in that
censure of his, as he has done. He is discovered for such as he is, viz. a man
who being the misbegotten of a ploughman, and he a cuckwold too, upon the body
of a plough-man, has accordingly demeaned himself; first, in begetting two
bastards male and female, upon the body of his own sister, between his age
of seventeen and three and twenty, which was the cause he ran away (as
fearing the sheet, etc.) And so became a Jesuit; secondly, or rather formerly
and continually, by being a common alehouse-squire, and the drunkennest sponge
in all the parish where he lived; thirdly, for being an heretic of the family
of love all his life, till he became a Jesuit. These words are set down in
master. A.C. his third letter, page 50. and more at large, page 78.

O Parsons, monster of mankind, fitter for hell then middle earth. Thou give
occasion to think, that thou art not a mere man, but some fairies brat,
begotten of some Incubus, or aerish spirit, upon the body of a base woman.
These words are set down expressly, by the author of the quodlibets. quodl.
8. art. 5. page 238. and quodl. 4. art. 5. he is termed a sacrilegious bastard,
borne of a base queen.

Not, here gentle Reader, two things of great moment. First, that when the
Pope abandoned lawful and honest wedlock to priests. (which was ever deemed
lawful, until Syricius was advanced to the Popedom in the year 385. as I
have proved in my book of Surucy,) then the priests had good store of
bastards; one of which as the priests here confess, was expelled from Balioll
College for his bastardie, and seditious dealing, and is this day (even by the
free confession of the secular priests,) an arrant traitor to his prince and
native country. Secondly, that this holy father, who must forsooth reform the
Church of England and manage every thing in that high and heavenly function,
was to be sent from heaven with heavenly and extraordinary gifts. viz. he must
first be a priests, sacrilegious bastard. Then, he must be a common drunkard.
Thirdly, he must be polluted with the execrable sin of incest, and beget male
and female upon the body of his own sister. Fourthly, he must be given to
sedition and libelling. Fifthly, he must be a rank traitor to his natural
sovereign. At the length, being thus qualified with supernatural gifts, and
extraordinary graces proceeding from Beelz^bub that notable Machiuell; he must
deprive noble Queen Elizabeth of her royal and princely Diadem, and set the
same upon the Spaniards head; he must make a bloody massacre, of all the
nobles and other her loving subjects; he must abolish, abandon, and make
havoc, of all the ancient laws of this Church and Realm; and so forsooth (
si dijs placet) set up his newly devised Monarchy, his holy so falsely named
reformation.

Sect. II.
Of his notortous treasons and bloody trecheries.
THe next point brought in by father Parsons, is the last Irish attempt; but
before we say any thing to that, we must put his fatherhood in mind of his
practices, concerning two other preparations, wherein he cannot deny himself
to have been not only a dealer, but also the very chief and principal
actor. The first was that, whe^in Doctor Stillington and some others got their
death, which miscarried by reason of the ignorance of their pilotes, or rather
by the provision of God, thirty four ships being shiuered upon their own
bays. If he deny this, we have master Thomas Leake a reverend priest, and
others witness thereto, with whom he dealt to go in that army. And because
master Leake refused, he entreated him accordingly. This preparation was
intended, (as then was thought,) for Ireland. The second preparation was some
three or four years after (if I be not deceived,) of which father Parsons
makes mention, in a letter written to master Thomas fitzharbert from Rome into
Spain, desiring to hear of the success thereof, saying withal, that they
had little hope of that attempt at Rome. This preparation (as I remember,) was
in the same year, that the Earl of Essex went into the Islands, and it
miscarried also by tempests. These two preparations are so evident, to have
proceeded with his concurre^ce, and cooperation, as he no way can deny it,
without the note of impudency; so many witness and his own letters, being in
testimony against him. What wise man will not laugh at father Parsons, to
hear him in such sober protestation affirm, that he never intended, that the
king of Spain should have any temporal interest to the Crown of England, and
yet by all his might and power seek to make him master thereof, by invasion
and force of arms? Was the book of titles (wherein the kings daughter, the
Lady Infanta was entitled to all her Majesty's dominions,) writ to no
purpose, Parsons the author of the traiterous book of titles.
but to exercise father Parsons wit,? was it a vain speculation in the air,
without relation to effect or end? there is a most traiterous letter of his
extant, which in time may come to light. But should I labor to light a candle
at noone tide? whose positions good father are these? the Catholics in
England, Tyrone in his wars, and that with great merit, and hope of eternal
reward, as though they warred against same case, that shall help the English
with any victuals, or any such like thing. The most worthy prince Hugh o Neale
and other Catholics of Ireland, that fight against the Queen, are by no
construction rebels. How say you friar Robert, out of what forge came these
warlike engines? they were hammered in Salamanca the seventh day of March, 1602.
and are as you see, read hot. But what Vulcan was the workman of them? you
shall hear every one of them, speak for themselves. So I John de Sequenza,
professor of Divinity in the College of the society of Jesus, in the famous
University of Salamanca, do think. I Emanuel de Royas, professor of Divinity
in the same College of the society of Jesus, am of the same opinion. I Jasper
de Mena, professor of divinity, and of the sacred scripture in the same
College, do assent to these fathers sentence, as to an assured truth. I Peter
Osorio, preacher in the College of the society of Jesus at Tire, ain
altogether in judgment with these fathers. Now father Parsons, speak out man,
have any of your company been practicioners in the treasons of Ireland? the
Catholic author of the Jesuits Catechism tells us, that all the late
rebellious treacheries and murders he there mentions, were plotted and
contrived in the colleges of the Jesuits in France: and do not these
Jesuitical professors, tell us as much, of their own proceedings in their
colleges in Spaynt, for our treasons, rebellions, and murders in Ireland? I
can be but sorry, that the ancient Christian faith and rebellion of Christ,
should thus be scandalized by Machiuilians, under pretense of the blessed name
of Jesus. We can allege his letter written to the Earl of Angus, the 24. of
January, 1600. wherein he confesses, that he had labored eight or ten
years for his Majesty of Scotland, and the preferment of his title, with the
sum of twenty hundred crowns a year for two years together from Spain,
which were as he says, disbursed in the year 1583. and 84. as also 4000.
crowns procured to y^ same effect, from Pope Gregory the 13. by bil of
exchange; which he confesses he brought to Paris, and there delivered it. And
he says the same had continued, it any correspondencie of gratitude, or hope
had continued from Scotland; with no small assurance of far greater matters,
and advancement to the kings person, if the enemies since of both our Realms
(as he says,) had not over thrown, and altered that course. This he has in
that letter, and much more. Whereby you may perceive, what his practices have
been from time to time, against her Majesty and State; seeking first as you
see, by large pensions from Spain, to work with the Scots and others, for the
untimely advancement of his title, which must have been with the overthrow of
her Majesty, or otherwise you know, it could not have been. And here I
request the reader, to note these labors of father Parsons for the affairs,
of Scotland, to have been in the years, 1583. and 1584. in which self same
year, happened the traiterous plots of Patry, Frances Throgmorton, and the
Earl of Northumberland, and the practices with the Duke of Guise, Spayniard,
and other English abroad, about the delivery of the Queen of Scots, and
overthrow of her Majesty; and shortly after, the treasons of Babington and his
accomplices. Which I note, that you may see, how father Parsons courses concurred
at the same instant with their attempts; and by this you may guess, whether it
be not more then probable, that he was inward with all those devises; and
perhaps some of that money was employed, to the setting forward of those
attempts, though he would seem clear in all things. But it is Gods will, that
his own letters and writings, should discover his dealings. There want not
other letters of his and his accomplices, which show his good will toward our
sovereign and country, but these shall be sufficient at this time. These
words are set down, in the reply to Parsons libell. Fol. 65. fol. 66. fol. 67.
fol. 68.

The Jesuit Parsons caused the students in Spain, to subscribe to the Lady
Infantaes title to the crown of England, and to what else he would, having
gotten their names to three several blankes. These words are set down, in
the hope of peace, page. 22. and they are defended to be true, in the reply to
Parsons libell, fol. 68. b. where it is affirmed, to be a matter very
notorious and evident, as also, that there are diverse priests yet living,
as well of them that were enforced to subscribe against their wills, as others
that openly refused the same, who will confirm this by oath.

To come to Parsons book of succession, what title is there, which he does not
inualidate one way or other, with bastardie, or the like, the Infanta her title
only excepted? does he not bring the marriage of the Earl of Harford in
question, to debar that line? does he not exclude the Scot, by the
assotiation, and so in the rest? only he leaves the Infanta sole heir,
without spot or stain. Again, has he not raked up a title for the Infanta,
See more of this fellows treasons in the next chapter.
from John of Gaunt, and before? never dreamed of in the world till his time,
to bring in her as a competitor. I am sure, he might bring in 300. at the least
within our own country as well, and with as good right and interest to the
Crown. These words are set down, in the reply to Parsons Libell. Fol. 77. a.

Sect. III.
Of Parsons impudency, and other his bad qualities manifold.
I will say, he is impudent, and has a face of brass, and is as shameless as
father Persons; who will affirm, or deny any thing. For my self have hard
the foresaid irreuerent speeches, from some of their own mouths. these words
are set down, in the reply to Parsons libell. fol. 21. a. 22. Again in an
other place, viz. fol. 10. a. 16. Thus; they are so apparently and inuincibly
confuted, as that I admire much at the man's brazen forehead, that he durst, so
palpablie lay open his follies, if not his malice.

But this is but an ordinary trick with Parsons, and his accomplices; that
every man, be he never so honest, if he once speak against a Jesuit, must
be esteemed a bad man, and a suspected companion; marry, if he run a long
with them in their courses, let him be never so lewd a varlet, he shall be
reputed for most honest. Witness this, Tomson, Coulfon, Tunsteed, and many
others of that rabble, which I could name. These words are set down, in the
reply to Parsons libell. fol. 11. a 19.

Believe me, when I read this, I was amazed with wondering at this man's brazen
visage, (he speaks of Parsons that holy Jesuit.) Never did I in my life (I
protest,) read or hear so notorious wickedness and injustice, so impudently
recounted for just. Jesus, whither will this man go, or what will he not
justify and commend? Does not all our little world know, that the erecting of
the Arch. priest, was the cause of all our dissentions? How then was he
procured, at our own petition? did not M. Standish most falsely by his means,
suggest unto the Pope in our names a desire of such a thing, we never dreaming
thereof? did any one priest in England send his hand, or consent with Master
Standish to solicit any such matter? Were not the Jesuits constrained, Lo,
Parsons has the trade of lying.
cunningly to extort ratihabitions from the priests themselves, by
subscriptions unto a congratulatorie letter, after that they had by forgerie
erected him, and saw him impugned? Diabolus est mendax, and pater eius. God
send father Parsons more shame, more honesty, and more truth. I wonder not
now, at any thing he says. for I well see, he has wholly given himself over,
to the trade of fittening; with which it seems, he has made sale of his
conscience. These words are set down, in the reply to Parsons libell, fol 57.
a. And in an other place, viz. fol. 53. b. Thus; but father Parsons will never
leave, his old tricks of iugling. In an other place. viz. fol. 75. b. Thus;
neither were their wits so weak, as not able to see father Parsons cunning
aim therein, Though like a Gipsey, he play at fast and loose, yet men that are
acquainted with his old tricks, can guess at his new fetches.

The complement of this chapter.
As for Don Bernardino Mendoza, it is known, that he was wholly affectionate to
the Jesuits. and it is but an ordinary course with the Jesuits, to bind both
noble men and noble women, and others also, unto them by vow; and yet leaving
them in the world to be their instruments; of which kind in both sexes, I could
name some in our own country; and therefore it is no strange thing to charge
the Jesuits, to have men in the world abroad that are theirs, and bound to
them in vow, and therefore may be termed Jesuits. for what does incorporate
into a religious body, but the vows thereof, amongst which obedience is the
chiefest. These words are set down, in the reply to Parsons libell. fol. 47.
a. 23.

Note here gentle reader, what a cursed crewe of disloyal caterpillars these
Jesuits be. they are not only rank traitors, as you have hard at large; but
so full of cozonage, and hypocritical dealing in their pestilent sect; that no
man can tell, when he talks, or conue^seth with a Jesuit. for they are both
Friars and Nuns, both men, and women, and live in the world to set forward
Jesuitical plots and treasonable practices, as if they were lay people. The
like was never heard of in the world; it is a new no religion; it is a folly of
all follies; Friars are become Nuns, and Nuns are Friars, and all are
iumbled up together. They may dilate and enlarge their hypocritical sect, by a
most execrable and sacrilegious propag^tion. For Friars may begette Friars, and
Jesuitical Nuns may be their mothers. Well, it is expedient to know these
holy secular Friars, as also the religious contemplative Nuns. For secret
traitors are most dangerous, Remember the memorable caue^^.
and not to be tolerated in a well managed common weal. Now, these gallants,
these Friars and these Nuns, are known to the secular priests, as here you
see. again, they are arrant traitors, as the said priests confess. Thirdly,
the said priests, as themselves have voluntarily granted, are bound in
conscience to discover them. Let wise magistrates remember these points, and
think upon the execution. Let them not forget, that both secret friars, and
secret Nuns, are in this Realm; and that not base Friars and base Nuns,
but nobles of the best families, noble men, and noble women. if this gear, and
this treacherous dealing, be permitted a while; welladay, and welladay, may be
Englands song night and day. for the Priests themselves here tell us, that
these noble Friars and these noble Nuns, are permitted by the Jesuits, to
live as lay-persons in the world; that so they may the better be able to
effect, their treacherous and bloody practices every where.

Chap. VI.
Of the Pope and his English hispanized seminaries.
Paragraph. I.
Of Parsons the Popes instrument in stateaffaires.
Parsons was the special instigator of the Duke of Guise, an. 1583. Or there
abouts, for his sudden surprising the City of London, and her majesty's
person, with 5000. men; assuring him, that the Catholics would assist him, if
need required. It is not unknown, what a villainous attempt the traitor Parrie
undertook; against the life of her Majesty, ann. 1583. With which outrageous
plot, sundry of the Jesuits were acquainted, and namely this arrant traitor
Parsons; who also entitled Alexander the Duke of Parma to her Majesty's
crown, and endeavored with all his skill, to persuade the Duke in the right of
his son Ranutius, to set upon this Realm with all his force. But the attempt
of anno. 1588. By the King of Spain against her Majesty and this whole
kingdom, is to be abhorred above all the rest, and to be had in perpetual
detestation. And yet in that cruel attempt, this our Jesuit was a chief
firebrand, and had his hand in that pernicious book, that was then printed for
the stirring up of her Majesty's subjects, to have taken part with the
Spaniard, if he could have arrived. These words are to be found, in the sparing
discovery. page 49. page. 51. page 52.

A large volumne is set forth by this Parsons and his general, The high
counsel of reformation
called the high counsel of reformation for England, to take place and to be
of force, when the catholic conqueror shall be established in great Brytaine.
First, no sicut placuit Iesuitis; for the holy Ghost has forsaken all other
religious orders, and is only in the Capuchenes and Jesuits. If you ask us,
why they make choice of the Capuchenes only; we answer you, as a good
Capuchene did to the like question. we suit best (quoth he,) with the humor of
the Jesuits; for their drift is to have all, and to rule all; and on the
contrary, our orders are such, as we must neitheir rule at all, neither have
any thing at all.





yearly; and what diet they shall keep at their tables.

Lastly, the common laws of our contrie must be abolished, page 28. 29. and in
the dialogue also, page. 95. as also, quodlibet. 4. art. 2. page. 93.
quodlibet. 9. art. 2. page 289.

Note here gentle reader, these important points with me. First, that the
Jesuits do persuade themselves confidently, and would persuade all others in
like manner; that they can procure a conquest of England, at their pleasure.
Secondly, that themselves are the only wise men in all Europe, at least in
their own conceits; and consequently, that all people or all estates and
condition whatsoever, must in reason yield to their counsel of reformation.
Thirdly, that all bishops, parsons, and vicars, must depend upon the
Jesuitical munks, those irreligious and traiterous friars; a thing never heard
of, since the world began. Fourthly, that not only the ancient laws of the
Church, but also of the Realm, must be altered by Jesuitical profested
friars. Fifthly, that munks (the hautie and arrogant Jesuits I mean,) must be
the high treasurers of the land. Sixthly, that all the nobility of the land,
must be censured and limited by the said Friars, what retinew they shall keep,
what sums of money they shall spend, and what diet they shall use, Seventhly,
and lastly, that these Jesuits, these Lordly Friars, these noble treasurers of
England, are lawles and independent; above all and under none; no man may call
them to accoumpt; no man may once ask them, what is become of the common
treasure.

Two Priests (Master Bishop and Master Charnocke,) being messengers to
Rome, sent in the name of all the rest, were imprisoned at Rome before their
message was delivered. The French Ambassador came to the Pope and told him,
that in imprisoning those two men, he had done that, whereof no example could
begiuen in any age. And therefore beseeched the Pope, to give them audience.
After the Ambassadors departure, forthwith comes the Spanish Ambassador
suborned by, Parsons, and disswadeth the Pope from that which he had promised.
The French Ambassador comes again the second time, and urges as before;
and again audience was granted to the Priests. This being known to the
Jesuits, they procured the said Spanish Ambassador to come again to dissuade
the Pope, at whole motion audience again was denied, and the Priests cast into
prison. These words are set down, in the preface to the important
considerations. fol. 8. page. 2. See also Master Elies notes upon the
Apology. page 108. for there the same is avouched.

Note here gentle reader, these points with me. First, that the Jesuits are
men, which respect neither religion nor conscience, nor honest moral dealing.
Again, that the Pope is an unfit man, to govern any one nation; and much
less fit, to govern all the christian world. But all is well, his traytorous
Jesuits can do it for him. Yea, they can rule the Pope himself, For so
themselves affirm. These are their words, in the notes upon the Apology.
page. 267. Parsons for his credit (you say,) in the Roman court, does greatly
let and hinder their designements. And this their saying was not many months
since confirmed, by one of his own coat passing by this way; who said Father
Parsons could do what he would, with the Pope.

Paragraph. II.
Of the Popes dealing in matters of treason.
Pi^s quintus practiced her majesty's subuersio^; he sent into England one
Ridolphi a gentleman of Florence, under color of merchandise, Lo, the Pope
purposely intended rebellion.
to solicit a rebellion. He moved the King of Spain to join in this
exploite, for the better securing of his own dominions, in the low countries.
He denounced his bull against her majesty, purposely to further the intended
rebellion, and to deprive her from her kingdom. The Pope and king of Spain
assigned the Duke of Norfolk, to be the head of this rebellion. The Pope gave
order to the said Ridolphi, The Duke of Norfolk a traitor.
to take 150000. crowns to set forward his attempt. some of which money was
sent for Scotland, and some delivered to the said Duke. King Philippe at the
Popes instance, determined to send the Duke of Alua into England, with all his
forces into the low countries, to assist the Duke of Norfolk. Are all these
things true, and were they not then in hand, King Philip appointed the Duke of
Alua, to aid the Duke of Norfolk.
whilst her majesty dealt so mercifully with you? how can you excuse these
des^gnements, so unchristian, so vnpriestly, so treacherous? when we first
heard these particulars, we did not believe them; but when we saw the book,
and found them there; God is our witness, we were much amazed, and can say no
more, but that his holiness was misformed, and indirectly drawn to these
courses. To proceed, the Catholics continued as before, Ergo the Pope may err.
till the said rebellion brake forth in the North, 1569. a little before
Christmasse; and that it was known, that the Pope had excommunicated the
Queen, and thereby freed her subjects (as the bull imports) from their
subjection. The^ followed a restraint, but the sword was only drawn against
such Catholics, as had risen up actually into open rebellion. Well, the
sentence was procured by surreption, Rebellion in the North. 1569.
and the Pope was deceived, as he is often in matters of fact. These words
are set down, in the important considerations, page, 10. 11.

Master Sanders also tells us, that Master Morton and Master Web two
secular priests, were sent by the pope before the said rebellion, to the Lords
and gentlemen in the North, to excite them with their followers, Lo, every
thing tends to rebellion.
to take up arms against their sovereign. And the rather to persuade them
thereunto, they signified to them by the Popes commandment, that her majesty
was excommunicated, and her subjects released from their obedience. And the
said Master Saunders does justify the commotion, and ascribes the evil
success it had, to the ouerlate publishing of the Bull, it being not generally
known of, till the year after, when Felton had set it up upon the Bishop of
Londons gate.

These words are set down in the discovery before said, Page 12 in the said
important considerations, page 12. The Priests confess, that Master Saunders
does to much extol the said rebels; because say they, they were men arraigned
and executed by the ancient laws of our country, for high treason.

In the place alleged, the Priests confess, that Parsons and others of his
coat, have since followed the former intolerable and vncatholike course. They
confess also, that with in four or five years, it was commonly known to the
Realm, what attempts were in hand by Master (...) Master Saunders, for an
interprise by force in (...); in which action Master Saunders being to much
Iesuited did thrust himself in person, as a chief ringleader, The priest
Saunders, was the Ringleader ^^^bellion.
for the better assisting of the rebels. and whilst these practices were in
hand in Ireland, Gregory the 13. renews the said Bu^^ of P^us quintns, and
denounces her majesty to be excommunicate, with intimation of all other
particulars in the former Bull mentioned, which was procured no doubt by
sur^^ption, the false Jesuits daring to attempt any thing, Lo, the devil
brought the Jesuits. into England. Ano. 1580.
by untrue suggestion, and lewd surmises; which Jesuits as the devil would
have it, came into England, and intruded themselves into our harvest, being the
chief instruments of all the mischiefs, that have been intended against her
majesty, since the beginning of her reign. Their first coming was in the
year 1580. Campion the (...) and Pa^sons the provincial, Alias bastard
Cardinal Cowbucke, as you have heard already.

In the said important considerations, page 22. it is set down, how the Pope
by the ins^^gations of the Jesuits, plotted with the King of Spain, Mendoza is
a Jesuit.
for the assistance of the Duke of Guise against the Queen of England. For the
better effecting whereof, Mendoza the Jesuit and ledger for the King of Spain
in England, See impors* co^sid p. 22. 24. P. 23. 18.
set on work Fraunces Throckmorton and diverse others. two others also about
the same time viz. ann. 1583. Arden and Sommervile, were purposed and had
contrived how they might lay violent hands upon her Majesty's sacred person.
And Doctor Party the same year, Important considerat. p. 22 24. and p. 23. 18.
was plotting with Jesuits beyond the seas, how he might have effected the
like villainy. About the same time, the Earl of Northumberland, was brought
into the plot of the Duke of Guise. Hereunto may be added, the notable treasons
of Anthony Babington and his accomplices, in the year 1586. the treachery also
of Sir William Stanley the year following 1587. in the page. 40. it is
confessed, that Cardinal Allen and Parsons, published the renouation of the
Bull by Sixtus Quintus; so as the Pope must needs be condemned, to have dealt
in matters of treason, and to have been the chiefest author thereof. For in
his name, and upon his pretensed authority, the others did all that was done;
and without him they durst not have done any thing, as is evident by this
discourse.

Paragraph. III.
Of the Popes Seminaries.
THat the Pope did erect his seminaries, for to withdraw English subjects, from
their due obedience and allegiance to their natural sovereign; it may and
does appear most evidently, by his first mission of his seminarists, into the
Realm of England. For I pray you, when Sherwin, R^ston, and Birket, were sent
into this land from Rome, (who were the first that came from thence,) did not
the Pope send with them at the same time, Gregory 13.
the Jesuits C^mpion and Parsons that priestly bastard? I wot he did, my
self was ^estis oculatus, being then one of that College. And how did he send
them? Mush, one of these secular priests which now stand against these
Jesuits, can tell as well as my self, because he was then of the same
college at Rome. I know, and he knows, that the excommunication was then
renewed in fresh print, and common in every man's hands, my self had one of
them at the same time. In which Bull, her Majesty was denounced to be
excommunicate, to be an usurper, and pretensed Queen of England, and all her
subjects were thereby absolved, freed, and discharged of their allegiance to
her. In this manner furnished, these good fellows receive the Popes blessing,
and their viaticum, which was a good one I warrant you, and so they march
toward England. Who forthwith after their arrival, (as you may read in the
important considerations, Page. 14.) bestirred themselves, as the devil would
have them, (for these are the very words of the priests,) like a tempest,
with great brags and challenges; and Parsons forthwith fell to his Jesuitical
courses, of which you have heard copiously, in the chapter next before going.
Touching the erection of popish seminaries, who so lists, may read at large
in my book of motives, in the chapter of dissension.

CHAP. VII.
Of the English hispanized Seminaries, and the intent of their erection.
IT is apparent, that the seminaries in Spain were intended by father Parsons,
of purpose to cause a conquest, and to bring this land into the bondage and
slavery of the Spaniard. quodl. 8. art. 10. page 278.

The Jesuits have been plotting about this Monarchy, these twenty years
together. That is to say, how to bring both states ecclesiastical and
temporal under their subjection. For this cause it is, that father Parsons so
speedily obtained of the king of Spain, there to institute three seminaries on
his Majesty's costs and charges; that grains and indulgences must be
published in England on the Spanish behalf, for all that take his part; that
all who come out of Spain, must swear, vow, profess, or at least
acknowledge, an obedience to master Blackwell in all things; Yea, even to
become rank traitors against their prince and country, for that is principally
intended. These words are set down in the end of the preface, which is annexed
to the sparing discovery.

Parsons caused diverse by fair means and threats to subscribe, that in all
conferences they should when they came into England, advance the Infantaes
title, not intending thereby to expect her Majesty's death, but by all means to
remove her, from the present possession of her royal estate. These words are
set down in the discovery, See the 16. Preamble.
Page 57. as also in the important considerations, Page. 34.

By these testimonies gentle reader, two things are cleared; the one, that
Parsons the Jesuit, alias bastard Cowbucke, takes upon him as roundly as
traitorously, to place and displace, to put on and take of royal Diademes, at
his good will and pleasure. The other, that the three English hispanized
semiminaries, erected in Saint Lucars, Civil, and Valledolid, are and must be
mainteyned, to further, aid, and assist, the Spanish bloody intendments,
against their undoubted sovereign and native country.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Popes authority.
I Have discoursed at large of this theme, in my book of motives. I mean
here to speak thereof only, See the fourth chapter, in the 11. Paragraph.
as the printed books published by the secular priests, have ministered ^t
occasion to me. Where I wish the indifferent reader, to mark well what I shall
by Gods help, deliver in this behalf. In which my dispute, I will for
perspicuitie sake, proceed by way of sections.

Sect. I.
Of the Popes fact in assoyling her Majesty's subjects, from their homage to
her.
TOuching the Bull of Pious Quintus, and the same since confirmed by Gregory
13. against her Majesty; as neither the Spaniard, nor any other foreign
power, is either by express or implied terms thereof, incited to dominion
over this land, as little are English hearts thereby disallegeanced so from her
Majesty, as to concur with any foreign inuadour. For though the said Bulls
upon her Majesty's excommunication therein promulged, See the 4. chapter. the
6. Paragraph.
do de facto assoyle the subjects of this Realm from their homage to her; it
therefore follows not, that they must and ought to be parties against her
Majesty, and their country to a foreign power, howsoever pretending even
Religion, or the civil good thereunto. For that were to conster the Popes act
so overmuch in religion, and grace, as to the destruction of nature, which were
against the marime aforesaid. These words are taken out of the answer, to the
Iesuited gentleman, Page. 39.

Sect. II.
Of power granted to Saint Peter.
A Man to go against his own country, is and ever was holden in the civil
part of the world, an act contraius gentum; also unnatural, yea against all
grace. Besides, that Christ never did delegate any such power to S. Peter, as
tradere gentem in gentem, that being a mere temporal revenge, and he but his
vicar spiritual.

Sect. III.
Of the confirmation of the power, named in the former Section.
SAint Peter's commission against transgressing kings and kingdoms, is no more
then only to denounce by excommunication, and other the like ecclesiastical
censures, Gods displeasure against them for their transgression, and not to
exercise the secular sword at all. These words contained in the third and
second sections, are set down in the answer to the Jesuitical gentleman.
Page. 40.

Sect. IIII.
Of the explication of the former confirmation.
I Say again, I do not see, how that chair and those keys to be imbrued in
blood, and to atchieue conquests, especially such a tradition as of England to
Spain by the sword, can any ways stand, either with Christ's, or his said
vicars honor. These words are set down in the answer to the Iesuited
gentleman. Page. 42.

Sect. V.
Of the obeisance to the Popes comamundement.
WE all of the secular clergy, do with one assent utterly renounce both
Archpriest and Jesuits, as arrant traitors to their prince and country, whom
to death we will never obey; no, if the Popes holiness should charge us to
obey in this sense, to advance an enemy to the English crown, we would never
yield to it; as by no law of nature, of nations, or of man, to be compelled
thereunto. These words are set down, in the preface to the important
considerations. Fol. 9. page 2.

Sect. VI.
Of the Popes stat commandment, in matters. of treason.
THe secular priests hau^ng told us, The Pope is the cause of all rebellion.
that the Pope denounced his ^ul against her Majesty, purposely to suffer the
intended rebellion, and that he gave order to Ridolphi the Florentine to take
150000. crowns to set forward the said attempt, and much other matter to the
like effect, whereof I have spoken at large in the sixth chapter; do add
thereunto these express words; when we first heard these particulars, ^e did
not believe them, but would have laid our lives they had been false; but when
we saw the book, and found them there; God is our witness, we were much
amazed and can say no more, but that his holiness was misinformed, and directly
drawn to these courses. These words are set down in the important
considerations, Page. 10.

Now, out of these weighty and important points contained in these Sections,
certain conclusions are necessarily inferred, for which I have reserved the
next chapter, wishing the reader seriously to observe the same.

CHAP. IX.
Of certain memorable conclusions, worthy to be kept in perpetual
remembrance.
The first conclusion.
THe bishop of Rome has no authority derived from Christ, Read the 4.
chapter, in the 10. and 11. Paragraph.
or S. Peter, by which he may lawfully deprive and dispossess her Majesty,
(that now most happily reigns over us,) from her royal Diadem and
regalitie; and give the same to the king of Spain, to Isabella his sister, or
to any other foreign potentate whosoever. This conclusion is effectually
proved, by all the sections of the former chapter. For in the first section,
this authority is said Peter, whom all papists will grant to have had as great
power, as their Pope has, I am sure. In the third section, it is said plainly,
Peter's commission was only to denounce by excommunication, Gods displeasure
against trangressors of his laws. In the fourth section, it is avouched, that
this

The second conclusion.
THe pope was neither misinformed, nor indirectly drawn to deal as he did, in
the matters of treason. I prove it many ways. First, because he knew, See the
4. and 5 chapters, and note then w^ll.
that our gracious Elizabeth, was heir to the crown of England by succession
in blood royal; that she was opposite to his disholy holiness in religion; and
that the crown was set upon her head, by Oglethorpe the bishop of Carlett, a
papist to his own liking. 2. Because he knew his own viz. that he did
excommunicate her Majesty, that he did deprive her from her kingdom by his
Bull, that he did pronounce her an usurper; and that he discharged, absolved,
and freed all her subjects, from their allegea^ce to her. 3. Because he knew
Ridolphi the Florentine, the king of Spain, the Duke of Guise, and Stukeley,
Ridolphi, as the priests also grant, to take 150000. crowns to set forward the
This does confound the secular priests.
as the priests do, that he has no such authority. For the Jesuit
Bellarmine ascribes the said authority to the Pope, and defends it in that
very book, which he dedicated to the Pope himself; which book is this day
in p^int, in all or most parts of Europe. If the priests do not recant this
point, and submit themselves to his holiness; I am well assured, they must
smart for the same. I would therefore advise them, that as they have wisely
renounced the Jesuits and the Archpriest; so they will also (as I have
conceived some hope therein,) renounce the usurped and diabolical authority,
which the bishop of Rome falsely chalengeth to himself.

The third conclusion.
THe Pope even by the doctrine of the secular priests, has erred iudicially in
a matter of faith. For the proof whereof, we must o^ serve first, that the
Pope has no authority, neither from Chirst, nor from Saint Peter, to
translate. kingdoms, tradere gentem in gentem or to give the (...) of one
prince to an other. He has no such powe granted him, upon the face of the
earth. Thus much ^ freely granted in express terms, by the testimony of th
secular priests. Their words are set down in the chapte next aforegoing. Sect.
2.

Cap. 8. sect. 3.

Cap. 8. sect. 4.

Cap. 8. sect. 5.

de facto, thus commanded. This I prove by two strong reasons. First, because
the Jesuit Parsons did charge the English priests under pain of
excommunication, to join themselves forthwith with all their forces to the
Spaniards, against our most gracious Lady Queen Elizabeth. Secondly, because
Cardinal Alien did affirm openly, that the pope had made him cardinal with
intent to send him as his Legate, O graceless Cardinal.
for the sweeter managing of the said great affayre. I will here allege their
express words, as the secular priests have published them in print. Thus they
write;

Father Persons ascribes it to error of conscience, O most cruel and bloody
villain.
and want of coura^e, terming the same an effeminate dastardy, that we had then
suffered her majesty almost 30. years; o reign over us. He threatened us with
excommunication, and utter ruin both of our selves and all our posterity* if
we did then any longer obey or aid, defend or acknowledge, See the third book
in the third aduito.
her highness to be our Queen or superior; and did not forthwith join our
selves with all our forces to the Spaniards. The good Cardinal Allen by
Parsons means is drawn to say, that the Pope had made him Cardinal,
intending to send him as his legate, for the sweeter managing of this (for^oth)
godly and great affair; and to affirm upon his honor, Fie, s^e shall the (...)
depend upon the courtisie of the Spaniard^^ goodly new no recompense to all.
and in the word of a Cardinal, that in the fury of the Spaniards intended
conquest, there should beeas great care had of every c^tholike, and penitent
person, as possibly could be. And to allure the nobilit^e of his Realm, he
promised them to become an humble suter on their behalfes, that (so as they
show themselves valiant in assisting the King of Spain his forces,) they may
continue their noble name and families. These words are set down in the
important considerations, page, 25. 26. quodl. 8. art. 7. page. 247. See the
fourth book and the fifth chapter in the first section, and note it well.

Sixthly, that by popish doctrine, every papist is bound in conscience, to
employ his person and forces by the popes direction. For in justifying the
disloyalty of Sir William Standley, a worthy papist laid down this ground,
viz. that in all wars* which may happen for religion; every Catholic viz Now
far, when, and where, either at home or abroad, he may and must break with
his temporal sovereign. These words are set down, in the important
considerations, page. 24. See the fourth book and fifth chapter, and note it
well in the first section.

Out of these observations well marked and thoroughly them with all their
forces, as is proved in the first observation. de facto, even iudicially, and
in a matter of faith: when he affirmed it to be lawful, and a matter of
conscience, to obey his wicked and most execrable sentence; when he appointed
the English preiests and others, to take part with the Spanish powers against
their sovereign. And here by the way, It is lawful for every christian to
judge of the Popes do^trine. See the sixth quodlibet art to infine and the
apology. page. 17.
the gentle reader may note this excellent and golden corollary; viz that
though the priests and all Papists hold if for a constant maxim, that the pope
is the only judge in controversies; yet do the priests now when the case
touches themselves, take upon them to censure the Pope, and to say bouldly,
that they will not, because they are not bound, in such and such cases to obey
him. Mark well for Christ's sake, it is not my doctrine, but the doctrie of the
secular Priests; and so of greatest force against them, and all other papists.

The fourth conclusion.
THe Pope has no authority to assoyle or exempt the subieces of this Realm,
from the homage to her majesty. This conclusion is clear and plain, by the
free grant and open confession of the secular Priests; where and when they
write in express terms, as you have heard in the chapters a foregoing more
then once; that the Pope has no power over y^ law of nature, which is indeed
the law of God; and therefore he is no more to be obeyed therein, For the
proof, see the fifth aduiso in the third real^ and note it well.
the^ if he should command to commit adultery, incest or to murder our selves,
or our parents, that I may use the priests, their own words. And the case is
evident, to every child. for who knows not, that no inferior has power, to
chaung or alter the law of his superior. And yet is it clear I ween, enen in
the opinion of every papist, that God is the Popes superior, and so the Pope
has not to change or alter his law. How the difficulty is this, if there be
any difficulty at all; whether the Popes fact, in assoylinge subjects from
their loyalty, be against the law of nature, or nor. To which I answer
briefly, that it is so. And I prove it, because our allegiance to our
sovereign, is comprised in the first precept of the decalogue, which is
moral, and of the law of nature, under the name of parents. For in the name of
parents, are contained and understood al superiors, by what title or name
soever they be termed. all both old and late writers without exception, do so
hold, write, and believe. If any papist can this deny, let him put down his
reasons, and I am ready to reply upon him. But I suppose, none of the^ will
oppose himself, against this undoubted truth. I therefore conclude, that the
late bishops of Rome show who and what they are, when they proudly take upon
them, to assoyle subjects from their allegiance, and natural obedience to
their Prince.

CHAP. X.
Of the secular Priests, and there late Printed Books.
Paragraph. I.
Of there religion in matters of state.
THe secular priests profess themselves to hold constantly, every point and
article of the Romish faith, For thus do they write; name that article, or one
point of the catholic Romish faith, wherein the secular priests do either
stagger in themselves, or seek to seduce you. These words are set down, in
the preface to the important considerations, fol. 4. page. 2.

Touching this demand, I have thought it worth the labor to make a sincere
answer unto the priests, out of their own papers and writings published to
the judgment of the world. Partly* that they themselves may see (if they will
not continue obstinate.) their own folly in religion, as also the great
absurdities, which thereby they do unwittingly and unwillingly admit and
defend. Partly also, that others may dislike their religion, and more zealously
embrace the truth. First therefore, the bishop of Allan^ approved it, See the
fourth book and fourth chapter, in the.5. section,
and your selves have granted the same, as I have already showed. How, either
you, (the secular priests I mean,) hold the same opinion, or not. If ye do
not, then are ye not such perfect papists, as you write. If ye do so hold,
then are you traitors against your sovereign, as well as the Jesuits, whom
yet your selves term arra^t traitors, as they are indeed.

Elizabeth is not the lawful Queen of England, but an usurper and pretensed
Queen* you know it, you write so. How, if you hold not so, you are not perfect
papists. If you hold so, you are arrant traitors. Bear with me for my words,
your selves have provoked me therevnvnto.

See the fourth aduiso, in the answer to the sixth reason.
to take part with the king of Spain against her. If you hold not so, you are
not perfect papists, If you hold so, you are rank traitors.

^gnus deis, and grant pardon to all them, that will take part with him
against our sovereign, See the preface to the discovery, in the end.
and use them as signs and seals of that covenant. If you hold not so, you
are not perfect papists. If you hold so, you are traitors.



Master Saunders a secular priest, justifies the rebellion in the North, and
holds the Earls with their adherents, to be glorious martyrs. Morton and
Web do hold the same opinion, who are likewise secular priests. the Jesuits
at Rome are of the same stamp, and defend the same treason in the highest
degree. for Alphonsus the Jesuit then rector of the English college in Rome,
caused the Organs to be sounded in the English chapel, and all the students
to come to the chapel, Campion is canonized for a Saint.
(of which number my self was one.) and then and there he himself putting on
his back a white surplesse, (to signify for sooth, the purity of the
matyrdome,) and the stole about his neck, sange a collect of marrtyrs; so
after his manner, canonizing Campion the rebel for a saint. This to be so,
John Mush, one of these secular priests, knows right well, and cannot deny
the same, seeing himself was then present in the college at Rome, which
public solemnity, for a traytorous Jesuit, ( Campion I mean,) Alphonsus
durst not have attempted doubtless, unless he had first obtained the consent of
his general; neither yet would y^ general (for he durst not so have done,)
have approved the fact, The Secul^^ are either traitors, or not sound papists.
if he had not had the consent of the Pope, whose consent is the consent of all
the popish Church. To which I must needs add, that it is usual among the
English papists, to keep the relikes of Campion, Sherewin, and the rest; and
to pray unto them, as unto the saints of God. How, if you secular priests hold
not thus, you are not sound papists. If you hold so, you are arrant traitors.
So then, the seculars are either not perfect papists, or else arrant traitors
like the Jesuits.

Paragraph. II.
Of the staggering of the Secular Priests, in their asseueracions.
THe priests write, that they cannot be justly charged, to stagger in any
point. Let therefore the indifferent page. 24. that a worthy man has laid down
this for a ground, This worthy man was. Cardinal (...).
that every catholic is bound in conscience, to employ his person and forces
by the popes direction, and at his beck to break with his sovereign. This
ground work you see is flat treason, and yet the priests term him a worthy
man, that laid the same. But how they can this do, and not stagger in their
affirmance, let others judge.

page. 26. that Allan confessed openly, that the pope had made him Cardinal,
for the sweeter managing of the Spanish forces; and yet with all, they term
him the good Cardinal* on the one side, they condemn the Spanish forces; on
the other side, they commend the chiefest agent, in that most bloody and
traytorous complot. Again, in one place they say, Quadl. S. art. 5. page. 223.
they profess their obedience to y^ pope; in an other place, quodl. 8. art. 1.
They grant, they may not do ought against parliament statuets. Lo, how they
stagger.

See quodl. 8. art. 6. page. 243.
page. 15. and put down these express words; we had some of us greatly
approved the said rebellion; highly extolled the rebels, and pitifully bewailed
their ruin and overthrow. Many of our affections were knit to the Spaniardes;
and for our obedience to the Pope, we all do profess it. The attempt both of
the Pope and Spaniards failing in England, h^s holiness as a temporal prince,
displaied his banner in Ireland. The plot was to deprive her highness first
from the kingdom, ^ehould, how God inforceth the Papists to disclose the very
truth^ truth will ever prevail in time.
if they could; and then by decr^es, so depose her from this. In all these
plots, none were more forward, then many of us that were priests, These are
their own words. Out of which I note first, that both the Pope and Spaniards
wherefully bent, to depose our gracious Queen Elizabeth, from Ireland and
England by degrees. Secondly, that the priests greatly approved this
rebellio^s course. Thirdly, that the priests highly extolled the rebels.
Fourthly. that their hearts were knit to the Spaniards Fifthly, that the priests
did and still do profess, their obedience to the Pope. Sixthly, that in all
these plots, none were more forward then the Priests. This notwithstanding*
they term the said attempts rebellion, and the agents and dealers therein
traitors; they put the Pope himself, in the predicament with the Spaniards,
and they ^reely confess, that they themselves were as deep in all these
plots, and as forward, See quodl. 9. art. 8. page 8. page 27. et. quod^. 8. art.
9. page 277.
as any others were. And yet forsooth, they would qualify the matter so, as
the state must needs believe them, and acknowledge the^ for true hearted
subjects. Her majesty's honorable counselors, are so wise and careful of
their places, and charge committed to them, for the peaceable and godly
managing of her dominions; as I nothing doubt thereof, but they will look
narrowly into y^ practices of these good fellows, and tr^e them thoroughly
before they trust them. They stagger you see in there assertions: and what they
say in one place, that they gainesay in an other. They contemn equivocations
in the Jesuits, and I scare me, that in matters of state, they do no leise
equivocate themselves they labor to have a tolleration to live as they list,
and they are offended with the reverend, w^^e, grave, and learned father, the
good bishop of Durham; for that in a sermon at Paul's cross, he spoke against
the said tolleration. But God of his mercy forbid, that ever any such
tolleration be granted to them, The Secular priests in matters of treason and
state, seem to equivocate.
for if it be true which Christ himself tells us, Mat. 6. that no man can
serve two masters, viz. which are opposite* and not subordinate the one to the
other, as it is most true indeed; then doubtless cannot these Preistes be true
to her majesty, who profess obedience to the Pope, her known professed
enemy. But if they shall once join with her good subjects, in prayer and
sacraments openly in the Church, which God grant then may they be thought
indeed, to be true and faithful to her sacred person to her honor, crown,
and royal scepter. But in the in^erim, let us I pray you believe them at
leisure.

Paragraph. III.
Of the dissimulation, which the priests seem to use in their books.
THe priests seem to deliver plainly, and without all equivocation, their
great enmity and hatred against the Jesuits, as who say almost nothing of
them, which my self have not ineffecte published before, both in my book of
motives, and also in my book of survey. Where I wish the reader to note by the
way, that my adversaries have therein justified my writings, The authors book
(...) iustifid by, the priests.
and are not able to charge me with any untruth in that behalf. The substance
likewise of all and every thing and things, contained in their several
books and treatises, which I have seen; viz. There hope of peace, their
important considerations, their sparing discovery, their dialogue, their
relation, their quodlibets, and sundry other of their books; my self upon my
own knowledge, am able to contest with them to be a mere truth. But when they
write, that they will stand to her majesty against her enemies, be their
pretenses never so fair, for their country, for religion, or what else soever
can be devised; they must pardon me, if I cannot yet give credit to their
pens, and that for sundry reasons. First, See more hereof in the third
book, in the fourth aduiso, in the latter end.
because equivocation is demed very lawful, even with the best papists; three
circumstances concurring, which I have set down in my book of Survey.
Secondly, because the priests being as yet papists, and so not acknowledging
her majesty, nor her maiestrates to be their competent judges, may justly be
suspected in the premises. Thirdly, because the priests do still write
resolutely, that they will perform their obedience to the Pope.

Paragraph. IIII.
How the priests do proudly vant and brag, of their mighty strength and
forces.
HEr Majesty, Page. 68.
as write the priests in their answer to the Iesuited gentleman, Page. 68.
has a wise counsel which cannot but see, that though for the present time,
the estates ecclesiastical and civil both of our country being so thoroughly
settled as they are, It is good and necessary, to keep the papists under. See
quodl. 8. art. 9. Page. 270.
it is meet (they think,) and easy (we know,) to keep the Catholic under
and suppressed; yet what hereafter in a change, and in a troubled state, our
party may work it self, they may rather perhaps guess, then prevent. Sure I
am, we are not so ignoble a party in the land, for all the persecution of
these forty years, but that the unity thereof with the rest at such a day,
will perhaps be as requisite for our commonweal, as any other. The
consideration whereof, together with other no less important, may somewhat
prevail with so prudent a counsel as her Majesty's is, if not for a
toleration of our rites, at least for a mitigation of our aggriefes in the
mean time. Thus write the priests out of these words.

I note first, Lo, the papists expect a day, as Esau did when be meant to kill
his brother. Genesis 27. 41.
that the papists expect a day, viz. the death of her Majesty, either natural
or violent; whose happy life and victoirous reign, God bless with Nestors
years, and defend her sacred person, her honor, crown, and royal scepter,
from all traiterous attempts and bloody designements, of the Pope, Spaniard,
Jesuit, and other disloyal papists, now and ever.

I note secondly, that the priests expect trouble, rather

I note thirdly, that the priests boldly anouch, that her

I note fourthly, that they proudly and malepeartly, like forty years
persecution, that the Queens power must stand in fear thereof.

I note fifthly that they seem to have conceived an hope, that they shall as it
were with big words and threats, enforce a toleration to be granted them.
Where me th^^ke, they should rather fear, to procure sharper measure to them
selves in time to come, then to live in hope of any toleration.

Paragraph. V.
Of the popish Catholic religion of Secular priests, and why it is called
Catholic.
THus write the Catholic secular priests, of their popish Catholic religion.
Is there any sin (dear Catholics.) rising upon infirmity, and frailty of
man, committed by an apostate an infidel, an heretic an atheist cast out of
the favor of God, and accursed out of his Church: but a Catholic may, and
often has fallen into the saire, and yet remained constant in his religion to
death? questionless, there is not. As innumerable examples of treasons, of
murders, of adulteries, of incests, of drunkenness, of cusnage, of what not
vice, does verify it in all nations, in all times* sexes* and sorts of people.
These words are set down, in their preface to their important considerations, a
little from the beginning thereof.

Note here gentle reader, many most excellent epithites, which the secular
Romish priests, ascribe to themselves, and to their Romish or popish
Catholics. Viz. That they may be traitors, murderers, adulterers, incestuous
persons, drunkerds, co^seners, and all manner malefactors; and yet be popish
catholics good enough, constant in the popish religion unto death. If the
papists themselves had not written thus, who would have believed me? none at
all. But Gods spirit has enforced their own pens, to testify the truth
against themselves. Out of this their plain doctrine, and open confession;
these golden corollaries, are deduced evidently. First, that the popish James
says, cap. 1. pure and sound religion is this, to keep our selves unspotted
of this world. And

Paragraph. VI.
Of the Romish late English Archpriest, and the excellency of his creation.
IN good sooth, we think his mastership as far to blame, as either of them,
or more; in that being a secular priest, he does so tyrannize over his own
brethren by calling, and has not the wit to see, how he is abused and made a
puppie to dance after their pipe, and to execute what they do command him.
These words are set down, in the preface to their relation. In another place
thus.

Because none are judged virtuous, that oppose themselves selves against the
Jesuits, Loc, their Popish Archpriest is an idol.
or refuse to worship their Jesuitical idol our Archpriest. But in good
sooth master Blackwell, speak truly man; does not that contention, in some
sort touch your high authority? Was it not the ground of it? Did not our
garboyles beget your greatness? If master Weston had prevailed with us, master
Garnet would have wiued your nose, for dealing like a young prince abroad as
you do. And therefore indeed in a right goodsense, we are your good masters,
and so you ought to esteem us. These words are set down, in the same preface
to their relation.

Note here gentle reader, these important points with me. First, that the
popish priests in this Realm are so multiplied, and become so strong and
mighty, and have conceived so firm and constant hope, of their ability
shortly to accomplish their long wished conquest; that they have desired their
Pope, to appoint presently some bishop or bishops over them. What would
these boisterous Nimrods do, if a toleration were granted them? if they be so
saucy, malepeart, and peremptory, when they are in some sort by law kept
under and suppressed; what troubles, what garboyles, what sedition and treachery
would they stir up, think you; If the magistrates should favor them, in
such sort as they desire? I doubt not, but her Majesty's wise and grave
counselors, do sufficiently see, what mark these good fellows aim at.
Secondly, that the Jesuits labor with tooth and nail, that they may have
all, and ouerrule all. And when they could not prevail therein, as they wished
directly, their solemn vow withstanding it; they brought to pass by indirect
means, that an Archpriest to their liking, is appointed over all. This Lordly
Archpriest is George Blackwell forsooth, I know the man right well. He is made
a puppie, to dance as the Jesuits pipe unto him. For he is the Jesuitical
idol, as the priests write; and dares to do nothing, but as they command
him; neither may he refuse to execute, whatsoever they will have done.
Thirdly, that it is true, which I probably foretold long since in my book of
motives. viz. That as the Romish English seminary began with an ungodly oath
and dissension; so it would continue unto the end. And I pray you, is it not
this day apparent to the world? You see it, it can not be denied. The priests
confess, (as you hear,) that their contention was the ground of the
Archpriestes authority; that their garboyles did beget his greatness; and
therefore, that they are his good masters. Fourthly, that the secular priests
the Romish seminarists, repute it no shame to publish in printed books; that
the superiority among them, proceeds of sedition and factious dealing.
Happy are they forsooth, that are guided by such rulers.

The third Book, containing sundry grave aduisoes, set down for the good of
all true-hearted Subjects, least they be hereafter seduced with Jesuitical
hypocrisy, and treacherous Popery.
Aduiso. I.
Of Popish proceedings against, Kings, Potentates, and Monarkes of this world.
THE Jesuit Parsons in his book Philopater, is very peremptory, sly, and
saucie, very boldly affirming, that when kings deflect from the Catholic
religion, and draw others with the^* then their subjects are free, and both may
and ought, (if they be able, to cast such a man out of his dominions. An other
Jesuit gives us this lesson; the quarrel for Religion (says he) and defense
of innocence is so just, that Heathen princes not at all subject to the
Churches laws, may in that case by the Christian arms be resisted. An other
Jesuit says thus; that Christians in times past did not depose Nero and
Dioclesian, and Julian the Apostata, and V^lens the Arrian, and others: it was,
because Christians did then want temporal forces, for otherwise they might
lawfully have dealt so with them. Thus it is written: quodl. 9. art 4. q. 296.

Note here gentle Reader, that most unnatural rebellion, is as a natural or
proper passion, to all seditious Popish religion. which doubtless is a grave
aduiso, seriously to be thought upon.

Aduiso. II.
Of the charitable physic of the Jesuits.
IF hereafter any Pope shall cross the Spaniards plots and purposes, the
Jesuits will have such a fig in store or his pains that shall do so, as no
Ruebarbe, Angelica, Mithridate, or other medicine, or antidote, shall expel
the venime, poison or infection from his heart; nor any Bezar, Pearl, gold, or
Unicorns horn, long preserve his life after it. And if there be, as there
are, shrewde suspicions in Rome, concerning the death of two Popes, two
Cardinals, and one Bishop already; and that but for breaking, or rather
intending to break the Jesuits a little of their will, and unbridled
insolency, and only to reform them in their order; then no marvel at their
disignments for England; and much less doubt to be made, The king of France
murdered by the Jesuits.
what they would do in such a case, if it came to canuasing for a kingdom.
Thus is it written, quodl. 8. art. 6. p. 245. It is true, that in France there
are public monuments of Isuiticall tyranny. For first, they procured Henry
the third to be excommunicated, and then by degrees they murderd him. quod. 8.
art. 8. p. 261. see the 2. Book chap. 2. and 2. Parag.

Note here gentle Reader, three important points with me. first, that our holy
fathers, the late vpstart Jesuits, are not religious fathers as they profess
to be but disordered, dissolute, and blood-thirstie companions. Secondly, that
they are charged with wilful murder, Lo, the Jesuits are most skillful
Physicians.
and that of no mean personages; but even of Bishops; even of Kings; even of
Cardinals; yea, even of Popes themselves. Thirdly, that murder is a thing so
common, or rather so connaturall to Jesuitical faction; that if their purposes
and plots be but a little crossed, not only by Barons, Earls, or Dukes, but
even by Kings, Emperors, and monarkes; nay, even by the Pope himself, whom
they would be thought to honor above the rest; then doubtless, that Barton,
Earl, duke, King, Emperor, or Pope, shall have such a fig given him by these
skilful Physicians, for his restoratiue Catholic an^tpast; as he shall never
after it, be in need of any Christian preservative post-past: this is a grave
Aduiso, it does pourtray our Jesuits gallantly, in their deserved and well
beseeming colors.

Aduiso. III.
Of Cardinal Allens intendment, against his prince and native Country.
IT can not be denied, but that in the year 1588. Cardinal Allen compiled a
book, to be published when the Spaniards should have arrived; to have stirred
up all English papists to take arms against their Sovereign, for the speedy
conquest of their native Country. The first part of which book, was entitled
a declaration of the sentence: The second part. An admonition to the Nobility,
and people of England: but presently upon the overthrow of the great invincible
Armado, under their heroical Adlantado, for shame of the world they procured
the whole Impression to be burnt; saving some few that had been sent abroad
beforehand to frindes, and such as had otherwise been conveyed away by the
Printer, and others in secret wise. Thus it is written, quodl. 8. art. 6. p 240.

Note here gentle Reader, that Cardinal Allen, the chief governor under the
Pope, in all popish English affairs; did further the Spaniards intended
conquest of England, with all his might, strength, power, and force; and that
he published a most traiterous book in his own name, for the speedy
complement of that most cruel and bloody attempt: to which add with me, that
the said Allen was sent by the Pope, to manage that great affair: and was also
made Cardinal for that only end and purpose, as I have proved in the second
Book, ninth chapter, and third conclusion. now then, seeing the Pope, the
Cardinal and the Jesuits, did all wholly intend the invasion and conquest, and
did at all times bend their Bulls, bills, libels, and all their forces, to depose
her Majesty from her Crown and royal Scepter; and seeing also, that the
Secular priests confess freely, as is already proved in the second book, tenth
chapter, and second Paragraph; that many of their affections were knit to the
Spaniards, and that none were more forward then they, in those bloody
treacheries; and seeing thirdly, that the said priests do still profess their
obedience to the Pope in every thing. and humbly submit themselves and all
that they have written, to be decided, judged, and censured, as shall seem
good to his holiness; (for so they write, in their important considerations,
page 43. quodlibet. 10. p. 342 et. p. 361.) let them (the secular priests I
mean,) say and write what they list and like, of their true and loyal hearts
toward her majesty; I for my own part will never give credit to them,
unless they will join with us, in sacrament and common prayer. And I verily
think, that whosoever shall mark this discourse seriously, will be of mine
opinion. For, concerning equiuocating and temporizing instate affairs, they
are nothing inferiors to the false cogging Jesuits.

They utter in deed many truths, but they do it of necessity; so to be
avenged of the Jesuits, and to be delivered from their tyranny. The Jesuits
they spare in no respect; But Cardinal Allan they highly commend, and the Pope
they dare not in any case o^tend. Which two, the Pope and the Cardinal, while
they do commend in many things; they do often unawares, appeach themselves
of high treason. I say, (unless they join themselves with us in sacrament and
common prayer;) because many disloyally affected subjects. will present
themselves in the church with us; as also eat flesh on frydays, and temporize
with all companies, Prea^bles. 7* and 8.
as is proved in the seventh and eight preambles. But if they will receive the
holy Communion with us, read or singe* Psalms publikelye in the Church with
us; that were a sign most probable, though not ever infallible. This is a
grate aduiso, it may not be forgotten.

Aduiso. IIII.
Concerning the appeal of the seculars to the Pope.
THe instituton of the Archpriest was procured from the Pope, sea, and court
at Rome; and that by a bull, and in such meaner, as not only a Praemunire was
incurred thereby by ancient laws of this land, but also and much more by
recent statute laws, there being treason upon treason committed in the action.
quodlibet. 6. art. 3. 4. 5.

This aduiso contains matter most important; in regard whereof, I purpose in
God to examine it ad amussm, for the better satisfaction of the indifferent
reader.

The secular priests impute notorious treason to the Jesuits, (as appears by
their own words uttered in the defense of their appeal,) because the Jesuits
procured the arch-priests authority from the Pope; but this notwithstanding
they affirm peremptorily, that they themselves are clear and free from all
offense. For these are their words; the seculars are so clear and far from
all danger of any offense, committed by appealing from the archpriest to the
sea of Rome; as most dangerous, unjust, unnatural, indiscret, irreligious,
and prejudicial to all, both Pope, Prince, Church, commonwealth, and all
estates, if they had not appealed. These words are set down, quodl. 6. art.
5. q. 171.

Note here gentle reader, that these seculars are great wisemen in their own
conceits, and so they may rightly be esteemed, if they can make good indeed,
that which they take upon them in external show of words; viz. that they may
acknowledge and perform, their professed obedience to her majesty's known
enemy the bishop of Rome; that they may submit themselves to his resolution in
all things, and concur with his bloody designments; against the honor,
state, crown, regalitie, and life, of their natural sovereign. and all this
notwithstanding, still be clear and free from all offense. I will truly lay
down their own reasons, in their own words; and frame my sincere answer to
the same. Which, when the indifferent reader shall have perused duly, all
partiality set a part; I wish, that he give his censure accordingly.

The first reason of the Seculars.
TO whom the injury is done, to him the right of revenge does accurne; but
the popes holiness was injured, by the Jesuits their suggestion in obeying the
bull. ergo. Thus do they reason.

The Answer.
I say first, Deuteronomy. 32. v. 35. Romans 15. 19
that the right of revenge belongs to God alone; Vengance is mine, I will
repay. And for this cause, when lawful magistrates do take reuengement upon
this or that malefactor, for his irregular and bad dealing; all such penal
mulcte is hereby justified, for that they are Gods vicegerents on earth, and
what they do is done in his name, and by authority given them from above. So
says God himself; I say, Psalm. 82. 6. John. 13. 1.
ye are Gods, and ye all are children of the most high. Again; thou could
have no power at all against me, Romans 13. 1.
except it were given thee from above. Again; there is noe power, but of God.

Secondly, that injury was done to the secular Priests Mat. 26. v. 52.
that they being private persons, either ought or could take revenge, either
upon the Jesuits, or upon their Iesuited Blackwell, that Romi^h traytorus
archpriest for of private persons is this text verified; all that take the
sword, shall perish with the sword.

Thirdly, that the greatest injury of all, was done to our Elizabeth. For
first, the Jesuits that procured the authority, and the Archpriest excepting
it, were all her majesty's naturally borne subjects* and so thereby committed
execrable villainy, and intolerable injury, against her most sacred person.
Secondly, the seculars being also her majesty's subjects, did gracious and
merciful sovereign; in submitting themselves to the Romish tyrannizing
Bishop, the professed enemy of her honor, her state, her crown, her life, and
her regalitie. Thirdly, the seculars promised their homage and Bishope and
Charnocke by name, to take along, painful, dangerous, and chargeable journey,
If a like, ergo treasonablie.
even to the gates of Rome. but they were so far from yielding any obedience
herein to her majesty; that they would not once intimate the matter to her, or
to her most honorable counsel. Nay, it is confessed plainly, that the Romish
faith is defended outwardly, on both sides alike quodl. 4. art. 10. page 135.

The Second Reason.
The Jesuits in procuring the Popes Bull and authority, made it a matter of
state in prejudice of regal Majesty. But the sculars in appealing, made it a
matter of conscience, thereby to refell, infring, and abrogate, all such
premunireall treachery.

The answer.


and power, was acknowledged on both sides; the Jesuits urged his authority
the seculars yielded to his authority; this only was the difference. The
Jesuits affirmed, that the Pope had authorized the archpriest; the seculars
stood only upon this point, that so much was not yet known to them. So then,
they differed not in the thing, but in the modification of the thing.

Thirdly, that the seculars made in deed a matter of Elizabeth.

The Third reason.
The pretense was made outwardly by the Jesuits, to be wholly for matters
pertaining to the catholic Church, religion, and order in works of charity,
pierie, devotion, etc. Ergo the seculars approving the contraire, (that they
never had such a meaning, neither did the archpriest practice any such
matter,) meddle no way in any things by their appeal, whereby a Praemunire can
be incurred, no not so much as interpretatiuely.

The Answer.
I say first, that the seculars have an huge multitude of

Secondly, that albeit I am ignorant, what the law word ( praemunire) means;
yet do I constantly avouch, that if the Jesuits have incurred the praemunire,
for their dealing in the arch-priests case and cause (as they affirm, and I
willingly admit, (then have the seculars likewise incurred the same pemunire;
by reason of their appeal to the bishope of Rome. In which dispute, I am
content to encounter with them, when they shall challenge me for the same.

aduiso.

The fourth reason.
The Jesuits bolster out and build, as well the intended vsurpate authority of
the arch priest; as also their own treasonable attempts, plo^s, and practices,
upon the said bull and his holiness authority. Ergo none other to appeal
unto for justice against them.

The Answer.
Elizabeth,) should not have appealed to the Pope, the morta^l known enemy of
the said allegiance; but from the Pope to her Majesty, or to some in authority
under her. But the seculars have no such meaning, because forsooth they will
acknowledge no such allegiance.

that there is none other to appeal unto, but the Pope alone; they desperately
appeach them selves of high treason. The reason is evident, Quod. 8. art. 1.
page 223.
because they peremptorily avouch, a foreign potentate, yea a foraine known
enemy, to be the competent judge over her majesty's subjects, even within her
Majesty's Realms, and dominions. Which themselves else where, grant to be
unlawful.

The fifth reason.
The seculars by their appeal, clearly exempt, redeem, and keep out
themselves, from acknowledging any obedience to that already premunirized
archpriest; and by consequent, from all danger of incurring a praemunire.

The Answer.
I say first, that though the seculars do not now acknowledge praemunire,
neither from treason in the highest degree.

Secondly, that the seculars did once acknowledge de facto viz. when they under
stood by the Popes Breue, his holiness, holy pleasure therein. And that, they
now revoke and deny the said obedience to the arch priest; such denial
proceeds of mere malice against the Jesuits, and Iesuited crew, and not of
loyal duty to Queen Elizabeth, whom they outwardly pretend to love for
servile fear.

The sixth Reason.
They labor by their appeal, for security to her majesty's person, for quiet
to the state, for auoydance of all invasions, for cutting of all conspiracies,
state-ta^perings, erasperating libels. etc. And for assurance of relaxation and
freedom from their heavy persecution, procured by the Jesuits against them,
as well by false suggestions to his holiness, as also by stirring up other
princes against our sovereign and nation, and thereby bringing wars and
fears upon all, and heart breaking frowns to be cast upon the innocent; ergo
so clear and far from all danger of any offense* committed by appealing from
the arch-preist to the sea of Rome; as most dangerous, unjust, unnatural,
indisc^^t, irreligious, and prediuciall to all, both Pope* prince, Church,
commonwealth, and allestates; if they had not appealed, but let the matter he
dead in discontent, obloquie, and danger of sorest trialles.

The Answer.
For the better understanding of this reason, and full answer to the same; I
observe first, in the contents thereof, the seculars are freede, and made
clear from all offense,

Ergo.





Elizabeth by the laws of England. For as the seculars write else where*
every appeal is an acknowledging of highest authority, See the answer to
the (...) gentleman. page. 24.
in the party appealed unto. And this answer is confirmed by their fourth
reason, where they flatly deny her Majesty's royal prerogative over them,
while they affirm disloyally, peremptorily, saucily, and tootoo arrogantly,
that there is no other to appeal unto, but only the bishop of Rome, whom
they know (as is already proved,) to be her Majesty's mortal enemy, and the
chief agent, in all conquests, invasions, plots, conspiracies, treasons, and
bloody intendments whatsoever, against Queen Elizabeth, her sacred person,
her Realms, her royal honor, her princely Diadem and most noble peerless
regalitie. Secondly, by not appealing, seculars should have been unjust and
unnatural, as is in Elizabeth. To her, they are thereby in deed unjust, for
that they withhold thereby, their homage due unto her. to her, they are indeed
vnnnaturall, because they deny that loyalty, which by nature they own unto
her, and they are in a sort naturalized to his disholie holiness, by the said
appeal: For they say flatly, in the next article of the same quodlibet, that
they may not yield to the Jesuits, until his holiness have decided the cause
in the court of Rome. And yet vnwitingly, they condemn themselves in an other
place, quodlib. 8. art. 1. page. 223.
granting that they may not by word or writing, impugn the parliamentall
Laws of this land.

Thirdly, by not appealing, they should have been prejudicial to prince,
Church, and all estates, as is in the second ergo, to the prince, Church, and
State of Rome, for of force they must so mean, the force of truth has
enforced their pen. Fourthly, they appealed for her Majesty's security, as
is in the third observation; where The seculars are insolent fellows.
the impudent insolency of these disloyal Seculars, who make a treacherous
flowrish, as if the security of their dread Sovereign, did depend upon their
Popes good pleasure, and their treacherous appeal unto him. Herein they make
havoc other Majesty's statute-lawes, which else where by popish statization
and equinocation, they say they may not offend. A note worthy to be remembered.
Fifthly, they appealed for the quiet of the state, which is as disloyally
spoken, as the former, for God auert, that the peace of her Majesty's state,
and her Realms, do at any time stand in need of the Popes favor, and the
entreaty of the sedicious Seculars. Sixthly, they Coral. 1.
against her sacred person, Coral. 2.
her royal throne, her crown, her state, and dominions. Secondly, that the
Pope is the principal actor, in all plots, conspiracies, treacheries,
invasions, and conquests; intended against the Queen, her realms, and faithful
subjects. I therefore conclude, that the Seculars are this day as dangerous, in all treasonable plots, bloody practizes, and disloyal conspiracies, as they
have been heretofore. For albeit they belabour themselves seriously, to hide
and bolster out all their cursed intendements, against their dread sovereign
and native Country; especially, when they are occasioned to speak of matters
of state, as they do or may concern their own persons; yet do they but
equivocate and temporize in so doing, See the 10. chapter in the 3. Paragraph
in the second book.
and that as scornefully and treacherously, as ever did the Jesuits. Of which
point none can be ignorant, that shall seriously peruse and ponder this
discourse. Wherefore, as the Seculars say of the Jesuits, so say I of them;
that though they swear, can yet we not safely believe them in state affairs.
the reason is evident, In the second book, chap 3. (...).
because they do not acknowledge any magistrate under her Majesty, to be
their lawful and competent judge. If they say, write, or swear the contrary,
yet give no credit to them therein: for even then do they seek to delude the
Magistate, by their hypocritical and execrable equivocations. No, no, it
neither does nor can stand with popish religion; to think and believe that
Queen Elizabeth, (whom God long preserve over us,) can ordeine any competent
judge over them. And consequently, until the Seculars renounce the Pope and
his damnable proceedings, against Christian kings, their royal diademes, and
sacred regalities; they will doubtless delude the maiestrates, with their
fondely invented equiuocationes. This is a grave aduiso which may not
beforgotten.

Aduiso. V.
Of the opinion, affection, and true meaning of the seculars, in all the
treasonable practices, bloody conspiracies, and other disloyal intendmentes,
against their dread sovereign and native country.
THe seculars conspire, concur, and iumpe with the Jesuits, in opinion,
affection, and inward meaning; touching the Popes authority, the bloody
conspiracies, invasions, conquest, and other disloyal intendments, against
most noble Queen Elizabeth, and our native country* this I prove by many
strong, weighty, and irrefragable reasons.

The first reason.
The pretenses of such practices were general, Quodl. 8. art. 9. page 277.
and common to all Catholics alike, all maintaining one and the same opinion,
concerning what might be done by Apostolical power and authority, and never
talking of what was necessary. Thus is it written, quodl. 8. art. 9. page 277.
but the seculars are papists as well as the Jesuits, Ergo, of the same opinion
with the Jesuits. Here the reader may see plainly; that the seculars iumpe
with the opinion of the Jesuits, touching the popes authority. For by
apostolical power, they understand the power and authority of the Pope. To
which must be added, (which is already proved,) that the Pope has
excommunicated her Majesty de facta, and has been the chiefest agent, in all
treasonable practices, bloody conspiracies, invasions, conquests, and other
execrable intendments; against her Majesty's person, honor, state, and
dominions. To this must likewise be added, which is also proved; that the
Jesuits affirm malepeartly, damnablie, and disloyally, that the Pope has
done nothing in the premises, but that he lawfully might do.

The second Reason.
Among many examples, of the dear love and compassion of the Popes holiness
toward the inhabitants and princes of this land, in times of imminent
commonwealths dangers; the chief since the Norman conquest, was showed in the
days and reigns of king Henry the second surnamed Fitzempresse, and of his
son king John the third Monarke of England of a Plantagenets royal race.
Against whom having used his fatherly correction, (as pastor vnivniuersall over
the whole flock of Christ,) for their great cruelty and tyranny used toward
their natural subjects; yet upon their repentance, mercifully receiving them
into grace and favor of Gods Church again; his holiness on the behalf of the
second, did not only accurse and excommunicate prince Lewis of France with all
his adherents, forcing him to yield up all the interest, right, and title, that
he or his posterity had or ever should have to the English crown, but also
surrendered up the said crown of England frank and free, to king John and his
heirs and successors from of the head of Cardinal Pandulphus, having sit
inthronized three days therewith in the Popes right. And thousands there are
in England, that desire as much. Thus is it written, quodl. 8. art 9. page. 327.

Out of these words it is evidently deduced, that the Pope takes upon him,
(though most injuriously and tyrannically,) to translate kingdoms, to depose
kings, Emperors, and Monarkes, and to bestow their princely Diademes and
royal regalities, as seems best to his good pleasure. Yea, which is more to
be admired, the seculars, (who in outward show of words by often and earnest
protestations, affirm themselves to be most loyal subjects,) Henry, they
term it his fatherly correction. Secondly, they say he did it, by his Lewis,
and the restoring of king John to the crown, the chiefest fatherly compassion
since the Norman conquest. Fourthly, they tell us, that Cardinal Pandulphus
was three days enthronized, with the Lewis, to yield up his whole title and
right, that either he or his posterity had or ever should have, to the English
crown. This they likewise approve and commend. Sixthly, they Lo, thousands are
bent and wish disloyalty.
to be enthronized three days with the English crown upon his head, in the
right of his holiness, and then to surrender it up to Arbella, or to some other
popish favorite. For so the Spaniard or other foreyner have it not, they have
their desire. Me think, this my gloss swarueth not much from the text. The
reason is clear, the reader can easily make application thereof.

The third Reason.
I know, that Iure ecclesiastico, and by the authority and sentence of the
Popes holiness, much more may be done, then here I will speak of. But yet I
think it will prove in the end the best course, for men not to do so much as
they may. Many things be lawful, which are not expedient. Thus is it written,
quodl. 9. art. 3. page 293.

This reason ab authoritate, (for better reasons then their own grants and
confessions, cannot be had,) is as strong as the former, if it be well noted
with the circumstances thereof. For first, after Watson, (who speaks in the
name of the seculars,) had told us by the doctrine of a learned man, that if we
go no further then to the law of nature, or to the law of God, no king is
deprived from his sovereignty over his subjects, though it be for the sin of
apostasy from faith; forthwith he adds the words of this present reason,
affirming peremptorily, that the Pope can do more; The Pope has greater power
then God.
The latter he dare not say; and yet has Satan so bewitched and besotted him,
that it follows necessarily of the former* that is of the doctrine, which he
delivers from the pen of a learned writer, and puts it down for good.
Now what is it, that the Pope can do more, then may be done by the law of
nature and of God? forsooth, he can excommunicate kings, depose kings from
their royal thrones, and put their Diademes upon the heads of others. This is
it, that Watson will not say here, because it is not expedient. Yet
unwittingly (the truth enforcing him,) he tells us no less in another place.
For, a reverend priest (says he,) and ancient gentleman, old master
Middleton, was content at Parsons his motion, Quod. 9. art. 5. page 306.
to subscribe to the title of Infanta; upon condition, that she should be
joined by marriage, to some noble or peer of our land, Thus they write, Quod.
8. art. 6. page. 24^.
peruse the place quoted in the margent. Again, in another place it is thus
written; say then for the present, (which yet is more then I would willingly
put to maintain, the time of our afflicted state considered,) that his holiness
and the king of Spain might lawfully have taken arms, against her Majesty
and this her kingdom our native land; yet was it a shameful part of father
Parsons and his companions, to be the contriuers or instigators of (...). These
are the express words, of the place quoted in the margent. Out of these two
several assertions, the confirmations of the third reason general; I gather
first that all the difference between the Jesuits and the Seculars,
concerning the invasion and conquest of this land, consists in this only
point, viz. that the Jesuits would have the Lady Infanta of Spain to be the
Queen of England, but the seculars will have an English man, to be king of the
land. They differ not in the thing to be done, Mark this well, that ye may
understand it aright.
but in the manner of contriuing the thing that should be done; not in the
party to be deposed from the crown, but in the person that should have the
Crown; not about taking the crown from Queen Elizabeth, but about giving the
crown to the Spanish Lady. The reason hereof is evident, because our
Quodlibetist tells us roundly, that old Middleton consented willingly; to
give his name to the charter of subscription; in the behalf of the Lady
Infanta of Spain; upon condition, that she should be married to some English
noble man. Which disloyal narration, the secular Quodlibetist approoueth and
greatly commends, terming the said Midleton a reverend priest and ancient
gentleman. I gather secondly, Lo, the secular priests are as traytorou, as the
Jesuits. See the fi^t reason.
that our Quodlibetist Watson, sings the self same song with old traiterous
Midleton. For he puts the case; that the pope and Spanish king should be
said to have taken arms lawfully, against her Majesty and her Realm of
England. That done, forsooth, he tells us, that he would not willingly
maintain that doctrine, the time and circumstances considered. Where he
unwittingly avouches; that the Pope and king of Spain might lawfully take
arms, to depose her Majesty from her royal Diadem. Yea, he grants, that
he would defend the same doctrine, but that the time is not correspondent
thereunto. Let the words be well pondered, and this will be the sense.

The fourth Reason.
The Quodlibetist and the seculars, do often protest their obedience to the
pope, Imp. consid. p. 43. quodlib. 342 p 267. and p. 361.
and submit themselves and all their writings, yea, every word syllable and
title to the censure of the Roman Church. One place may suffice, where these
words are to be read. With all humble obedience to the sea Apostolic be it
spoken. Quodl. 8. art. 8 page 267.

This reason does plainly convince, the contents of this fifth aduiso to be
true. For how is it possible to conceive, that they shall in true meaning, say
or write any thing against the pope on the behalf of her Majesty; who protest
zealously before God and his Angels that they will yield all obedienc^ to the
pope, and therefore do submit themselves and all their writings, sentences,
words, and sillables, to his censure and judgment? it cannot be, they do but
temporize in these state matters, they use Jesuitical equivocation.

The fifth Reason.
The seminaries were willing at the first, Lo* the penal laws are justly
made against the seminaries.
to color hide, and conceal all, making the Jesuits causes, attempts,
intents, practices, and proceedings, their own in every thing, until at last
they were entangled, by penal laws justly made against them equally, as
against the Jesuits. These words are set down, in the preface to the
Quodlibets, page* 6. Again, in another place the priests write thus: we had
some of us greatly approved the said rebellion; highly extolled the rebels, and
pitifully bewailed their ruin and overthrow. Many of our affections were knit
to the Spaniards, and for our obedience to the pope, we all do profess it. The
attempts both of the pope and Spaniard failing in England, Lo, the seminary
priests are traitors. See the 3. reason.
his holiness as a temporal prince, displaied his banner in Ireland. The plot
was to deprive her highness first from that kingdom, if they could, then by
degrees, to depose her from this. In all these plots, none were more forward,
then many of us that were priests. These are the express words of the priests,
in their important considerations, page. 15. Lo, this reason is so plain,
that it needs no application. ^ll both Jesuits and Seminaries will obey the
pope, and the pope will have them to murder their sovereign. These things the
seculars concealed a long time, and would never have discovered them, if
necessity had not constrained them so to do. For, as the common proverb is,
See the 4. book and 7. chapter.
when thieves begin to reckon, true folks shall have their own. I therefore
conclude, that the seculars do prove themselves arrant traitors, and that when
they say ought to the contrary, they do then but temporize, dissemble, and
equivocate. To which I add, that when they say, (we say without all
equivocation,) then do they equivocate in the highest degree, for simulata
sanctitas duplex est iniquitas. The truth is this; if we will not be deluded,
we must not in state matters give credit to them. They utter many truths
indeed, but with an intention much like the devils; who speaks the truth in
the beginning, that he may deceive in the ending.

Aduiso. VI.
Of the Popes double person, and disholy holiness.
THus writes our grave Quodlibetist; as the prudent Greek appealed from
Alexander furious to Alexander sober, and Bishop Crostrate from Pope Adrian
private to pope Adrian public, and as Summus pontifex in Cathedra Petri; so
may the seculars, notwithstanding any decree set down by his holiness to the
contrary, by wrong information given; appeal even from the pope as Clemens,
unto his holiness as Peter. These words are set down, This is a maxim in the
Roman church. see D. Elyes notes upon the Apology p 93. 31. et p. 103 6.
quodl. 6. art. 10. In the very end thereof. By this doctrine so plainly
delivered, (which is a constant position in the Romish Church,) the seculars
give us to understand, that execrable and never enough detested fallacy;
wherewith the Pope and his popelinges have a long time seduced, the greater
part of the christian world. viz. That the Pope may err as a private man, but
not as a public person. Of which absurd doctrine I have written at large, in
my treatise entitled the hunting of the Romish fox. I will therefore at this
present only speak thereof, as these words give me fit occasion. First then;
we see here, that if we mean Peter, that blessed These points, if they be
well marked, will utterly confound Clemens, Sixtus, Adrianus, or some other
like Pope, and not Saint Peter himself; then he may err, The Pope may be
judged, even by Popish doctrine. See book. 2. cap. 9. ^euel. 3.
and so both be deceived and deceive others. whereupon it follows of
necessity, that every one must examine well the popes doctrine and judgment,
before he believe it; otherwise doubtless, he may receive poison for medicine,
falsehood for truth, and erroneous for orthodoxe christian doctrine. Nay,
otherwise he cannot possibly tell when he shall appeal from the Pope, as a
falfe teacher and reducer of the people. Secondly, the time cannot be named, in
which the bishope of Rome shall be the bishope there, and not a public Peter;
they shall never do it, till the worlds end. Fourthly, if they will appeal
from the now Pope, as Clemens, they must perforce appeal Clemens when he
became their Pope. Be it so. Ergo when they appeal from him as Clemens, they
appeal from him as Pope. For doubtless if he be not Clemens the Pope, he is not
Pope at all. Fifthly* if he be Peter by office or calling, then Peter; unless
perhapes he be sometime Lucifer, which were a rare metamorphosis. Sixthly, this
popish distinction may fitly be termed, a trick of fast and looose. a public
parson. But if he define an error, How the Pope cannot err, but the devil in
his coat.
then they say, he defined as a private man. So doubtless it may be said
indeed, that he can nener err; but some man in his coat, or some devil
under his pall. See the eleventh aduiso, and note it well.

Aduiso. VII.
Of the penal statutes, against Jesuits and Seminaries.
Until at last they were inta^gled by penal laws, Note this word (justly)
for it is of great importance.
which were justly made against them equally, as against the Jesuits. Thus do
the seculars write of themselves, in the preface to the quodlibets. page. 6.
toward the end. Again, in an other place, I find these words. All priests and
others, that are not of that seditious Jesuitical and spanish faction, are
bound in charity, as now the case sta^ds, to detect them to the uttermost.
First, for a caveat to the ignorant multitude seduced by them, hereafter to be
ware of them. Secondly, perlegem talionis, returning their malice, The Priests
are bound to detect the Jesuits.
detraction, defamation, calumniation, obloquie, and what not invented by them
against the innocent, upon their own heads. These words are set down, quodl.
1. art. 4. page. 9. This is a most excellent aduiso. For first, we learn hear
viz. That the penal laws of this land, are justly made against the Jesuits
and y^ seminaries. Oh sweet Jesus? who could have believed this. This is that
mighty point, against which all the papists do so often and bitterly
exclame; to wit, Lo here, the Priests confess freely, that they are
traitors.
that the popish priests and Jesuits are put to death for their conscience,
and not for treason. For seeing they grant those penal laws, by which they
are conninced of treason, to be justly made against them; they do consequently
grant, that they are executed for treason. Yet it may also be said, that they
die for their conscience, because their conscience is to take part with the
Pope, and to make war against their sovereign.

Aduiso. VIII.
Of the great, strong, and mighty friends, of the Jesuits and seculars.
THe Jesuits think it is unknown, under whose wings the archpriest lives
shrouded, or to and from whom the letter was sent on father Gerards behalf,
to wish her (after some few complements and thanks for the token she lent
him,) to keep her Jewel (the said Gerard) well, etc. Or who they be, that
plie and plead for the Jesuits underhand; or by whom they are backed, to be
so bold as they are both in prison and abroad; to make their vaunt, that they
have more and greater friends, both in ye English and Scottish court, Note this
point well; it is to be admited, and to be sought into carefully
then the seculars have; more then half naming some particular Nobles and
others, in high esteem and authority under her majesty, that are secretly
entered into league with them on the spanish behalf. These words are set
down, quodl. 7. art. 2. page. 188. Again in an other place, it it plainly
written; that the Earl of Essex, was solicited to be the King of Spaines
close pensioner, for furdering of the invasions. quodl. 7. art. 2. page 189 A
Jesuit priest was sent from Parsons to the said Earl of Essex, to move him to
take a pension of the King of Spain privately for the advancement of his
designements. quodl. 5. art. 8. page 150. In an other place they write bouldly,
that four seminary priests were altogether at supper, with a noble person, a
Lord of high renoune; who would not sit down, until they all were set and
placed before him. quodl. 3. art. 1. page. 51. In an other place, it is thus
written; these two noble persons are now most earnest persecutors of the
Jesuits and Arch-priests sedition, falsehood, and faction. quodl. 4. art. 7.
page. 126. In an other place thus; and other like speeches he used of him, to
an honorable Earl who told me it. quod. 4. art. 9. page. 132. In an other
place thus; Parsons, Note this point well.
in his books affirms the infortunat Howard of Norfolk, to have been one
and the chief cause of the overthrow both of the Church and common wealth, yet
with whom he and his have had* (I will not say have, videant ipsi,) more
inward and close dealing, for the advancement to the crown by marriage of the
lady Arbella. etc. and other means then with any other house and family.
quodl. 7. art. 9. page. 212. This is a worthy and a very golden aduiso. For by
it, he that has but one eye may see, what a dangerous kind of people the
Jesuits and the seculars be. For to say nothing of their practices with the
late Earl of Essex, nor of that tender and dear familiarity, which they have
with many of the nobility; this is a thing that makes me sigh and groan, when
I remember it; viz. That some nobles and others in high esteem and authority
under her majesty; are secretly entered into league with the Jesuits, on the
behalf of the King of Spain, for the long intended conquest of this land.
This, this, is it, which can not but grieve and wound even to the heart; all
true hearted English, Mark well for Christ's sake.
that shall hear the same. Not the seminaries doubtless of themselves, but the
holy Ghost enforcing them thereunto, have revealed this notable stratageme.
Yea, the seculars do acknowledge thus much themselves, See the reply to
Parsons libell, fol. 68.
where they write in this manner; God has most straungly and in very indeed (as
it may be termed,) miraculously revealed the truth which long has been
hidden. quodl. 8. art. 9. page 267. Thus we see, the Priests have discovered
long hidden traitors, and detected many notorious treasons: yet not intending
good thereby to Queen Elizabeth, but to their own persons in their combat
with the Jesuits. I trust her majesty's wise and faithful counselors, will
have due consideration of this aduiso. pauca sufficient sapienti.

Aduiso. IX.
Of the Jesuitical exercise and their profitable effects thereof.
First John Gerard the Jesuit caused Henry Drurie to enter into this
Jesuitical exercise, and thereby got him to sell the manor of Lozell in
Suffolk, and other lands to ye value of 3500. pounds and got all the money
himself; the said Drurie haven chosen to be a lay-brother. Afterward he sent
him to Antwerpe, 3500. pounds.
to have his Nouitiat by the provincial there, by name Oliuerius Manerius,
(for at that time father Garnet had not authority to admit any;) where after
twelve or fourthteene days he died, not without suspicion of some indirect
dealing.

Secoudly, the said Gerrard gave the same exercise to Master Anthony Rowse,
100. pounds.
of whom he got above 1000. pounds.

Thirdly, the said Gerrard gave the exercise to Edward Walpoole, 1008. Marks.
whom he caused to sell the manner of Tuddenham, and had of him about 1000.
Marks.

Fourthly, he gave the exercise to Master James Linacre his fellow prisoner in
the Clinke, from whom he drew there 400. pounds; and afterward got a
promise of him of all his lands, 400. pounds.
but was prevented thereof by the said Linacres death.

Fifthly, 1000. pounds.
under pretense of the said exercise, he confined sir Edmond Huddlestones son
and heir by sundry sleights, of above.1000. pounds.

Sixthly, he has drawn Master William Wiseman into the said exercise so often,
as he has left him now very bare to live. So he dealt also with Master Thomas
Wiseman, whose land he got, and the^ sent him to Antwerpe, where he died.

Seventhly, he wrought so with Master Nicholas King lately of Grayes Inn, as
he has gotten most of his living, and sent him to Rome. Master Roger Lee of
Buckinghamshire has been in this exercise likewise, and is also by him sent
to Rome.

Eighthly, in like manner he deals with such gentlewomen as he thinks fit
for his turn, and draws them to his exercise; as the Lady Louell, mistress
Haywood, and mistress Wiseman now prisoner; of whom he get so much, as now
she feels the want of it.

Ninthly, he drue Mistress Fortescue the widow of Master Edmond Fortescue
into his exercise, and so got a farm worth 50. pounds a year, and paid her
no rent.

Tenthly, by this his exercise of consinage, he persuades such gentlewomen as
have large portions to their marriage, to give the same to him and his company,
and to become Nuns. So he prevailed with two of Master Williame Wisemans
daughters of Broddocke; with Elizabeth Sherlie, borne in Leicestershire; with
Dorothy Buckwood Master Richard Buckwoods daughter of Suffolk, who had a
great portion given her by the Lady Elizabeth Drurie her grandmother; with
mistress Marie Tremaine, Master. Tremains daughter of Cornewell she having a
large portion; with Mistress Mary Tremain of Dorcetshire, of whom he had
above.200. pounds; with mistress Anne Arundle, of whom he got a great portion;
with Lady Marie Percie, who is now a Nun at Bruxells. All these words of
this holy cousinage, I would say, exercise, are set down in express terms,
quodli. 3. art. 10. toward the end. By this aduiso we may see, in what sort
and by what means, our Jesuits have enriched their coffers; and consequently,
we may have a coniecturall prognostication thereby, that they expect a day,
when to bestow the same to their advantage. In the mean time, if they with
their co^plices be permitted scot free; they will set the whole land on fire,
with their seditious and bloody treacheries.

Aduiso. X.
Of Jesuitical religious policy, never enough to be admired.
IT is a plain testimony of no religion in the Jesuits, but flat I Atheism,
making religious piety, but only a matter of mere policy. These words are
expressly set down; quodl 6. art. 4. page 168.

There is not a Jesuit, nor a Jesuits fautour any where to be found, but he
has a foul taste of Atheism, either directly per^^e, or indirectly, or
virtute primi and principalis agentis. The experience whereof, half witted men
may see in England, and else where. These express words are set down quodl. 4.
art. 4. p. 113.

The Jesuits have most traytorously cast the platform, and do go about so
much as wit of man can devise, to bring all Kings, princes, and states in
christendom, under their subjection. quodl 9* art. 7. page. 313.

They (the Jesuits) have made religion, but an art of such as live by their
wits, and a very hotch potch of omnium githerum. These words are set down;
quodl. 2. art. 8. page. 44.

The Jesuits, during the time of their rebellious practices and conspiracies,
against the late King Henry the 3. of France, and Henry now regnant the 4. did
cast at the whole kingdom and crown of France. quodlibet. 9. art. 6. page.
^11.

The seculars will be, when not one Jesuit shall be left alive in the world,
(unless they amend their manners, and reform their order,) but all damned for
heretics, or thruste out of Gods Church, as aposta^a^s and Atheistes, These
words are to be read, quodlibet. 2. art. 7. page. 42.

How the Jesuits have abused that sacred seal (of confession) of purpose to
tyrannize over poor souls, as getting thereby occasion to intrude themselves
for disposing and managing of their wordly causes, I leave it to sundry reports
and woeful experiences, whereof mistress Wibur in Kent together with he
husband can and will be witnesses another day, against father Cur^y the
Jesuit, unless his repentance were great for it, ere he died. These words are
set down, quodl. 2. art. 4. page. 69.

Only in hell and amongst heretics ordo negligitur, Ergo, the Jesuits
appointing us a superior (without order,) do imitate one of these, (the
devils, or heretics.) These words are set down. Quodl. 6. art. 4. page 164.

One is in time of solemn processions, at which it has been noted, that the
Jesuits will seldom or never come. These words are to be read. Quodl. 3. art.
1. page. 51.

The power of priesthood is called into question, by these new religious
Scribes and Pharisees, (the Jesuits.) These words are set down. Quodl. 2.
art. 7. page 42.

It follows, that they must either renounce the Catholic Churches
authority, in crediting these false hearted, seditious, and erroneus Jesuits,
or else renounce the said Jesuitical doctrine. These words are set down,
Quodl. 2. art. 7. page. 42. By this Aduiso we see plainly, that whosoever
follows the doctrine of the Jesuits, must of necessity renounce Christ's
Church. Fie upon them therefore, and their badde religion.

Aduiso. XI.
Of the testimony, that the Jesuits give to the Pope.
THey (the Jesuits) have preached openly in Spain, against Pope Sixtus the
last of all holy memory; and railing against him as against a most wicked man
and monster on earth, they have called him a Lutheran heretic; they have
termed him a Wolf, they have said, he had undone all Christendom, if he had
lived. And Cardinal Bellarmine, being asked what he thought of his death, See
the sixth Aduiso and note it well.
answered thus: conceptis verbis, qua^tum capio, quantum sapio, quantum
intelligo, descendit ad infernum. Thus in English; as far I can perceive,
understand, and apprehend, our pope is gone to hell. They gave him doubtless,
a merry farewell. Thse words are set down. quodl. 3. art. 2. page. 57.

The Jesuits hold and defend this proposition, hominem non christianum posse
esse Romanum Pontificem. A man that is not a Christian, may be the bishop or
Pope of Rome, These words are set down in the discovery. page. 37. quodl. 4.
art. 2. page. 100. This is a worthy Aduiso, which must be well marked and
remembered, for it gives popery a deadly wound. First, we see here, that the
Pope may be an ethnicke de facto. Sixtus disliked of popish auricular
confession. Fourthly, that it is lawful to judge both of the popes religion,
and of the pope himself. For we see here, King Henry now regnant.
that the Jesuits did judge the pope. Yea, our quodlibetist tells us in
another place, that the Jesuits affirmed the pope, to have erred in absoluing
the French king. quod. 4. art. 2. gage. 101. See the fourth Preamble, and the
sixth Aduiso sup.

Concerning the pope, how he both has erred and still does err, as also how
both he has been judged, and this day ought to be judged, even of his dearest
popelings; I have sufficiently proved elsewhere; nevertheless, for the full
satisfaction of the reader. I will here add a little, which in the former
books is wanting and cannot but well content, every indifferently affected
person.

Master Doctor Gerson a famous papist, and chancellor of the viuersitie of
Paris, does make the case so plain in many places of his works, as none that
with judgment shall peruse the same, can stagger or stand in doubt thereof.
Some few places only I will here allege, referring the Reader for the rest,
unto the author himself in his books.

The first place is contained in these express words: co^cluditur ex hac
radice duplex veritas. Prima, quod de terminati^ s^lius papa in his quae sunt
fidei, non obligat vt pracise est talis, ad credendum: al^^quin staret in casu,
Gerson. pri. part. de examine. doctrinar. confider. 2.
quod qui* obligaretur ad contradictoria, vel ad falsum contra fidem.

Out of this root is concluded a double truth. First, that the resolution or
determination of the pope alone, in things belonging to faith, as it is
precisely such, (not confirmed by a general counsel,) does not tie or bind a
man to believe it. For other wise the case might so fall out, that one should
be bound either to believe contradictories, or else falshoode against his faith.

The said Gerson, after he has in the same place by me quoted in the margent,
Gerson, vbi supra.
delated at large, that the Popes erroneous doctrine must be controlled by a
general council, adds these express words: Cui legi haud dubie subest papa
licet hactenus multis haec veritas non placeret propter inordinatu^, fauorem ad
summum pontificem, vel scripta sua male suscepta, plus quam ad Christi^ and
Euangelia. Nunc aute^ opposita falsitas est haeresis express damnata per
concilium Constantiense, cum alijs multis in vtilitatem totius politiae
Christianae.

To which law the pope doubtless is subject, although hitherto this truth did
not please a great many, by reason of their inordinate affection to the pope,
more then to Christ and his gospel. But now the opposite falsehood is an
here^ie, slatly condemned by the counsel of Constance, together with many
other things for the good of all Christian policy.

The second place is contained in these words: Concilium generale sic est supra
papam, Gerson. pripart. in sermon. pro. viagio regis Roman. part. 3. direct. 1.
and alium quemlibet de ecelesia, quod ipsum papam potest deponere pro
quocunque crimine, de quo notorie and incorrigibiliter scandalizatur ecclesia.
Hoe est practicatum dudum de papa Ioh. 12. and nunc de Ioh. 23. In cuius
deiectione non inseritur, quod fuerit haereticus, vel a fide deuius.

A general council is so above the Pope, and every one of the Church, that it
has power to depose the Pope, for what crime soever, whereof the Church is
scandalized notoriously and incorrigibly. This was done upon John the 12. Long
sythence, and now upon John the 23. of that name, in whose deiection it is not
inserted, that he was an heretic, or had swarued from the faith.

The third place is contained in these words: Concilium generale potest eum
quem reputat summum pontificem, Gerson in pri. part. in sermon. pro ^agio regis
Romans direct. 2.
nedum consultiue inducere, sed authoritatiue compellere ad offerendum viam
cessionis, vel ad cedendum papatui, etiam sine culpa licet non sua sine causa.

A general council may not only by way of council induce him* whom it
reputeth to be the lawful Pope; but also by way of authority compel him to
offer to give place, or to depart from the Popedom in very deed; yea, without
his own fault, though not without a cause.

The fourth place is contained in these words: Status papalis, Gerson pri.
part. d^^stati^us ecclesiastic. consider 3.
non eximit papam a legibus pure diuinis, quae vel in euangelijs, vel
generalibus concilijs positae sunt. Et ex hoc conseque^ter patet, quod papa
subijcitur legi de correctione fraterterna. Si peccauerit in te frater tuus,
etc. Sic quod potest fraternaliter corripi, dum peccat. Et si tandem nolet
audire ecclesiam, quam generale concilium representat, debet haberi sicut
ethu^^us and publicanus. Et ita potest hoc modo per concilium, vel iudicari,
vel coerceri, vel pro excommunicato haberi.

The Popes estate does not exempt the Pope from the pure divine laws, which
are set down either in the gospels, or in general councels. And hereupon it
is clear consequently, that the Pope is subject to that law of fraternall
correction, if thy brother offend against the, etc. So that he may be reproved
brotherly, when he sins. And if at length he will not hear the Church,
which a general council does represent, he must be reputed as an Ethnicke and
Publican. And so he may this way by a council either be judged, or corrected,
or reputed an excommunicate person.

The fifth place is contained in these words: Ecclesia vel generale concilium
potuit and potest congregari, Gerson in sermon. co^^. council. Constan. K. prim.
part.
sine expresso consensu vel mandato papae, etiam rite electi and viuentis, in
multis casibus.

The Church or general council both might and may be called together, without
the express consent or mandate of the pope, even when the pope is lawfully
elected and living, and that in many cases.

Again, Gerson ibidem.
the same Doctor has these words: Ecclesia vel generale conciliu^ eam
representans, est regula a spiritu sancto, directa tradita a Christo, vt
quilibet cuiuscunque status etiam papalis existat, eam audire ac eidem obedire
teneatur, lioquin habendus, est vt ethnicus, and publicanus.

The Church or general council representing it, is a rule directed of the
holy Ghost, and given us of Christ, that every one of what state soever even
papal, must hear and obey the same, or else he must be reputed as an ethnic
and publican.

The sixth place is contained in these words: Concilium generale potestatem a
Christo immediate habet, Gerson in sermon. pro viagio regis Romanorii, direct. 1.
prim part.
cui quilibet cuiuscunque status vel dignitatis etiamsi papalis existat,
obedire tenetur in his quae pertinent ad fidem, and extirpationem schismatis,
ac generalem reformationem ecclesiae dei, in capite and in membris.

A general council has power from Christ immediately, to which every one of
what state or dignity soever he be, yea the pope himself, is bound to yield
obedience, in those things which pertayne to faith, and extirpation of schism,
and the general reformation of the Church of God, in the head and in the
members.

The seventh place is contained in these words: Johannes (papa) non est
accusatus vel conuictus de haeretica prauitate, Gerson p^. part, in tractatu
de appellatione a papa circa medium.
and tamen concilium vocauit and indicauit ipsum, tanquam suum subditum. Vnde
and in toto processu vsque post sententiam definitiuam suae depositionis,
reputans est ab eodem concilio verus papa.

Pope John was neither accused nor convicted of heretical prauitie, and for
all that the council both called him and judged him, as their subject.
Whereupon the council reputed him the true Pope, in all the time of their
proceeding against him* until after the definitive sentence of his deposition.

The eight place is contained in these words: In causis fidei non habetur in
(...) iudex infallibilis, Gerson vbi (...) in 2. prop^it.
vel qui non sit deuiabilis a ^ide de l^ge communi, praeter ipsam ecclesiam
vniuersalem vel concilium generale eam sufficienter repraesentans.

In causes of faith there is no infallible judge upon earth, or which cannot
swerve from the faith by the common course of Gods proceeding, saving the
universal Church or a general council.

Thus you see at large, the constant doctrine of this great Doctor, and famous
papist; who was present at the council of Constance, and one of the best
account in the same council. Out of whose words I gather many very excellent
documents, well worthy to be written in golden letters. de facto put in
execution, both in Pope John the 12. and in Pope John the 23. of that name.
Seventhly, that elected and then living. Tenthly, that the Church or

Aduiso. XII.
Of the tolleration expected by the Seculars.
TOuching the toleration which the secular priests aim at, I will only put
down the reasons which persuade me, that it cannot stand with the peaceable
government of this land, referring the decision thereof as appertains, to the
grave consideration of higher powers. The same toleration is no less
dangerous, in the kingdoms of Scotland and Ireland, a point that would not be
forgotten.

The first reason.
In the book which Cardinal Allen published in his own name, See the
Apology, page. 172. and note it well.
when the invasion of England was chiefly intended, with the cruel massacre
of her Majesty's sacred person, in the year 1588. (which book the Jesuits
partly framed to his hands,) they first make their entrance into their
discourse, with a most odious and shameful declaration against her Majesty,
thereby to stir up her subjects hearts to contempt of her highness, and to
make her beholden every where for odious both to God, to the world, and to all
good men. Secondly, in that book the Cardinal and the Jesuits threaten the
nobility, gen^rie, and all the rest of the inhabitants of this kingdom, with
loss of all their goods, their lands, their lives, and with damnation besides,
Lo, the like treason was never hard of to this day.
except that presently upon the landing of the Spaniards, they joined
themselves and all their forces, men, munition, victuals, and whatsoever else
they could make, with that Catholic army. The words of that book be these;
if you will avoid (say they) the popes, the kings, and other princes high
indignation, let no man of what degree soever, obey, abet, aid, defend, or
acknowledge her, etc. adding, that otherwise they should incur the Angels
curse and malediction and be as deeply excommunicated as any, because y^ in
taking her majesty's part, they should fight against God, These words are set
down. quodl. 8. art. 7. page. 247.
against their lawful king, and against their country. Ergo the Jesuits are
unfit men to enjoy any toleration, in a well managed commonweal. And
whatsoever I say of Jesuits concerning this toleratio^, I understand y^ same
indifferently Allen (with whose opinion This my self know to be so.
which is quoted in the margent. Thirdly, Because Ballard the secular priest,
did at his coming over, about the year 1586. deliver a like message to al
reconciled

The second reason.
Many nobles and others in high esteem and authority under her majesty's, are
secretly entered into league on the behalf of the Spaniard, and that by
procurement of the Jesuits, as I have proved in the eight aduiso; Ergo the
Jesuits, and seculars are unfit men, to enjoy and toleration in a well managed
common weal.

The third Reason.
All papists must employ their persons and forces by the Popes direction, how
far, when, and where, either at home, or abroad; as men bound in conscience
to further all wars for religion, and to break with their temporal
sovereign at the Popes appointment. This is proved preamble. 18. Ergo Jesuits
and Seculars. etc.

The fourth Reason.
The King of Spain plotteth and by Jesuitical faction resolves, to proceed
where his father left against England, And for this end sundry persons are
sent into England, to be agents in that behalf. This is proved preamb. 19.
Ergo.

The fifth Reason.
The seculars confess in plain terms, that the penal statutes are justly
made against them. this is proved in the seventh aduiso. Ergo unfit men to have
a toleration.

The sixth Reason.
The seculars commend the pope, for taking the English diadem from the king,
and highly approve the dissoyal fact of Cardinal Pandulphus, in keeping the
said English crown three days upon his head in the Popes right; Ergo. etc.
This is proved in the first aduiso, in the second reason.

The seventh Reason.
All that come out of Spain, must swear to be rank traitors against Queen
Elizabeth. This is proved in the second book, chapt. 4. page. 6. Ergo. etc.

The eight Reason.
The seminaries in Spain were intended and erected, of purpose to cause a
conquest, and to bring England into the slavery of the Spaniard. This is
proved, quodlibet. 8. art. 10. page. 278. Ergo. etc.

The ninth Reason.
The seculars in their answer to the Iesuited gentleman, do prowdly vaunt of
their great power and forces, in the 68 page. Ergo.

The 10 Reason.
In all the blondie attempts and treasonable practices of the Pope and
Spaniards, none were more forward then the secular priests. This is proved in
the important considerations, page. 15. Ergo.

The 11. Reason.
The seminaries were willing to color, hide, and conceal, all the attempts,
intents, practices, and proceedinges of the Jesuits, until they were
entangled by penal laws. these words are set down, in the preface to the
quodlibets. Ergo.

The 12. Reason.
All papists (seculars and Jesuits,) maintained one and the same opinion, in
all the practices and bloody complots concerning England. This is proved,
quodli. 8. art. 9. page. 277. But some seculars were as forward against Queen
Elizabeth, as the bloody Spaniards, as is proved in the 10. Reason. Ergo unfit
men to have a tolleration,

The 13. Reason.
The seculers granut freely, as is already proved at large; that they have
many friends both of the nobility, and of the gentry, who love them dearly,
and are devoted to the Pope. Ergo. many other reasons may be gathered to this
effect, out of this precedent discourse; but I will not stand upon the matter.
Her Majesty's grave and wise counselors, know best what is to be done herein.
only this I wish to be remembered, (which is already made manifest in the
second book, chapter. 4. paragraph. 1.) that the Jesuits are banished out of
the kingdom of France, for their seditious dealing there. For doubtless, if
they be unfit persons to dwell in that Realm; where popery is openly
professed, and therefore are banished from thence; it seems not to stand with
christian policy, to grant them a tolleration to live as they list in England.
And seeing the seculars were as deep and as forward in all bloody practices,
as y^ Jesuits or spaniards, (as is already proved;) and seeing with all, they
do still profess their obedience to the Pope, her Majesty's professed mortal
enemy; they seem as dangerous, and as unfit to enjoy a tolleration, as do
the Jesuits. What say I of a tolleratio^? seeing the seculars confess (as I
have proved,) that the penal laws are justly made against them; it were not a
miss think I, if this their general maxim were put in execution; viz. fiat
iustitia, and ruant coeli. For as our quodlibetist tells us, Quodl. 7. art. 7
p 196.
the execution of priesthood and treason are now so linked together by the
Jesuits in England; as they cannot exhort any to the catholic faith, but
dogma^^zando, in so doing they draw him in effect to rebellion. quodl. 9. art.
4. page. 304. note the next reason.

The 14. Reason.
The Pope will not suffer nor permit the Jews to dwell in Rome, I speak this
of my own knowledge*
unless they will orderly and dutifully hear the popish sermons in their popish
Churches; and yet are the popish sermons as much against the conscience of the
Jew, as are the English sermons against the conscience of the papist. Again,
the Jews are not the Popes subjects, and so do they owe less duty to the
Pope, the^ our english papists owe to Queen Elizabeth. And consequently, if
the Popes practice with the Jews be made a rule, to square and measure the
actions of his popish English vassals; they must have no toleration to abide in
England, unless they will come to the Church to hear godly sermons. To which I
must needs add, that the Jews live peaceably in Rome, and do not any way
meddle in seditious and treasonable practices; which for all that, is a thing
very common and usual with our English papists, as is already proved. If
therefore the execution of popish priesthood, be lincked inseperably with
treason, as is already proved; I hope popery will be so far from a
tolleration, as no disloyal papist shall be permitted, to have any footinge
within this land.

The complement of the three former books
Paragraph. I.
Containing a golden redolent posie, for the Jesuits and their Iesuited
family; presented by the secular Priests, to signify their amity.
THe Jesuits and their arch-priesbyteran or Spanish faction, inueighing
against the secular priests, for appealing to the Sea apostolic for justice in
spiritualibus, and to the regal throne of sacred majesty, in defense
apologiticall of their innocence in temporalibus; do pervert all laws,
customs, and orders, and arrogate to themselves a dignity, pre-eminence, and
authority, above the Pope and Prince, and are therebie guilty of high
treason. These words are set down, in the preface to their dialogue.

Note here gentle reader, these important points; first that by the flat
testimony of the seculars, the Jesuits are censured to be guilty of high
treason; and consequently, that they are worthily condemned by the laws of
this land for the same. secondly, that these good fellows the secular priests,
do make themselves guilty of the same treason, though not in the same degree.
For their appeal to the Pope in spiritualibus, implies high treason against
their natural sovereign. Which to be so themselves confess else where, as
shall appear in the next paragraph.

Paragraph. II.
Showing that the secular priests unawares condemn themselves, in their own
public writings.
THe seminaries were willing at the first, to color, hide, and conceal all;
making the Jesuits causes, attempts, intents, practices, and proceedings,
their own in every thing, and yielding to them the pre-eminence, fame, honor
and renown in every action acted by them; until at last they were entangled
by penal laws, justly made against them equally, as against the Jesuits.
These words are set down, in the preface to the quodlibets.

Note here gentle reader, these important points with me; For the Jesuits
began their treasons, in the year. 1580. as is already proved; and the
seculars did not reveal them, until the year. 1601. Neither then, but to be
avenged of the Jesuits, and to save their own necks from the halter.

Paragraph. III.
Of the cause of the discovery of the Jesuitical treasons.
Now of late God has most strangely, and in very deed, (as it may be termed,)
miraculously, revealed the truth which long has been hidden. These words are
set down, quodl. 8. art. 9. p. 267.

Note here gentle reader, that God for his own glory, for the preservation
of his faithful servant our gracious sovereign, and for the common good of
our native country; has miraculously contrary to the expectation of man,
caused the secular priests to discover the long hidden treasons, contrived and
disloyally practiced both by the Jesuits and themselves.

The fourth Book, containing a sparing postpast, provided by the Seculars for
the Jesuits; in regard of the delicate and sumptuous Antepast, bestowed on
their messengers at Rome.
AFter I had accomplished the three books aforegoing, I had a sight of a
Jesuitical book, itituled a brief apology; which in pervse, I found not
only to confirm the treasonable complots and bloody practices, heretofore
intended against her majesty and this our native contry; but with all to sound
out alarm, to most cruel and unnatural rebellion in time to come; and
consequently, I have thought it my part and bounden duty, to use my pen for
the confutation and confusion, of such unchristian villainy.

CHAP. I.
Of the Author of this seditious apology.
ALthough by the inscription of this libell, some Iesuited priests should be
the authors thereof: yet do I verily think, See the ^ chapter and the secon^
section.
that the traytorous Jesuit Parsons did compile the same. For first, if the
style and method be conferred with his other books, they will seem to be
of one and the same moulde. Secondly, the author thereof speaks of himself
in the singular number, Apology page. 2.
so as the words can no way be applied unto many. See Colling^ons defense.
page. 123. p. 124. p. 126.
when he has told us some part of Master Bluets letter to his fellow
master Mush, in these words; (I have by opening the cause unto there honors,
and to Caesar, obtained etc. He puts down in the margent, these words;
(the Queen after a sort.) As if he had said, she is deprived by the Popes
Bull, Apology, page. 211.
and is not Queen indeed, but by bare name only. And the very reverend
prelate Master Doctor Bancroft, he terms the false bishop of London. And
yet this good fellow is grievously offended, Apology page. 162. page. 10.
that the seculars do not term the Archpriest ( Blackewell) by the name of
Reuerendissimus, Apology. page. 194.
that Parsons himself did diligently inform them, how and in what sort they
should write. And consequently he was the architect indeed, It is not Parsons
manner, to put his name to his books. See the apology. page. 172.
howsoever others have the name. But every wiseman will think, that (seeing
Parsons is the party accused.) if his own conscience had not condemned him in
the answer, he would have put his own name to the Apology. Well, the
answer is so badde, the author may not be known. See more hereof, in the
fourth chapter.

CHAP. II.
Of the cruel proceeding, against the messengers sent to Rome.
MAster Charnocke, and master Bishop two of the secular priests, who had
traueiled many years in the Popes affairs here in England, being unjustly
molested by the tyrannizing Jesuits; did with the consent and counsel of many
other priests, vered by the Jesuits as themselves, take a long and painful
journey to Rome, to desire some mitigation of his holiness in that behalf.
But God thank you, Parsons by the help of their Jesuits, made such an
heinous complaint to the pope against the said messengers, O tyranny of all
tyrannies in world. See D. Elies notes upon the Apology. p. 108. p. 111. p.
112 verse. 20.
that the prison was made ready for them, before they came to Rome. Yea, at
their coming they were imprisoned indeed, neither to this day could they be
permitted to come to the Pope. And which is more, they were enjoined at their
going out of prison, to remain in exile; the one, in Paris; the other, in
Lozaine; and not to return into England, without special license of his
holiness, or of the protector his deputy. Which cruel decree, they were
compelled to confirm with a corporal oath. Hereupon the other priests
exclayme and cry out; O miserable times? O wicked manners of men? that their
two messengers should so be handled, as to be put in prison, before they could
be heard, page. 192. Master Collington says, Apology, Page, 139. Page. 154.
that they were kept in prison till Parsons had made all sure, by getting forth
a Breue for confirmation of his plotted authority. page. 208. Now what does
Parsons answer, in defense of his intolerable tyranny? you shall hear the
express words of the Apology, in the next chapter.

CHAP. III.
Of Parsons his answer, for the punishment of the messengers.
THey say, that Cardinal Bellarmine his letter to father Parsons from Ferrara,
a lttle before their arrival, does prove, that the imprisonment of their
messengers was procured by Parsons, for that the said Cardinal wrote that the
two English priests were not yet come, but should be imprisoned when they came,
How would these Jesuits entreat others, that deal so cruelly with the popes
friends?
nor that it should be needful for Parsons to fly, or make haste to Ferrara
for that cause. And then the priests cry out, O tempora, O mores, that their
two messengers should so be handled, as to be put in prison before they were
head. But God be thanked, that worthy Cardinal is yet alive, and can testify
all this to be their fiction, and that his holiness being advertised in Ferrara,
from his Nuncioes in France and Flaunders, of these men's coming, was offended
at their new stirring, and willed the said father to write to Rome to father
Parsons, so be en^ormed of them and their pretenses, before ever father Parsons
had written or spoken word thereof, Ask my brother, if I bea a these.
as the said Cardinal will bear witness. And as for the least clause of his
letter, whereby he should write, that Parsons needs not to sly or make haste
to Ferrara; it is added and forged by themselves, and no one such word in the
letter. These are the express words of the Apology, Apology. page. 193.
in which all is said for the Jesuit Parsons, that himself possibly could
devise for his own defense. For either he was the man that penned the
Apology, or at least the man that diligently instructed him, who penned it, as
is already proved. Mark then the due examination thereof.

Apology, we must observe first, that the Jesuit Bellarmine now Cardinal,
wrote from Ferrara to Parsons at Rome, telling him that the priests were not
yet come thither.

the priests came either to Rome or to Ferrara; whither it was thought they
would come, because the Pope was there.

Thirdly, that it was decreed, that they should be imprisoned,

Fourthly, that the Pope was advertised in Ferrara, by

Fifthly, that the Pope willed the Cardinal to write to Parsons, to be informed
of them and their pretenses.

Sixthly, that the Cardinal Bellarmine can testify all this,

These observations duly pondered, it will appear to the indifferent reader,
as clear as the Sun when it shines at the noone tide; that the Jesuit
Parsons is c^ndemned in his own conscience, and knows now no other means
how to defend his badde dealing, but by hypocri^ie, falsehood, and impudent
lying. First therefore, he Bellarmine, with false testimony. This is evident
by the first observation, where after he told us the words of the Cardinals
letter, he adds immediately to the same words, the exclamation of the priests.
That done, he forthwith with an impudent mouth auouceth, that the Cardinal can
testify all this to be their fiction. Peruse the words in the beginning of
this third chapter, and mark them well. The devil is termed a liar, John. 8.
verse. 44.
and pater eius; but henceforth let him give place to Parsons, in that behalf.
For having told us of the Cardinals letter written to him, and of the contents
thereof; he forthwith affrmeth to us, that all is false, and the mere fiction
of the priests. And yet is the greater part, or rather the total sum of
their narration, contained in the said Cardinals letter. But let us in the way
of dispute, and in favor of our good Jesuit Parsons, and in regard of his
travels for the king of Spain against our native country; suppose with him,
that the priests had uttered many untruths, (the contrary whereof God
willing, shall shortly be made manifest;) yet must the lie perforce be retorted
upon Parsons, as upon him that best has deserved it; for his impudent,
shameless, and most notorious lying. The reason is evident, because he
granting a great part to be true, affirms in the same periode, the whole to
be false. But it shall be proved before the end of this reply, that there is
no falshoode therein at all; save that only, which proceeds from his own
lips.

Parsons to purge himself of bad dealing, if possibly it would be, tells us
in the fifth observation, that the Pope willed the Cardinal to write to him, to
be informed of the priests and their pretenses. Here Parsons either condemns
himself, or else gives the Pope a mortal wound. If the Pope gave no such
charge to his Cardinal, then has Parsons committed a damnable sin, in lying
so egregiously upon the Pope and his Cardinal. And it seems very probable,
that the Pope was not then acquainted with the matter, but that the General of
the Jesuits by Parsons his information, had required the Cardinal to move the
Pope for their imprisonment, if perhaps they should come to Ferrara, while the
Pope made his abode there. And for this cause did the Cardinal answer, that
the priests were not yet come, O blessed Iesuitical, Cardinal. servant of the
devil. Page. 199.
but should be imprisoned when they came, as we have in the third observation.
As if he had said, have ye no care, I will be mindful to gratify you in
your desire. The priests are not yet come, but I shall not fail to procure
their imprisonment at their coming. For it can not be imagined, that
intelligence of this matter could come to the pope, but by the consent of
Parsons, and as Parsons did design to be done. The reason is evident, because
Parsons boasts, that he is appointed the Rector of the English College, the
Prefect of the English mission, and the like. All which is true indeed, and by
reason hereof, all English papists depend upon Parsons, and will do nothing
without his advise; the seculars ever excepted, Note this dilemna.
that now oppose themselves against him, who doubtless would not bewray their
own cause. If the Pope gave such a charge indeed, then did he show himself to
be the devils vassal. and not Christ's vicar, as he pretends to be. For who,
but the devil of hell, would first decree that the priests should be imprisoned
and afterward labor to know, what offense they had committed? For if Parsons
say truly, the Pope knew not what offense was done. Well, be this as it be may,
it is confessed on all sides, that the priests with the Popes knowledge, were
first imprisoned, then enjoined to live in exile, and never to return into
their native country without license, and could not to this day, be permitted
to speak to the Pope. Justly therefore may the priests exclayme, O miserable
times? O wicked manners of men? O cursed Parsons? O cruel bishop of Rome?
Do thou send thy priests with the danger of their lives, to execute thine
employments, and when they have taken a long, painful, and chargeable
journey, to know thy further pleasure, in their doubts and distresses in that
behalf, do thou cause them to be imprisoned? Do thou punish them, The
Pope is a most cruel tyrant.
before thou know any cause? Do thou condemn them, nay banish them, before
thou do hear them speak? they truly have deserved no less, because they
have taken part with thee against their natural sovereign. Yet is it a shame
of all shames for thee, to have dealt so cruelly with them. They may see if
they have but one eye left, that thou art neither Saint Peter nor Christ's
lawful vicar.

Thirdly, they were more strictly imprisoned at Rome, Parsons was the chief
Iaylour. Secondly, the priests were put in ^eucrall places of the prison so as
the one could not speak with the other. Thirdly, they could not be permitted
to talk with scholars, Apology. Page. 193.
nor the scholars to talk with them. Page. 191.
This is a good president. ^ew to deal with tay^orous Jesuits, when they
shall hereafter be apprehended in this land.

Fourthly, the notarie that penned the examination, was a Jesuit, so as
Parsons had his desire, in every respect. These things put together with the
former, the last clause of the Cardinals letter, of Parsons his hasting to
Ferrara, will be evident.

Parsons fearing, that the Pope would make some subordination in England,
labored by all means possible, Apology. Page. 99.
that Blackwell might be the Archpriest. I prove this evidently. For first,
the Pope willed that information should be procured out of England, who were
the fittest men for government. And yet Parsons confesses, that the opposite
seculars were not acquainted therewith; Albeit they were the fittest men, as I
shall prove demonstratiuely, if any Jesuit will provoke me thereunto.
Secondly, the Protector demanded the opinions, of the principal English in
Rome. And I pray you, who were these? Parsons himself forsooth, and his
brother Jesuit Baldwin, lately come (for that intent) out of England, Haddocke
also, Martin Array, and Allen, all Iesuited vassals, and at his command.
Thirdly, diverse other principal men wrote out of Spain, to signify the
sufficiency of Blackwel for his Arch-presbiteran office, and that he should be
the governor. This does Parsons or his flattering vassals at his designement,
Apology. page. 99.
set down in express terms in their Apology. Now I beseech the gentle
reader, who is so blind, as cannot see this malicious treachery? Parsons
seeks by hook and by crook to hide his false dealing, and yet does he
unwittingly bewray his own villainy. Men forsooth in Spain, See Collington.
Page. 126. Page, 127. and note them well.
must please Parsons for their own gain; and they must write to the Protector
at Rome, that Blackwell (whose sufficiency they know not,) is a most
sufficient man. He and none but he, must govern all the priests in England.
Will ye know the reason? this Blackwell is Iesuited, (if not a close and secret
Jesuit;) and consequently, he being the governor, Parsons may rule at his
pleasure, and banish all that will not subscribe to his treasons. For not only
the prests, but the Cardinal also; yea, the Pope himself must conclude and
agree, to the Jesuits their designements. Who so will read the instructions,
which the Archpriest is enjoined to follow, can not possibly; but be of my
opinion.

CHAP. IIII,
Of the fashoods, leasings, and untruths, contained in the Jesuitical
Apology published to the world.
Paragraph. I.
Concerning Boromoeo the late Cardinal of Millan.
ANd as for that, which our discontented brethren do cite in diverse places of
their books, of Cardinal Boromaeo of holy memory, that he took the
government of one of his seminaries in Millan from the fathers; we have
informed our selves of the truth, that the fathers of their own will, and
upon their own earnest suite; left the said government of the great labor and
trouble thereof; as also some little difference in opinion, about the scholars
education; which the good Cardinal would have had somewhat more bare in their
diet and apparel, then the fathers order in their seminaries did permit. For
which the holy Cardinal alleged no evil reason: saying, that seeing they
were to be sent afterward, abroad to poor benefices among country people,
where they must fair hardly; they would refuse to go, being brought up
after the diet of other seminaries. But the fathers thought it easier for them
to leave this government, then to admit this difference, and so they left it.
And the good Cardinal did use all the means possibly he could, both there and
in Rome, to stay it in their hands. These are the express words of Parsons his
Iesuited vassals, Apology. page. 4^.
or rather of Parsons himself in the said Aplogie.

By these words, two things are clear. The one, that the Jesuits had once the
government, of one of the seminaries in Millan, under the jurisdiction of the
Cardinal Boromaeo; the other, that the said Cardinal was a good man, and of
holy memory. Now the controversy is this, whether the good Cardinal disliked
of their government, and therefore displaced them, or that the Jesuits were
weary of the place, and therefore did voluntarily leave it. The seculars say,
that the Cardinall^ (...) them, the Jesuits deny it. But why would the
Jesuits give over that government, which they had once taken upon them?
because forsooth, the good Cardinal would have had the scholars, to be
brought up more barely in their diet and apparel. Thus they say, but the
contrary is the truth.

Note this (...).
nor of so holy memory, as the priests do affirm. If it were sufficient, then
was that excessive, and consequently vicious, which the Jesuits did require,
then was their government justly disliked, then did they show themselves to be
a prude and arrogant kind of people, that would not condescend to the
Cardinal, in his most lawful demand.

Lewis the late bishop of Cassana, a man of great credit and renown, See the
r^p^^e to (...).
and who had great familiarity with the said Cardinal, did often affirm to
his friends, that the Cardinal could not endure them, nor like of their
government. Master Hugh Griffeth, master Morg^n, and master Meredith, all
priests this day living, can and will testify this to be so.

Millar, enquired diligently what should be the cause, for that I thought well
of the Jesuits, at that time indeed. And one of their own order, being then a
Prefect in the English College, (to say nothing of the common report of
others,) confessed freely, that the Cardinal could not brook well their
fathers, but he would not in any case, show the cause thereof. This to be true,
I protest before God, and his holy Angels.

Fourthly, they allege a reason which they would have viz. because they were
to be sent afterward abroad to poor benefices, where they must fare hardly.
But this reason is their own, and never framed by the Cardinal; and it is
confuted many ways. For first, they grant, (mark their words already cited)
that the cardinals reason was good; and consequently, that the Jesuits were
bad, and without all reason, when they refused to yield unto reason. Secondly,
where shall those benefices be found, See Colleton, page. 224.
and in what country; which are not sufficient to fill the priests belly? No
where doubtless; for the mainteynance of Popish priests, is too great every
where. Yea, by the settled law of popery, (would God it were so in our english
ministry,) every priest at the hour of his consecration, has some title for
his sufficient maintenance; to say nothing of the huge commodities, that do
daily ensue upon his priestly function. And for this cause, the papists that
now come into England, where they have no titles; are created ad titulum
sanctissimi, and so may justly challenge necessary maintenance of the Pope;
howsoever he has imprisoned the messengers, but bestowed no viaticum on them
at all, neither great nor small.

Fifthly, it follows of the Jesuits their own proceedinge, be yielded, and
yet this perforce must be rejected.

Paragraph. II.
Of the Jesuit Bellarmine, now Cardinal of the sea of Rome.
To prove the Jesuit Parsons an impudent and a most notorious liar; it is
sufficient to pervse to remember, what is already said thereof in the third
chapter of this book. See the Second book in the fifth chapter.
for after that Parsons has set down the narration of the seculars, and
freely granted the greater part thereof to be true; yea, the whole in effect;
as there it is proved, and so needs not here to be recounted; he forthwith
like a desperate ruffian, and as one unmindful what he had immediately
written; affirms with shameless lips and railing tongue, that the whole
narration is false. Which doubtless, is such a notorious untruth; as nothing is
worthy to be of credit, that shall hear after proceed from his pen.

Paragraph. III.
Of the students in the English College,
Parsons that arrogant Jesuit, for his own credit if it would be; tells us
in the apology, in the 184. page, that upon a certain falling out between
Master Doctor Jews then archdeacon of Cambray, and after bishop of Cassane,
and the English youths then students in the English College; the said youths
above 30. in number, were all dismissed thence, and yet brought again and
placed in the college by his good means. Thus does this good fellow boast of
his rare favors toward the english students, and his deserts in this behalf
are exceeding great, if we will believe him. But I assure thee gentle reader,
(whosouer thou art,) and I speak upon mine own knowledge as who was at the
same time one of the same number; that this is to be enrolled, among his other
notorious at all, between the late Bishop of Cassana and the students. Again,
the contention was indeed, between the Cardinal Morone then the protector of
the English, and the students, or rather the Jesuits; who like wily foxes did
all in all covertly, and yet would seem openly, to be most unwilling to have
the government of the college. Thirdly, Parsons was at that time, a man of no
reckening among the Jesuits; Apology. p. 184. 1579. 1574.
or could he do any thing in that behalf. The reason hereof is evident,
because he confesses in the said apology, that the college was erected in
the year 1579. And that himself entered into the society, in the year 1574.
so that he had then been Jesuit scantly four years, whereof one must be
allotted for his probation. now if any wise man will believe him, Parsons would
very gladly have credit, but it will not be.
that he could be of such credit with them upon so short a trial, he may; but
my self know the contrary, and so do many more yet living; viz. Master
Meredith, Master Griffeth, Master Morgan, M. Elize, and sundry others; but
none better then Master Mush, if he list to speak the truth therein.
Fourthly, there were at that time Iesuited English men, of long continuance
Toledo, (afterward Cardinal,) was but an instrument to help the said Parsons
in his employment. A shame it is for this fellow, to tell of himself such a
shameless lie. The truth is this; the general of the Jesuits was desirous
indeed, to have the government of the college, committed to his society; as
who knew right well, that it would tend both to his credit, and to his
commodity. But for fear of the displeasure of Cardinal Morone, who took
part with Master Morice the welch-man, whom he had designed to be the Rector
of the college; he neither would deal openly for the scholars, neither
suffer any of the society, to concur with the^ in that behalf. yet he did
that secretly, which was the vpshot, and end of all; viz. he commanded by a
secret message, the reverend father Toledo, a great learned man and one of
great reckening with the Pope at that time; that he would instantly beseeth the
Pope prostrate on his knees before his holiness, and to make a most pitiful
lamentation for the ouethrow of England. that is forsooth, that now were
rejected the finest wits; the most toward youths; the seed of popery; and
the only hope of the English nation, who now exiled for zeal in religion, and
come to be his popish vassals; must either be trained up in papistry after the
Jesuitical manner, or else should England never be reclamed, world without end.
this sweet narration noe sooner sounded in the Popes ears, but the commanded
the scholars to be received into the college again. Where note by the way
what politicians the Jesuits be. This Toledo was a Jesuit, then remaining in
the Popes house with the Pope, and was the Popes chiefest aduiser, in all
ecclesiastical causes. He then being a Jesuit, must needs do the designement
of his general, the master Jesuit of all the rest. For his profession was,
to obey at a beck. And for that he was present with the Pope, in his palace
Bel-v^dere, he was free to deal without suspicion, in this great and weighty
matter. Lastly, being in high esteem with the Pope, and speaking in a cause so
plausible and profitable for his holiness, he was most likely to prevail in
his suite. which (I protest to the reader,) the Jesuits did more then once
promise to the scholars, before it came to pass. Thus it is most apparent to
every indifferent reader, that the goodly story which Parsons tells for his
own vain glory, is a lie with a witness. For the first credit that ever he
got, was wrought by his treacheries and treasons against his native country,
most noble England. By reason whereof he crept into such credit with the King
of Spain, that now he is able to do all in all, both with that King and the
Pope himself. Wherefore my opinion is this, that the seculars are over
matched, and that howsouer they brag, that they will have audience, or else
dye for it one after another; yet are they more like many of them, if they go
to Rome to be cast into their holy most holy inquisition. for Parsons has now
by the reason of their writings, matter enough to work upon; and therefore
their best course is, to submit themselves to Queen Elizabeth, and to bid
the Pope fair well with all his traytorous Jesuits.

Paragraph. IIII.
Of the dealing of the Jesuit Parsons, during his abode in England.
THe seculars write, that Parsons being in England, did so exasperate the minds
both of the Prince and magistrates by his doings, as then first of all by that
occasion, capital laws were appointed against priests, Apology. page. 183.
and their receivers. Parsons answeareth, that this is a calumniation, which
has diverse evident falsehoods, reproueable by the witness, of all that lived
at that time in England, both catholics and heretics. But I reply, y^ this
aunsweare of Parsons contains a lie so palpable and so notorious, as I wonder
how he could utter it, without blushing. For first, diverse of the seculars in
England at that time, refuse Parsons was gone forth of England. This is that
goodly narratio^, which father Wiseman makes for his honest purgation; if it
may stand good either in law, or with right reason. let us examine it, to know
the truth thereof. First, he grants freely, that by Apology page. 183.
was imposed for recusancie. Secondly he grants freely, y^ by his traytorous
preaching Parsons has lost his wi^.
of their due allegiance to their natural sovereign and the profession of yt
same to the Pope her mortal enemy. And yet is this consequent necessarily
inferred of the premises, which this fellow freely has admitted. I cannot but
admire the folly of the man, that does not see it. for every recusant is
reconciled to the Pope; and must perforce take part with the Pope against the
Queen, as is already proved. And to this recusancie must be ascribed, as to
the principal cause; the enacting of all capital laws, and other penal
mulcts whatsoever. I say, to this recusancie, that is, to that recusancie to
which treason is annexed as an inseparable accident thereof. For until
recusancie was so linked with popish treason, Note this point well.
that disloyalty was thereby set a broach in every corner, recusants did i^ioy
all courtesy, liberty, and freedom, Whereof this is a sufficient argument,
because all the capital and other sharp penal statutes, did nothing at all
touch the old popish recusants. Albeit we see this day, (which is to be imputed
to the traytorous Jesuits,) that other priests together with the lay people,
are as deeply drowned in treasonable practices, as the seminarie-priests. But
what? Can Parsons say nothing for him self? Yes forsooth; he tells us first,
that he was gone forth of England, before capital laws were Apology. page.
183.
what a poor shift is this? Nay, what a foolish man is this? Parsons committed
treason upon treason, and then ran away for fear of the halter. Ergo the
capital laws ensuing, were not made to prevent his and the like future
treasons. Every child I ween, will see the absurdity of this consequution. He
tells us secondly, that in Ca^pions arraignment, (which was after Parsons his
departure,) there was Parsons objected in particular against the state, though
he were known to have been the superior in that mission. To this I reply,
that the silence of Parsons in Campions arraignment, cannot discharge Parsons
of the same or like treasons. Besides, it may be, that the state was
advertised, how dastardly Parsons ran away; and that they thought that their
conniuence and silence in the matter, would be an occasion of his return, and
then they would talk with the good fellow. He tells us thirdly, that Parsons
was the chief in the Jesuitical mission. which assertion Parsons who will
needs be the chief. I therefore conclude, that the Jesuit, Parsons is a
notorious liar, and that the lie which he would bestow upon others, is justly
and fitly retorted against himself. See the fifth chapter, in the second
section.

Paragraph. V.
Of Haddockes life and conversation.
Richard Haddocke now doctor, (as Parsons terms him,) is charged by the
secular priests to have been of no edification in England, in his life and
conversation. But Parsons (because he resisted the messengers sent to Rome,
Apology, page. 167.
and was ready at a beck to do his designements,) desperately aff^rmeth with
a brazen face, the contrary in these words; as for his liberty of life (as
they call it,) while he was in England; it is false, that it was of any evil
edification, and some of us knew him better then these libellers, these are the
words of our grave Apologians. To which I answer breifely, that these words
of the Prophet are truly verified of Parsons, who was the author of this
Apology indeed. There is no faithfulness in his mouth, Psalm. 5. v. 9.
there inward parts are very wickedness, their throats an open sepulcher,
they flatter with their tongues. For my self knew the man, See Colleton, page.
126. See also the 5 and 6. chapter follow.
and his life right well; and I will only say that in few words of him, which
I think himself will not deny. If he do, it shall God willing be proved
heareafter, by a multitude of honest witnesses, and by such particular known
circumstances, of times places, and parsons, as no possible denial can be made
thereof. for it shall never be proved God willing, that I write any untruth of
any man living. God is my witness, See the second book and third chapter, in
the (...) paragraph. See the ^eply to Parsons libell, fol. 96. a.
that is far from my meanining.

But I wonder, that the earth does not open her mouth, to swallow up quick the
Author of this Apology, for his manifold notorious slanders, impudent
leasings, and most excerable caluminations. And Parsons is the man, as I have
proved in the first chapter. The phrase, style, and method, with many other
circumstances concurring, do evidently convince it to be see. For to say, that
it has not his name, See Colleton. page. 1^^.
is too too vain and frivolous. for by that reason, no man should be the
author thereof, because it has no man's name. To which I add, that it is not
the wonted manner of Parsons, to put his name to his books. The secular
priests have truly unfolded that secrecy, in their public writings. And
Parsons himself unawares, reports no less in effect in this Apology. Well,
Apology. page. 172.
what does Parsons call evil edification? Richard Hadocke I am well assured*
spent his whole time or the greater part thereof, (subtracting time for
sleeping, eating, and drinking,) in hawking, hunting, carding, dicing, and
licentious living, to say nothing of other more homely, but less comely
qualities. Of which manner of living, he was sufficiently admonished, I know
when, where, and by whom, and can so decipher all the particulars thereof, as
himself shall never be able to deny the same. I therefore conclude, that when
Parsons says, it is false, See Colleton, page. 126.
etc. The falsehood proceeds from his own stinking mouth. He indeed is the
libeller, See also the fifth and sixth chapters following. See Colleton. page.
294.
though it please him to bestow that name on the seculars. But such good
fellows as Haddocke, must be maintained, to bolster out master Parsons, and
his detestable treacheries. For by his plotting to set the English Crown on
the Spanish Infantaes head, he is become so familiar with the Spanish king, and
the Arch-dutchesse Isabella his sister, that he is able with his word to set up
or pull down, all disloyal kil-princes in the world. Who then dare write
against him? the seculars have entered the combat, and if they fail in the
conflict, a halter will be the end. He seeks by flattery to make them yield,
and to bring them to submssion, Apology Page. 221. and 222.
but if that be once done, actum est de illis, they must enter into glory,
that is to say, into the holy inquisition, where there they must either remain
perpetuo, or be bondslaues to Parsons and his Iesuited family. I might enlarge
my self, in discoursing upon many other vntru^hs, leasings, falsehoods, and
caluminiations, published for truths in this scandalous and most disloyal
Apology. But by these falsehoods already discoured, it is apparent to all the
world, that no credit can be given to the words or writings, of the notorious
traitor Robert Parsons that bloody Jesuit.

CHAP. V.
Of Parsons his contradictions, peremptorily uttered in his lewd Apology.
Sect. I.
Concerning traitors like himself, and his confederates.
PArsons in one place of the Apology, Apology. Page. 22.
has these words; for, (as the common saying is,) howsoever the treason be
embraced, yet the traitor is hated and contemned. But in another place,
Apology. page 172.
he has these words* what say you of my Lord Cardinal Allen his answer, to
the English justice; his defense of the twelve martyrs, in one year; his
epistle for allowance, of sir William Stanleyes rendering up of Dauentry; his
declaration against her Majesty, and the present state, in the year 1588.
when the Armado was on the seas, were these exasperating treatises, or no? and
how then is father Parsons only named by this man, as though his writings
only were the cause of all exasperation? Nay, was there any man ever known to
be particularly troubled hitherto, See the second book and ninth chapter, in
the sixth observation.
for any book written by father Pasons by name? we are sure, that neither
master Mush, nor any of his, can ever prove it. These are the very express
words, set down in the Jesuitical Apology, in the places quoted in the
margent. Out of which words, the indifferent reader may observe these important
points with me.

Parsons, who seems to repute himself the only wiseman in the world. For in
the former place he tells us, that howsoever the treason be embraced, yet the
traitor is hated and contemned. But in the second place, he sings another
song, for he commends the notorious treason of sir William Stanley, and
defends him therein.

right honest men. It is evident in Sir William Stanley, a man in great esteem
with them.

Thirdly, that Cardinal Allen was a notorious traitor, William Stanleys Note
here, that the secular priests dostil commend Cardinal Allen in all things. See
Colleton. p. 282.
and highly extolled him for the same. Fourthly, that he published a most
traytorous book, against her Majesty and the State, in the year 1588. when
the kings Armado was on the seas. Add hereunto for the complement, that the
seminaries, who ever to this hour speak most reverently of that Cardinal,
and did obey him during life at a beck; could not but be up to the ears in
deep treasons, seeing the Cardinal himself was so forward, in all the bloody
treacheries.

Sect. II.
Of Parsons his letters written to Master Bishop.
THe Jesuit Parsons wrote a letter the ninth of October, 1599. to master
Bishop in Paris, Apology, page. 177.
for answer (as Persons pretends, to certain grievous calumniations, which
master Bishop and master Charnocke had spread abroad the world, of the hard and
injurious dealing used to them in Rome; which were contrary to all truth, if
the good Jesuits words were of any credit. In one place of the said letter, he
has these words: Master Bishop, it being now diverse months since you
departed from hence, and no one letter appearing yet from you, nor from your
friend master Charnocke; it made us marvel, considering your promise at your
departure. In another place of the same letter, he has these words; by a state
letter which I received this week from you, I perceive etc. These are the
words of the Apology. In which words, any man may easily behold a flat
contradiction. For, in the former place, he denies the receipt of any one
letter; but in the latter he grants, that he had received one stale letter.
The seculars have charged him with this contradiction, and he answers that
from May to November is more then half a year, in which time no letter was
come from them, contrary to their promises, until this present week. This is
the answer. To which answer, I reply in this manner. Parsons says, it is
more then half a year from May to November, he is a liar. For, from May to
November, are only five months; and yet do 12. months concur, to the
complement of one year. Again, if he begin his supputation the first day of
May, (which is to reckon from April rather then from May,) yet is it but just
half a year; and consequently, Parsons affirming

Secondly, Apology. page. 176.
that his reckoning must end upon the ninth day of October, at which time
Parsons wrote his letter; and so perforce he is far short of his half year,
and consequently a liar.

Thirdly, that when Parsons says, from May to November is more then half a
year, in which time no letter was come from them, he both contradicts
himself, and is an impudent liar. I prove it, because every child knows,
that between may and November, interceedeth the month of October; and yet as
Parsons confesses liberally, he wrote his letter to master Bishop the ninth of
that month, and the same week received a stale letter firm the same Bishop.
So then, it is true, that Parsons received a letter from master Bishop, in the
month of October; and consequently, it is false, that he received no letter
from May to november.

Fourthly, that the word (now) in Parsons his letter, does connotate the time
present: that is, the time of the date of his letter, to wit, the ninth of
October; at which time as he says in one place, he had received no letter, but
as he says in another place, he had that week received a stale letter: Ergo,
Parsons is a stale liar. This lie is confirmed, in perpetuam res memoriam, by
the word (yet,) for when he says, no one letter appearing from you yet; he
does flatly contradict himself, when he says, by a stale letter, which I
received this week from you.

Fifthly, that when Parsons says, See the third chapter.
the reports of the hard and injurious dealing used to the messengers in Rome,
is contrary to all truth; the falsehood proceeds from his lying lips, as I
have already proved.

Sixthly, that master Bishop (I know the man right well,) is of better credit,
then twenty Iesuited Standishes; 70. Iesuited Haddockes; 100. Iesuited
Personians.

Sect. III.
Of the Secular priests, and their writings.
PArsons in the preface of his Apology tells us, that these books must
needs be presumed to have been published either by some one or few
discomposed passionate people, or by some heretic, or other enemy to
dishonor them all, and to discredit their cause and nation; and so as to such
he will answer, Parsons loves the priests dearly, as appears by the
int^^ati^ of then messengers sent to Rome.
and not against his brethren whom he loves most entirely; but in many other
places, he sings an other song. For page. 63. he affirms it to be probable
by many evident arguments, that a long and slanderous narration, was written by
the proper pen of the chief authors of all these broils. Again, page. 8. he
confesses, that two priests (whom he terms the ambassadors of the secular
priests,) came to Rome about the controversy. Again, page, 9. he confesses,
that in November last, 1600. diverse of the discontented made a general appeal
from the Archpriests iurisdictien. Again, page, 24. he says, that his
brethren do use so fond a calumniation against the Jesuits, as no man can
but wonder thereat. Again, page. 105. he terms the authors of the books,
his discontented brethren. To be brief, in maine other places he confesses,
that master Bishop, master Charnocke, master Mush, master Bagshaw, master
Champney, See Apolog. page (...).
master Collington, master Warson, and others, have written against the
Jesuits; so as contradictions may be deemed a thing very common, with our
grave and holy Jesuit Robert Parsons; who knew right well, that the
declaration sent to his holiness, was subscribed with the hands of thirty
priests, whose names I would here put down, but that I study to tbe brief.

Sect. IIII.
Of the elegant Epithetons ascribed to the Jesuit Parsons, by John Collington
the Secular priest, in his book of Defense.
John Collington has lately published a large volume in defense of the
seculars, for their appeal to the Pope against tyrannizing Blackwel, which
book came lately to my hand, but does so evidently convince the Archpriest and
the Jesuits, specially that notorious traitor Robert Parsons, as I cannot omit
to make brief recital of some parts thereof, for the common peace of this our
native country.

In the page, 30. He has these words, whose busy head (he speaks of
Parsons.) and actions, have been the cause and increase of much trouble and
persecution, in our Church and Realm. And who being a member of an other
body, and professing also a mortified state, and to have relinquished the
world, seeks nevertheless to be our great master, and to rule all, or to
tyrannize rather. Again, page 31. He says, they have most pregnant grounds to
prove, that Parsons was the inditer of the Cardinals letter constitutiue, for
the archpriests jurisdiction. Again, page. 296. He affirms, that Parsons
writes no book, discourse, nor scarce any letter of these stirs, wherein he
does not recount some good act of his own. Again, Parsons spends 5 or 6.
crowns a week in (...).
page. 297. he tells us, that Parsons by managing of the College, has
gotten such store of money, as he spends five or six crowns a week, in
postage for letters only. Again, page. 253. he affirms boldly, that
Parsons appointed the Archpriest. Again, page. 255. he terms Parsons the
Arch-deuiser, in getting the Cardinals hand, subscription, and seal. Again,
page. 206. he charge Parsons with many untruths, and to have as little
synceritie in his actions, as truth in his writings. Again, page. 256. he has
these words, Lo Parsons studideth deep divinity.
it would make to the pra^se of father Parsons, if religion were less
worldlisted* in him; and state matter, and the designing of kingdoms had not
so great a part in his studies. Again, page. 170. he has these words, we
assure our sel^es father Parsons, that your restless spirit and pen, your
enterprising and busy actions, have turned heretofore our Catholic
professants to infinite prejudice, for to no known cause, Parsons the cause of
sharp laws
can we impute so much the making of the severe laws of our country, as to
your edging attempts, and vocations. Again page. 240. he tells us plainly,
that Parsons has proferred and reprofered the Crown of England to several
princes, now to one, now to another, as opportunities best served, to
entertain the personage with the hope thereof. And to omit many testimonies,
because I would not be tedious, I will here recount one for all, which master
Colleton sets down in these words. Neither is father Parsons holden only
of our magistrate for a statist, or marchandizer of the Crown and Diadem, See
and note page. 297.
though this were enough to estrange us from having any partaking in ought with
him, but his travels and negotiations this way are become so notoriously
known, Lo, the Crown of England is set on sale.
that even Pasquine in Rome (as intelligence is sent us,) speaks in this
manner of him, if there be any man, that will buy the Kingdom of England; let
him repair to a merchant in a black square cappe in the City, and he shall
have a very good penny worth thereof. Thus writes Colleton of Parsons, who
both are devoted to the Pope alike.

Sect. V.
Of Parsons his birth, and expulsion out of Balioll College in Oxford.
THat Robert Parsons the Jesuit, and marchandizer of the Crown of England,
(as in the former Section,) is a bastard, and a man of bad demeanor, the fifth
chapter of the second book shows copiously. But because Parsons in his
Apology, Quodl. 4. art. 2. page. 109.
labors to purge himself thereof; I have thought it good, to speak a
little to that effect in this place. Watson the secular priest has these
words; we may not imagine, that father Parsons was ignorant of his own base
estate, as being a sacrilegious bastard in the worst sense, s^il. a spurius,
begotten by the parson of the parish where he was borne, upon the body of a
very base queen. This then being so, and he not so senseless as to think,
but that he will find the Canon law more strict in dispensation with him for
his irregularitie, then the civil or common law, will be for dispensation to
inherit; there is no question to be made of it, but that some close statute and
prouiso was closely made, and covertly foysted into the high council of
reformation, for enabling some bastards in the spitefullest sense, to be
capable of any honor or dignity, either in the Church or commonwealth. And
true it is, that this good father Parsons (alias Cowbucke,) filius populi and
filius peccati, or the very fiend himself, might be chosen to a kingdom by
his doctrine, if any people would be so mad, as to choose him for their king.
Thus does our Quodlibetst write. The same Watson in an other place, writes of
the same Parsons in this manner: O monster of mankind, fitter for hell, Quodl.
8. art. 5. page. 238.
then middle earth. If thy profession will not draw thee, to consideration of
the premises; yet show some signs of charity in sparks of grace, if it were
but only in policy, to move thee to forbear thy barbarous cruelty; because
thereby thou give occasion for diverse, to think thou art not a mere man, but
some fairies brat, or begotten by an Incubus or airish spirit, upon the body
of a base woman, thus does priest Watson write, you have his own words. Again
in an other place, he has these words, diverse of father Parsons books,
letters, and treatises, we have and do from our very hearts utterly condemn
them, as containing many seditious and traytorous points, Quodli. 7. art. 10.
page 184.
and being very full of slanderous speeches and impudent caluminiations.
Andreas Philopater being the fruits of father Parsons, and father Creswell, we
hold to be fraught till it almost burst again, (as some of my brethren else
where have noted,) with all Jesuitical pride and poison. and as touching the
exthortation printed 1588. It is so detestable a treatise, as all posterity
cannot choose, but condemn father Parsons for a most scurrilous traitor, if he
had been brought up amongst all the ruffians and curtizans in christendom, he
could not have learned to have writ more vilely, prophainely, and heathenishly.
Moreover, the said father Parsons and his fellow father Creswell, do glory in
the said book, that they have caused not only it, but also Master Saunders
treatise de schismate, to be translated into the spanish tongue, and do
rejoice, that thereby the Spaniards are brought already into a greater
detestation of her Majesty, Quo^l. 7. art. 10. page, 217.
her government, and proceedings, then they had before. Thus writes Master
Watson; and in an other place he tells us plainly, that he was a lewd boy
in his youth, that during his aboade at Oxford, his conversation was seditious,
wanton, and factious, and that for his libelling and other misdemeanour, he was
thrust out of Balyoll college. Again in an other place, he has these words,
I mean the great Emperor illegitimate, irregular, abstract quintessence of
all coins, coggeries and forgeries, Parsons the bastard of Stockgersey beyond
Cosinage in Somersethire.

This is that famous conqueror, Quodl. 8. art. 5. page. 236.
who has bathed all England by his seditious libels in priests blood. This is
that worthy excellent, that lies, dissembles, and equiuocates, at every word.
This is that learned counselor, that must rule, ruff, and range, through
every state. This is that same Parsons, whom Pope, Prince, and peer, with all
true English hearts, Lo, Parsons is purtrayed in his best be seeming colors
have cause to hate. This is he, of whom Master Blackewell (now his darling)
said; that his turbulent head and lewd life, would be a discredit to the
catholic cause. and in few, the general conceit of all, that have thoroughly
conuersed with him, is this; that he is of a furious, passionate, hot,
choleric, exorbitant working humor, busy headed, and full of ambition,
envy, pride, rancour, malice, and reueng. Cursed be the hour, wherein he had
the name of a Priest, nay of an irreligious parson, nay of a temporal layman
Jesuit, nay of a catholic, nay of a christian, nay of a humane creature; but
of a beast, or a devil; a violater of all laws; a contemner of all
authority; a stain of humanity; and impostume of all corruption; a corrupter
of all honesty and a monopole of all mischief. These are the words of William
Watson, the popish secular priest. quodl. 8. art. 5. page. 236. See the fifth
chapter of the second book, in the first, second, and third sections.

By these sections, especially the fourth and fifth, every man may easily see,
Of the uttered by Parsons, see Colleto^ page. 126.
that the Jesuit Parsons is not only acommon impudent liar, but also a most
bloody and scurrilous traitor, the monopole of all mischief, and the wickedst
man upon the face of the earth. The reports recounted of this Jesuit, cannot
but seem strange, if not incredible, to all that shall pervse the same. I know
it is sin to lie on the devil; and therefore I will not affirm any lie of
this Jesuit, nor of any other man. That which I have written of him, is most
true and sincere, in such sort as I have put in down. I name my authors, and
their words, the tale, and the tale-teller; the assertions, and the places
where they are to be read. I grant willingly, and will it not deny, that I
have set down in this discourse, many sharp observations, annotations,
correlaries, and illations, but all are deduced by necessary and evident
consequutio^s, out of those premises and antecedent propositions; which the
secular priests and Jesuits have published in printed books, to y^ view of
the whole world. In regard whereof; neither my self, nor any others guided by
the prescript of right reason, can but give credit to the same. For first, the
authors thereof are many, and the same of judgment Parsons supposed to be
true, and constantly admitted for such; it follows of necessity, y^ his own
bare denial in his own cause, of his bastardie, expulsion, and whatsoever
else; neither is, nor can be demed a sufficient purgation, to any indifferently
conceited man. Read the next chapter throughout, and note it well, with the
observations thereof.

CHAP. VI.
of the Jesuits here in England, and of their demeanor.
Paragraph. I.
Of the Jesuit Garnet.
THe Jesuit Garnet the provincial for England, has used the liberty of his
tongue against the secular priests* of this Garnet, thus writes John
Collington. Father Garnet the superior of the Jesuits, affirmed that we
ministered and received sacraments in deadly sin; that we gave poison in liew
of medicine; that we were such by the opinion of all the learned, as his
brother Lister had censured us to be; that our criminous, sinful, irregular,
and excommunicate state, was so plain and notrious, as none under sin could
forward, or assist us in the exercise of our funcions. Thus writes Master
Colleton, out of the Jesuit Garnets letter the tenth of November. Again in an
other place, Colleton, page. 179.
the same Jesuit has these words; ye have in the judgment of all the
learned, incurred the most shameful note of scisme. You have so entangled them
whom you-haue brought to Christ, Collingto^. page. 194. page. 281.
or whose pastor and father you have been; as if they shall receive sacraments
of you; if they shall induce you to say Mass, or shall assist you in
celebrating; they seem to partake with you in the crime of exercising your
function unworthily, and in liew of medicine, carry a way poison. Thus writes
Colleton out of Garnets letter, dated in March, 1599.

Paragraph. II.
Of the Jesuit Lister
LIster the saucy and malepeart Jesuit, in a foolish and very malicious
treatist has these words* ye are rebels, ye are schismatikes, Colleton. page
163.
ye are fallen from the Church and spouse of Christ. Yea hane trodden under
foot, the obedience you owe to the Pope. Ye have offended against all humane
faith and authority, by rejecting a moral certainty in a moral matter. Ye
have run headlong into excommucation, and irregularity, ye have lost the
faculties, by which you should have gained souls to christ, ye have raised up;
such great scandal in the minds of all the godly; that as infamous parsons,
you are tenesed in every man's mouth. Ye are no better then sooth sayers, and
Idolaters; and in regard ye have not obeyed the Church, speaking to you by the
highest Bishop, you are as Ethinkes and Publicans. Thus writes Colleton of
Lister the Jesuit.

Paragraph. III.
Of the Jesuit Jones.
Father Jones the Jesuit gave forth, and our superior said the position was
true, that whosoever maintained us not to be the abandoned creatures,
Collingto^, page. 180.
which father Lister judged us to be; in curred ipso facto for there defending
of us, the censures of the holy Church. thus writes Master Collington, of our
reverent father Jesuit Jones. Again, in an other place the same Colleton
tells us; that the same Jesuit Jones affirmed peremptorily, Collingto^. page
272.
that whosoever should stiffly mainteyne, that their refusal to the
subordination appointed before the arrival of his holiness breeue, did not
make them schismatikes. incurred by such his patronage of the secular priests,
the censure of holy Church. Thus much of this Jesuit. I will here surcease to
speak of the Jesuit Holtbie, and the rest of that crew, and use a convenient,
(if not necessary,) conversion, to our archpriest of the new religion: because
by very pregnant presumptions, he seems to be a covert and close Jesuit, or
at the least so Iesuited, as he dares to do nothing but after their command.

Paragraph. IIII:
Of Blackewell the Iesuited Archpriest.
THat all men may know, what a man this new-hatched Archpriest is, the golden
epithyte which the seculars have bestowed on him, shall here be set down for
a preamble to the rest. Now all catholics, say the priests, must depend upon
the archpriest, Mark well, all Jesuits and Iesuited persons, do depend upon
the devil.
and the archpriest upon Garnet, and Garnet upon Parsons, and Parsons upon the
devil, the author of all rebellions, conspiracies, treasons, murders,
disobedience, heresies, and all such other diabolical and bloody desigments,
as this wicked Jesuit has hitherto devised. This is the doctrine delivered by
the secular priests. discovery, page. 70. quodl. 5. art. 8. page. 151. The next
thing to be considered, is this; that this archpriest was appointed, by the
procurement of Robert Parsons the Jesuit, of whose honest demeanor you have
heard sufficient y. This to be so is proved already, if all things bewell
ma^rked; but Master Collington makes better proofs thereof. father Parsons
says he, in the eight chapter of the Apology, Parsons is a great liar, well
worthey of the wet-stone.
cunningly fassioneth a narration lasting for four of the first leaves, but
with addition of more untruths, then he used full points in the tale. Hence
suddenly arose an urgent, or as it were, a fatal necessity in father Parsons
conceit; of making a superior in England, over the secular priests, if witness
be demanded at our hands, we will (says Collington,) name no other, Behold
deceitful dealing.
but father Garnet and father Parsons themselves, having their own words for
testimony. for when father Garnet asked Master John Bennet, for his name (to
olim dice bamnr) that is, to a pretensed letter of thanksgiving to his
holiness, for institution of the authority, and found him unwilling to give
his name; he told him, that the subordination was the fact and prosecution of
father Parsons his old friend, and therefore stood assured, he would not deny
the grant of putting to his hand. Likewise father Parsons in his speeches with
M Charnocke at Rome, among other things freely acknowledged; that hearing how
we went about in England to make a superior among our selves, Colleion, page.
126. page. 127.
he thought it wisdom to prevent the effecting of such our endeavors, by
choosing and promoting one to the room, whom they knew to be their frind, and
would comply with them. Thus writes Colleton, with many more words to the same
effect.

Blackewell. First then, he said he had received a resolution from the mother
city, that the refusers of his authority were schismatikes, and thereupon
denied absolution to such as made no conscienced thereof. And yet by his own
affirmance, he receive that resolution either from father Warford, or father
Tichburne two English Jesuits at Rome. And yet Blackwell did so propose and
grace the said resolution; as many then did, and as yet some do believe, that
it came as a definitive sentence from the Pope. Colleton, page. 199.

Secondly, Blackewell in his letter to M. I. M. bearing Jones a priest of the
society to be true, auowing all those to incur presently the censure of
holy Church, who should stiffely defend, that we were no schismatikes. Which
position you again ratified, in your letters the 14. of March 1600. thus
writes Colleton* page 195.

Thirdly, Blackewell sent forth a most arrogant, absurd, George Blackewell
arch-piest in England, in virtue of holy obedience, and under pain of
suspension from your office, and loss of all faculties in the deed it self
to be incurred, do prohibit al priests to divulge any book, set out within
these two years, or heareafter to be set out, by which the lawful state may
be disturbed, or the same of any clergy catholic person of our english nation
may be hurt by name; and the same commandment is given to the laity, under
pain of being interdicted, the 17. of January, 1599 thus reports John
Colleton, page 197.

Fourthly, when the famous vniuers^ty of Paris, after full Paris; whether it be
truly given or forged, whether upon true information or otherwise, as being
prejudicial to the dignity of the sea apostolic, and his holiness breue.
Thus writes Master Colleton, Collington, page. 147.
of the arch-priests decree published the 29. of May. 1600.

Out of these sections and Paragraphes of the fifth and sixth omnium githerum, as
the secular priests are hold to write of them. And consequently, that foolish
and senseless may they be thought, Quodli. 2. art. 8. page. 43.
who refer themselves, their souls, their bodies, and all they have, to be
managed by such bad fellows, and lewd companions.

CHAP. VII.
Of the disloyal dealing of the seculars, in state-affaires.
I have delivered my opinion concerning the seculars, in this behalf, where I
showed by their own free co^fessions, y^ they were sometime, (howsoever they
be now,) as deeply drowned in bloody treasonable practices and defignments as
are their brethren by hopish profession, the lordly and insolent disloyal
Jesuits. I therefore mean here to set down no other thing, Apology. page.
212.
but that only which the Jesuit Parsons in his apology, sends unto the^ in
way of salutation. if he mean (says Parsons speaking of M. Bluet,) any other
causes of offense as practicing against the state or the like, then is it
calumnious to them both.

First, to all the Jesuits in England, who are no less innocent upon our
consciences in this point, the^ other priests, and secondly, to the order of
secular priests themselves, especially the better sort adhering to their
superior ( Blackewell the Archpriest,) who are as innocent also in this
behalf, as this man's (most part.) For whiles all other both priests and
Jesuits, have been quiet and silent in statematters, these men have been
busy, as far as their power or credit will reach, or as any prince would
hearken to them, or deal with them. And this appears, for that they have
sent of their own men even to Scotland, to deal with that prince in matters
of succession, They sent Watson with others.
and have tempered also with the king of France, by others of their consorts to
like effect, as the Lords themselves of her majesty's council cannot but know,
and at their going over into France, we doubt not, (and so we hear it already
by some of their counsel,) but they mean to offer themselves wholly to that
kings disposition, for the next succession of our Crown, ^ge, the seculars are
traitors like the Jesuits.
thereby to gain his grace and favor. And yet they vant every where, that
they and theirs are innocent in these affairs, and only Jesuits and their
friends do deal therein, and so master Bluet told the Queen, and counsel.

Out of these words I note first, that the secular priests

I note secondly, that the seculars are as guilty of traytorous

I note thirdly, that the Jesuit Parsons does here unawares, When thieves
begin to reckon, then true men shall come to their own.
(mark well my words,) but respectively and relatiuely, to be nolesse innocent
then other priests, that is to say, to be nocent and guilty in very deed. For
toward the end of his narration, he charge them with double treason, as well
by plotting in Scotland, as in the Realm of France. And in the marginall note,
he says Watson was sent with some others.

I therefore conclude this discourse, that seeing on the one side, the Jesuits
are impudent liars, notorious cousiners, and arrant traitors, even by the
testimony of the seculars, and seeing on the other side, that the secular
priests are bad fellows, no better then southsayers and idolaters, and that by
the verdict of the Jesuits, and seeing withal, that both the secular priests
and the Jesuits, profess one and the same religion, and are all devoted to
the pope alike, all men and women, noble and ignoble, learned and unlearned,
rich and poor, young and old, after mature deliberation had of these matters
and this whole discourse, must perforce and of mere necessity, loath, detest,
and abhor, both them, their Pope, and their popish faction. From which and
all treasonable practices, good Lord deliver us, Amen.

A profitable and compendious appendice, for the better confirmation of the
Reader.
Whosoever can and will seriously peruse, the printed volumes of many famous
writers, of great account, and high esteem even in the Church of Rome, cannot
but behold as in a glass of Crystal, that the late Romish religion, commonly
called of the people, the old religion, is but a newly coined religion, and by
piece-meale crept into the Church. I say (the late Romish religion,) because
the ancient Roman religion was in deed sincere, and agreeable to the holy
scripture, but the late Romish religion, is quite contrary to the same. This I
prove by two means: first, by late practical experience, for that the
institution or papal Bull, by which an Archpriest is designed the governor
over the Clergy and laity over all England, See the 4. chapter toward the
end.
is a thing never hard of before in ye Church of God, as the priests themselves
do willingly and truly grant* this is confirmed by the late order of the
Capuchenes, who affirm themselves to be nothing else, but only reformed
Franciscans, as the secular priests do know, and can it not deny. For as the
Francans did by little and little, neglect and abolish the ancient rules of
their order, Let this be well marked.
and brought into their society, novelties and new devises in stead thereof,
and therefore were reformed by the Capuchenes, and called home again to their
old settled rules, even so the late bishops of Rome, have neglected, and swarued
from the ancient doctrine of the primitive Church, 2. Reg. 18.
and brought into the Church novelties and new devises of their own invention
in stead thereof, 2. Par. 19.
and therefore godly and zealous princes endeavor to reform the Church, 2. Reg.
23. 2. 34.
and to abolish such superstitious novelties* after the examples of Iosaphat,
Ezechias, and other godly kings of Judah. Whereof I have discoursed more at
large, in my book entitled the golden balance. Secondly, by the flat
testimonies Victoria, Victor de potest. Papae. and council. relect. 4. page 139.
writetth in this manner, paulatim ad hanc etc. By little and little we are
brought to these inordinate dispensations, and to this so miserable state where
we are neither able to endure our own griefs, nor remedy assigned for the
same. And therefore must we perforce invent some other way, for conservation of
the laws. Give me Clements, Lines, Siluesters, and I will commit all things to
their charge. But to speak nothing grievously against these latter Popes, they
are doubtless inferior to Popes of old time, by many degrees.

Lo here gentle reader, the Popes own renowned doctor and professed friar,
tells us plainly, that the bishops of Rome in his time, were not like the
bishops of ^o^^er ages, but did degenerate, from the ancient doctrine and
discipline of the Church. He tells us in like manner, that this deflection
from the truth, was not done all at once, but was brought by little and little
into the Church. Thus you see or may see, that the doctrine I teach, is the
selfsame, which I received from the best learned papists. The Popes famous
Canonist Covaruvias, writes to the same effect in these words. ne^ me latet,
etc. neither am I ignorant, that S. Thomas affirms after great deliberation,
that the bishop of Rome cannot with his dispensation, take away from monks
their solemn vow of chastity. This notwithstanding, Couarr. 10. 1. cap. 20.
par. 11. in med.
we must defend the first opinion, least those things which are practiced every
where, be turned up side down. Thus writes Coueruvias, out of whose doctrine,
many godly and profitable lessons may be learned. First, that the papists
Thomas Aquinas is one, (whose doctrine sundry Popes have confirmed to be
sound,) do

First, the Church-seruice was made in the vulgar tongue every Phocas, at the
earnest suit of Boniface Siritius then bishop of Rome, made a wicked law de
condigno,

(...).
A Table Alphabeticall, containing the principal matters handled in this
work. The letter (P.) signifies the Page, and the letter (V.) notes the
verse.
A
ALlen the Cardinal was a traitor. Page. 93. Verse. 7. p. 92 verse. 28. Allen
set forth a traiterous book. page 108. verse. 5. Allen justified Sir William
Stanleyes treason. page 13. verse. 19. page 166. p. 167. Archpriest sets up
a new religion. page 89. v. 8. p. 179. v. 30. Archpriest a traitor. page 89.
verse. 8. Archpriest is an Idol. page 104. verse. 2. Arden and Someruile. See
treason. Authors true dealing in this discourse. page 1. verse. 7.
B
BLackwell reigns as a prince. Page. 104. verse. 7. Books written by Parsons,
are traytorous. page 173. ve. 7. page 80. verse. 7. page 106. verse. 9. Bishop of
Cassana prayed for by the Jesuits. page 20. ver. 21. Bellarmine against the
messengers. page 152. verse. 26. Borromeo rejected the Jesuits. page 156. verse.
12. Bull renewed by Allen. page 85. verse. 9. Babington. See treason. Birket the
priest. page 85. verse. 24.
C
CArdinals letter indicted by Parsons. Page. 170. verse. 27. Cardinal Allen. See
Allen. Cardinal Bellarmine. See Bellarmine. Cardinal Boromeo. See Boromeo.
Cardinals poisoned by Jesuits. page 107. verse. 19. page 37. verse. 34.
Cardinal Toledo was Parsons boy. page 159. 27. Cardinal Pandulphus crowned in
the Popes right. Page 120. page 20. Capuchenes why they agree with the
Jesuits. page. 80. verse. 20. Conquest of England threatened by the Jesuits.
page. 32. verse. 22. Coaches usual to Jesuits. page 9. verse. 20. page 7. verse.
17. page 25. verse. 18. Coozenage practiced by Jesuits. page 59. verse. 16.
Confession dissliked by Pope Sixtus. page 134. verse. 16. Church of Rome
heretical page 134. verse. 9. Confession used tyrannically by Jesuits. page
39. verse. 12 Constitutions of the Jesuits are mutable. page 56 Campion his
martyrdom. page 97. verse. 11. Change expected by the papists. page 101. verse.
9. Cogging of the Jesuits. page 29. Crichton the Jesuit a traitor. page 45.
verse. 11. page 75. verse. 28. page 181. verse. 12.
D
Devil brought Jesuits into England. page 84. verse. 22. page 86. verse. 8.
Doctrine of Jesuits is contrary to the truth. page 133. verse. 21. Duke de
Medina threatened to kill all. page 11. verse. 3. Duke of Parma entitled to
England. page 23. p. 79. Duke of Guise should have invaded England. page 75.
page 84. verse. 32. Duke of Alua purposed to invade this land. page 83. Devil
brought the Jesuits into England. page 84. page 83. v. 22. Devil rules and
reigns in the Jesuits. page 68. verse. 3. Dissension between the priests and
Jesuits. page 19. Day of channge expected. page 101. verse. 9.
E
Equivocation of the Jesuits. page 29. page 35. verse. 13. Expenses of the
Jesuits. page 34. verse. 15. page 26. verse. 31. Exercise used by the Jesuits.
page 29. verse. 6. page 130. Examination of the Popes dealing. page 94. verse.
16.
F
FRench Ambassador. page 82. verse. 5. French king murdered by Jesuits. page
37. verse. 34. page 107. verse. 34. French king banished the Jesuits. page 36.
verse. 3. Firebrands of sedition. page 36.. verse. 21. page 80. verse. 1.
Ferdinando Earl of Darbie. page 22. verse. 33. Felton set up the Popes Bull.
page 83. verse. 38. Figs given by Jesuits. page 107. verse. 3.
G
GErrarde the Jesuit a good hunter for money. page 29. Grains hallowed for
treason. page 86. verse. 28. Gybseys-Iesuites. page 77. verse. 35.
H
HEsket a messenger for treason. page 22. verse. 33. Haddocke a badde fellow.
page 30. verse. 9. page 165. verse. 8. High council of reformation. page 80.
verse. 8. page 81. v. 5. Hallowed grains. See grains.
I
Jesuits by secret vows. page 78. verse. 9. Jesuits are arrant traitors. page
75. verse. 35. page 12. page 11. page 44. verse. 5. page 22. verse. 17. Jesuits
are great liars. page 53. page 35. verse. 13. page 77. verse. 27. page 58.
Insuites are cruel tyrants. page 80. page 73. verse. 6. page 132. verse. 34.
Jesuits make a triple vow. page 17. verse. 35. page 46. page 47. Jesuits are
Statesmen. page 2. Jesuits ride like Earls. Page 24. verse. 22. page 34.
verse. 12. Jesuits must have their chambers perfumed. page 7. verse. 17.
Jesuits are murderers. page 107. page 7. verse. 12. page 42. page 37. verse.
34. page 23. page 107. verse. 18. Jesuits are devils. page 133. verse. 8. page 8.
Jesuits are right Machiuels. page 21. verse. 20. page 15. Jesuits will not
come at processions. Page 133. verse. 10. Jesuits are thieves. page 25. verse.
3. Jesuits are proud men. page 24. verse. 21. page 25. page 26. verse. 23. verse.
32. page 33. verse. 24 Jesuits ride in coaches. page 25. verse. 18. page 7.
verse. 16 Jesuits are Scribes and Pharisees. page. 133. verse. 14. Jesuits
command gentlewomen to pull of their boots. page 7. verse. 19 Jesuits trowle
up and down from good cheer to good cheer. page 7. verse. 15 Jesuits promise
to restore men to their livings, page 32. verse, 21. Jesuits do threaten a
conquest. page 32. verse. 22 Jesuits are frank gamsters. page 2. verse. 6
Jesuits cannot abide cloisters. P. 2. verse. 14 Jesuits use great penance.
page 7 Jesuits are firebrands of sedition. page 21. verse. 7. See firebrands,
Jesuits how they pray. page 20. verse. 21 Jesuits the wickedst men upon earth.
page 15 Isabella of Spain must have the Crown. page 11. page 12. page 22.
page 23.
K
King of France murdered by the Jesuits. p. 107. v. 19. p. 37. v. 34. King
of France banished the Jesuits. p. 36. v. 3. King of Spain intends to
conquer England. p. 14* King of Spain is the life of popery. p. 3. v. 4.
King of Spain did resist the Pope. p. 66. v. 15. v. 7. Kings cannot be
deposed by the Pope. p. 90. v. 13. p. 88. Kings have been deposed by Popes.
p. 106. v. 19. p. 119. v. 35. p. 120.
L
LOpez would have poisoned the Queen. page 22. verse. 38. League made by the
nobility to Spain. page 128. verse. 24. Laws are justly made against papists.
page 119. page. 124. verse. 10. Lands promised to be restored in the conquest.
page. 32. verse. 21. Leases may not be let to any, but by Jesuits. page. 31.
verse. 19.
M
Murders done by Jesuits. page. 107. verse. 19. Page. 37. Verse. 34. Page. 38.
Verse. 30. Medina will kill all before him. page 11. verse. 4. Mendoza is a
Jesuit. page 84. verse. 34. Martyrdom of Jesuits. page. 97. verse. 9. Miracles
done by Jesuits. page 51. verse. 14. Mutabilitie in Ies. religion. page 55.
N
NOble men in league with the Spaniards. Page 128. Verse. 24. 129. Noble men take
part with the Jesuits. page 128. verse. 24: Noble men assist the priests. page
128. verse. 33. v. 30. New religion of the Jesuits. page. 89. verse. 8. p. 179.
v. 29.
O
OLim dicebamur preferred by the Ies. to the Pope. Page 178. Verse. 14. Order of
the Jesuits. page. 56. Outcries of the secular priests. page 21. Outcries of
the Jesuits. page 19.
P
POpe may be judged of any man. Page 94. verse. 13. Pope Sixtus damned, says
our Jesuit. page 133. verse. 38. Pope Sixtus a monster on earth. page 133.
verse. 29. Pope may be an ethnicke. page 134. verse. 5. Pope may be an heretic.
page 133. verse. 29. Pope obeyed against Kings. page. 13. verse. 17. Pope cannot
depose Kings. page. 88. Pope can play tricks of fast and loose. p. 125. v.
23. page 126. Pope cannot err, and how. page. 125. Pope erreth not, but Satan
under his pall. page 127. uers. 4. Pope will depose kings. page 120. Pope not
the lawful bishop of Rome. page 3. verse. 22. Pope deluded by the Jesuits.
page 30. verse. 12. Pope is the cause of all rebellion. page 82. v. 30. page 85.
verse. 12. Pope is a cruel tyrant. page 153. page 157. page. 82. Popery is
annexed with treason. page 143. verse. 29. Priests die not for religion, but
for treason. page 167. page 127. verse. 12. verse. 32. page. 145. page. 86.
Priests expect a change. page 110. verse. 9. Priests are bound in conscience to
detect the Jesuits. page 127 verse. 15. Priests confess that treasons are
revealed miraculously. p. 129. verse. 29. Priests must adore the devil. page 8.
verse. 4. page 86.. verse. 32. Priests swear to become traitors. page. 86. verse.
33. Papists must depend upon the devil. page 8. verse. 4. page 68. v. 3.
Parsons is an arrant traitor. page 92. verse. 33. page 76. verse. 8. page 73.
page 162. verse. 13. Parsons is a bastard. page 69. page 71. verse. 24. Parsons
would be a Cardinal. page 71. verse. 8. Parsons a monster of mankind. page 71.
verse. 34. Parsons is impudent, and will affirm or deny any thing. p. 76.
verse. 23. Parsons is a gypsey. p. 77. v. 34. Parsons sets the english crown
on sale. 171. Parsons is the wickedst man upon earth. page 174. p. 173. Parsons
spends five or six crowns weekly in Postage. page 170. verse. 32. Parsons is
a notorious liar. page 77. page 76. verse. 23. page 178. verse. 6. page 161.
verse. 15. page 168. verse. 36. Parsons can rule the Pope. page. 82. verse. 24.
Pasquin in Rome talks of Parsons treasons. page 171. verse. 30. Parsons is an
incestuous person. page 71. verse. 24. Parsons an heretic of the family of
love. page 71. verse. 30. Parsons drunken sponge. page 71. ver. 28. Parsons was
begotten of some incubus. page 71. ver. 36. Parsons has written traytorous
books. p. 173. ver. 7. p. 106. P. 80. See books.
Q
QVerimonie of Priests against Jesuits. page 21. Querimone of Jesuits against
the Priests. page 19. Queen of Scots, page 75. v. 20, page 45, v. 11.
R
REbellion in the North. page 83, verse. 17. Religion of the Jesuits is of the
devil. page, 68. v. 3. page 59. page 57, v. 17. p. 63. p. 133. page 15. v. 8.
Religion of Jesuits is new. p. 179. v. 29. p. 89. v. 8. Religion of the
Jesuits brought from the devil. page 84. v. 22. p. 67. v. 21. Religious
parsons how they are distinguished. p. 4. Recusancie is linked with treason
inseperably. p: 143. v. 28. Religion of the Jesuits is mutable. page 56.
Religion of Jesuits is flat cooznage. Page 59. Verse. 16. Religion of Jesuits
is an hotch potch of Omnigitherum. Page. 67. page 15. verse. 8. Richard Hesket
sent to the Earl of Darbie. page 22. verse. 30. Riston the Priest. page 85.
verse. 24.
S
SAnders the priest the architect of rebellion. p. 84. v. 12. Secular priests
sworn to be traitors. page 75. v. 36. page. 86. verse. 32. Seculars do
equivocate. page. 118. verse. 19. Seculars must enter into glory. page 165.
verse. 28. Seculars are traitors. page 98. verse. 10. page. 119. Seminaries
erected for treason. page 86. verse. 19. Spies made of gentlemen. page 32. verse.
24. Standish a lying fellow. page. 30. verse. 7.
T
Treason in the north. page 84. verse. 5 Treason of Throckmorton. page 84. verse.
35. Treasons of Parrie, Arden, and Summeruile. page 84. page 85. Treasons of
Northumberland and Babington* page 85. Treason of Sir William Stanley. page 85.
Treason of Norfolk. page 83. Treasons of Saunders, Web and Morton. page 83.
Treasons of Hesket, Walpoole, etc, page 22. page 23. Treasons revealed
miraculously. page 75. verse. 28. p. 146. v. 9. Theft of the Jesuits. page 25.
verse. 3. Traitors may eat gold, if they will. page. 12. verse. 13.
V
Vows of the Jesuits. Page 46. p. 47. p. 48. p. 49. Verlets with Jesuits are
honest men. Page 77. Verse. 4.
W
Wealth of Jesuits. P. 26. V. 32. P. 34. V. 13. Vebbe. see treason. Walpoole
a traitor. page. 23. verse. 8.

