A DISCOVRSE OF LIFE AND DEATH: WRITTEN IN French, by PHIL. MORNAY.

Done in English by the Countess of Pembroke.

AT LONDON, Printed by H. L. for Matthew Lownes, and are to be soulde at his
shop in Paul's Churchyard, 1608.

A DISCOVERSE OF LIFE AND DEATH, WRITten in french by PHIL. MORNAY, Sieur du
Plessis Marly.
IT seems to me strange, and a thing much to be marueiled, that the laborer
to repose himself hasteneth as it were the course of the Sun: that the Mariner
rows with all force t'attain the port and with a joyful cry salutes the
descried land: that the traveler is never quiet nor content til he beat the
end of his voyage: and that we in the mean while tied in this world to a
perpetual task, tossed with continual tempest, tired with a rough and
combersom way, cannot yet see the end of our labor but with grief, nor behold
our port but with tears, nor approach our home and quiet abode but with horror
and trembling. This life is but a Penelopes web, wherein we are always doing
and undoing: a sea open to all winds, which sometime within, sometime without
never ceas to torment us: a weary iourny through extreme heats, and colds,
over high mountains, steep rocks, and theeuish deserts. And so we term it,
in weauing at this web, in rowing at this oar, in passing this miserable way:
yet lo when death comes to end our work, when she stretches out her arms to
pull us into the port, when after so many dangerous passages, and loathsome
lodgings she would conduct us to our true home and resting place: in stead of
rejoicing at the end of our labor, of taking comfort at the sight of our land,
of singing at the approach of our happy mansion, we would fain (who would
believe it?) retake our work in hand, we would again hoise sail to the
wind, and willingly undertake our journey anew. No more, then, remember we our
pains, our shipwracks and dangers are forgotten: we fear no more the
trauelles nor the thieves. Contrariwise, we apprehende death as an extreme
pain, we doubt it as a rock, we fly it as a thief. We do as little
children, who all the day complain, and when the medicin is brought them, are
no longer sick: as they, who (all the week long) run up and down the
streets with pain of the teeth, and seeing the Barber coming to pull them
out, feel no more pain: as those tender and delicate bodies, who in a pricking
pleurisy complain, cry out, and cannot stay for a Surgion, and when they see
him whetting his Launcet to cut the throat of the disease, pull in their arms
and hide them in the bed, as if he were come to kill them. We fear more the
cure then the disease, the Surgion the^ the pain, the stroke the^ the
impostume. We have more sense of the medicines bitterness soon gone, then of
a bitter languishing long continued: more feeling of death the end of our
miseries, then the endless misery of our life. And whence proceeds this
folly and simplicity? we neither know life, nor death. We fear that we ought
to hope for, and wish for that we ought to fear. We call life a continual
death: and death the issue of a living death, and the entrance of a never dying
life. Now what good, I pray you, is there in life, that we should so much
pursue it? or what evil is there in death, that we should so much eschew it?
Nay what evil is there not in life? and what good is there not in death?
Consider all the periods of this life. We enter it in tears, we pass it in
sweat, we end it in sorrow. Great and little, rich and poor, not one in
the whole world that can plead immunitie from this condition. Man, in this
point worse then all other creatures, is borne unable to support himself;
neither receiving in his first years any pleasure, nor giving to others but
annoy and displeasure, and before the age of discretion passing infinite
dangers: only herein le^^^ unhappy then in other ages, that he has no sense
nor apprehension of his unhappiness. Now, is there any so weak minded, that
if it were granted him to live always a child, would make account of such a
life? So then it is evident, that not simply to live is a good; but well and
happily to live. But proceed. Grows he? with him grow his travails.
Scarcely is he come out of his nurses hands, scarcely knows what it is to
play, but he falls into the subjection of some schoolmaster. I speak but of
those which are best and most precisely brought up: Studies he? it is ever with
repining. Plays he? never but with fear. This whole age, while he is under
the charge of another, is unto him but as a prison: he only thinks, and only
aspires to that time when freed from the mastership of another, he may become
master of himself; pushing onward (as much as in him lies) his age with his
shoulder, that soon he may enjoy his hoped liberty Inshort, he desires nothing
more the^ ye end of this base age, and the beginning of his youth. And what
else I pray you is the beginning of youth, but the death of infancy? the
beginning of manhood, but the death of youth? the beginning of to morrow, but
the death of to day? In this sort then desires he his death, and judges his
life miserable: and so cannot be reputed in any happiness or contentment.
Behold him now, according to his wish, at liberty: in that age, wherein
Hercules had the choice, to take the way of virtue or of vice, reason or
passion for his guide, and of these two must take one. His passion entertaines
him with'a thousand delights, prepares for him a thousand baits, presents him
with a thousand worldly pleasures to surprise him: and few there are that are
not beguiled. But at the reckonings end, what pleasures are they? pleasures
full of vice, which hold him still in a restless fever: pleasures subject to
repentance, like sweet meats of hard digestion: pleasures bought with pain and
peril, spent and past in a moment, and followed with a long and lothsom remorse
of conscience. And this is the very nature (if they be well examined) of all the
pleasures of this world. There is in none so much sweetness, but there is more
bitterness: none so pleasant to the mouth, but leaves an unsavory after-taste
and loathsome disdain: none (which is worse) so moderated but has his
corrosiue, and caries his punishment in it self. I will not here speak of the
displeasures confessed by all, as quarelles, debates, wounds, murders,
banishments, sickness, peril, wherinto sometimes the incontinency, sometimes
ye insolency of this ill guided age conducts him. But if those that seem
pleasures, be nothing else but displeasurs: if the sweetness thereof be as an
infusion of wormwood; it is plain enough what the displeasure is they feel,
and how great the bitterness that they taste. Behold in sum the life of a young
man, who rid of the government of his parents, abandons himself to all liberty
or rather bondage of his passion: which, right like an unclean spirit
possessing him, casts him now into the water, now into the fire: sometimes
carries him clean over a rock, and sometime flings him headlong to the
bottom. Now, if he take and follow reason for his guide, behold on the other
part wonderful difficulties: he must resolve to fight in every part of the
field, at every step to be in conflict, and at handstrokes; as having his enemy
in front, in flank, and on the rerewarde, never leaving to assail him. And
what enemy? all that can delight him, all that he sees near, or far off;
briefly the greatest enemy of the world, the world it self: But which is
worse, a thousand treacherous and dangerous intelligences among his own
forces, and his passion within himself desperate: which, in that age grown to
the highest, awaits but time, hour, and occasion to surprise him and cast him
into all viciousnes. God only and none other can make him choose this way: God
only can hold him in it to the end: God only can make him victorious in all his
combats. And well we see how few they are that enter into it, and of those
few how many that retire again. Follow the one way or follow the other, he
must either subject himself to a tyrannical passion, or undertake a weary and
continual combat, willingly cast himself to destruction, or fetter himself as
it were in stocks, easily sink with the course of the water, or painfully
swim against the stream. Lo here the young m^, who in his youth has drunk
his full draught of the worlds vain and deceivable pleasures, ouertake^ by
them with such a dull heaviness, and astonishment, as drunkeards the morrow
after a feast: either so out of taste, that he will no more; or so glutted,
that he can no more: not able without grief to speak, or think of them. Lo
him that stoutely has made resistance: he feels himself so weary, and with
this continual conflicte so bruised and broken, that either he is upon the
point to yield himself, or content to die, and so acquit himself. And this is
all the good, all the contentment of this flourishing age, by children so
earnestly desired, and by old folks so heartily lamented. Now comes that
which is called perfect age; in the which men have no other thoughts but to
purchase themselves wisdom and rest. Perfect indeed* but herin only perfect,
that all imperfections of humane nature, hidden before under the simplicity of
childhood or the lightness of youth, appear at this age in their perfection,
We speak of none in this place but such as are esteemed the wisest, and most
happy in the conceit of the world. We played as you have seen in fear: our
short pleasures were attended on with long repentance. Be hold, now present
themselves to us avarice, and ambition; promising, if we will adore them,
perfect contentment of the goods and honors of this world. And surely there are
none but the ture Children of the Lord, who by the fair illusions of the one
or the other cast not them selves headlong from the top of the pinnacle. But in
the end, what is all this contentment? The covetous man makes a thousand
voiages by sea and by land: runs a thousand fortunes: escapes a thousand
shipwracks, in perpetual fear and travel: and many times he either loses
his time, or gayneth nothing but sicknesses, gouts, and oppilatio^s for the
time to come In ye purchase of this goodly repose, he bestows his true rest;
and, to gain wealth, loses his life. Suppose he has gained in good
quantity: that he has spoiled the whole East of pearls, and drawn dry all
the mines of the West: will he therefore be settled in quiet? can he say
that he is content? All charges and iourneyes past, by his passed pains he
heapeth up but future disquietnesse both of mind and body; from one travel
falling into another, never ending, but changing his miseries. He desired to
have them, and now fears to lose them: he got them with burning ardour, and
possesses in trembling cold: he adue^tured among thieves to seek them; and
having found them, thieves and robbers on al sides, run mainely on him: he
la^oured to dig them out of the earth, and now is enforced to religge, and
rehide them* Finally, coming from al his voiages, he comes into a prison: and
for an end of his bodily travels is taken with endless travels of the mind.
And what, at length, has this poor soul attained, after so many miseries?
This Devil of couerise, by his illusions, and enchantments, bears him in hand
that he has some rare and singular thing* and so it fares with him, as with
those silly creatures who^, the Devil seduceth under color of relieuing their
poverty, who find their hands full of leaves, supposing to find them full of
crowns. He possesses or rather is possessed by a thing, wherein is neither
force nor virtue; more unprofitable, and more base, then the least herb of the
earth: Yet has he heaped together this vile excrement, and so brurish is
grown, as therewith to crown his head, which naturally he should tread under
his feet. But howsoever it be, is he therewith content? Nay (co^irariwise)
less now, then ever. We commend most, those drinks that breed an alteration,
and soonest extinguish thirst: and those meats, which in least quantity do
longest resist hunger. Now hereof the more a man drinks, the more he is a
thirst; the more he eats, the more an hungered: It is a dropsy (and as they
term it) the dogs hunger: sooner may he burst then be satisfied. And (which
is worse) so strange in some is this thirst, that it makes them dig the
pittes, and painefully draw the water, and after will not suffer them to
drink. In the midst of a river they are dry with thirst: and on a heap of
corn cry out of famine: they have goods and dare not use them: they have joys
it seems, and do not enjoy the^: they neither have for themselves nor for
another: but of all they have, they have nothing: and yet have want of al they
have not. Let us then return to that that the attaining of all these
deceivable goods is nothing else but weariness of body; and the possession
for the most part, but wearines of the mind: which certainly is so much the
greater, as is more sensible, more subtle, and more tender the soul then the
body* But the heap of al misery is, when they come to lose them; when either
shipwreck, or sacking or invasion, or fire, or such like calamities, to which
these frail things are subject, does take and carry them from them. Then fall
they to cry, to weep, and to torment them selves, as little children that have
lost their plaigame; which notwithstanding is nothing worth. One cannot
persuade them, that mortal me^ have any other good in this world, but that
which is mortal. They are in their own conceits not only spoiled, but
altogether slayed. And, forasmuch as in these vain things they have fixed al
their hopes; having lost them, they fall into despair, out of the which
commonly they cannot be withdrawn. And (which is more) al, that they have not
gained according to the accountes they made, they esteem lost: all that, which
turns them not to great and extraordinary profit, they account as damage:
whereby we see some fall into such despair, as they cast away themselves. In
short, the recompense that couetise yeeldes those that have served it all their
life, is oftentimes like that of the Devil: whereof the end is, that after a
small time having gratified his Disciples, either gee gives them over to a
hangman, or himself breaks their necks. I will not here discourse of the
wickedness and mischiefs whereunto the covetous men subject themselves, to
attain to these goods, whereby their conscience is filled with a perpetual
remorse, which never leaves the^ in quiet: suffices that in this ouer-veheme^t
exercise, which busieth and abuses the greatest part of the world, the body is
slain, the mind is weakened, the soul is lost without any pleasure or
contentment.

Come we to ambition, which (by a greediness of honor) fondly holds
occupied the greatest persons: Think we there to find more? nay rather, less.
As the one deceives us, giving us for all our travel, but a vile excrement of
the earth: so the other repayes us, but with smoke and wind; the rewards of
this being as vain, as those of that were gross. Both in the one and the
other, we fall into a bottomless pit: but into this the fall by so much the
more dangerous, as at the first show, the water is more pleasant and clear. Of
those that give themselves to court ambition, some are great about Princes,
others commanders of Armies: both sorts, according to their degree you see
saluted, reverenced, and adored of those that are under them. You see them
apparelled in purple, in scarlet, and in cloth of gold: it seems, at first
sight, there is no contentment in the world but theirs. But men know not, how
heavy an ounce of that vain honor weighes, what those reuerences cost them,
and how dearly they pay for an ell of those rich stufs: who knew them well,
would never buy them at the price. The one has attained to this degree, after
a long and painful service, hazarding his life upon every occasion, with
loss often times of a leg or an arm, and that at the pleasure of a Prince, that
more regards a hundred perches of ground on his neighbors frontiers, then the
lives of a hundred thousand such as he: unfortunate, to serve who loves him
not: and foolish, to think himself in honor with him, that makes so little
reckening to lose him for a thing of no worth. Others grow up by flattering a
Prince, and long submitting their tongues and hands to say and do without
difference whatsoever they will have them: whereunto a good mind can never
command it self. They shall have endured a thousand injuries, received a
thousand disgraces; and as near as they seem about the Prince, they are
nevertheless always as the Lions keeper, who by long patience, a thousand
feedinges, and a thousand clawings, has made a fierce Lion familiar; yet gives
him never meat, but with pulling back his hand, always in fear least he
should catch him: and if once in a year he bites him, he sets it so close,
that he is paid for a long time after. Such is the end of all Princes
favorites. When a Prince after song breathing has raised a man to great
height, he makes it his pastime, at what time he seems to be at the top of
his travel, to cast him down at an instant: when he has filled him with all
wealth, he wrings him after as a sponge; loving none but himself, and
thinking every one made, but to serve, and please him. These blind Courtiers
make themselves believe, that they have friends, and many that honor them:
(...) considering that (...) make (...) (...) and honor every bodi^^^ so
others do by them. Their superiors disdain them, and never but with scorn
do so much as salute them* their inferiors salute them, because they have
need of them (I mean of their fortune, of their food, of their apparel, not
of their person): and for their equals, between whom commonly friendship
co^sists, they envy each other, accuse each other, cross each other;
continually grieved either at their own harm, or at others good. Now, what
greater hell is there, what greater torment, than envy? which in truth is naught
else but a fever Hectique of the mind: so they are utterly frustrate of all
friendship, ever judged by the wisest the chief and sovereign good among men.
Will you see it more clearly? Let but Fortune turn her back, every man
turns from them: let her frown, every man looks aside on them: let them once
be disroabed of their triumphall garment, no body will any more know them.
Again, let there be apparelled in it the most unworthy, and infamous
whatsoever: even he without difficulty, by virtue of his robe, shall inherit
all the honors the other had don him. In the mean time they are puffed up,
and grow proud, as the Ass which carried the image of Isis was for the honors
done to the Goddess, and regard not that it is the fortune they carry which
is honored, not themselves, on whom as on Asses, many times she will be carried.
But you will say: At least so long as that fortune endured, they were at ease,
and had their contentment; and who has 3. or 4. or more years of happy time,
has not bin al his life unhappy. True, if this be to be at ease, continually
to fear to be cast down from that degree, whereunto they are raised: and
daily to desire with great travel to clime yet higher. Those (my friend) whom
thou take so well at their ease, because thou see them but without, are
within far otherwise. They are fair built prisons, full within of deep
ditches, and dungeons: full of darkness, serpents and torments. Thou
supposest them lodged at large, and they think their lodgings strait. Thou
think them very high, and they think themselves very low. Now, as sick is
he, and many times more sick, who thinks himself so, then who indeed is.
Suppose them to be Kings: if they think themselves slaves, they are no
better: for what are we but by opinion? You see them well followed and
attended: and even those whom they have chosen for their guarde, they distrust.
Alone or in company ever they are in fear. Alone they look behind them: in
company they have an eye on every side of the^. They drink in gold and silver;
but in those, not in earth or glass, is poison prepared and d^unke. They have
their beds soft and well made: when they lay them to sleep you shall not hear
a mouse stir in the chamber: not so much as a fly shall come near their faces.
Yet nevertheless, where the country man sleeps at the fall of a great river,
at the noise of a market, having no other bed but the earth, nor covering but
the heavens, these in the midst of this silence and delicacie, do nothing
but turn from side to side, it seems still that they hear some body, their
rest it self is without rest Lastly, will you know what the diversity is
between the most hardly entreated prisoners and them both are enchained, both
laden with letters, but that the one has them of iron, the other of gold; and
that the one is tied but by the body, the other by the mind. The prisoner
draws his fetters after him, the courtier wears his upon him. The prisoners
mind sometimes co^forts the pain of his body, and sings in the midst of his
miseries: the Courtier tormented in mind, wearieth incessa^tly his body, and
can never give it rest. And as for the contentment you imagine they have, you
are there in yet more deceived. You judge and esteem them great, because they
are raised high: but as fondly, as who should judge a dwarf great, for being set
on a Tower, or on the top of a mountain. You measure (so good a Geometrician
you are) the image with his base, which were convenient (to know his true
height) to be measured by it self: whereas you regard not the height of the
image, but the height of the place it stands upon. You deem them great (if
in this earth there can be greatness, which in respect of the whole heavens
is but a point): But could you enter into their minds, you would judge, that
neither they are great; true greatness consisting in contempt of those vain
greatnesses, whereunto they are slaves: nor seem unto themselves so, seeing
daily they are aspiring higher, and never where they would be. Some one sets
down a bound in his mind; Could I attain to such a degree, lo, I were content:
I would then rest my self. Has he attained it? he gives himself not so
much as a breathing: he would yet ascend higher. That which is beneath, he
counts a toy: it is in his opinion but one step. He reputes himself low,
because there is some one higher, in stead of reputing himself high, because
there be a millio^ lower: and so high he climes at last, that either his breath
fails him by the way, or he slides from the top to the bottom. Or is he get up
by all his travel it is but as to find himself on the top of the Alps, not
above the clouds, winds and storms: but rather at the devotion of lightnings
and tempests, and whatsoever else horrible, and dangerous is engendered, and
conceived in the air: which most commonly takes pleasure to thunderbolt and
dash into powder that proud height of theirs. It may be herin you will agree
with me, by reason of the examples wherewith both histories, and men's memories
are full. But say you, such at least whom nature has sent into the world with
crowns on their heads, and scepters in their hands: such as from their birth
she has set in that height, as they need take no pain to ascend: seem
without controversy exempt from all these injuries, and by consequence may
call themselves happy. It may be indeed they feel less such incommodities,
having been borne, bred, and brought up among them: as one borne near the
downefals of Nilus becomes deaf to the found: in prison, laments not the want
of liberty: among the Cimmerians in perpetual night, wishes not for dave: on
the top of the Alps, thinks not strange of the mists, the te^pests, the
snowes, and the storms. Yet free doubtless they are not, when the lightening
often blasteth a flower of their crowns, or breaks their scepter in their
hands: when a drift of snow ouerwhelmes them: when a mist of heaviness, and
grief, continually blinds their wit and understanding. Crowned they are
indeed; but with a crown of thorns. They bear a scepter: but it is of a reed
more then any thing in the world pliable and obedient to all winds: it being
so far off that such a crown can cure the maigrims of the mind, and such a
scepter keep off and fray away the griefs and cares which houer about them;
that it is contrariwise the crown that brings them, and the scepter which from
al parts attracts them. O crown, said the Persian Monarch, who knew how heavy
thou sit on the head, would not vouchsafe to take thee up, though he found
thee in his way. This prince it seemed gave for tune to the whole world,
distributed unto men haps and mishaps at his pleasure could in show make every
man content: himself in the mean while freely confessing, that in the whole
world, which he held in his hand there was nothing but grief, and unhappiness
And what will all the rest tell us, if they list to utter what they found? We
will not ask them who have concluded a miserable life with a dishonorable
death: who have beheld their kingdoms buried before them, and have in great
misery long ouerliued their greatness. Not of Dionyse of Sicil, more content
with a handful of twigs to whip little children of Corinth in a choole, then
with the scepter, wherewith he had beaten al Sicil: nor of Sylla, who having
robbed the whole State of Rome, which had before robbed the whole world, never
found means of rest in himself, but by robbing himself of his own estate,
with incredible hazard both of his power and authority. But demand we the
opinion of king Solomon, a man endued withsingular gifts of God, rich and
wealthy of all things. who sought for treasure from the Isles: He will teach us
by a book of purpose, that having tried all the felicities of the earth, he
found nothing but vanity, travel, and vexation of spirit. Ask we the
Emperor Augustus, who peaceably possessed the whole world: He will bewail
his life past, and among infinite toils wish for the rest of the meanest man
of the earth: accountinge that day most happy, when he might unload himself
of this insupportable greatness, to live quietly among he least. Of Tiberius his
successor, he will confess unto us that he holds y^ Empire as a wolf by the
ears, and that (if without danger of biting he might) he would gladly let it
go, complaining on Fortune for lifting him so high, and then taking away the
ladder, that he could not come down again. Of Dioclesian, a Prince of so great
wisdom and virtue in ye opinion of the world: he will prefer his voluntary
banishment at Salona, before all the Roman Empire. Finally, the Emperor Charles
the fifth, esteemed by our Age most happy that has lived these many ages: he
will curse his conquests, his victories, his triumphs: and not be ashamed to
confess that far more good in comparison he has felt in one day of his
Monkish solitariness, then in all his triumphant life. Now, shall we think
those happy in this imaginate greatness, who themselves think themselves
unhappy? seeking their happiness in lessening themselves, and not finding in
the world one place to rest this greatness, or one bed quietly to sleep in?
Happy is he only who in mind lives contented: and he most of all unhappy,
whom nothing he can have can content. Then miserable Pyrrhus king of Albany,
who would win all the world, to win (as he said) rest and went so far to
seek that which was so near him. But more miserable, Alexander, that being
borne King of a great Realm, and Conqueror almost of the earth, sought for
more worlds to satisfy his foolish ambition, with in three days content with
six foot of ground. To conclude, are they borne on the highest Alps? they
seek to scale heaven. Have they subdued all the Kings of the earth? they have
quarelles to plead with God, and endeavor to tread under foot his kingdom.
They have no end nor limite, till God laughing at their vain purposes, when
they think themselves at the last step, thunderstriketh all this presumption,
breaking in shiuers their scepters in their hands, and oftentimes intrapping
them in their own crowns. At a word, whatsoever happiness can be in that
ambition promises, is but suffering much il, to get ill. Men think by daily
climing higher to pluck themselves out of this ill: and the height whereunto
they so pamfully aspire, is the height of misery it self. I speak not here of
the wretchedness of the^, who all their life have held out their cap to receive
the alms of Court fortune, and can get nothing, often with incredible heart
grief, seeing some by less pains taken have riches fall into their hands: of
the^, who iustling one another to have it, lose it, and cast it into the hands
of a third: Of those, who holding it in their hands to hold it faster, have
lost it through their fingers. Such by all men are esteemed unhappy, and are
indeed so, because they judge themselves so. It suffices that al these
liberalities, which the Devil casts us as out at a window, are but baits:
all these pleasures but ambushes: and that he does but make his sport of us,
who strive one with another for such things, as most unhappy is he, that has
best hap to find them. Well now, you will say, the Covetous in all his goods,
has no good: the Ambitious, at the best he can be, is but ill. But may there
not be some, who supplying the place of Justice, or being near about a Prince,
may without following such unbridled passions, pleasantly enjoy their goods,
joining honor with rest and contentment of mind? Surely, in former ages (there
yet remaining among men some sparks of sincerity) in some sort it might be
so: but being of that composition they now are, I see not how it may be in any
sort. For, deal you in affairs of estate in these times, either you shall do
well, or you shall do il. I fill, you have God for your enemy, and your own
conscience for a perpetually tormenting executioner. If well, you have men for
your enemies, and of men the greatest: whose envy and malice will spy you out,
and whose cruelty and tyranny will evermore threaten you. Please the people,
you please a beast: and pleasing such, ought to be displeasing to your self.
Please your self, you displease god: please him, you incur a thousand dangers
in ye world, with purchase of a thousand displeasures. Whereof it grows, that if
you could hear the talk of the wisest and least discontent of this kind of
men, whether they speak advisedly, or their words pass them by force of
truth, one would gladly change garment with his tenant: another preaches how
goodly an estate it is to have nothing: a third, complaining that his brains
are broken with the noise of Court or Palace, has no other thought, but as
soon as he may to retire himself thence. So that you shall not see any but is
displeased with his own calling, and enuieth that of another: ready
nevertheless to repent him, if a man should take him at his word. None but is
weary of the businesses whereunto his age is subject, and wishes not to be
elder, to free himself of them: albeit otherwise he keeps off old age, as
much as in him lies.

What must we then do in so great a contrariety and co^fusio^ of minds? Must
we, to find true humanity, fly the society of men, and hide us in forests
among wild beasts? to avoid these unruly passions, eschew the asse^bly of
creatures supposed reasonable? to pluck us out of the evils of the world,
sequester our selves from the world? Could we in so doing live at rest, it
were something.

But alas! men cannot take herein what part they would: and even they which
do, find not there all the rest they sought for. Some would gladly do: but
shame of the world recals them. Fools, to be ashamed of what in their hearts
they condemn: and more fools, to be advised by the greatest enemy they can
or ought to have. Others are borne in hand that they ought to serve the
public; not marking, that who counsel the^, serve only them selves: and that
the more part would not much seek the public, but that they found their own
particular. Some are told, that by their good example they may amend others:
and consider not that a hundred sound men, even Physicians themselves, may
sooner catch the plague in an infected Town, then one be healed: that it is
but to to tempt God, to enter therein: that against so contagious an air there
is no preservative, but in getting far from it. Finally, that as little as the
fresh waters, falling into the sea, can take from it his saltness: so little
can one Lot or two, or three, reform a Court of Sodom. And as concerning
the wisest, who (no less careful for their souls, then bodies) seek to bring
them into a sound and wholesome air, far from the infection of wickedness: and
who led by the hand of some Angel of God, retire themselves in season, as
Lot into some little village of Segor, out of the corruption of the world,
into some Country place from the infected towns, there quietly employing the
time in some knowledge and serious contemplatio^: I willingly yield they are
in a place of less danger, yet because they carry the danger in themselves,
not absolutely exempt from danger. They fly the court; and a court follows
them on all sides: they endeavor to escape the world; and the world pursues
them to death. Hardly in this World can they find a place where the World
finds them not: so greedily it seeks to murder them. And if by some special
grace of God they seem for a while free from these dangers, they have some
poverty that troubles them, some domestical debate that torments them, or
some familiar spirit that tempts them: briefly, the world daily in some sort or
other makes it self felt of them. But the worst is, when we are out of these
external wars and troubles, we find great civil war within our selves;
the flesh against the spirit, passion against reason, earth against heaven, the
world within us fighting for the world, evermore so lodged in the bottom of
our own hearts, that on no side we can fly from it. I will say more: he
makes profession to fly the world, who seeks thereby the praise of the world:
he faineth to run away, who according to the proverb; by drawing back sets
himself forward. he refuses honors, that would thereby be prayed to take
them: and hides him from men, to the end they should com to seek him. So the
world often harbors in disguised attire among them that fly the world. This is
an abuse. But follow we the company of men, the world has his Court among
the^: seek we the Deserts, it has there his dens and places of resort, and in
the Desert it self tempts Christ lesus. Retire we our selves into our
selves, we find it there as unclean as any where. We cannot make the world
dye in us, but by dying our selves. We are in the world, and the world in us,
and to separate us from the world, we must separate us from our selves. Now
this separation is called Death. We are, we think, come out of the contagious
City* but we are not advised that we have sucked the bad air, that we carry
the plague with us, that we so participate with it, that through rocks,
through deserts, through mountains, it ever accompanies us. Having avoided
the contagion of others, yet we have it in our selves. We have withdrawn us
out of men, but not withdrawn man out of us. The te^pestuous sea torments us:
we are grieved at the heart, and desirous to vomit: and to be discharged
thereof, we remove out of one ship into another, from a greater to a less: we
promise our selves rest in vain: they being always the same winds that
blow, the same waves that swell, the same humors that are stirred. To all, no
other port, no other mean of tra^quillitie but only death. We were sick in a
chamber near the street, or near the market: we caused our selves to be
carried into some backer closet, where the noise was not so great. But though
there the noise was less: yet was the fever there never the less: and thereby
lost nothing of his heat. Change bed, chamber, house, country, again and
again: we shall every where find the same unrest, because every where we find
our selves: and seek not so much to be others, as to be other where is. We
follow solitariness, to fly carfulness. We retire us (so say we) from the
wicked: but carry with us our avarice, our ambition, our riotousnesse, all our
corrupt affections: which breed in us 1000. remorses* and 1000. times each day
bring to our remembrance the garlike and onions of Egypt. Daily they pass the
Ferrie with us: so that both on this side, and beyond the water, we are in
co^inuall combat. Now could we cassere this company which eats and gnawes our
mind, doubtless we should be at rest, not in solitariness only, but even in
the thicket of men. For the life of man upon earth is but a continual
warrefare. Are we delivered from external practices? we are to take heed of
internal espialles. Are the Greeks gone away? we have a Sinon within, that
will be tray them the place. We must ever be waking, having an eye to the watch,
and weapons in our hands, if we will not every hour be surprised, and given
up to the will of our enemies. And how at last can we escape? Not by the woods,
by the rivers, nor mountains: not by throwing our selves into a press, nor by
thrusting our selves into a hole. One only mean there is, which is death:
which in the end separating our spirit from our flesh, the pure and clean
part of our soul from the unclean, which within us evermore bandeth it self
for the world, appeaseth by this separation that, which conjoined in one and
the same person could not, without utter choking of the spirit, but be in
perpetual contention.

And as touching the contentment that may be in the exercises of the wisest men
in their solitarines, as reading divine or prosane books, with all other
knowledges and learnings: I hold well that it is indeed a far other thing,
then are those mad huntings, which make savage a multitude of me^ possessed
with these or the like diseases of the mind. Yet must they all abide the
judgment pronounced by the wisest among the wise, Solomon, that all this
nevertheless applied to man's natural disposition, is to him but vanity and
vexation of mind. Some are ever learning to correct their speech, and never
think of correcting their life. Others dispure in their Logique of reason, and
the Art of reason: and lose thereby many times their natural reason. One
learnes by Arithmeticke to divide, to the smallest fractions, and has not skill
to part one shilling with his brother. Another by Geometry can measure
fields, and towns, and Countries: but cannot measure himself. The Musician
can accord his voices, and soundes, and times together: having nothing in his
heart but discords, nor one passion in his soul in good tune. The Astrologer
looks up on high, and falls in the next ditch: foreknowes the future, and
sorgoes the present: has often his eye on the heavens; his heart long before
buried in the earth. The Philosopher discourses of the nature of all other
things: and knows not himself. The Historian can tell of the wars of
Thebes and of Troy: but what is done in his own house can tell nothing. The
Lawyer will make laws for all the world, and not one from himself. The
Physician will cure others, and be blind in his own disease: find the least
alteration in his pulse, and not mark the burning feauers of his mind.
Lastly, the Divine will spend the greatest part of his time in disputing of
faith, and cares not to hear of charity, will talk of God, and not regard to
succor men. These knowledges bring on the mind an endless labor, but no
contentment: for the more one knows, the more he would know.

They pacify not the debates a man feels in himself, they cure not the
diseases of his mind. They make him learned but they make not him good: cunning
but not wise. I say more: The more a man knows, the more knows he that he
knows not: the fuller the mind is, the emptier it finds it self: forasmuch
as whatsoever a man can know of any science in this world, is but the least
part of what he is ignorant: all his knowledge consisting in knowing his
ignorance, all his perfection in noting his imperfections; which who best
knows and notes, is in truth among men the most wise and perfect. In short, we
must conclude with Solomon, that the beginning and end of wisdom is the
fear of God: that this wisdom nevertheless is taken of the world for mere
folly, and persecuted by the world as a deadly enemy: and that as who fears
God, ought to fear no evil, for that all his evils are converted to his good:
so neither ought he to hope for good in the world, having there the devil his
professed enemy, whom the Scripture terms Prince of the world.

But with what exercise soever we pass the time, behold old age unawares to us
comes upon us: which whether we thrust our selves into the prease of men, or
hide us some where out of the way, never fails to find us out. Every man
makes account in that age to rest himself of all his travails without further
care, but to keep himself at ease and in health. And see contrawise in this
age, there is nothing but an after taste of all the foregoing evils: and most
commonly a plentiful harvest of all such vices, as in ye whole course of their
life has held and possessed them. There you have the vnhabilitie and
weakness of infancy, and (which is worse) many times accompanied with
authority: there you are paid for the excess and riotousnes of youth, with
gowtes, palsies, and such like diseases, which take from you limme after limme,
with extreme pain and torment. There also you are recompensed for the travels
of mind, the watchings and cares of manhood, with loss of sight, loss of
hearing, and all the senses one after another, except only the sense of pain.
Not one part in us but death takes engage to be assured of us, as of bad pay
masters, which infinitely fear their days of payment. Nothing in us that will
not by and by be dead: and nevertheless our vices yet live in us; and not
only live, but in despite of Nature daily grow young again. The covetous man
has one foot in his grave, and is yet burying his money: meaning belike to
find it again another day. The ambitious in his Will ordains unprofitable
po^ps for his funerals, making his vice to live and triumph after his death.
The riotous, no longer able to dance on his feet, daunceth with his
shoulders: all vi^es having left him, and he not yet able to leave them. The
child wishes for youth and this man laments it. The young man lives in hope
of the future: and this feels the evil present, lamentes the false pleasures
past, and sees for the time to come nothing to hope for; More foolish then the
child, in bewailing the time he cannot recall, and not remembering the evil he
had therein: and more wretched then the young man, in that after a wretched
life not able but wretchedly to d^^ he sees on all sides b^^ matter of
despair. As for him, who from his youth has undertaken to combat against the
flesh, and against the World: who has taken so great pains to mortify
himself and leave the World before his time: who besides those ordinary
euilles finds himself vexed with this great and incurable disease of old age,
and feels notwithstanding his flesh, how weak soever, stronger oftentimes
then his spirit: what good I pray can he have but only herein; that he sees
his death at hand, that he sees his combat finished that he sees himself
ready to depart by death out of this loathsome prison, wherein all his life
time he has been racked and tormented? I will not here speak of the infinite
evils wherewith men in all ages are annoyed, as loss of friends and parents,
banishments, exiles, disgraces, and such others, common and ordinary in the
world: one co^plaining of loosing his children, another of having them* one
making sorrow for his wives death, another for his life: one finding fault,
that he is too high in court another that he is not high enough. The world is
so full of evils, that to write of all, would require another world as great as
it self. Suffices, that if the most happy in men's opinions do counterpo^z^
his haps with his mishappes, he shall judge himself unhappy: and he judge
him happy, who had he been set three days in his place, would give it over
to him that came next: yea, sooner then he, who shall consider, in all the
goods that ever he has had, the evils he has endured to get the^, and having
them to retain and keep them (I speak of the pleasures that may be kept,
and not of those that wither in a moment) will judge of himself, and by
himself, that the keeping it self of the greatest felicity in this world, is
full of unhappiness and infelicitie. Conclude then, that Childe-hood is but a
foolish simplicity; youth a vain heat; manhood, a painful carfulness; and
old age, a noisome languishing: that our plays are but tears, our pleasures
feauers of the mind, our goods, rackes, and torments, our honors heavy
vanities, our rest, vnreste: that passing from age to age, is but passing from
evil to evil, and from the less unto the greater: and that always it is but
one wave driving on another, until we be arrived at the haven of death.
Conclude I say, that life is but a wishing for the future, and a bewailing of
the past: a loathing of what we have tasted, and a longing for that we have
not tasted: a vain memory of the state past, and a doubtful expectation of
the state to come: Finally, that in all our life there is nothing certain,
nothing assured, but the certainty and uncertainty of death. Behold, now comes
death unto us: Behold her, whose approache we so much ^eare. We are now to
consider whether she be such as we are made believe: and whether we ought so
greatly to fly her, as commonly we do. We are afraid of her: but like little
children, of a vizor, or of the Images of Hecate. We have her in horror; but
because we conceive her not such as she is, but ougly, terrible, and hideous:
such as it pleases the Painters to represent unto us on a wall. We fly
before her: but it is, because (foretaken with such vain imaginations) we give
not our selves leisure to mark her. But stay we, stand we steadfast, look we
her in the face* we shall find her quite other then she is painted us, and
altogether of other countenance then our miserable life. Death makes an end of
this life. This life is a perpetual misery and tempest: Death then is the
issue of our miseries and entrance of the port where we shall ride in safety
from all winds. And should we fear that which withdraws us from misery, or
which draws us into our haven? Yea but you will say, it is a pain to dye.
Admit it be: so is there in curing of a wound: Such is the World, that one
evil cannot be cured but by another; to heal a contusion, must be made an
incision. You will say, there is difficulty in the passage: So is there no
haven, no port, whereinto the entrance is not strait and combersom. No good
thing is to be bought in this World with other the^ the coin of labor and
pain. The entrance indeed is hard, if our selves make it hard, coming thither
with a tormented spirit, a troubled mind, a wavering and irresolute thought.
But bring we quietness of mind, constancy, and full resolution, we shall not
find any danger or difficulty at all. Yet what is the pain that death brings
us? Nay, what can she do with those pains we feel? We accuse her of all the
evils we abide in ending our life, and consider not how many more wounds or
grievous sickenesses we have endured without death: or how many more vehement
pains we have suffered in this life, in the which we called even her to our
succor. All the pains our life yeeldes us, at the last hour we impute to
death: not marking, that life begun and continued in all sorts of pain, must
also necessarily end in pain. Not marking (I say) that it is the remainder of
our life, not death that tormenteth us: the end of our navigations that pains
us, not the haven we are to enter: which is nothing else but a safegarde
against all winds. We complain of death, where we should complain of life:
as if one having been long sick, and beginning to be well, should accuse his
health of his last pains, and not the relics of his disease. Tell me, what
is it else to be dead, but to be no more living in the world? Absolutely and
simply not to be in the World, is it any pain? Did we then feel any
pain, when as yet we were not? Have we ever more resemblance of Death, then
when we sleep? Or ever more rest, then at that time? Now if this be no pain,
why accuse we death of the pains our life gives us at our departure? unless
also we will fondly accuse the time when as yet we were not, of the pains we
felt at our birth. If the coming in be with tears, is it wonder that such be
the going out? If the beginning of our being, be the beginning of our pain,
is it marvel that such be the ending? But if our not being in times past has
been without pain, and all this being contrariwise full of pain: whom should
we by reason accuse of the last pains? the not being to come, or the remnant
of this present being? We think we dye not, but when we yield up our last
gasp. But if we mark well, we dye every day, every hour, every moment.
We apprehende death as a thing unusual to us: and yet have nothing so common
in us. Our living is but continual dying: look how much we live, we dye how
much we increase, our life decreases. We enter not a step into life, but we
enter a step into death. Who has lived a third part of his years, has a
third part of himself dead: Who half his years, is already half dead. Of
our life, all the time past is dead, the present lives and dies at once, and
the future likewise shall dye. The past is no more, the future is not yet, the
present is, and no more is. Briefly, this whole life is but a death: it is as a
candle lighted in our bodies: in one the wind makes it melte away, in another
blows it clean out, many times ere it be half burned: in others it endures
to the end. Howesoeuer it be, look how much it shines, so much it burns:
her shining is her burning: her light is a vanishing smoke: her last fire, her
last wike, and her last drop of moisture. So is it in the life of man, life
and death in man is all one. If we call the last breath death, so must we all
the rest: all proceeding from one place, and all in one manner. One only
difference there is between this life, and that we call death: that during the
one, we have always whereof to die: and after the other, there remains only
whereof to live. In sum, even he that thinks death simply to be the end
of man, ought not to fear it: in as much as who desires to live long, desires
to dye longer: and who fears soon to dye, fears (to speak properly) least
he may not longer dye.

But unto us, brought up in a more holy school, death is a far other thing:
neither need we, as the Pagans, of consolations against death: but that death
serve us as a consolation against all sorts of affliction: so that we must not
only strengthen our selves, as they, not to fear it, but accustom our selves
to hope for it. For unto us it is not a departing from pain and evil, but an
access unto all good: not the end of life, but the end of death, and the
beginning of life. Better, says Solomon, is the day of death, then the day of
birth: and why? because it is not to us a last day, but the dawning of an
everlasting day. No more shall we have, in that glorious light, either sorrow
for the past, or expectation of the future: for all shall be there present unto
us, and that present shall never more pass. No more shall we power out our
selves in vain and painful pleasures: for we shall be filled with true, and
substantial pleasures. No more shall we pain our selves in heaping together
these exhalatio^s of the earth; for the heavens shall be ours: and this mass
of earth, which ever draws us toward the earth, shall be buried in the
earth. No more shall we ouerwearie our selves with mounting from degree to
degree, and from honor to honor: for we shall highly be raised above all
heights of the world; and, from on high, laugh at the folly of all those we
once admired, who fight together for a point, and as little children for less
then an apple. No more (to be brief) shall we have co^bats in our selves: for
our flesh shall be dead, and our spirit in full life: our passion buried, and
our reason in perfect liberty. Our soul, delivered out of this foul and
filthy prison, (where, by long continuing, it is grown into an habit of
crookedness) shall again draw her own breath, recognize her ancient
dwelling, and again remember her former glory and dignity. This flesh (my
friend) which thou feel, this body which thou touchest, is not man. Man is
from heaven: heaven is his country and his air. That he is in his body, is
but by way of exile and confinement. Man indeed is soul and spirit: Man is
rather of celestial and divine quality, wherein is nothing gross nor
material. This body, such as now it is, is but the bark and shell of the
soul: which must necessarily be broken, if we will be hatched: if we will
indeed live and see the light. We have, it seems, some life, and some sense
in us: but are so crooked and contracted, that we cannot so much as stretch
out our wings, much less take our flight toward heaven, until we be
disburthened of this earthly burden. We look, but through false spectacles:
we have eyes, but over grown with pearls: we think we see, but it is in a
dream, wherein we see nothing but deceit. All that we have, and all that we
know, is but abuse and vanity. Death only can restore us both life and
light: and we think (so blockish we are) that she comes to rob us of the^.

We say we are Christians: that we believe, after this mortal, a life
immortal: that death is but a separation of the body and soul: and that the
soul returns to her happy abode, there to joy in God, who only is all good:
that at the last day it shall again take the body, which shall no more be
subject to corruption. With these goodly discourses we fill all our books:
and in the mean while, when it comes to the point, the very name of death as
the horriblest thing in the World makes us quake and tremble. If we believe as
we speak, what is that we fear? to be happy? to be at our ease? to be
more content in a moment, the^ we might be in the longest mortal life that
might be? or must not we of force confess, that we believe it but in part?
that all we have is but words? that all our discourses, as of these hardy
trencher-knights, are but vaunting and vanity? Some you shall see, that will
say: I know well that I pass out of this life into a better; I make no doubt
of it: only I fear the midway step, that I am to step over. Weak hearted
creatures! they will kill themselves, to get their miserable living: suffer
infinite pains, and infinite wounds at another man's pleasure: pass infinite
deaths without dying, for things of naught, for things that perish, and
perchance make them perish with them. But when they have but one pase to pass
to be at rest, not for a day, but for ever; not an indifferent rest, but such
as man's mind cannot comprehend: they tremble, their hearts fail them, they are
affraide: and yet the ground of their harm is nothing but fear. Let them
never tell me, they apprehend the pain: it is but an abuse; a purpose to
conceal the little faith they have.

No, no, they would rather languish of the gowte, the sciatica, any disease
whatsoever: then die one sweet death with the least pain possible: rather
pyningly dye limme after limme, out-liuinge as it were, all their senses,
motions, and actions, then speedily dye, immediately to live for ever. Let them
tell me no more that they would in this world learn to live: for every one
is thereunto sufficiently instructed in himself, and not one but is cunning in
the trade.

Nay rather they should learn in this World to dye; and once to dye well, dye
daily in themselves: so prepared, as if the end of every days work, were the
end of our life. Now contrariwise there is nothing to their ears more
offensive then to hear of death. Senseless people! we abandon our life to
the ordinary hazardes of war, for seven frankes pay: are foremost in an
assault, for a little booty: go into places whence there is no hope of
returning, with danger many times both of bodies and souls. But to free us
from all hazards, to win things inestimable, to enter an eternal life, we
faint in the passage of one pase, wherein is no difficulty, but in opinion:
yea, we so faint, that were it not of force we must pass, and that God in
despite of us will do us a good turn, hardly should we find in all the
World one, how unhappy or wretched soever, that would ever pass.

Another will say, had I lived till fifty or sixty years, I should have
been contented, I should not have cared to live longer: but to dye so young is
no reason. I should have known the world before I had left it. Simple soul!
in this world there is neither young nor old.

The longest age in comparison of all* that is past, or all that is to come, is
nothing: and when thou have lived to the age thou now desire, all the past
will be nothing: thou will still gape for that is to come. The past will
yield thee but sorrow, the future but expectation, the present noe
contentment. As ready thou will then be to redemaund longer respite, as
before. Thou fliest thy creditour from month to month, and time to time, as
ready to pay the last day, as the first: thou seek but to be acquitted.

Thou have tasted all which the world esteems pleasures: not one of them is
new unto thee. By drinking oftener, thou shall be never a white the more
satisfied: for the body thou cariest, like the bored paile of Danaus daughters,
will never be full. Thou may sooner wear it out, then weary thy self with
using or rather abusing it.

Thou crauest long life to cast it away, to spend it on worthless delights,
to misspend it on vanities. Thou art covetous in desiring, and prodigal in
spending* Say not thou find fault with the Court, or the Palace: but that
thou desire longer to serve the Common wealth, to serve thy Country, to
serve GOD. He that set thee on work knows until what day, and what hour,
thou should be at it: he well knows how to direct his work. Should he
leave thee there longer, perchance thou would mar all. But if he will pay
thee liberally for thy labor, as much for half a days work, as for a whole:
as much for having wrought till noone, as for having borne all the heat of the
day: art thou not so much the more to thank and praise him? but if thou
examine thine own conscience, thou lamentest not the cause of the widow, and
the orphane, which thou have left depending in judgment: not the duty of a
son, of a father, or of a friend, which thou pretendest thou would
perform: not the embassage for the Common wealth, which thou were even ready
to undertake: not the service thou desire to do unto God, who knows much
better how to serve himself of thee, then thou of thy self.

It is thy houses and gardens thou lamentest, thy imperfect plots and purposes,
thy life (as thou think) imperfecte: which by noe days, nor years, nor
ages, might be perfected: and yet thy self might perfect in a moment,
could thou but think in good earnest that where it end it skils not, so
that it end well.

Now to end well this life, is only to end it willingly: followinge with full
consent the will and direction of God, and not suffering us to be drawn by
the necessity of destiny.

To end it willingly, we must hope, and not fear death. To hope for it, we
must certainly look, after this life, for a better life. To look for that,
we must fear God: whom whosoever well fears, fears indeed nothing in this
world, and hopes for all things in the other. To one well resolved in these
points, death can be but sweet and agreeable: knowing, that through it he
is to enter into a place of all joys,

The grief that may be therein shall be allaied with sweetness: the
sufferaunce of ill, swallowed in the confidence of good: the sting of Death it
self shall be dead, which is nothing else but Fear. Nay, I will say more,
not only all the euilles conceived in death shall be to him nothing: but he
shall even scorn alll the mishappes men redoubt in this life, and laugh at all
these terrors.

For I pray what can he fear, whose death is his hope? Think we to banish
him his country? He knows he has a Country otherwhere, whence we cannot
banish him: and that all these countries are but Innes, out of which he must
part at the will of his host.

To put him in prison? a more strait prison he cannot have, then his own
body, more filthy, more dark, more full of rackes and torments.

To kill him and take him out of the world? that's it he hopes for: that is it
with all his heart he aspires unto. By fire, by sword, by famine, by
sickness? within three years, within three days, within three hours, all
is one to him: all is one at what gate, or at what time he pass out of this
miserable life. For his businesses are ever ended, his affairs all dispatched;
and by what way he shall go out, by the same he shall enter into a most happy
and everlasting life.

Men can threaten him but death, and death is all he promises himself: the
worst they can do, is, to make him dye, and that is the best he hopes for.
The threatninges of tyrants are to him promises, the swords of his greatest
enemies drawn in his favor: for as much as he knows that threatening him
death, they threaten him life: and the most mortal wounds can make him but
immortal: Who fears God, fears not death: and who fears it not, fears not
the worst of this life.

By this reckening, you will tell me, death is a thing to be wished for: and
to pass from so much evil, to so much good, a man should (it seems) cast
away his life. Surely, I fear not, that for any good we expect, we will
hasten one step the faster: though the spirit aspire, the body (it draws
with it) withdrawes it ever sufficiently toward the earth. Yet is it not that
I conclude. We must seek to mortify our flesh in us, and to cast the World
out of us: but to cast our selves out of the world is in no sort permitted us.
The Christian ought willingly to depart out of this life, but not cowardly to
run away. The Christian is ordained by GOD to fight therein: and cannot leave
his place without incurring reproach and infamy. But if it please the graund
Captain to recall him, let him take the retrait in good part, and with good
will obey it. For he is not borne for himself, but for God: of whom he
holds his life at farm, as his tenant at will, to yield him the profits. It
is in the Landlord to take it from him, not in him to surrender it, when a
conceit takes him. Die thou young? praise God, as the Mariner* that has had
a good wind, soon to bring him to the Port. Dyest thou Old? praise him
likewise: for if thou have had less wind, it may be thou have also had less
waves. But think not at thy pleasure to go faster or softer: for the wind is
not in thy power; and in stead of taking the shortest way to the Haven, thou
may happily suffer shipwreck. God calls home from his work, one in the
morning, another at noone, and another at night. One he exercises till the
first sweat, another he sunne-burneth, another he roasteth and dries
thoroughly. But of all his he leaves all to rest, and gives them al their hire,
every one in his time. Who leaves his work before God call him, loses it:
and who importunes him before the time, loses his reward. We must rest us in
his will, who in the midst of our troubles sets us at rest.

To end, we ought neither to hate this life for the toils therein; for it is
sloth and cowardice: nor love it for the delights; which is folly and vanity:
but serve us of it, to serve God in it, who after it shall place us in true
quietness, and replenish us with pleasures which shall never more perish.
Neither ought we to fly death; for it is childish to fear it: and in flying
from it, we meet it. Much less to seek it, for that is temeritie: nor
every one that would die, can die. As much despair in the one, as cowardice
in the other: in neither any kind of magnanimity. It is enough that we
constantly and continually wait for her coming, that she may neiuer find us
unprovided. For as there is nothing more certain then death, so is there
nothing more uncertain then the hour of death, known only, o God, the only
Author of life and death, to whom we all ought endeavor both to live and die.

Dye to live: Live to Dye.
The 13. of May, 1590. AT WILTON.

