PHILIP MORNAY, Lord of Plessis his Tears.

For the death of his Son.

Unto his Wife CHARLOTTE BALISTE.

Englished By JOHN HEALEY.

AT LONDON Printed by G. Eld, dwelling in Fleetelane, at the sign of the
Printers Press. 1609.

To my most honored and constant friend, Master JOHN COVENTRY.
MOrality (worthy Sir) gives us this instruction, that Fortitude is more
apparent in sustaining then in performing: and Divinity assures us that he
that endures Gods trials with a pacient humility, and an humble patience,
shall thereby ascend a state most glorious. How much it behooves both your
self and me, to apply this Cataplasme to our own present estates, it is best
known to us both, who have thus long sailed in a deep, dark sea of
misfortunes: but as the divine light shone unto Sire du Plessis in his deepest
night of sorrows, and showed him the way to his wished rest, so let us light
our Torches at his, and out of these his tears for the death of his only
son, extract a Quintessenc^ for the cure of all our own calamities. To this
end, have I presented them to you, perhaps in a form vnfiled, yet no such (I
am sure) as will return from you, vnaccepted. The discourse of it self is a
general Amulet, and being truly worn, resists all the infections of
fortune. Take it then, and wear it, God may lend you sons, and take them
away again at his unchangeable pleasure; Keep this Enchiridio^ therefore at
your elbowe, upon all such occasions: wherein you shall find desciphered both
the passions of a loving parent, and that restraint of them, that befitteth a
religious Christian.

Prenez en gre. Yours entirely: IO: HEALEY.

Phillip Mornay, Lord of Plessis his Tears: to his wife CHARLOTTE BALLISTE.
Dear wife, seeing that in this abundant sorrow, we can have no solace but
from the sorrow it self, nor any ease for this deep wound, but what must be
fetched from the wou^d, let us make much of it: stop it too soon, it spoils
us: stay it too long, it kills us. I do not therefore exhort you to exclude
lamentation: far be that want of feeling from us; let us ever want this want
of true affect. Should you become obdurate, flinty, free from sense of sorrow?
oh no: Gods corrections never propound us this condition: the Lords punishments
are to far other purpose: No, let us be moved, let us be melted. And my
desire is that we acquaint our selves fully with this accidental (not
eternal) affliction: let us afford this corrosiue ulcer somewhat to feed upon
easily, least it feed upon our own bosoms too fiercely: let us tame this
untamed accident, and take it into our essence: let us make it a part of that
substance which it has already wholly transformed: it is now become one of our
essential parts, no more a passion, no more an imperfection. Here then are
our tears for thee to use, if it be inflamed, to cool it; if it be
ranckled, to supple it: put it from us, nay shake it off us we cannot, and
wicked were we truly if we could; we are deprived of a son, (dear wife)
an only son: and ah how good a son! our God the true comforter, be our
comfort: he that has caused our sorrows, conclude them: be he our cure,
that has procured our hurt: only comforter, only Chirurgian. But stay: he
has spared our son, that s^ared not his own only begotten for us: he has
acquitted him from this world, and admitted him into a better: timely, in
respect of his own age, and no more but timely in respect of the ages of most
besides him: freeing him from the conditions, nay the corruptions of this age,
maugre all the vainely-banded vows of all such as wished his presence, and wept
for his departure.

PHILIP MORNAY, PHILIPS Son, making an enterprise under the Grave Maurice,
upon the City of Geldre, having broken open the first and second gate, and
bending all his power and endeavor against the last, with a Musket Shot was
struck through the breast, and fell; leaving behind him the reward of his
virtues, included in the worlds general lamentation for him, as he had
possessed it with honorable hopes of him.

He was borne at Antwerp in his fathers Embassage: 1579. the 20. day of Iulie:
and was made immortal, 1605* the 23. of October.

Nature has wept out the tears she had: Now let reason; and piety weep
their parts, for they have their springs of sorrow as well as the other:
though not so fluent, not so abundant; yet more pure, more excellent, more
eternal. When Nature has drained the source of her tears dry, then come
these two, and supply sorrows current.

What, shall I then speak out my woes, or shall I entombe them in silence? I
had but one one only son, perhaps I shall never have more. This son, our
God bestowed bountifully upon our vows: and this same son (our God) our
vows returned dutifully unto thee, and that instantly after. He was but now
borne, thou had but now given him us, when we gave him back again to thee:
he but now saw the world, when the world saw him thine in his education, and
our dedication. Grace her self was the gracewoman, the Midwife that received
him from his Mother, gave him Milk, and attended his first hour of birthe: so
did Piety his infancy, Learning his childhood, Virtue his youth, Honesty his
fuller growth and firmer age. And yet so kind was this contention of the
corporal and mental virtues, being all enranged and enrooted in him, that
neither did his strength make him decline unto pride, his good shape to
looseness, his learning to vanity, his valor to cruelty, or his love of
uprightness unto any sowrenesse of manners: his towardness so happily
prevented his education, his fruit stepped in before his flower, and true
gravity took place in his heart, ere any little down had spread it self on
his face. So graciously were these contraries gathered together, each one to
bestow the proper grace, without endamaging the residue. And already now began
he to be styled the Stay of his Parents, the Star of his country, that I
(feign fool) was a saying. My root is spread out by the waters, and the dew
shall lie upon my branch. My glory shall renew toward me, and my bow shall be
restored to my hand. In him I am renewed, in him I am reniued, that was
otherwise half dead, and more then half dust. But behold! thou breathed'st
but upon him, and as y^ down of a flower he flew away in fleeces. Job. 14. 3.
and 15. 33
He shot forth as a flower, and is cut down: thou have taken him away, as the
unripe grape: thou have cast him off, as the Olive does her flower.

Here, is the heart strings of comfort, all cut! here (LORD) how can I speak
enough, though I were all tongue! how can my stupid silence be sufficient,
were I all flint? Thy Jonas, Lord, for who^ thou preparedst a goord, in the
shadow whereof his faint sadness might be refreshed, as soon as the touch of the
worm turned the verdure into canker, and the beams of the Sun beat upon his
head, his courage, at an instant, converted into faintness, Jonah. 4. 8.
It is better for me (says he) to die then to live. Thus this great Prophet
grew in passion against thee for showing thy power upon his poor shelter, upon
that little shade he sat in: what then shall poor I say to one so potent? I,
that am sodden in sorrow, and yet my boiling brought to no end! exposed to the
sons fiery rigor, never to be removed, never to be refreshed! Oh my LORD!
I feel a rebellious battle within me! keep down my tongue, let it loose to
no language, but those sounds of the Psalmist: I am dumb; and do not open my
mouth, because thou have done it. Psalm. 39. 10
But thou Lord, lay thine hand upon my mouth, that my redoubling dolor burst
not out into outrageous murmr; and I being a fool my self, charge GOD with
foolishness. Job. 1. 22.


My son, when as yet his childhood swayed his estate in nature, bent his
full endeavor to the attaining perfection in the principal tongues, and all
honest and honorable disciplines: he never wanted instigation, but rather
inhibition, his forwardness was so toward, and his towardness so forward: and
still as his growth enabled him, so he enured himself to all illustrious
exercises, sharing his time between the splendour and light of learning, and
the thunder and lightning of war: that Mars did seem to grudge that Minerua
had so great a part in his perfections. His youth saw him a traueler in most
countries Christian, extracting what ever made for virtue, where ever he found
it, and expelling vicious affect far from him, where ever he met it.

The industry, and ornament of each peculiar, was in his observation (as in a
storehouse) carefully reposed for practice: the defects and exorbitance of
each, observed also, but without the slightest acquaintance and with the
carefullest auoydance of their least touch, or tainte.

But now, growing to one degree rearer ye full man, and beholding France her
pacification with a mind not minding peace, resolving to set forth his virtue
upon ye quest of Honor, away he departs to Holland, (ye worlds Theater or the
sepulcher whether?) to give his valor action under Prince Maurice, the
Fortrazer of this our age, and there duly performs all the duties of a
future captain, and a present-hearted souldior. For having had command in
diverse services under the unconquered King of France, by his especial
appointment, he was firmly resolved to write in wounds upon his enemies
bodies, that he was worthy of that enstalment from so worthy an advocate. Many
held his resolution too hot, and heady, but that he would have left, had he
lived: the tempera^e affects that attend upon the years of maturity would have
allaied his youthful feruor, had he surniued to have seen maturty. Mean
while, all these illustrious instruments of industrious verture, stored he
together, for ye glory of his God, the service of his King* the benefit of his
country, and the defense of honesty, in every son of hirs: they were also
prepared by piety, so seasoned by equity, and so preserved by charity: it was
admirable to see Zeal have so fair an harbor in such a youthful and fiery
spirit: and Piety to stand* supported with divine studies, higher by the head
and shoulders the^ al ye other (though high and honorable virtues. Here again
began I to set up my rest, and trust upon him, as on a stay to my feet and a
staff to mine age: O my Lord (said I) Thou of thy loving kindness have made
my mountain to stand strong: Ps. 30. 7.
thou (Lord) art the shadow on my right hand. Ps. ^ 21. 5.
But ah! behold: the thing I feared, is fallen vponmee: the thing I was afraid
of, Job. ^. 25.
is befallen me.

Here is a sad breach of natures order, for the father to prepare the funeral
of the Son: for the father to be the sons suruiuer. Job. 7. 10
All the thoughts of my heart are now turned into confusion. All my affairs in
my house, in my heart, all quite confounded: utterly out of frame! Go then and
guird thy self with sackcloth (wretched man) wallovv thy self in ashes,
^erem. 6 27
make lamentation and bitter mourning. Why, let me go meet with death also,
what delight is there in delay? I, I, that have out-liued so many sorrows, so
many perils, nay now the loss of mine own bowels, and nerves, and yet live
to record the cutting of mine own heart-stringes, nay my heart it self? Thou
hadest a King (LORD) and Israel had a light, who when he heard of the death
of his Son, albeit he was a rebel and would have been a parricide, yet
burst out in a full presence, 2 Samuel 18
and cried: O Absalon my son, would God I had died for thee: 2 Samuel 18
O Absalon my son. Thus turned he the safety of his people into tears and
mourning, and shamed the faces of all his servants, being so loath to leave
the dust he laid in, that Ioab was feign to threaten him with the sedition and
departure of the people from him. What then shall I do? ah what shall I not do?
having lost an only son, a companion, a kinsman, a brother the^! whom,
(choose which of these you can) never man had a better! what life is worth
love, nay what death is not worth life to me in this helpless extremity!

Oh but, my soul, my soul, return a little unto thy rest: man's ways, nor
his life thou know are in his hand: In the Lords hand is the breath of every
living thing and the soul of all mankind. Job. 12. 10.
And GOD cutteth of the days of man: Job. 14. 16.
for in his hand is in the number of his months: Job. 24. 12
which none either preuenteth, or surpasses, and yet does not GOD decree any
thing with folly.

Therefore say rather to thy self and be not sorry for saying so.

I am dumb, Psa. 39. 1.
and do not open my mouth, because thou have done it.

But thou (LORD) keep a bridle within my mouth, be sure (Lord) that thou see,
that my lips be not let loose to impute injustice unto thee: oh no but let the^
ever oppose iniquity, and attribute righteousness unto my maker.

Ah! but (my gracious Lord) I am full of (dolorous) matter: my spirit swells
within me, and compells me! Behold, my belly is as the wine that has no vent:
and wanting vent, resembles the embotteled air that breaks through all that
binds it in.

Therefore I will speak (I think it be best) that I may take some breath,
against this abundant excess of sorrow. Thou know (LORD of all mine, and
all others life) what I aimed at, in my Son, my scope in him was not excluded
from thy supereminent understanding. Had I any thought, any intent but to
employ his luster wholly to the illustration of thy glory, the Churches good
increase, and his Kings and countries grace? no, no, I consecrated his years
in their fullest maturity, his understanding, in the greatest perfection, wholly
and soly to those sacred employments. At that, all my vows leuelled; unto
that, all my prayers tended; with that, all mine instructions concluded; and in
y^, all mine endeavors were bounded: that, ah! nothing but that, was the center
from which all my cogitations were drawn, and the circle to which they tended.
But it was thy pleasure (Lord) in the mean space, to make me the point, the
mark, where-at thou would shoot, so that I am now become mine own burden.
Nay thou have shot me through, and that through the sides of mine only son:
striking Father and child stark dead both at one stroke. Alas, thou Lord of
mine, are thine ears become deaf? is thine heart grown obdurate also: is
that that eternal, neuer-dried fountain of thy free mercy, frozen with cold,
or dried with heat, when I come to drink, and unto none but me? It is true*
Lord that If I should dispute with thee, Job. 9. 3. and 12.
I should not answer thee to one thing in a thousand! Thou art wise in heart,
and mighty in strength: When thou take a prey, who can enforce thee to
restore it? who shall say unto thee, why did thou thus? I, but I do not
stick in the courts of thy power Lord, I press in, unto thy very sanctuary,
and look all about me, upon thine exceeding power, commixt and contemperate
with thine unmeasured goodness, and thine inscrutable wisdom. Psalm. 73,
Thou Lord art righte^us in all thy ways, and mercifully) holy in all thy
works: Psalm. 145. 17,
Nay, thy mercy is above all thy works. Therefore are thy judgments deep, and
thy mercies a boundles, a soundlesse depth: thou give these, as Cauterismes
in Physic, not as hurtes in hostility. We thought thou had not heard our
vows, and see thou have heard them truer then we were aware of: our words it
may be thou refusedst, but our intents thou have admitted: and signed both our
desires with a better condition to us both: to our son thou have done better,
in taking back as thy just due, him that thou had but lent unto us during
thine Almighty pleasure, and seating him in Heaven, whom thou had but shown
(and scarcely that) unto the Earth: to us thou have done better, in taking him
out of the dangers of the worlds devouring whirle-pittes, wherein perhaps we
might (unto our more excess of sorrow) have seen him swallowed, and have swum
after that Funeral in a Sea of more bitter tears.

Once again, here Lord, seal up my lips: once more, here bind mine organs
of speech: for the flesh rebels, and compels me, nor see I means to bridle it,
it is grown so headstrong, and so impatient of suppression. It bids me say,
why tookest thou him away ere his time? thou inexorable creditor that would
not stay thy day, but catch him up ere his fate was ready to call him.

True, thou frail flesh and blood: why was it not his time to take him, that
was Times Creator? and what is fate, but the will of GOD the Father? And what
better limite has life in any of us all, then the rest from all our labor?
And what matter is it whether the ship of our mortality be brought to the
haven by a stern tempest, or a gentle gale? by wind, or by tide? had not he
that from all eternitye predestined the moment of his birthe, the same power
to decree the hour of his death by? If thou have any reason to complain that
thou lost him so soon, the same cause have thou to expostulate why thou had
him no sooner, or no later, but even then when he was given thee: and do
thou think he has not lived long enough, whose life his country extolleth,
and whose funeral song the purest Christ of God sings?

This, as virtues desired reward, have many worthy men bestowed much toil to
attain, hardly deserving it in their declining age, and their frostiest part
of nature, which he got signed him, ere he got out of his youth, ere his
age was at the Summer Solstice: namely his wish, and want, in the hearts of al
such as honor goodness?

Therefore thou talkest like a foolish Woman: go and learn better language of
the wise: Wis. 4. 10.
It is not length of time, but wisdom, a life well lead, a course well run
in the Lord, come we never so soon to the stake, that is the true gravity.

The sanctified man, dye he never so soon, Psalm. 116. 15.
has had a long time: Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of such
as he holds dear: and that for ever.

But thou have no measure, thou frail corruption, thou art in my bosom again
with an other frivolous objection. He was all, all the sons I had, and now;
I have neith^r son nor daughter amongst my people: Job. 18. 19.
nor any posterity in my dwellings. No, GOD knows not I: and in the mean
while, the imaginers of mischief, such as like Moles, dig groueling in
sin, until they have cast up a mount of hateful enormitie against Heaven,
Their seed is established before them, Job. 21. 8.
and their generation stands strong in their sight. It does: O but stand, stand
a little, and cast an eye about. Now tell me how many great Princes and
Potentates thou see to sit debarred from the fruit of progeny, and the
fruition of children, in so much y^ the whole world seems to stagger for want
of stays from their loins, and to endeavor to make them fruitful by bathing
their barrenness in fullness of tears. And what have thou foregone that thou
should so grieve at? a model of virtue, whom all men respected more then
he in whom it was resident: a pattern of honorable honesty, forcing praise
from others, and following nature in himself: Ah fix thy fickle heart and
give the Deity his due praise! How often are the branches of the wicked,
shiuered in sunder with the wind. Nay let us grant them (that which God
seldom grants,) their full growth: the fruit they bring, is unprofitable,
not relishing any taste, nor befitting any use. But call thy thoughts home to
thine own issue: why in him, his sweetness of fruit thrust his sweet
blossom from the stalk, his unparalleled virtue pressed out the delicious
juice of his sweet fruit, and left it to be casked up by all succeeding
posterity. And now the tents of the godly are perfumed with his rare, and
redolent fragrancie: his heat, nay and that in the height, his ardor, arms,
and animates them all to emulation of virtue. Time ranked many with him in
respect of age, and gave his fore-lock into diverse hands as soon as his, yet
were there not any of his time that knit that lock into so many knots of virtue
as he did: what can thou grumble further at? yet me thinks thou art not
satisfied: oh thou would feign have had him, as thou thoughtst thou had
begotten him, to been the heir of thine intents, to have been enfcoffed in
thy determinations, and have suruiued to have inherited thine honest and goldy
endeuoures.

I pray thee now look after him once for me, that have longed so for him in
thy self. Now, blind man, has he not discerned his heritage himself, and is
he not now seized of that real inheritance where thou would share with him
with all thine heart? has he not left thee, his country, and the church
possessed with as plentiful and as pleasant fruit, as such a green stock as
his could possibly bring to perfection? yes: and GOD himself has laid it up
in his Granary: and that I think makes thee most melancholy, because thou
think that God has lost the more absolute use that thy sons farther
years might have affoorded him.

Go to, keep thy self content, and let Gods losses lie upon his own hand:
it is in his power out of this heap of stones, to raise himself servants, the
country soldiers, and the Church supporters: cannot he fill the heavens with
legions of Saints, the earth with hoasts of Protectors, and his Church with
millions of assistants, but he must be feign to take a corruptible man's
direction, and stand drawing out the life of this man or that, longer then his
eternity likes? ah far be it from true sense to be so beesotted.

Why so then, I am satisfied: give me leave, I will now take the bitte out of
my mouth my self, and plead the cause of the all-sufficient Creator, even
against mine own soul. Why do thou not see then (dear wife) how all the
world like a Bowl, is ouer-swayed by the over strong byas of iniquity, and
bends (despite all opposition,) to black corruption? oh how seculent, how
pestilent a vapor of sin draws every man in with the first breath he
takes, attracting vices as innumerable as Attomes, even in his first moment of
respiration: and the longer he lives to draw his breath, the surer foote-hold
he gives viciousness in his foul bosom, and settleth the contagion in his
soul: which the devil is sure of, though he be senseless of: Satan has a
beadroll of those impious, and daily increasing inhabitants, though the poor
Landlord takes no note of their entry to possession, nor receives any rent
of them but ruin: happy he (too few so happy!) that can bring his action
against them before GODS bench, or in that celestial star chamber, and
remove them from possession by a bill of repentance: but few such suites go
forward: the world comes with one bribe, and the flesh with another: and either
too easily (GOD knows) can persuade the poor plaintiff to let his action
fall: for this flesh, let the soul, let the spirit come never so fresh, never
so zealous, never so hot in that zeal from the hand of God, it will find one
angle or other in, wherein it may sow the seed of sin, and plant a too
fruitful infection. And when the soul is once dipped in worldly delights,
what should deliver it from being drowned therein? What hold has any one that
is once over the shoes in iniquity, upon any thing that may save him from
slipping in over the shoulders? and what privilege had the court of heaven
granted our son more then another? had he a lease of his souls life letten
him? none.

And we see, (and might learn by sight of it) that virtue when it is exalted,
and eleuate, if it begin once to draw damnation in, it becomes graduate in
the most extreme degree of viciousness. Yes. yes, when goodness once misseth
the true tract, and lights into the broad way of black destruction, it will
hardlye hear of any reclaim, but makes the more speed to mischief, and
runs headlong to evident ruin.

So then, was it not better for our son to have taken pay for a little space
in the Camp of Virtue, then to have been enranked as an old attendant in the
Court of vice? and had he not better have been exposed to an hours sharp
toil, then to a years subtle temptation? Think but of him as he was indeed.
A youth of an egregious alacritye, a penetrating spirit, and an unbounded aim.
His vigorous virtue would enter upon any enterprise, and generally the effect
would answer his endeavor: his valor found no obstacle so obstinate but it
would through it, and bring glory through it again? breaking the squadrons of
the most sollid oppositions, and mounting his honor upon the rubbish of their
ruined forces.

Now being such an one (and such he was indeed!) his heart lay open to all
the assaults of affect, of glory: desire of renown (you know) might soon have
put him out of the pace that virtue had taught him: ambition is a great fowler,
and of exceeding cunning in her baytes: why might not he have start out, and
have slipped into one of her sprindges? might not that (holy) hunger after honor
have turned his wrong side outward and have led him clear out of the sight of
sobriety in affection? yes, and this hunger is most commonly an utter enemy to
the temperate diet of virtue, and cannot endure to eat any thing that
moderation provides.

Besides, lofty spirits (if they be really eleuate) can never brook the
horrible decay of honorable worth in these declining times, and this Sunne-set
of the world, but will sometimes fly out, and advance their spirit in his full
freedom against these ages neglect of the deserving worthy, and then comes
port and power, together with their appendants or hangbies, and treades out
the light of their most glorious luster: Ah this is too true, and thus might
our son have been lost, had he lived any longer.

But indeed true sorrow will always build upon false grounds to augment it
self, if it be not taken up in time, and if it once get head, it will
have a reason to show for any unreasonable passion that it shall entertain.
In truth it is true.

For he that greeueth unfeignedly, greeueth also that any one should hold his
griefs cause not sufficient to procure a greater affect of sorrow then he
endures. But tell me now I pray thee (loving wife) would thou not have lost
thy son? no, would thou not have had him transported from this ruined state
that earth stands in, unto that excellence of eeternity that heaven
affords? yes. Why, now then, seeing that thou see he has prevented thine
expectation, and is gotten up thither long before thou thoughtst he should,
why have not thou reason to say with the wise man: Wis. 4. 10. 11.
He pleased God, and was beloved of him, so that where as he lived amongst
sinners, he translated him: This was Henock (wife) a man that was full of the
fear of God. And he was taken away least wickedness should alter his
understanding, and least deceit should have beguiled his mind. And thus, and
no otherwise but thus, has our glorious GOD taken away our Son, like a good
Father, who seeing his Son placed in the broadest beeach of perverseness,
takes him out of danger in time, least he should be drawn into too evident
danger, and be struck down by one shot or other from the assaylant enemy:
The deluge of wickedness, has almost covered the highest mountain of
Godliness, and good manners; and therefore blessed be God that has set our
son in a place of so blessed security.

The sons of men grow more and more peremptory against the prescriptions of
the highest, the monuments of goodness are so weather-beaten, that iniquity
and antiquity has almost left no character thereof undefaced: the rust of
irreligiousnes has eaten into the most steely tempers of our age: and had our
son (think thou) any especial protection promised him? no, effect in others
confirms this to us. Wipe away those tears once more that gush out in such
abou^dance (seeming as if he were not dead already, to drown him in his
grave:) and consider but this: How inumerable and almost inevitable trapfalls
are set in the tract of virtue, in all her walks? Here you shall have one that
will kiss the visar of virtue: but show them her true face, and you turn all
their kisses unto curses.

You shall have other some that while she is underfoot, will lend her a hand
to help her up: but when she is up and has gotten wing, and mounteth, then
they either suspect her themselves, or buzze suspicions of her into the heads
of others.

Affording her all their diligent culture while she is a springing, but
growing once aloft, they make haie of her ere she come to her hight, and rend
her up by the roots.

And then there is that pestilence reigning ever amongst men of equallity, in
what rank soever, I mean Envye: and her nature, and consequently her practice
is ever to persecute that good which she cannot parallel. That hight which she
cannot mount unto, she presently undermines, setting all her Pioners,
cauillation, detraction, and derision on work upon the ruin of that glory
which she cannot reach: it is her food to be felt heavy upon the highest
fortunes. And this is the source of all the grudges, malice, and altercations
that have been the pestilence which has swept such multituds from the bosom
of our mother France: this malice, oh this madness of the Nobility, that (for
ought I can see) are now but bastards to their ancestors valor: these
adulterous births, have obscured the rising glory of France, with the mystes
arising from the bleeding bodies that have fallen in this fatal war: wherein
with thoughts more bloody piercing then their arms, Religion, and all respect
of goodness being thrust ou^ of the true place, the brother ran headlong
upon his brother, as upon his fiercest enemy.

And look now; our son is acquit from having any hand in these desperate
hacksters actions, and sittes aloft, looking down, and laughing at this little
lump of earth, (so ouergrowne with Spuma Cerberi, and the weeds of the Devils
harvest) which he has left beneath him.

But what comfort can thou have of this, or I, that share with thee in this
sorrow if we stand shaking our hands, or arming our hearts against GOD, who is
the only consolation in the extremest agony, and anguish of heart? Are not
we of them that have received the seal of the Lion of Judah? are we not
Christians? Down, down, perturbed spirit! thou abortiue of misery.

Why? but God might have shielded him from all these encounters of vicious
extremes. You need not tell me that: I know he might: but had he not made
him a frail mortal? nay, and had he not appointed him a place in wars, and
instilled a Military vigor into him? Being every day between the chaps of
death, why might he not be caught at length? is it possible to stand in a
shower of hailstones, and have not one to touch him?

GOD had made him valorous: the likelier to be ouerha^dy in daring of death,
and so ouer-taken in his too much heat, and too little dread. God had made him
with an heart that put forth his rigor in all the endeuoures of masculine
virtue:

Alas, what was he in this, but a fair shotte-marke for foul Envy? a rock
for the untaught billows of injurious suspect to beat against, and perhaps
(though breaking many of themselves first) at length to shake down into ruin?

Did thou look to have him miraculously lifted up from his seat in this sea
of deprauation? What warrant has GOD given the for that? what bargain had
Fate made with thee, or me, including any such condition?

How much more com fort should we find, and how much more easily should we
settle the rebellious affects that keep this coil in our bosoms, if we
would step a little out of this wildness of conceit, and suffer our
imaginations to be guided unto Truth by the set order of nature, by man's
frail estate in this order, and by the real cause of this frayltie of state?

Death ending man in this order, time bringing him on to death, and original
sin (the due deseruer of death) bringing man forth to his first moment of
time? Such considerations as these, were far more fit for us, then to cast
off our thoughts at randon, to suffer them fly beyond the pitche of our
obedience to our maker.

And now tell me true ( consideratis considerandis) and all accounts being
cast, is not our sorrow exceedingly lightened, to see our beloved son
delivered from those complete armed Battailions of deadly dangers, that
environed him on every side? Tell me now thou vile and mis-beleeuing flesh,
have thou not now reason to turn over a new leaf, and to say with that holy
singer: I acknowledge O Lord, that thy judgments are just: and that thou have
afflicted me, for my faith: for trial of my faith. God is (ever) good unto
Israel, and pure in heart.

He is so, and when his wrath seems to threaten us in most terrible thunder,
then reigns he his mercy upon us in a most mellifluous dew. I will therefore
turn me, (I will leave all and turn me) to my GOD, and on him will I build
my confidence.

And now shall my mouth be shut no more: but I will turn it into a Trumpet,
in the cause and quarrel of the Almighty: This will I resound, and of this
shall all the world return an Echo, Thou have done it O Lord, and well have
thou done it.

Well have thou done it: for thou can do nothing but well: being thy self
the never dried Well of goodness. Unto the good, nothing befalls but good:
come it in never so horred a shape of mischief; in a form never so fearful.

Well have thou done unto our son, in taking him out of the perilous
conflicts where-into he had now set foot (and that was all, if he had done
that) and bestowing his freedom gratis upon him nay and besides, crowned him
with a Garland of such glory. Had he lived longer, he might have run astray
the more, the larger weight of worldly experience might have bent him
downwards, and have fixed his affections upon fading glories. For there was
Solomon, whose eminence of wisdom is by the divinity of wisdom it self
eternized unto all after ages, as also his fall is, being the more amazefull
unto all posterity, by reason that is was from such an admired height of
universal understanding.

Oh what a goodly harvest of glory had fallen to him, had he fallen sooner
himself. What a lasting disgrace be-rusted his luster by his lives lasting so
long? The world sees it, and sighs to see it.

Well have thou done also unto me his Father: for it is not unknown to thee,
what an anxiety, and restless disquietnesse of thought possessed me,
concerning his passage out of those bogs yt the world had laid all about him:
And of his descent from so tottering a stand in the wheel of the destenies
revolution. A fear, a chill fear like a fever still hung at mine
heart strings, in doubt of his deliverance from these dangers, which now I see
effected, now is he, after all my cares, after his education in the true
faith, his discharge of the duty of a Christian soldier, and his little
progress in the paths of more maturity, and discretion, taken out of this
worlds winter, and placed in the caelestiall, Summer climate, and in the soul
quickening Sunshine of the Trinity.

Well have thou done to me, LORD in this also: as long as the world had my
Son, my Son had my heart, and consequently, the world kept it fixed, on an
unfit and fickle foundation: But now, in calling him away, thou have even
almost, (there wants but one other pull) torn me up from my rooting in earth,
to be transplanted in thy celestial paradise! the world holds me now but by
two or three slender fiuers: let but the mariners give one other sweigh, and
mine anchor will come up, for altogether^: and I will cast off al and say only
this. It is good for me to adhere unto my GOD. Psa. 73. 28.
Come Lord Jesus, come quickly. Apoc. 24, 20.
I was a slee^e in sin (Father) but thou gave me a sound pinche, and set me
quickly on my fee^e, to cast over my cause by thy decrees, to proo^e my self
guilty before thy bench: to yield to the justice of thine ever just sentence,
and yet to avow thy mercies, in every pardoning the penitent.

And therefore I will even make no more a do, but say with thy servant Job,
condemn me not* but show me the cause why thou contendest with me: Job. 10. 1
I have sinned (my merciful Lord) I confess, and I sin daily: in sin was I
bred, in sin was I borne: sin seized my youth, and has lackeied my life
unto this age. O my gracious Lord, come thou, and free me from my secret
sins: lay thy finger Lord, upon my soul, and tell me that here, and here is
such a canker bred: So shall I see the vlcerous carcass of my spirit, and
seal, my self, to the sentence that condemns me: coming truly about those
dangerous sands, and doubling the cape of good hope under thy conduct (my
sacred Pilot) and bearing in with full sails to the haven of thy gracious
mercy, I may turn all my plaints into prayers and all my sorrows into
special songs: Because of this: Job. 6. 10
that though my bosom do burn with anguish and though thou (LORD) do not
spare me, yet have I this eomfort, that I have not suppressed my speech of the
most holy* nor been a denier of the doctrine he taught me.

Glory be to the glorious GOD that in all mine unrest, I have this grace of
his to rest upon.

In thy presence therefore (my dear Lord) I stand all naked: O behold me with
a tender heart* My eyes dissolve into moisture: sorrow had congealed them all
into Ice with one extreme, and now it thawes them all into tears with an
other.

My soul melts for heaviness: Ps. 119. 28
O raise me up according to thy word. Art not thou (LORD) he alone that
possesses my reigns, Ps. 139. 13.
and covered me in my Mothers womb? Ps. 22. 11
Thou art he. Into thy hands was I cast from my mothers womb: O mine
eternal, all-sufficient LORD! Thou know my setting down, Ps. 134, 2
and my rising up: thou vnderstandes^ my thought, a far off.

And mark now whether our Gods counsel fail us in any part of our extremes.
Does he bid us, Ps. 55. 22
Cast thy burden upon Jehovah, and he will sustain thee: he will be a rest for
thy shoulders, and a stay for thy feet* Why then let my mine enemies tongues
run counter as long as they list: Ps. 79. 11
let them say, GOD has forsaken him, pursue him, take him, there is none to
deliver him from danger, not any to revenge his quarrel.

You err, you err, (you maleuolent Sathanistes) GOD has not forsaken me,
for I have not forsaken him.

No (my gracious, GOD,) I will never be ashamed at tribulation as long as I
trnst in thee: never shall the enemeie confound me, having thee for the
foundation of my hopes, and whole affections. For I have no need to start at
any peril: I know so fully that thou LORD wilt look upon mine afflictions,
Job. 5. 18
and pardon me all my sins. Psa 147. 3
Thou make the wound, and thou bindest it up: It is the Lord God of hoastes
that cures those that are broken in heart, and annointeth all their sores with
his precious Balsam: He only searches the depth of all the souls putrid
ulcers, and salueth them with salvation. Psa. 35. 26
Let shame then be their continual attendant that rejoice at this hurt of
mine.

Confusion be their companion that insult upon the soul that is drenched in
the depth of misery. For I see I have a gracious God on my side, maugre all
their inueterate malice. And Job. 5. 19.
he has delivered me from six troubles, and in the seventh the evil shall
not touch me. I may therefore fall, but I shall never be cast out, Psalm. 37.
24
nor trodden down: I have hold upon the highest: the LORD has me fast by the
hand.

This LORD has been my good Lord and master ever: he has taught me from
my childhood unto this present: hitherto have I been an instance of thine
inestimable good-nesse: and shall I think thou will fail me now in my old
age, and add unto the failing of nature? nay I will never do it.

When my powers are all vanished, then will thou stand my good LORD in all
inconveniences. Let my soul be filled with evils, Psalm. 88. 4.
and let my life approache the grave under never so great a load of
calamities, yet shall my soul be vigorous in her duty still, and speak of
all thy marvelous works. Psalm. 9. 1.
Nay, let death seize me never so soon, yet (my LORD and GOD) will I never
cease to say with thy servant: Though thou slaye me, my trust shall rest upon
thee for ever.

LORD give us grace, O LORD give thy servant and hand-maide grace to say
continually: Let our life be in thy son Jesus Christ, and in him let us have
the end of al our labors. For we are sure, that our Redeemer lives and that
he shall stand the last upon earth.

That is thy Christ (O Lord) even our only Savior and supporter. And though
that worms turn all our one bodies into themselves, yet shall we resume the
self same flesh, and behold the blessed in his Majesty with these self same
eyes.

And there and then shall we see our Son again (dear wife): yes assuredly,
in these very bodies, we our selves and no other for us, shall see him in that
self same house of flesh that he held on earth, and in no other. O thou
incomprehensible, sacred, unbounded, individual, and unconfounded Trinity,
grant that our meeting be to all our joys. Amen.

IN these tears (beloved wife) and in this manner of sorrow, it is no sin to
take our orders and proceed graduates: We may weep lawfully thus, as long as
the streams that rain from our eyes, do not make the river of our griefs
over flow their banks, so then, keeping this channel, let them drop from
our cheeks eternally: Let us make us pearls of them, which no blood, no
vinegar may ever dissolve. We must say, adieu the worlds comfort: needs must
we then lay faster hold upon that in Heaven. Adieu then Philip our son, for
a while, and welcome Jesus our Savior for ever.

FINIS.

