THE SHIELD AND Reward of the Faithful.

Or a Meditation upon Genesis 15. Chap. Verse. 1.

Written By PHILLIP of MORNAY Lord of Plessis-Marly

And faithfully translated according to the last French Copy.

LONDON Imprinted by T. D. for NATHANAELL NEVVBERY, and are to be sold at the
sign of the Star, under S. Peter's in Cornhill, and in Pope-head Alley. 1620.

TO THE RELIGIOUS AND Worthy Knight Sir PEETER MANVVOODE, Grace, Mercy, and
Peace, from Jesus Christ.
RIGHT WORSIPFVLL,
THe Lord promised unto Abraham to be his shield and his exceeding great
reward; the same he promises to every true Israelite, the child of Abraham:
the Creator will be the creatures shield, the King his subjects target, the
father a buckler to his child, God to man both a shield and a reward, the
infinite and immortal God the portion of a finite and mortal man, yea a crown
to dust and ashes: what better shield can we desire? what greater reward can
we require? what greater honor, dignity, or profit can we demand or
obtain? He is our summum bonum, our supreme good, the good God who is
goodness it self. The worthy subject of our meditation, the chiefest object
of our contemplation, capable to take away our fear, to satisfy our desire.
For desire we any thing? behold a reward, are we afraid of any thing? behold a
shield, yea a more excellent shield then that of Achilles, that contained in
it the description of heaven, earth, and sea, for our shield is the Creator of
the whole world a heauenlier shield, the^ that brazen one of Numa Pompilius,
feined to be sent down from heaven, for the preservation of the city of Rome,
for the God of heaven is our shield to preserve us: a richer shield then those
of Solomon, that were of beaten gold, a more precious and divine shield, then
Perseus crystal shield, given him by Pallas, to preserve him from that snaky
headed Medusa, (who turned menn into stones) by virtue of which shield he
overcame her; for by ye virtue of this shield given us by Pallas, that is
wisdom it self, yea himself given to us as a shield, we have the victory
over the Devil that old serpent, that strives to turn our fleshy hearts into
hearts of stone, a better and a bigger shield, then that of great Goliath, how
great and good so ever it was, it could not cover him all over, nor preserve
him from death; whereas God who is our shield, both couers us, and preserues
us. This our shield cannot be peirced, will not betray us us that of Brasidas
did, it can not be taken away from us by the Devil, as those golden shieldes
of Solomon were by Shiskak King of Egypt. And therefore a shield worthy to be
made much of, for if Ajax and Ulysses striued so much for ye shield of Achilles
if Epaminondas being wounded to death, asked if his shield were whole, and
rejoiced thereat, yea kissed it, how much more must we strive to get this
shield, and having gotten it, to esteem it, to rejoice at it, never to cast it
away, rather to cast away our weapons then this shield. It was more
dishonorable in a Roman soldier to fling away his shield, then his sword,
his dart or spear, for the which fault he was disgraced, degraded, and
punished; how much more dishonorable, nay dangerous will it be for us to cast
away our shield, by the which we are covered, which the darts of Satan can not
pierce, without the which we must needs perish; nay cast away our shield, and
God can not be our reward; and therefore let us take up this shield, embrace it
and keep it, and as spiritual and Christian soldiers armed from top to toe
with the whole armor of God, having on the breast plate of righteousness, the
sword of the Spirit, the helmet of salvation, the shield of faith, fight under
the banner of Christ Jesus our captain, against the Devil, the world, and the
flesh; we shall be able to stand against the wiles of the Devil, and to quench
all the fiery darts of the wicked, and so having fought a good fight, having
finished our course, having kept our faith, there is laid up for us a crown of
righteousness, a crown of glory, a crown of life, not one of Laurel, of
brass, of silver, or of gold, give to Roman Conquerors, but a glorious an
immortal and eternal crown, which God the just judge shall give us at the
latter day yea God himself shall be our crown, our glory, and our life; yea
shall be all in all in us.

This is the Sum of that divine meditation, which that learned divine and
religious gentleman du Plessis penned in the French tongue, which I have
translated into English, and am bold to present it to your Worships
consideration. Of all things that moved me to offer this small treatise to your
Worship: the first is, your great continual and continued affection and favor
toward our French Church of this city of Canterbury, the second, your
particular affection and undeserved love toward me; the last though not the
least, your calling, as being not only a Soldier, a Captain, and a Knight in
regard of this world, but also a Christian soldier and a spiritual Knight,
fighting under Christ's colors, against your spiritual enemies, having GOD
both for your shield and your exceeding great reward, so that you may say
with David ye Lord is my shield and my portion Embrace therefore the divine
meditation of the Author, accept the good will and affection of the
translatour; make much of this shield, it will cover you, it it will defend
you from all harms; esteem much this reward, and you shall enjoy all good yea
God himself. I be seech that God, who is the shield and the reward of the
faithful, to be both a shield to preserve you from all evil, and your reward
both of grace here on earth, and of glory in the life to come.

Canterbury the 10. of May. 1620. Your Worships to command in the Lord, JOHN
BVLTHEL

THE SHIELD and Reward of the Faithful.
GENESIS 15.1. Fear not Abraham, I am thy shield, and thy exceeding great reward.
ABRAHAM the Father of the faithful, left at the voice of God his country,
and his parentage, the superstition of his Fathers, to follow the service of
the true God. And there withal received a promise, that within some ages, his
posterity should inherit the land of Canaan, where he lived as a stranger.
There was notwithstanding a small proportion between the commandment and
the promise, if he had not looked further; and the more admirable was his faith
in obeying, in that the commandment of leaving all was directed to his
person, the promise of possessing to his posterity, a great way off; The
commandment subject to sudden execution, the effect of the promise deferde,
not to some days but to many ages; And again of a promise made to a
posterity, that passes all degrees, little sensible when one sees it not, How
much less to be considered when the great grandchildren cannot attain unto,
nay not their great grand children. Notwithstanding he is snatched away from his
dearest and nearest friends, transplanted from his country and soil, in a
strange air, a more strange people; who doubts here but that the flesh in so
an aduantageous subject did argue against the spirit, reason against faith,
Satan assisted with them both, against Gods servant tossed and much moved in
himself: For what could the land of Canaan stead him four hundred years
after? Much less then Esaus red pottage when he was an hungry? and in
following this purpose, how many mischiefs was he to encounter and incur*
what goods was he to loose, rediculous to the flesh contrary to reason, little
credible to his soul. On the other side taking an other course, the beaten way
of the world, the course taken by his friends, what goods might he have gotten?
what evil might he have eschewed? who found to favor his part the discourse
of reason? the desire of the flesh and man's will? aiming at the same intention
the same contention, by the instinst of Satan, who can spy out his time, take
his occasions, and what better, then when the faithful is bandied in himself?
God therefore in this his perplexity appears to him in vision, breaks all
their arguments, all his discourses; Fear not Abraham, says he, I am thy
shield, and thy exceeding great reward. If thou fear in following my
vocation thy calling to have evils, I am to cover thee I have wherewith to put
thee under shade to shelter thee; If thou fear that thou shall have no
goods, I am goodness it self; and this goodness how great soever it is, is
so good, it will gush, and dispearse it self upon thee. Few words, but which
comprehends all, yea a bottomless depth Fear not for it is fear it self
that assures thee; the fear of Isaac: and of Jacob that only which men must
fear; Is thy spirit tempted and attempted by apprehension, by a feeling of
evils? Behold here is a shield for thee; Is it assaulted with concupiscence, or
with the loss of that we call goods? Behold here is a reward. The eternal
and immortal God to a mortal man, a worm, both a reward and a shield: Having
so great a reward, what can thou desire more? Or being under so sure a
shield, what can thou fear? And that which is said to Abraham, is said to
his seed, to the Church in general, the lawful race of Abraham: in
particular to every Israelite, to all the faithful: for see thou O Israel
the Egyptians, behind thee, the mountains at thy sides, the sea before thine
eyes? Exodus 14.13.
Fear ye not stand still and see the Salvation of the Lord, which he will
show to you to day. Moreover do thou see the thunderings and the
lightenings, and the mountain smoking, Exodus 20.20.
Fear not, for God is come to prove you, and that his fear may be before your
faces, that ye sin not. Were thou but a worm before thine enemies,
contemptible and disdained by them, abject and base to thy self; Isaiah.
41.8.10.13.19
Fear not Israel, my servant, for I am with thee; Fear not thou worm Jacob,
I will help thee, says the Lord and thy Redeemer, the holy one of Israel.
Luke. 12.32.
Fear not little flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure, to give you the
kingdom. Yea though thou were alone, these words belong to every one let every
one take it as said unto himself. For David says for all the faithful, yea
in the name of every one. Psalm. 3.6.
I will not be afraid of ten thousand of people that do set themselves
against me round about. Psalm. 56.
I will not fear what flesh can do unto, me. Psalm. 46.2.3.4.
No though the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the
midst of the sea, though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though the
mountains shake with the dwelling thereof, yea Psalm. 23.9.
though I walk through the valley of the shadow of death, I will fear no
evil. And the reason of this strong confidence is not less strong, I am thy
shield; of thee Abraham and of all thine, the shield of Israiel, and of the
Church. For Moses says, Deuter. 33 29.
Happy art thou O Israel! Who is like unto thee O people! saved by the Lord,
the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy excellency Happy
therefore is every faithful man that can confidently say with David, 2. Sam
22.3.
He is my shield, and the horn of my salvation. Psalm. 5.12.
He blesses the righteous, with favor does he compass him as with a shield.
2. Sam. 22 31.
He is a buckler to all them that trust in him.

Again, I am thy exceeding great reward, the reward consequently of thy seed,
and of the Church; and not a reward only, but also an inheritance, for behold,
Genesis 17.7.
I will establish my covenant between thee and me, and thy seed after thee,
for an everlasting Covenant, to be a God unto thee and to thy seed after thee.
I will be thy God and thou shall be my people; Thou mine inheritance, and I
thine. Thou my purchase, I thy reward, I thy partage, and David applying to
himself, for us this promise says. Psalm. 16.5.6.
The Lord is the portion of mine inheritance, the lines are fallen unto me in
in pleasant places; Yea I have a goodly heritage; Certes because cause the wise
man says, Ecclesiast. 11.22.
The blessing of the Lord is in the reward of the Godly, that fears God; the
rather says the Apostle, because 1. Tim. 4.8
Godliness is profitable unto al things, having promise of the life that now
is, and of that which is to come. Notwithstanding this exceeding abundant
reward, super abounding infinitely our sure demerits, our pretended merits,
because there is no communion of unrighteousness with righteousness, no
proportion of man to God, of nothing to all, nor therefore of humane merit to
this reward, of our default our extreme dryness to this infinite sufficiency
and fulness, to this eternal well springs.

Now therefore fear not Abraham says he, fear not Israel nor any Israelite;
for the wise man says, Eccles. 7.18.
He that fears God, shall come forth of them all; Ecclesiast. 34.14.
He that fears God, will not fear at all nor be afraid, for he is his
hope. Now hope is the counterpoison and remedy of fear, a remedy stronger then
the evil; An infinite remedy against a limited evil, an assurance in the
creator, against the apprehension of creatures. A confidence in him that has
made all the creatures, and that soly alone has made them all, and that of
nothing; and therefore a confidence in him that is all, and of him that is all,
against that which is nothing. Let all the elements therefore make a hurrie
together, all the meteors arm themselves together against us, against the
Church; let us say with David, Psalm. 46.3.4.
Though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled, though the mountains shake
with the swelling thereof; there is a river, the streams whereof shall make
glad the city of God. The infirmity and baseness of the Church, contemptible to
the eyes of vain men; a small brook in comparison of these impetuous torrents,
the current of the Ocean, shall not cease to subsist, nor omit to stream and
run on. The faithful shall strengthen and harden himself a against their
stirrings, or rather trembling for the wise man says, Ecclesiast. 34.16.
God is his mighty protection and strong stay, a defense from heat, and a
cover from the sun at noone, a presernation from stumbling, and a help from
falling. Yea the Lord himself says, Isa. 43.2.
When thou passest through the waters I will be with thee; and through the
rivers, they shall not overthrow thee; when thou walk through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt; For I am thy Savior. His providence in a word is unto him
both a counsel and a rampire, against all accidents, against all cases and
haps; because there are no chances in respect of God. Let the tirants of the
world insence themselves and rage, the people murmur, mutin, and thunder; the
Ila^ds and the ends of the world conspire against the Church; the Lord will
speak to the souls of his servant, Isa. 7.4.
Fear not, neither be faint hearted, for the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria,
and of the son of Remaliah. It shall not come to pass, the Lord shall gather
the hearts of the Kings and Captains of nations, when and as he lists. All
the Psalm. 78.
choler and anger of man is to him, but as much subject and matter of glory and
fame. The nations conspire, Isa. 8.12.
Let them take counsel together and it shall come to naught. Let them combinde
and band themselves together, and they shall be crushed and bruised; only let
us sacrifice unto the Lord of Hoasts, let us serve him, and let him be our
fear; and not the fury of these mortal men, Isa. 51.12.
of these men of grass, (as the Prophet speaks) that cannot subsist against
him, that has stretched forth the heavens and laid the foundations of the
earth; whose hand we have so often felt to our comfort, and his arm for our
deliverance. For says the Lord Cha. 13.
Where is the fury of the oppressor? And have thou not seen the ends of the
world to tremble, my people not withstanding have gone their way in peace! and
have thou not seen them fall before my face, before my sword as dust, before
my how as stubble? Yea let the powers of the air, the principalities of the
world, the rulers of the darkness of the world the spiritual wickedness in
high places. Ephesians. 6.
With whom the faithful are to wrestle every day, (says the Apostle) let them
come, shall we yield our selves? shall we faint and leese courage? but rather
we will say, the Lord is with us, what need we fear* 1 Cor. 10.13.
He is faithful, who will not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able.
He will strengthen us against the devil; he has Colos. 1.
created all things that are in heaven and on earth, visible and invisible
whether they be thrones, or dominions, or principalities or powers, all things
were created by him and for him, let us bouldly say, and therefore for us, and
therefore for his Church Let us therefore oppose the thrones and celestial
dominions against the powers of the air; the armies of Angels against the
legions of Satan, against their malicious practices; the holy conduct of the
Angels whom God causes to camp about his children, to assist them in their
way in all their paces, yea the most slipperest, that they stumble not against
the gates of hell, against the devils that can nothing against the faith of
Christ, against his members, that have no power upon Jobs Cattle, upon the
hogs; though they roar never so much, but as much as God vnbridleth them. But
let us say over and above, and that without excess; These devils themselves
cannot be but for us, in as much as they are for God; their malice turns to
his service, is at Gods pay and wages, and therefore at ours. For if Satan
afflict Job in his family, in his person, the Lord knows how far and how
long, and limits him; the righteousness and patience of his servant shines and
appears the more, and his condition is the better for is at the last. If the
Devil puts in the heart of Judas, to sell the blood of the righteous, to
betray and deliver the son of God into the hands of the Jews; let us adore
God, banish all fear; He is sold but far, far from their intention, for the
ransom of our souls, he is delivered for the remission of our sins; of those
sins that cause the quarrel between God and us; of those sins where with
Satan alone did prevail, did brave it out against us, and therefore to his
confusion; to his ruin, and that of his kingdom, on the otherside for the
salvation of the world, and of men. Dare we say that this fear does assure us
even against God, against his justice, against his anger? certes we may, seeing
that in this fear, of children of wrath we are made the children of his
mercies; seeing we may say unto him with David, reserve O Lord the greatness of
thy power, to try the strength upon the children of death; we are contented
with thy clemency, because there is no condemnation to the true seed of
Abraham, Romans 8.1.
To them (says the Apostle) which are in Christ Jesus. For in this Isaac, in
this alone is the true seed. On the other side make what covenant thou will,
with all that which makes it self to be feared in the world; without out this
fear thou will fear all things: not the elements in their fury only, but even
the leaves, yea the dust; not the arms offenssiue, the armor and armies
alone, but how great soever thou be, the flies and Caterpillars; not only
the principalities of the air, or the powers, but also their corruption, but
their infection, yea their very breath; yea that which is the least perfect,
which has the lest power in the world; For says the Lord, Isa. 28.15 18.
Though thou had made a covenant with death and were at agreement with hell;
yet your covenant with death shall be disanulled, and your agreement with death
shall not stand; when the ouerflowing scourge shall pass through, then ye
shall be trodden down by it. And they that have cast their eyes toward
Ethiopia, that have Isa. 20.5.
gloried and vanted of the help of Egypt shall be afraid and ashamed thereof;
contrariwise, happy is he that fears the Lord, and believes in him; For the
wicked tremble where there is no cause of flight or fear, Prou. 19.26.
But in the fear of the Lord is strong confidence, and his children shall have
a place of refuge. A Sanctuary for Abraham, when Sara his wife, his flesh, and
bones, is at the discretion of the Philistin, according to the judgment of the
flesh; there says the Scriptures Genesis 20.
Sure the fear of God is not in this place: Notwithstanding God caused
himself to be feared there, for his servant that feared him: A shelter for
Jacob in this fear, against the fury of Esau: God sendes before him an army of
Angels, changes over and besides and turns that cruel heart to favor him:
So far forth that Saul is afraid of David, that great king of a sheep-heard:
because says Samuel the Lord was with him. Elisha on the other side besieged
in Dothan by the king of the Assirians, in stead of fearing them takes it away
from others, and gives them courage. 2 King. 6.16.
Fear not, (says he to his servant) for they that be with us, are more then
they that be with them. An army that he shows him, (God opening his servants
eyes at his request) a mountain full of horses, and chariots of fire round
about Elisha for his succor, inuisisible before to his faith, much more to his
eyes; and how often is our help at the door which we see not, from how many
dangers does God deliver us which we feel not.

What then? is it in the power of man, of flesh and blood, not to fear the
creatures? and so powerful? so many perils whereunto he is subject every
moment? Nay, God forbid! yea it is as little in his power as to fear God
himself: to fear God, and not to fear the creatures, spring from one
fountain, and that fountain is God himself; faith the gift of God, that
prints in us his fear, ought also to wipe out of us all other fear; and
therefore he that bids us, fear not, adds sometimes, but believe, yea which is
more, he that bids us believe and fear not, in commanding it, works it in
us by his word this powerful word to create in us these qualities, which we
have not; no less powerful then in saying, Let their be light, let the waters
bring forth. This word bringes forth, causes them to bring forth those things
that were not; and therefore is it said, I will command my blessing upon you;
because that his sayings is a doing, his word an act, his blessing a good deed,
a certain effect of his good will toward his children. On the other side, I
will dread before you, to make your way plain. I will put into the hearts of
your enemies to forgo you their place; they shall beat you another time in
one quarter and you shall fly away seven ways, namely according as you shall
fear me, or not fear me. Because it is God alone, that can give or take away
this fear, in his blessings or curses, as to create all other things. But yet
we must be well assured, that he that gave these qualities unto Abraham, and
to our fathers according to the ability and capacity of their infirmity, in
commanding and reco^mending them unto them by mouth, gives them to us at this
time, asking them of him with heart, in the name of his well-beloved (as the
Apostle says) Iam. 1.6.
Ask in faith, nothing wavering, Our Lord himself says, Ioh. 14 and 15. and
16.
Ask my father in my name; Ask and it shall be given you. For in this fear,
there is confidence, says the wise man. Confidence that proceeds from faith;
faith that assures us of Gods love toward us, breeds in our hearts a love
toward God. Two loves springing from one fountain, the first takes from us or
diminishes in us the fear of creatures, Romans 8.31
For if God be for us, who can be against us? The second, a reflection of the
first, which gives us his fear the fear of a Son toward his father, no
more of a slave toward his master, nor of an offender toward his judge. A
fear to offend his gentleness, not to provoke his anger.

Now it is this faith also, which alone is capable in Abraham, in all the
faithful, to take this shield that God prese^ts, to take it I say, not by the
merit of works which it brings forth, what are they? Nor for the dignity that
is in her; for what is infirmity? but in the apprehension of his mercy, in
his gracious promises. For I am thy shield, says the Lord unto Abraham, the
Lord an infinite essence, a holiness not to be approached by sinners, a
consuming fire that deuours them where is then the hand that supports it, yea
that takes it, that can bear it but by him, take it but by himself. Surely
we have no other hand to lend, then that of faith and he himself gives it
us. And again this faith has no hold but by his promise, this shield cannot
be handled, nor welded but by faith in God, grounded on his promises.
Otherwise who would be so rash that durst presume to arm himself with his
power, or cover himself with his goodness, to stand and shelter himself
therewith and use it as a buckler against the creatures, against the creator
but by himself; and therefore it is said that by faith Abraham left his
country, obeyed to the voice of God even so far as to offer his only son;
Who Romans 4.
against hope beeleeued in hope, kept and looked for an issue and posterity
from barrenness, afterward Heb. 11.
of a child whom he led to death, and in fine, millions of his only son;
refelling and beating back all temptations with his shield. But it was also
expressly said that it was grounded on the promises. Behold then how Abraham,
every true Israelite, has the Lord for his shield, takes hold of him by faith,
keeps him by his promise; What need he then fear? what? that this shield is
not big enough to cover him? strong enough to defend him? Why, he couers the
whole world with his shadow, he couers particularly his Church under his
winge. It is not such a Isa. 28.20.
narrow covering, wherewith the Prophet threateneth us; When we pretend to
cover ourselves against him without him, against the Creator by a pretended
agreement with the creatures, with death, the grave, and hell. Contrariwise
says David, it is a shield of salvation, yea salvation it self; he that
retires himself thereto Psalm. 91.
Shall abide under the shadow of the Almighty; is covered with his feathers;
his truth, the faithfulness of his promises serves him in stead of a Target,
though a cloud of arrows should fall upon him, it cannot hurt him, no plague
(says he) shall come nigh thy dwelling much less nigh his person. Does the
world beat us with losses and calamities? Job. 5.21 22.
Thou shall not be afraid of destruction when it comes, at destruction and
famine thou shall laugh. Will he pierce us with the disfavors of calumnities?
Thou shall be hid from the scourge of the tongue, how piercing, how venomous
soever it be. Does he threaten us with death? does he offer it unto our view?
Psalm. 91.7.
A thousand shall fall at thy side, and ten thousand at thy right hand. For
all that it shall not come nigh thee, he cannot hasten it a minute, yea even
then when he throws his dart at our hearts, when he thinks he has found the
default and weakest part of this shield in our infirmity. But rather it shall be
our life, and truly life. It is then properly that we shall brave it. 1 Cor.
15.
O death where is thy sting? Where is thy victory? Job. 19.26
For I know (says Job) that in this my flesh (which thou think thou have
killed) shall I see God; 1 Cor. 15.43.
I know (says the Apostle) that that which is sown in dishonor and
weakness, shall be raised in glory and power. So then does the faithful
suffer? Is the Church assaulted in her body, in her members? Let us beware of
all things, that we fling not away our shield. Let us rather forgo our
weapons. If Christ had not been buried. laid in the grave, covered with a
stone; thou had not believed he could have raised himself to life, how much
less thee? If also the Church were not persecuted, thou in the Church; thou
could not know what this shield is worth, how much it steades thee. Thou
could not discern thine infirmity from his power. Thou would impute to the
hardness of thy skin that which thou sholdst attribute to her temper; to thy
nature that, that comes from his grace, to humane prudence that which proceeds
from his providence; and therefore it behoues thee to be often tempted, to be
touched to the quick. And therefore the Prophet did rejoice; that he had been
chastised, that he might thereby remember God, and know himself. And at least
have we this sure comfort in our afflictions and our wounds, from whence soever
they come they aim directly at this shield, they fall upon this shield, upon
the Lord, yea upon his own flesh. If we are unjustly persecuted by the malice
or ignorance of men, Act. 9.
Saul why presecutest thou me? says Christ, he feels thoroughly our pains, he
accepts our wounds, he will repel them, he will avenge them, no less then if
they were his own. And therefore have we seen so many darts blunted, so many
weapons become dull, so many armies to retire; the sharpest points of weapons
to turn and retort upon the face of the enemies, the very finest, the very
sharpest, the most finely temperd, to their own damage. If we are justly to
be chastisd for our sins, he bears the punishment, he caries the wounds.
The eternal son of God one with him, Isa. 53.
Surely has borne our griefs (says the Prophet) and carried our sorrows;
he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised for our iniquities, for
the transgression of my people was he stricken says the Lord. And from thence
let us hearten and harden ourselves also against death, against Satan, against
hell. For what can we desire and require more in a shield, to have all his
qualities, then to make our wounds hers, then to redeem us, to except us from
evil, and to revenge them, to repel them more liuelily, to make ours hers? why
then does the flesh arm her principalities against us? Ierem. 6.1
Does she lay hold without compassion on bow and spear, against the daughter
of Sion? We will say, the Lord is our shield; that shield before the which the
Philistians fall, the walls of Jericho, yea the very earth trembles, Then
(says Debora) Judge. 5.8.
When there was nere a shield or spear seen among forty thousand in Israel;
He has not omitted to sane his people. The shield of the mighty (says
David) is driven back, so calls he Saul, but the shield of the righteous
will never fail; On the otherside. Psalm. 47.10.
The shields of the earth belong unto God, he rules over all the sheilds of
the earth; that is to say, all the armor and armies of the world (will they
nill they) are at his payment and intertainement, and are sworn to him. Thence
comes it to pass, that we have so often seen, the Church delivered and
released from the armies of the Syrians, by the armies of Egypt; from the
Assyrians by them of Persia; from the Persians by the armies of the Grecians;
those bended with all their powers to his ruin; these notwithstanding having
not the lest thought, that tended to his deliverance; the Church also often
raised from whence and by whom one thought she should be oppressed; then
triumphing when one thought they should have led him in triumph; and the Lord
of Hoasts, (says the Prophet) did that; the Lord (says David) unto whom
belong all the shields of the earth, on whom depend all the Monarchies: whence
it comes to pass, that under this shield the Church has passed over all the
ages and seasons and shall without doubt shut up the last age; although that
all the Monarchies, one after another in the emulation and despite one of the
other, have trod her under foot. They one the otherside, all of them
discomfited the one by the other, without leaving any trace or mark after them
but what was for the glory of God. Of God (says Moses) that carries his
Israel under his wing, as the Eagle her young ones; of God on the otherside,
who in favor of his Israel, and hy his just judgment, withdraws his
protection from other people. The powers of the air do they reuy at her on
the earth, and do they think they can do more against her? Have they caused
our flesh to reuolte against our spirit, to make us sin, drawn in our
consciences to convict us, kindled as they suppose, Gods wrath to confound us;
ranked in a word, all our sins in battaillion before our eyes, to make us
tremble, to terifie us, to make us despair of his mercy, to give us over to
Satan as a pray; Let us here take hold, and the more firmly on the shield of
faith, on this shield (says Paul) Epeses. 6.
Wherewith we overcome in combat the principalities, the powers, the
spiritual wickedness in high places; whereby we may quench the fiery darts of
the wicked. Tell him, I have been indeed 1 Timothy 1.1
an idolater, a blasphemer, a persecuter, an oppressor, and much more! but I
obtained mercy, and the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant toward me in
Christ Jesus; and this Christ the son of God has changed my sins, has been
made sin for me, and I have put on Christ, and I live in Christ, and Christ
in me. If then thou can nothing against Christ, against my head, neither
can thou against me. These sins of mine how enormous soever they be,
concern me no more, neither then the punishment. As little shall thy darts
bear against me or hurt me, furnished with Christ, armed with Christ; no nor
against Christ neither. Christ that strong man who has long ago bound thee,
cast thee into the bottomless pit; Christ the promised seed to his Church,
and unto all the faithful, who has heretofore bruised thy head; And thou
can not with all thy rage do more without danger then prick our heel.
Finally, does the almighty he present himself in his justice, in his anger?
A consuming fire; let not the Christian fear, though he were of straw; Lord
will he say permit that dust and ashes speak to thee? Thou art exceeding
just, the most just; So that the sinner cannot subsist in thy justice. But good
God, have thou not armed us with the righteousness of thy Son? and has he
not been made sin for us? and has he not been made unto us righteousness
and sanctification? Thou sit indeed in judgment; and thy judgment is a
consuming Malac. 3.2
fire, is like a refiners fire; the straw or the stubble shall they not be
parcht and burnt on a sudden? But O God! are not we founded and grounded upon
thy Son Jesus Christ, towe and stubble that we are? 1 Cor. 3.
And shall we not then be preserved from this fire? And against the fire of
thine ire and wrath, are not we bedewed and sprinkled with the water of thy
mercies? bathed in the blood of of thy Lamb? in this living spring springing
to life eternal? Certes thou art great, O Lord, thy justice infinite; But thy
Son, says he not, I and my father are one; and then is he not equal to
thee, infinite to an infinite, his obedience to thy justice? Therefore march we
O God by thy mercy, under the obedience of thy Son; under this obdience we
will not decline from thy judgment, we will no more cry out away with thy
justice; but rather, and that aloud, let thy judgment come, thy justice arrive;
thy judgment, Romans 8.
For there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, Who shall lay
any thing to the charge of Gods elect; It is God that justifies. Thy justice,
for it can do nothing but justice unto his righteousness, and his
righteousness is ours. Thou will glorify him, O Lord, for his righteousness,
for he has deserved it; Yea with that same glory that he had before he came
into the world and he had it already, and never left it; and therefore has it
doubly; the last shall be ours, 2 Timothy 4.8
A crown of righteousness (says the Apostle) is laid up for me, which the
Lord the righteous judge shall give me at that day, (in that great day
otherwise so terrible and dreadful) and not to me only, but unto them also
that love his appearing. Certes whether it be in grace, or in glory.

And it is that also that the Lord adds unto Abraham I am thy exceeing great
reward. For, it suffices him not, to cover us from harm; man's desire stoppes
not there, much less Gods goodness; he will also fill us up with goodness.
It pleased him to be our Shield against the evil of this world, and of the
world to come. In like proportion is he our Reward; A reward here beneath, a
reward above: In things of this present life never to forsake us: In things of
the life to come giving himself to us. But in the one and in the other, by his
grace alone; for what could he without forgiving? Now, what a large field
has the Christian here to meditate upon these hie mysteries? He knows and
acknowledges naught in himself but wickedness, even from his conception, in
his conception naught but sin. He cannot be ignorant, that the wages of sin
is death, and of a sin that is infinite, an infinite punishment; against a God
eternal, an eternal death. Where is then the reward? or rather, where is not
the punishment? And where is the ouer-weening presumer that asks a Reward?
that thinks not he has gained much to be quitt of the punishment? but the
Lord says to him in mercy, I am thy Reward, in lieu of the punishment that is
due unto thee: A man conceived in sin, a stranger unto my law, as all others
are. And I will not only give thee a reward, but give my self also to thee,
as an infinite reward, not due to thy merits, mauger thy demerits. For, by
what law can the slave purchase his master by his service, or the subject his
prince? to have him for a reward, to make him his own, to possess him as an
inheritance? much less the creature his Creator: unless certes (says the
Apostle) it be by the law of faith, by pure grace. So that we have him as a
reward, with the same right and title as we have him for a shield, by faith
grounded on his promise. And notwithstanding a Reward says the Lord, and
therefore due; but how due? It is due unto thee, for I have promised it thee,
thou have not deserud it, I owe it unto my self. It is due to thee, I owe it
to my Son, bought with his blood, and I have given him thee, yea, his blood
for thee, and therefore due to thy self.

I am therefore says the Lord to Abraham thy Reward; But here flesh and blood
are not contented therewith, cannot attain unto it; and therefore Abraham
says, Lord God, what will thou give me, seeing I go childlesse? So little can
eternal and heavenly happiness pierce into our souls except it has first
entered into our hearts; Yea but when I say unto thee I am thy Reward; I
comprehend all, even that All my self; for will thou have posterity (says
he)? Look now toward Heaven, and tell the stars, if thou be able to number
them, so shall thy seed be, and notwithstanding he had but one son: VVilt
thou have goods? I give unto thee, and unto thy seed after thee this land for
an everlasting possession, and yet must he buy his sepulcher; and will thou
assure them for ever, the Lord makes a covenant with thee; notwith. standing
thy posterity serves many ages after: now to what end was this but only to
raise him up from the creatures to the Greator, to tell him plainly, if these
earthly things seems to thee a reward worthy for thee that art but dust, it
is not a present worthy of God that gives it thee the everlasting God cannot
give unto his children worcester thily but everlasting things. And not withstanding
least thou should be discouraged, I am in such wise thy reward above, as
that I cease not to be it here beneath, for, 1. Tim. 4.8,
godliness my true service, has the promise of the Life that now is, and of
that which is to come. And therefore do we see him blestin his family, abound
in his household business, rule amongst strangers, reverenced and honored of
idolaters? I am so in this life a reward, as I cease not to be it in their
death, and then so much the more; not as the masters of this world, their
servants dead, dead their services: and therefore do we read so often, The
God of Abraham, of Isaac, and of Jacob; For the love of my sernant Abraham:
for, the promise of the eternal. God is eternal, suruiues his servants and
their services, Therefore the Apostle said, p. To me to line is Christ, to die
Philip 1.
to die is gain; so also Christ shall be magnified in my body, whether it be
by life or by death. In a word, serve thou in this life according to thy
calling, according to mine, whosoever it be, howsoever froward he be to thee,
be not dismayed, thou losest not thy pains. Ephesians. 6. Tit. 2.
The servant serves his master with good will, the subject his prince; he
serves the Lord he does the will of God not of men, with good will doing
service as to the Lord and not to men. But let the^ rely also on him, trust to
this reward, and not to men. For have thou Genesis 3. and32.
Incob served an ungrateful Laban, the best of thy years in the scorchng
heat of the Sun by day, in the frost by night; and the Lord has evidently
blessed thee to his profit, it may be to thy damage. Fear not (says the Lord)
For I am thy reward. Thou have passed over the Jordan with thy staff, and
behold thou art become two bands. Have thou faithfully serud a prince, or the
state of a kingdom; and God has he vouchafed to work amongst them by thy
hand; and they repay thee with contempt, with hatred, yea with, injuries; do
not bemoane thy self, do not belly thy self, or derogate from thy self,
whatsoever happens thee, thou have served according to confidence and not
according to favor, and not according to anger, thou have, served the Lord thy
God, and not men; The Lord is faithful (says the Apostle) is faithful, Heb.
11.6.
He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is a rewarder of
them that diligently seek him.

That is to say, that it is not more true, that God is, then that it is
consequently true that his reward is with true that his reward is with him;
that he is the reward of them that serve him, even of those that in the
consideration of his calling, take their condition in good part, undergo
joyfully all bitterness, and their charges and burdens scarce tolerale and
supportable for the most part in themselves, less for being less
acknowledged, but least acknowledged of them, whom they serve; Israel also, I
mean the Church, is she hardly oppressed in Egypt; Joseph's services are they
there forgot, yea turned into torments and punishments, to make and bake
brickes, to gather straw, to feel the rod of the taske-masters, the discretion
of the exacter, the severe corrector? Let him not doubt but that he shall be
drawn away with an out stretched arm, a strong hand, that God shall be
glorified in delivering his people, in chastising Egypt. But know also Israel,
and do not abuse thy self that thy reward is not in this soil, in the slime
and mud of Nilus, Thou art there a stranger, how fertile soever it be; but thy
reward is in Canaan, in the true Canaan, in the heavenly. There properly, Shall
thou laugh at the cry of the oppressors, at the noise of people, there may
thou say assuredly, Va. 14.4.
How has the oppressor ceased? and what is become of the Scepter of the
rulers: Yea come thou thus far, O servant of God whosoever thou be, to
receive amongst thine own, amongst his own, hard handling yea even death for
thy pains and pay; Thy pay and reward for that thou have assisted them with
counsel in their perplexities, with aid in their aduersiries thou have made
no reckoning of thy life, of thy dignity, of all that man ciuily esteems
most; and that because many times they shall want an onyon or melon, or
somesauce of Egypt; not necessary things but things superfluous; yield not unto
them, but ^^fly bend and harden thy self against them, to do them good. For
how often have they murmured against Moses: and have not they knocked down the
Prophets, and did they ever reverence them but when they were dead? and would
they not stone our Savior: and have not they forgot the Lord their possession?
Yea how often have they kicked against him? Now who art thou then, what are thy
services, that thou expressest either less, or better? and the greater they
shall be, see thou not that proportion ably they are often followed with envy,
yea with hatred and reproach yea though the Lord should say unto thee, as he
said unto Moses Numb. 14.
I will smite this people with the pestilence; and disinherite them; and will
make of thee a greater nation, and mightier then they. Do not consent unto
their evil, their punishment, no not unto thine own good; say rather, Lord
what will the Egyptians say, The Lord was not able to bring this people into
the land which he swear unto them, therefore he has stane them in the
wilderness Pardon I beseech thee the iniquity of this people, according unto
the greatness of thy mercy, and as thou have for given this people from Egypt
even until now, Luke 23.34.
For give them father said our Lord Christ, For they know not what they do,
Yea even be willing to sacrifice thy self for them, to make thy seife an
anathema, acc^rsed; because Certes thy reward is not here, nor of here beneath,
it is from a boue and it is there also and therefore be not offended, if the
wicked do prosper. It belonges to the men of this world to seek it here on
earth, to expect it of men. Contrary wise it is said unto us Matthew. 3.11.12.
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and persecute you, and shall say
all manner of evil against you falsely for my name sake; rejoice and be
exceeding glad, for great is your reward in heaven; Great in it self, and
indeed what is there great but God? No less great in regard of the faithful.
For Psalm. 8.4.
What is man that thou art mindful of him, and the Son of man that thou
visitest him? And therefore it is added very great, or exceeding great in him
and of him, for God is all sufficient to himself, and therefore super abounds
upon all creatures, and of his fullness have they all received; but so much the
more in us, for the due wages of all men was death, and what have the best men
of all but that which they have received? and is it not then grace upon grace
and not salary: and besides, what can we do that can oblige God, or make him
beholden unto us, seeing that Psalm. 16.
Our goodness (says the Psalmist) extends not to him, For what can we
suffer, that is worthy him: Seeing says the Apostle that Rim. 8.18.
The sufferings of this present time, are not worthy to be compared with the
glory, which shall be revealed in us. But Certes, where Romans 5.20.21.
sin abounded, grace did much more abound; that as sin has reigned unto
death, even so might grace reign through righteousness, unto eternal life,
by Jesus Christ our Lord. Grace verily most abounding drawn from the depth of
the treasures of the mercies of God our father, reconciling his elected and
chosen in his Son; the seed of Abraham according to the flesh, but the joy
of Abraham according to the promise, in whom he has called us, justified,
sanctified, and glorified us; In whom, and for whose sake he will be here of
mere good will our Shield; in heaven above, freely our Reward: And therefore
again and again, fear not Israel, fear not any true Israelite; for Psalm. 11.2.
Blessed is the man (says the Psalmist) that fears the Lord, he shall not be
affrayde of evil tidings; the evil always weaker then goodness; the
goodness it self camping always about him, camping for him, he shall be
always (says he) environed with all kind of blessings; he shall abound in
them, because he shall enjoy and possess from this very time forward here on
earth, this good thing in hope; assured fully to enjoy it in Heaven above in
the glory of the Father.

To whom, with the Son, and the holy Ghost, be ascribed all honor, glory,
power, and dominion for ever and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

