A fruteful / and pleasant work of the best state of a publyque weal, and
of the new isle called Vtopia: written in Latin by Sir Thomas More knight, and
translated into English by Raphe Robynson Citizein and Goldsmythe of London,
at the procurement, and earnest request of George Tadlowe Citezein and
Haberdassher of the same City.

Imprinted at London by Abraham Vele, dwelling in Paul's churcheyarde at the
sign of the Lamb. Anno. 1551.

To the right honorable, and his very singular good master, master William
Cecylle esquiere, one of the two principal secretaries to the king his mo^^e
excellent majesty, Raphe Robynso^ wissheth co^tinuaunce of health, with daily
increase of virtue, and honor.
Upon a time, when tidings came too the city of Corinthe that king Philippe
father to Alexander surnamed y^ Great, was coming thetherwarde with an army
royal to lay siege to the city. The Corinthia^s being forth with stryken with
great fear, began busily, and earnestly to look about them, and to fall
to work of all hands. Some to ^^owre and trymm^ up harneis, some to carry
stones, some to amend and build higher the walls, some to rampiere and
fortyfie the bulwarks, and fortresses, some one thing, and some an other for
the defendinge, and strengthenynge of the city. The which busy labor, and
toil of theires when Diogenes the philosopher saw, having no profitable
busi^es whereupon to set himself on work (neither any man required his
labor, and help as expedient for the comme^ wealth in that necessity)
immediately girded about him his phylosophicall cloak, and began to roll, and
tumble up and down hither and thither upon the hille side, that lies
adioyninge to the city, his great barrel or tun, wherein he dwelled: for
other dwelling place would he have no^e. This seeing one of his friends, and not
a litell musing thereat, came to him: And I pray the Diogenes (quod he) why
do thou thus, or what meanest thou hereby? Forsothe I am tumblyng my tubbe
to (quod he) because it were no reason y^ I only should be ydell, where so many
be worki^g. In semblable manner, right honorable sir, though I be, as I am in
deed, of much less ability then Diogenes was to do any thing, that shall
or may be for the auauncement and commodity of the public wealth of my
native country: yet I seeing every sort, and kind of people in their
vocation, and degree busily occupied about the common wealths affairs: and
especially learned me^ daily putting forth in writing new inventions, and
devises to the furtherau^ce of the same: thought it my bo^^den duty to God,
and to my country so to tu^ble my tubbe, I mean so to occupy, and exercise
me self in bestowing such spare hours, as I being at y^ beck, and
commandment of others, cold conveniently win to me ^elf: y^ though no
commodity of that my labor, and travail to the public weal should arise,
yet it might by this appear, yt my^e endeuoire, and good will hereunto was
not lacking. To the acco^plisheme^t therefore, and fulfyllyng of this my mind,
and purpose: I took upon me to turn, and translate out of Latin into our
English tongue the fruitful, and profitable book, which sir Thomas more knight
compiled, and made of the new isle Vtopia, co^^eining and setting forth y^ best
(...), and form of a public weal: ^ work (as it appears) written almost
forty years ago by thesaid sir Thomas More ye author thereof* The which man,
forasmuch as he was a man of (...) time, yea almost of thies our days: and
for y^ excellent qualities, where (...) the great goodness of God had
ple^tyfully endowed hi^, and for y^ high place, and ^owme, whereunto his prince
had mo^^ graciously called hi^, notably well known, not only among us his
cou^treme^* but also in foreign countries and nations* therefore I have not much
to speak of him. This only I saye^ y^ it is much to be lamented of al, and not
only of us English men, y^ a man of so incomparable wit, of so profounde
knowledge, of so absolute learning, and of so fine eloquence was yet
nevertheless so much blinded, rather to obstinacy, then with ignorance y^ he
could not or rather would not see the shining light of gods holy truth in
certain principal points of Christian religion: but did rather che^se to
persevere, and continue in his wilful and stubbourne obstinacy eue^ to y^ very
death* this I say is a thing much to be lamented. But letting this matter
pass, I return again to vtopia. Which (as I said before) is a work not only
for y^ matter y^ it co^teineth fruteful and profitable, but also for y^ writers
eloque^t latin stiele pleasant and delectable. Which he y^ reads in latin,
as y^ author himself wrote it, perfectly understanding y^ same: doubtless he
shall take great pleasure, and delight both in y^ sweet eloquence of y^ writer,
and also in y^ witty inue^cion, and fine co^^eiau^ce, or disposition of y^
matter: but most of all in the good, and wholesome lessons, which be there in
great plenty, and abou^dau^ce. But now I fear greatly y^ in this my simple
translation through my rudenes and ignorance in our english tongue all the
grace and pleasure of y^ eloquence, wherewith y^ matter in latin is finely set
forth may seem to be utterly excluded, and lost: and therefore the frutefulnes
of the matter it self much peradventure diminished, and app^yred. For who
knows not which knows a^y thing, that an eloqent styele sets forth and
highly commends a mean, ^^^ter? Where as on the other side rude, and
unlearned speech defaceth and disgraceth a very good matter. According as I
hard ones a wise man say: A good tale euel told were better untold* and an
evil tale well told needs none other sollicitour. This thing I well
pondering and wayinge with me self, and also knowing, and knowledging the
barbarous rudenes of my translation was fully determined never to have put it
forth in printe, had it not been for certain friends of mine, and especially
one, whom above al other I regarded, a man of sage* and discret wit, and in
wordly matters by long use well experie^ced, whoes name is George Tadlowe: an
honest citi^ein of London, and in the same city well accepted, and of good
reputation: at whoes request, and instau^ce I first took upon my weak, and
feeble sholders y^ heavy, and weighty bourdein of this great enterprice. This
man with diverse other, but this man chiefly (for he was able to do more with me,
the^ many other) after that I had ones rudely brought y^ work to an end,
ceased not by all means possible co^tinualy to assault me, until he had at ye
^aste, what by y^ force of his pitthie arguments and strong reasons, and what
by his authority so persuaded me, that he caused me to agree and consent to
the impryntynge hereof. He therefore, as the chief persuadour, must take upon
him the danger, which upon this bold, and rash enterprise shall ensue. I,
as I suppose, am herin clearly acquytte, and discharged of all blame. Yet,
honorable Sir for the better avoiding of enuyous and malycyous tongues, I
(knowing you to be a man, not only profoundely learned, and well affected
toward all such, as either can, or will take pains in y^ well bestowing
of that poor talente, which GOD has endued them with: but also for your
godly dysposytyon, and virtuous qualytyes not unworthily now placed in
aucthorytye, and called to honor) am the bolder humblye to offer and dedycate
unto your good mayst^rshyppe this my simple work. Partly that under the
sauffe conducte of your protection it may the better be defended from the
obloq^ie of the^, which can say well by nothing, that pleases not their fond,
and corrupt judgments, though it be else both fruitful and godly: and partlye
that by the means of this homely pre^e^t I may the better renew, and revive
(which of late, as you know, I have already begone to do) y^ old
acquayntaunce, that was between you and me in the time of our childhode, being
then ^colefellowes togethers* Notdoubting that you for your nati^e goodness, and
gentelnes will accept in good part this poor gift, as an argument, or token,
that mine old good will, and hartye affection toward you is not by reason of
long tract of time, and separrtion of our bodies any thing at all quayled and
diminished, but rather ^ I assuer yo^) much augmented, and increased. This
verily is y^ chieffe cause, y^ has encouraged me to be so bold with your
maistershippe. Else truly this my poor present is of such simple and mean
sort, that it is neither able to recompense the least portion of your great
gentelnes to me, of my part vn^eserued, both in the time of our old
acquayntance, and also now lately again bountifully showed: neither yet fit,
and mete for the very baseness of it to be offered to one so worthy, as you be.
But al mighty god (who therefore ever be thanked) has auau^ced you to such
fortune, and dignity, that yo^ be of hability to accept thankefully as well a
man's goodwill as his gift. The same god grant you and all yours long, and
joyfully* to continue in all godlynes and prosperytye.

Thomas More to Peter Giles se^deth gretynge.
I Am almost ashamed, right well-beloved Peter Giles, to se^de unto you this
book of y^ vtopian commen wealth, welnigh after a years space, which I am suer
you looked forwithin a month and a half. And no marueil. For you knew
welenough, that I was already disbourdened of all y^ labor and study belonging
to the invention in this work, and that I had no need at all to trouble my
brains about the disposition, or co^ueyaunce of the matter: and therefore had
her in nothing else to do, but only to rehearse those things, which you and I
togethers hard master Raphaell tell and declare. Wherefore there was no cause
why I should study to setforth y^ matter with eloquence: for as much as his
talk cold not be fine and eloquent, being first not studied for, but sodein
and vnpremeditate, and then, as you know, of a m^^ better seen in the greek
language, then in the latin tongue. And my writing, the nigher it should approach
to his homely plain, and simple speech, so much the ^igher should it go to the
truth: which is the only mark, whereunto I do and ought to direct all my
trauail and study herin. I grant and confess, friend Peter, meself discharged
of so much labor having all thies things, ready done to my hand, that almoost
there was nothing left for me to do. Else other the invention, or the
disposition of this matter might have required of a wit another base, another
at all unlearned both some time and leisure, and also some study. But if yt
were requysyte, and necessary, that the matter should also have been written
eloquentelye, and not alone truly: of a suerty that thing could I have
performed by no time nor study. But now seeing all thyes cares, stays, and
lettes were taken away, wherein else somuche labor and study should have
been employed, and that there remained no other thing for me to do, but
only to write plainly the matter as I hard it spoken: that in deed was a
thing light and easy to be done. How beit to the dyspatchynge of this so
little b^synes my other cares and troubles did leave almooste less, then no
leisure.

Whiles I do daily bestow my time abowte law matters: some to plead, some
to hear, some as an arbytratour with mine awarde to determyne* some as an
vmpier or a judge with my sentence finallye to discuss. Whiles I go one way to
see and visit my friend: an other way about mine own private affairs. Whiles I
spend almost all the day abroad emonges other, and the residue at home among
mine own: I leave to meselfe, I mean to my book no time. For when I am come
home, I must commen with my wife, chatte with my children, and talk with my
servants. All the which things I reke^ and account emonge busynes,
forasmuch as they must of necessytye be done: and done must they needs be,
oneles a man will be a stranger in his own house. And in any wise a man must
so fassyon and order his condytyons, and so appoynte and dyspose him self,
that he be merye, iocunde, and pleasant among them, whom either nature has
provided, or chance has made, or he himself has chosen to be the
fellows, and companyons of his life: so* that with to much gentle be hauyoure
and famylyaryte he do not mar them, and by tomuche sufferaunce of his
servants make them his masters. Emonge thyes things now rehearsed
stealethe away the day, the month, the year. When do I write then? And all
this while have I spoken no word of sleep, another yet of meat, which emonge
a great number does waste no less time, then does sleep, wherein almooste
half the life time of man crepethe away. I therefore do win and get
only that time, which I steal from sleep and meat. Which time because yt
is very littell, and yet somewhat it is, therefore have I ones at the last,
though it be long first, finished Vtopia, and have sent it to you friend
Peter to read and peruse: to the intent that if any thing have escaped me,
you might put me in remembrance of it. For though in this behalf I do not
greatly mistruste meself (which would God I were somewhat in wit and
learning, as I am not all of the wor^^e and dullest memory) yet have I not so
great trust and confidence in it, that I think nothing could fall out of my
mind. For John Clement my boy, who as you know was there present with us,
whom I suffer to be away from no talk, wherein may be any profit or goodness
(for out of this young bladed and new shot up corn, which has already
begone to spring up both in Latin and Greek learning, I look for
plentiful increase at length of goodly ripe grain) he I say has brought me
into a great doubt. For whereas Hythlodaye (oneles my memory fail me) said
that the bridge of Amaurote, which goes over the river of Anyder is five
hundredth paseis, that is to say, half a ^^yle in length: my Ihon says that
^^. hundred of those paseis must be plucked away* for that the river
conteyneth there not above three hundredth paseis in bredthe. I p^^ye you heartily
call the matter to your remembrance. For if you agree with him, I also will
say as you say, and confess me self deceived. But if you cannot remember
the thing, then suerly I will write as I have done, and as mine own
remembrance serves me. For as I will take good head that there be in my book
nothing fal^e, so if there ^e any thing in doubt* I will rather tell a lie
then make a lie: because I had be good the^ wise rather. Howbeit this matter
may easily be remedied, if you will take the pains* to ask the question of
Raphaell himself by word of mouth, if he be now with you, or else (...)
your letters. Which you must needs* do for an other doubt also, which has
chanced, through whoes fault I cannot tell* whether through^ ^yne or youres
or Raphaels. For neither we remembered to enquire of him, nor he to tell us in
what part of that ^^we world Vtopia is situate. The which thing, I had
rather have spent no small sum of money, then that it should thus have
escaped us: as well for that I am ashamed to be ignorant in what sea that
Island stands, whereof I write so long a treatise, as also because there be
with us certain men, and especially one devout and godly man* and a
professor of divinity, who is exceeding desierous to go unto Vtopia: not for
a vain and curious desiere to see news, but to the intent he may^ further and
increase our religion which is there already luckely bego^^e. And that he may
the better accomplish and perform this his good intent, he is minded to
procure that he may be sent thither of the bishop, yea and that he himself
may be ma^e bishop of Vtopia: being nothing scrupulous: herein, that he must
obtain this byshopricke with suete. For he counts that a godly (...), which
proceeds not of the desiere of honor or lucre, but only of a godly zeal.
Wherefore I most earnestly desyere you, friend Peter, to talk with Hythlodaye,
if you can, face to face, or else to write your letters to him, and so to work
in this matter, that in this my book there may neither any thing be found
which is untrue, neither any thing be lacking, which is true. And I think
verily it shall be well done that you show unto him the book it self. For if I
have myssed or failed in any point, or if any fault have escaped me, no man
can so well correct and amend it, as he can: and yet that can he not do,
oneles he peruse and read over my book written. Moreover by this means shall
you perceive, whether he be well willing and content that I should undertake
to put this work in writing. For if he be minded to publyshe and putforth his
own labors and trauayles himself, perchance he would be loathe, and so would
I also, that i^ publyshynge the Vtopiane weal publyque, I should preuente,
and take from him the flower and grace of the novelty of this his history.
Howbeit, to say the very truth, I am not yet fully determined with meselfe,
whether I will put forth my book or no. For the nat^res of men be so diverse,
the fantasies of some so wayewarde, their minds so unkind, their
judgments so corrupt, that they which lead a merry and a iocounde life,
followinge their own sensual pleasures and carnal lusts, may se^^e to be
in a much better state or case, the^ they that vex and unquiet themselves
with cares and study for the putty^ge forth and publyshynge of some thing,
that may be either profett or pleasure to other: which nevertheless will
disdaynfully, scornefully, and unkindly accept the same. The most part of al
be unlearned. And a great number has learning in contempt. The rude and
barbarous allows nothing but that which is very barbarous in deed. If it be
one that has a little smacke of learning, he rejects as homely and commen
ware whatsoever is not (...) full of old ^^oughteate^ words, and that be
worn out of use. Some there be that have pleasure only in old rustie
antiquities. And some only in their own doings* One is so sour, so
crabbed, and so unpleasant, that he can away with no myrthe nor sport. An
other is so narrow in y^ sholders, that he can bear no iestes nor ^awntes.
Some (...) poor souls be so aferd that at every s^appishe word their nose
shall be bitten of, that they stand in no less dread of every quick and
sharp word, then he that is bytten of a mad dog fears water. Some be so
mutable and waueryng, that every hour they be in a new mind, sainge one
thing sitting, and an other thing standy^ge. An other sort sytteth upon
their allebencheis, and there among their cups they give judgment of the
wits of writers, and with great authority they condemn eue^ as pleases
the^^ every writer according to his writing: in most spiteful manner mocking,
lowtynge, and ^l^wtynge them: being themselfes in the (...) ^eason ^a^ffe, and
as says the proverb, out of all danger of go^neshotte. For why they be so
(...) and smoethe, that they have not so much as ^ne hear of an honest man,
whereby one may take hold of them. There be moreover some so unkind and
vngen^ell, that though they take great pleasure and delectation in the work,
yet for all that they can not find in their hearts to love the author thereof,
nor to aforde him a good word: being much like vncosrteis, unthankful, and
chourlishe guestes. Which when they have with good and deyutie mea^es well
filled their bellyes, depart home geuynge no thanks to the feast maker. Go
your ways now and make a costly feast at your own charge is for guestes
so dep^tie mouthed, so dy^ers in taste, and bisydes that of so unkind and
unthankful natures. But nevertheless friend Peter do I pray you with
Hythlodaye as I willed you before. And as for this matter, I shall be at my
liberty afterward to take new aduisement. Howebeit, seeing I have taken
great pay^es and labor in writing the matter, if it may stand with his
mind and pleasure, I will as touching the edition or publishing of the book,
follow the counsel and advise of my friends, and specially yours. Thus fare
you well right heartily beloved friend Peter, with your gentell wife: and love
me as you have ever done, for I love you better then ever I did.

The first book of the communycacion of Raphaell hythlodaye concerning the
best state of a commen wealth.
THe most vyctoryous and tryumphante King of England Henry the ight of that
name in all royal virtues Prince most peerlesse, had of late in contra^ersie
with the right high and myghtie king of Castle weightye matters and of great
importance, for the debatement and final determination whereof y^ kings
May. sent me Ambassador into flanders joined in co^missio^ with cuthebert
Tu^stall a man doubteles owte of comparison, and whom the kings majesty of
late to the great reioysyng of all men did prefer to y^ office of master of
y^ Rolls: but of this man's praises I will say nothing, not because I do
fear that small credence shall be given to the testymo^y that commyth out of a
frindes mouth: but because his virtue and lernyng be greater and of more
excellencye, than that I am able to praise them: and also in all places so
famous, and so perfectlye well known, that they need not nor ought not of me
to be praised, onles I would seem to show and set forth the brightenes of the
son with a candell, as the Proverb says. There met us at Bruges (for thus
yt was before agreed) they whom their prince had for that matter appointed
commyssyoners, excellent men all. The chief and the head of the^ was the
Marcgraue (as they call him) of Bruges, a right honorable man: but the wisest
and the best spoken of them was George Temsice pro^oste of Casselles, a man not
only by lernyng but also by nature of singular eloquence, and in the laws
profoundelye le^ned: but in reasonynge, and debatynge of matters what by his
natural wit, and what by daily exercise, suerlye he had few fellows.
After that we had ones o^ twice met, and upon certain points or artycles
could not fully and throughlye agree: they for a certain space took their leave
of us, and departed to Bruxelle there to know their princes pleasure. I in
the mean time (for so my busynes lay) went streyghte thens to Antwerpe.
Whiles I was there abydinge often times among other, but which to me was more
welcome then annye other* did vysite me o^e Peter Gyles a Citisien of Antwerpe,
a man there in his contr^y of ho^est reputatyon, and also preferred to high
promotyons, worthy truly of the highest. For it is hard to say whether the
young man be in lerny^ge or in honestye more excellent. For he is both of
wonderful virtuous condytyons, and also singulerlye well^lerned, and toward
all sorts of people exceeding gentyl. But toward his fryndes so kind hearted
so loving, so faithful / so trustye, and of so earneste affectyon, that yt
were very hard in any place to find a man, that with him in all points of
frendshyppe may be compared. No man can be more lowlye or courteys. Noman
vsithe less symulatyon or dyssymulatyon, in no man is more prudente
symplycytye. Besides this he is in his talk and commu^ycatyon so merye and
pleasant, Yea and that without harm that through his gentle intertaynement
and his sweet and delectable communycatyon in me was greatly abated and
dymynyshed the fervent desire that I had to see my natyue contreye, my wyffe
and my children, whom then I did much long and co^ett to see, because that
at that time I had been more then.iiij. monythes from them. Upon a certain
day as I was herynge the deuyne service in our ladies church, which is the
fairest the most gorgious and curyous church of building in all the city
and also most frequented of people, and when the deuyne was done, was ready
to goo home to my lodgyng, I chanced to epsy this forsayde Peter talking
with a certain stranger a man well stryken in age with a blake son burned
face, a long bearde and a cloak cast homely about his shoulders, whom by his
favor and apparel forthwythe I judged to be a maryner. But when this Peter
saw me, he cummythe to me and saluteth me. And as I was abowte to answer him:
see you this man says he (and therwyth he poynted to the man that I saw him
talking with before) I was minded quod he to bring him streyghte home to you.
He should have be^e very welcome to me said I for your sake. Nay (quod he)
for his own sake if you knew him, for there is no man this day living that
can tell you of so many strange and unknown peoples and co^treis as this man
can. And I know well that you be very desirous to hear of such news. Than I
coniectured not far a mysse (quod I) for eue^ at the first syghte I judged
him to be a maryner. Nay (quod he) there ye were greatly deceived: he hayth
sailed indede not as the maryner Palynure but as the expert and prudent prince
Ulysses: Yea rather as the ancient and sage Philosopher Plato. For this same
Raphaell Hythlodaye (for this is his name) is very will learned in the Latyne
tongue: but profounde and excellent in the greek tongue: Wherein he ever bestowed
more study than in the lattyne, because he had given him self holy to the
study of Phylosphy. Whereof he know that there is nothing extante in the
lattyne tongue that is to an^y purpose, saving a few of Senecaes and Ciceroes
doings. His patrymonye that he was borne unto he left to his brethren (for
he is a Portugalle borne) and for the de^yre that he had to see and k^owe the
far contreys of the world he joined him self (...) company with Amerike
vespuce, and in the.iij. last voyages of thoes iiij. that be now in prynte
and abroad in every man's hands he continued still in his company, saving
that in te last voyage he came not home again with him. For he made such
means and shyfte what by intreataunce and what by importune suit, y^ he got
ly^ence of master Amerycke (though it were sore against his will) to be one
of the.xxiiij. which in the end of the last voyage were let in the contrye
of Gulike. He was therefore left behind for his mi^des sake, as one that took
more thought and care for trauaylyng, then dyinge: having customablye in his
mouth these sayi^ges. He that has no grave is covered with the sky, and The
way to heaven owte of all places is of like lenghth and distance. Which
fa^tasye of his (if God had not been his betterfrende) he had suerlye bought
full dear. But after the departing of Master ^espuce, when he had
trauayled thoroughe and abowte many contreis with v. of his companyo^s
Gulykyans, at the last by marvelous chance he arrived in Taprobane, from
whens he went to Calyquit, where he chanced to find certain of his country
ships, wherein he returned again into his countreye, nothing less the^ lokyd
for. All this when Peter had told me: I thankyd him for his gentle kyndnes
that he had vouchesaufed to bring me to the speech of that man, whose
commu^ication he thought should be to me pleasant and acceptable. And there
with I turned me to Raphaell and when we had haylsede the one the other and had
spoken thies come^ words, that be customably spoken at the first metynge and
acquentaunce of strangers we went thens to my house and there in my gardeyne
upon a benche coueryd with grene tor^es we satte down talking togethers. There
he told us how that after the departing of vespuce, he and his fellows that
tarryed behind in Gulyke began by little and little thoroughe he fair and
gentle speech to win the love and favor of the people of that contreye in so
much that within short space, theye did dwell among them not only
harmelese, but also occupied with them very famylyerly. He told us also that
they were in high reputatyon and favor with a certain great man (whose
name and contreye is now quyte owte of my remembrance) which of his mere
lyberalytye did bear the costs and charges of him and his five companions.
And besides that gave them a trustye g^yde to conducte them in their journey
(which by water was in botys and by land in wagains) and to bring them to
other princes witheverye frindlye commendatyons. Thus after many days
iourneis, he said they found townys and cytyes, and weal publyques full of
people governed by good and holsom laws. For under the line equynoctyall and
of both sides of the same as far as the son does extend his course, lies
(quod he) great and wide deserts and wyldernesses parched burned and d^yed
up with continual and intolerable heat. All things be hydeous terryble
lothesome and unpleasant to be hold: all things owte of fasshyon and
comylynes inhabyted with wild beasts and serpents, or at the least wise
with people that be no less savage wild and noisome, then the very beasts
them selfs be. But a little farther beyond that all things begin by little and
little to wax pleasant. The air soft temperate and gentle. The ground
covered with grene grass. Less wildnes (...) the beasts. At the last shall
ye come again to people cities, and towns wherein is contynuall intercourse and
occupyinge of marchandyse and chaffare not only among them selfs and with
their borderers, ^ut also with merchants of far contreys both by land
and water. There I had occasion (said he) to go to man yecontreys of every
side. For there was no ship reddye to any voyage or journey, but I and my
fellows were into it very gladlye receauyde. The ships that they found
first were made plain flat and broad in the botome troughewyse. The sails
were made of great russhes or of wyckers, and in some places of lether.
Afterward they found ships with rydged kyeles: and sails of canuas, yea
and shortelye after having all things like owers. The shyppemen also very
expert and conning both in the sea and in the wether. But he said that he
found great favor and fryndeshyppe among them for teaching them the feate
and use of the lode stone. Which to them before that time was unknown. And
therefore they were wont to be very tymerous and fearful upon the sea. Nor
to venture upon it, but only in the somer time. But now they have such a
confidence in that stone, that they fear not stormy winter, in so doing
ferther from care then ieopardye. I^ so much that it is greatly to be
doubtyd, lest that thing thoroughe their own folyshe hardynes shall turn
them to evil and harm, which at the first was supposyde should be to them
good and commodyous. But what he told us that he saw, in every country
wheare he came, it were very long to declare. Another it is my purpose at this
time to make rehersall thereof. But peradventure in an other place, I will
speak of yt, chyefelye such things as shall be profitable to be known, as in
special be thoese decrees and ordinances that he marked to be well and
wyselye pro^yded and e^acted among such peoples as do live to gethere in a
cyuyle pollycye and good order. For of such things did we busily inquire,
and demand of him, and he like wise very wyllynglye told us of the same,
But as for mo^sters, because they be no news, of them we were nothing
inquysitine. For nothing is more easy to be found, then bebarking Scyllaes,
rauenyng Celenes, and Lestrygo^es deuowerers of people, and such like great
and vncredyble monsters, but to find cytyzyns ruled by good and wholesome laws,
that is an exceeding rare and hard thing. But as he markyd many fond and
folyshe laws in thoose new found lands, so he rehersyde many acts and
constytutyons whereby thies our cytyes, nations, contreys and Kingdoms may
take ensample to amend their faults enormytyes and errors, whereof in another
place as I said I will entreat. Now at this time I am determined to rehearse
only that he told us of the manners customs, laws, and ordinances of the
vtopians. But first I will repete our former communycatyon by thoccasyon, and
as I might say the dryfte whereof he was browghte into the mentyon of that
weal publyque. For when Raphaell had very prudently touched diverse things
that be amysse sum here and sum there, yea very many of both parts, and
again had spoken of such wise and prudent laws and decrees as be
establyshed and vsyde both here among us and also there emonge them, as a man
so conning and expert in the laws and customs of every several cou^treye,
as though into what place so ever he came geaste wise, there he had led al his
life: then Peter much meruellyng at y^ man: Surely master Raphaell (quod he) I
wondere greatly why you get you not into some Kings court, for I am sewre
there is no prince living that would not be very glad of you: as a man not
only able hyghelye to delight him with your profounde learning, and this your
knowledge of contreis and peoples, but also are meat to instruct him with
examples and help him with counsel. And thus doing you shall bring yowre
self in a very good case, and also be in habylytye to help all your fri^des
and kyn^folke. As concerning my fryndes and kyn^folke (quod he) I pass not
greatly for them. For I think I have suffycyentlye done my part toward them
all ready. For thies things that other men do not depart from until they be
old and sick, yea which they be the^ very loathe to leave when they can no
longer keep, those very same things did I being not o^lye lustye, and in
good health, but also in y^ flowere of my youth, deuyde among my fryndes and
kyn^folkes which I think with this my liberalytye owghte to hold them
contentyd and not to require nor to look that be^ydes this I should for
their fakes give my self in bondage to kings. Nay god forbedde (quod peter)
it is not my mind y^ you should be in bondage to kings, but as a retaynoure
to them at your pleasure which sewrelye I think is the nygheste way that
you can deuyse how to bestow your time frutefullye, not only for the
pryuate commoditye of your fryndes and for the general proffytte of all sorts
of people, but also for the auauncemente of your self to a much welthier
state and condytyon then you be now in, To a welthyer condition (quod Raphael)
by that means that my my^de standethe clean against? Now I ^y^e at lybertye
after mine own mind and pleasure, which I think very few of these great
states and peers of realms cansaye. Yea and there be ynowe of them that sike
for great men's frindeshippes* and therefore think it no great hurt, if they
have not me nor.ij. or.iij. such other as I am. Well I perceive plainlye frind
Raphaell (quod I) that you be desierous another of riches, nor of power. And
truly I have in no less reverence and estimatyon a man that is of your mind,
then an^y of them all that be so high in po^r and authority. But you shall do
as it becommith you, yea and according to this wisdom and this high and
free co^raghe of youres, if you can find in your heart so to appoynte and
dyspose your self that you may apply your wit and delygence to the proffyt
of the weal publyque, though it be ^ume what to your own pain and
hyndraunce. And this shall you ^euer so well do, nor with so great proffitte
perform, as if you be of sum great princes council, and put in his head
(as I doubt not but you will) honest opynyons, and virtuous persuasyons. For
from the pry^ce, as from a perpetual well spring cummythe among the people
the floode of all that is good or evil. But in you is so perfitte ler^ynge
that wythowte any experience and again so great experyence that without
any learning you may well be anny kings counselor. You be twyse deceived
master More (quod he) first in me, and again in the thing it self. For
another is in me that habilitye that you force upon me, and if it were never so
much, yet in dysquieting mine own quietness I should nothing further the weal
public, for first of all the most part of all princes have more delight in
warlike matters and feats of che^alrie (the knowledge whereof I another have nor
desire) than in the good feats of peace, and employe much more study how by
right or by wrong to enlarge their dominions, tha^ how well and peaceably to
rule and govern that they have all ready. More over they that be counselors
to kings, every one of them either is of him self so wise in deed that he
need not orelles he thinks him self so wise, that he will not allow an other
man's counsel: saving that they do shamefully and flatteringly give assent to
the fond and f^lishe sayings of certain great men. Whose favors, because
they be in high authority with their prince, by assentacion and flattering
they labor to opteyne, And verily it is naturally given to all men to esteame
their own inuentyons best. So both the raven and the apethincke their own
yongo^es fairest. Than if a man in such a company, where some disdain and have
despite at other men's in^entions, and some cownte their own best, if among
such men I say a man should bring forth any thing: that he hayth read
done in times paste, or that he has seen done in other places, there the
hearers fare as though the hole existimacion of their wisdom were in ieopardy
to be overthrown, and that ever after they should be counted for very
diserdes, onles they cold in other men's inventions pycke out matter to
reprehende and find ^^wt at. If all other pore helps fail: then this is their
extreme refuge. Thies things (say they) pleased our forefathers and
auncetours: would god we could be so wise as they were: and as though they
had wittely concluded the matter, and with this answer stoppid every man's
mouth, they sit down again. As who should say it were a very dangerous
matter, if a man in any point should be found wiser then his forefathers
were. And yet be we content to suffer the best and wittiest of their decrees to
lie unexecuted: but it in any thing a better order might have been taken,
than by them was, theare we take fast hold and find many fawtes. Many times
have I chanced upon such proud lewd ouerthwarte and waywarde Judgments,
yea and o^es in England. I pray you Sire (quod I) have you been in owr
country? yea forsothe (quod he) and their I tarried for the space of.iiij.
or.v. monythes together, not long after the insurreccion, that the western
English men made against their king, which by their own miserable and
pitefull slaughter was suppressed and endyd. In the mean season I was much
bound and beholden to the right reverend father Ihon Morton Archbishop and
cardenall of Canterburye and at that time also Lord chancellor of England a
man master Peter (for master More knows all reddy that I will say) not
more honorable for his aucthority, the^ for his prudence and virtue. He was of
a mean stature and streken in age though, yet bare he his body vpryght. In his
face did shine such an amiable reverence as was pleasant to behold. Gentell
in co^munycatyon yet earneste and sage. He had great delight many times with
roughe speech to his ^ewters to prove, but wythowte harm, what prompte wit,
and what bold sprite were in every man. In the which as in a virtue much
agreinge with his nature, so that therewyth were not ioyn^d impudency, he took
great delectatyon. And the same person as apt and mete to have an
admin^stratyon in the weal public he did lovingly enbrace. In his speech he
was ^yne eloquent and pythye. In the law he had profounde knowledge, in wit
he was incomparable, and in memory wonderful excellent. Thies qualytyes which
in him were by nature synguler, he by learning and use had made perfytte. The
^ynge putt much trust in his council the weal publyque also in a manner
leaued unto him when I was there. For even in the chief of his youth he was
taken from schole into the Court, and there passyd all his time in much
trouble and busynes, and was contynually troubled and tossed with diverse
mysfortunes and aduersytyes. And so by many and great dangers he learned thee
xperience of the wordle, which so being learned can not easily be forgotten.
It chanced on a certain day when I sat at his table, there was also a
certain lay man cu^nynge in the laws of yowre Realm. Which, I can not tell
whereof taking occasyon, began dyligently and busily to praise that strayte and
rygorous justice, which at that time was there executed upon fello^es, who as
he said were for the most part.xx. hanged together upon one gallows. And
seeing so few escapyd punyshement he said he could not chewse but greatly
wonder and marvel, how and by what evil ^n^ke it should so cum to pass that
thieves nevertheless were in every place so ryffe and rank. Nay Sir quod I (for
I durst boldly speak my mind before the Cardynall) marvel nothing herat, for
this punyshement of thieves passes of the lymytes Justice, and is also very
hurtefull to the weal publyque. For it is to extreme and crewell a
punishment for theft, and yet not sufficient to refrain men from theft. For
simple theft is not so great an offense, that it owght to be punished with
death. Another there is any punishmente so horrible that it can keep them from
stealing which have no other craft whereby to get their living. Therefore in
this point, not you only, but also the most part of the wordle be like evil
scholemasters which be ready are to beat then to teach their scholars. For
great and horrible punysheme^tes be appointed for thieves, whereas much rather
prouysyon should have been made, that there were some means whereby they might
get their living, so that no man should be dreuen to this extreme
necessity, first to steal, and then to dye. Yes (quod he) this matter is well
enough provided for all ready. There be ha^dy crafts there is husbandry to
get their living by if they would not wyllingely be nowgh^. Nay (quod I) you
shall not skape so, for first of all I will speak nothing of them that come
home owte of war may mede and lame, as not long ago owte of black heath
filde, and a lityll before that out of the wars in France: such (I say) as
put their lives in ieopardy for the weal publiques or the kings sake, and by
the reason of weakness and ^amenes be not able to occ^py their old crafts,
and be to aged to learn new: of them I will speak nothing, because war
like the tide ebbeth and flows. But let us consydere those things that
chance daily before our eyes. First there is a great number of gentilmen,
which can not be content to live idle them selfs like dorres of that which
other have laboryd for: their tenauntes I mean, who^ they polle and shave to
y^ quycke by reysing their rentes (for this only point of frugalitye do they
use, men else thoroughe their lauasse and prodigal spending able to bring
them selfs to very beggary) thies gentilmen (I say) do not only live in
ydilnes them selfs, but also carry about with them at their tails a great
flock or train of ydell and loytrynge serving men, which never learned any
craft whereby to get their liuinges. Thies men as soon as their master is
dead, or be sick them selfs, be incontinent thruste owte of doors. For
ge^^lemen had rather keep ydil perso^es then sick men, and many times the d^ad
man's heyr is not able to mainteyne so great a house, and keep so many seruinge
men as his father did. Then in the m^ane season they that be thus destytute
of service, other starve for honger, or manfully play the theaues. For what
would you have them to do? When they have wandered abroad so long until they
have worn threde bare their apparel and also appayred their health, then
gentlemen because of their pale and sick faces and patched co^es will not take
them into service. And husbandmen dare not set them a work: Knowing well
enough that he is nothing mete to do true and faithful service to a poor
man with a spade and a mattoke for small wages and hard fare, which being
dey^^ely and tenderly pampered up in ydilnes and pleasure, was wont with a
sword and a buckeler by his side to iette through the street with a bragging
look and to think him self to good to be any man's mate. Nay by saint Marie
se^ (quod the lawier) not so, for this kind of men must we make most of. For
in them as men of stowter stomachs, bolder spyrytes, and manlyer currages then
handy crafts men and plowe men be, does consyste the hole power strength and
puisaunce of our host when we must fight in battaill. Forsothe ser as well
you might say (quod I) that for wars sake you must cheryshe thieves. For
sewerly you shall never lack thieves whiles you have the^. No nor thieves be not
the most false and faint hearted soldiers, nor soldiers be not the cowardl^ste
thieves: so well thees.ij. crafts agree together. But this fawte, though it be
much used among you, yet is it not peculiar to you only, but commen also
almost to all natyons. Yet France besides this is troubled and infected with a
much sorer plage. The hole realm is filled and besieged with hierede
soldiers in peace time, if that be peace, which be brought in under the same
color and pretense, that haith persuaded you to kype thies ydell serving
men. For thies wisefooles and very archedoltes thought the wealth of the hole
country herin to con^ist, if there were ever in a readynes a strong and a
sewer garriso^, specyallye of old practysed soldyours, for they put no trust
at all in men vnexercysed. And therefore they must be feign to seek for war to
the end they may ever have practysed souldyours and cunning mansleers: least
that (as it is prettily said of Sal^ste) their hands and their minds
thoroughe ydylnes or lack of exercise ^houlde wax dull* But how pernycyous
and pestylente a thing it is to maynteyne such beasts, the French men by
there own harms have learned, and the examples of the Romans,
Carthaginie^s, Siriens and of many other contreys do manyfestly declare. For
not only the empire, but also the fieldys and cities of all thies, by di^ers
occasyons have been ouerru^ned and destroyed of their own armies before hand
had in a reddines. Now how unnecessary a thing this is hereby it may appear:
that the French soldiers which from their youth have by^e practysed and
vrede in feats of arms do not crack nor auaunce the^ selfs to have very
often got the vpperhande and masterye of your new made and vnpractysed
soldiers. But in this point I will not use many words least perchance I
may seem to flatter you. No nor those same ha^dy craft men of yours in cities,
nor yet the rude and vplandishe ploughemen of the country, are not supposed to
be greatly afraid of your gentilmens ydill serving men, onles it be such as
be not of body or stature correspondent to their strenghte and currage, orels
whose bold stomachs be dyscourraged thoroughe pouertye. Thus you may see,
that yt is not to be feared least they should be effe^y^atede they if were
brought up in good crafts and laborsome wourkes, whereby to get their
living, whose stowte and sturdye bodies (for gentlemen vouchesauffe to
corrupt and spill none but picked and chosen men) now other by reason of r^st
and ydil^es be brought to weakness, orels by to easy and womanlye exercises be
made feeble and unable to endure hardenes. Trewly how soever the case stondeth,
this me thinks is nothing a veyleable to the weal public, for war sack,
which you never have, but when you will your selfs, to keep and mainteyn an
innumerable flock of that sort of men, that be so troblesome and noyous in
peace, whereof you owght to have a thowsande times more regard the^ of war*
But yet this is not only the necessary cause of stealing. There is an other
which as I suppose is proper and peculiare to you English men alone. What is
that, quod the Cardenall* forsooth (quod I) your sheep that were wo^t to be so
myke and tame, and so small eaters, now, as I hear say, be become so great
deuowerers and so wild, that they eat up and swallow downthe very men them
selfs. They consume destroy and devour hole fields howses and cities. For
look in what parts of the realm does grow the fynyst, and therefore dearist
woll, there noble men, and gentlemen: yea and certain Abbottes, holy men god
wot, not contenting them selfs with the yearly reuennues and profyttes that
were wont to grow to their fore^athers and predecessors of their lands, ^or
being content that they live in rest and pleasure nothing profytyng ye much
noyinge the weal publiqu^: leave no ground ^or ryllage: they enclose all in
pastures: they throw down houses: they pluck down towns, and lea^e nothing
stondynge but only the church to make of it a shepehowse. And as though you
lost no small quantity of ground by forestes chases laundes and parkes, those
good holy men turn all dwellinges places and all glebelande into desolation
and wilderness. Therefore that one covetous and insatiable ^ormaraunte and very
plage of his natyue country may compass abowte and enclose many thousand acres
of ground to gether within one pale orhedge, the husbandmen be thrust owte of
their own, orels other by co^eyne or fraud, or by vyolent oppression they be
put besides it, or by wrongs and injuries they be so weried that they be
compelled to sell all: by one means therefore or by other, other by howke or
crook they must needs depart away, pore, sylie, wretched souls men, women,
husbands, wives fatherles children, widows, woeful mothers with their young
babes, and their hole household small in substance, and much in nombre, as
husbandry requires many hands. Away they trudge I say out of their known
and accustomed howses, fyndyng no places to rest in. All their household
stuff, which is very little worth, though it might well abide the sale: yet
being sodeynelye thrust out, they be constrained to sell it for a thing of
naught. And when they have wandering about so^e spent that, what can they else
do but steal, and then iustelye God wo^e behanged, or else go about a beggyng?
And yet then also they be cast in prison as vagaboundes, because they go about
and work not: whom no man will set a work, though they never so willingly
offer them selfs thereto. For one shepherde or heard man is enough to eat up
that ground with cattle, to the occupying whereof about husbandrye many hands
were requysyte. And this is also the cause that victualles be now in many
places dearer. Yea besides this y^ price of wolle is so risen that poor
folks, which were wont to work it and make cloth of it, be now able to bye
none at all. And by this means very many be feign to forsake work, and to
give them selfs to ydelnes. For after that so much ground was enclosed for
pasture, an infinite multitude of sheep died of the rotte, such vengeance God
took of their inordinate and insatiable covetousness, sendyng among the sheep
that pestiferous morreyn, which much more justly should ha^efallen on the
shepemasters own heads. And though y^ nu^bre of sheep increase never so fast,
yet the price falls not one myte, because there be so few sellers. For they
be almost all common into a few rich men's hands, whom no neade drives to
sell before they lust, and they lust not before they may sell as dear as they
lust. Now the same cause brings in lick dearth of the other kinds of
cattle, yea and that so much the more, because that after farms pluckyd
down, and husbandry decayed, there is no man that passyth for the breadyng of
young stoore. For thees rich men bry^ge not up the young ones of great
cattle as they do la^^es. But first they bye them abroad very chepe, and
afterward when they be fattede in their pastures they sell them again excedyng
dear. And therefore (as I suppose) the hole incommoditie hereof is not yet felt.
For yet they make dearth only in those places where they sell. But when they
shall fetch them away from thens wheare they be bredde faster then they can
be brought up: then shall there also be felt great dearth when stoore
begynnyth to fail their, whear the ware is bought. Thus the unreasonable
covetousness of a few has turned y^ thing to the utter undoing of your Island
in the which thing the chief felicity of your realm did consist. For this
great dearth of victualles causes every man to keep as little houses and as
small hospitality as he possible may. And to put away their servants:
whether I pray you but a beggynge: or else which thies gentle blood is and
stout stomakes, will sooner set their minds unto a stealinge? Now to amend
the matters to this wretched beggerye, and miserable poverty is joined great
wantonness, imp^rtunate superfluytie, and excessive ryote. For not only gently
men's servants, but also handy craft men: yea and almost the ploughemen of
the country, with all other sorts of people, use much strange and proud
new fanglenes in their apparel, and to much prodigal riotte and sumptuous
fare at their table. Now bawdes, qweynes, hoores, harlottes, strumpettes,
brothelhouses, stews, and yet an other stews, wine tauernes, ale houses, and
^ipling houses, with so many noughty lewd and unlawful games, as dice,
cards, tables, tennyes, bolles, coytes, do not al this send the hau^ters of
the^ straight a stealing when their money is gone. Cast out thies per^ycious
abomynacyons, make a law that they why^he plucked down fermes and towns of
husbandrye, shall build them up again, or else y^lde and vprender the
possessyon of them to such as will goo to the cost of building them anewe.
Suffer not thies rich men to bye up all, to ingrosse and forstalle, and with
their monopolye to keep the market alone as please them. Let not so many be
brought up in ydelnes, let husbandrye and tyllage be restored again, let
clothe workynge be renewed, that there may be honest labors for this ydell
sort to pass their time in profytablye, which hitherto other pouertye has
caused to be thieves, or else now be other vagabondes, or ydell serving men,
and shortelye wylbe thieves. Dowteles oneles you find a remedy for thyes
enormytyes, you shall be in vain auaunce your selfs of executinge justice upon
felloues. For this justice is more beautyfull then just or profitable. For by
sufferynge your youth wantonlye and viciouslye to be brought up, and to be
infected even from their tender age by little and little with vice: than a gods
name to be punyshed, when they commytte the same faults after they be commen
to man's state, which from there youth they were ever like to do: In this
point I pray you what other thing do you, then make thieves, and then
punyshe them? Now as I was thus speaking, the ^awier began to make him
self ready to answer, and was determined with him self to use the common
fassyon and trade of disputers, which be more dylygent in rehersynge, then
aunswerynge, as thynking the memory worthy of the chief praise. I^ deed sir
(quod he) you have said well being but a stranger, and one that might rather
here sum thing of thyes matters, then have any exact or perfect knowledge
of the same, as I will incontinent by open proffe make manifest and plain. For
first I will rehearse in order all that you have said: then I will declare in
what thing you be deceived, through lack of knowledge, in all our fassions,
manners and customs: and last of all I will answer to your arguments, and
confute them every one. First therefore I will begin where I promised. Four
things you seemed to me: hold your peace (quod the Cardynall) for by like you
will make no short answer, which make such a beginning, wherefore at this
time you shall not take the pains to make your answer, but keep it to
your next meatynge, which I would be right glad that it might be even to
morrow next (onles other you or master Raphaell have any earnest let).
But now master Raphaell, I would very gladly hear of you, why you think
theft not worthy to be punished with death: or what other punishment you can
deuyse more expedient to the weal public. For I am sewer you are not of
that mind, that you would have theft escape unpunished. For if now the
extreme punishment of death cannot cause them to leave stealing, then if
ruffians and rubbers should be sewer of their lives, what violence, what fear
were able to hold their hands from robbynge, which would take the mitigacion
of the punishment, as a very peruocation to the mischief? Suerly my lord
(quod I) I think it no right nor justice that y^ loss of money should cause
the loss of man's life. For mine opinion is that all the goods in the world
are not able to counteruayle man's life. But if they would thus say: that the
breaking of justice, and the transgression of the laws is recompensed with
this punishment, and not the loss of the money, then why may not this
extreme justice well be called extreme injury? For neither ^o cruel
governance, so streyte rules, and unmercifully laws be allowable, that if a
small offense be committed, by and by the sword should be drawn: Nor so
stoycall ordinances are to be borne wythall, as to count all offenses of
such equality, that the killing of a man, or the taking of his money from
him were both a matter, and the one no more heinous offense then the other:
between the which two, if we have annye respect to equity, no symylytude or
equalytie consysteth. God commands us that we shall not kill. And be we then
so hasty to kill a man for taking a little money? And if annye man would
understand killing by this commandment of GOD to be forbidden after no
larger wise then man's constitucio^s defyneth killing to be lawful, then why
may it not likewise by man's constitutions be determined after what sort
hooredome, fornication, and periurye may be lawful? For where as by the
permission of GOD no man has power to kill another him self, nor yet annye
other man: then if a law made by the consent of men concerning slaughter of
men: ought to be of such strength force and virtue, that they which
contrary to the commandment of GOD have killed those, whom this
constitucion of man commanded to be killed, be clean quyte and ^xempte owte
of the bonds and danger of Gods commandment: shall it not then by this
reason follow that the power of Gods commandment shall extend no further,
then man's law does defyne, and permytte? And so shall it come to pass,
that in like manner man's constitucions in all things shall determyne how far
the observation of all Gods commandments shall extend. To be short
Moses law, though it were ungentle and sharp, as a law that was given to
bondmen, yea and them very obstinate, stubborn, and styf necked: yet it
punnyshed theft b^ the purse, and not with death. And let us not think that
GOD in the new law of clemency and mercy, under the which he rules us
with fatherly gentleness, as his dear children has given us greater scoupe
and license to execute cruelty, one upon an other. Now ye have hard the
reasons whereby, I am persuaded that this punishment is unlawful. Furthermore I
think there is no body that knows not, how unreasonable, yea how pernicious a
thing it is to y^ weal public, that a thief and a homicide or morderer,
should suffer equal and like punyshme^t. For the thief seeing that man, that is
condemned for theft in no less ieoperdie, nor judged to no less punishment,
then him that is convict of ma^slaughter: through this cogitacion only he is
stronglye and forcybly provoked, and in a manner co^streyned to kyl him, whom
else he would have but robbed. For the murder ones done he is in less care, and
in more hope that the deed shall not be bewrayed or known, seeing the party
is now dead and rydde out of the way, which only might have uttered and
disclosed it. But if he chance to be taken and discriued: yet he is in no more
danger and ieopardie then if he had committed but single fello^ye. Therefore
whiles we goo about with such crueltye to make thieves aferd, we provoke the^
to kill good men. Now as touching this question, what punysshemente were more
commodyous and better: that truly in my judgment is easyer to be found, then
what punysshement were wurse. For why should we dowt that to be a good and a
profitable way for the punysshemente of offenders, which we know did in
times paste so long please the Romans, men in thadmynystratyon of a weal
publyque most expert polytyque and cunnyng? Such as among them wear
conuycte of great and heinous trespaces, the^ they condemned into ston
quarris, and in to myenes to dygge mettalle, there to be kept in cheynes all
the days of their life. But as concerning this matter, I allow the ordenaunce
of no nation so well as that I saw (whiles I trauayled a broad about the
wordle) used in Persia among the people that commenlye be called the
polylerytes. Whose land is bo^he large and ample, and also well and wyttelye
governed: and the people in all conditions free and ruled by their own laws,
saving that they pay a verily tribute to the great king of Persia But because
they be far from the sea, compassed and closed in almost round abowte with
high mountains, and do content the^ selfs with the fruits of their own
land, which is of yt self very fertyle and fruitful: for this ^ause ^other
they goo to other cow^ireys, nor other comme to them And according to the old
custom of the land, they desire not to enlarge the bowndes of their
domynyons: and those that they have by reason of the high hills be easelye
defended: and the trybute which they pay to the mighty King settethe them
quyete and free from warfare. Thus their lyffe is commodyous rather then
gallawnte, and may better be callede happ^e: or lucky^, then notable or
famous. For they be not known as much, as by name, I suppose, saving only to
their next neighbors and borderours. They that in this land be attay^tede
and conuycte of felonye make restitutyon of that they stool to the right
owner: and not (as they do in other lands) to the King: whom they think to
have no more right to the thief stolen thing than the thieffe him self has.
But if the thing be lost or made away, then the value of yt is paid of the
goods of such offe^dours, which else remains all hole to their wyffes and
children. And they them ^elfes be condemned to be common laborers: and onles
the theft be very heinous, they be another locked in prison, nor fettered in
gyues, but be untied and goo at large, laboring in the common works. They
that refuse labor, or goo s^owly and s^acly to th^re work, be not only tied
in cheynes, but also pricked forward with stripes. They that be diligent about
their woork^ live without check or rebuke. Every night they be called in by
name: and be locked in their chambers. Beside their daily labor their lyffe is
nothing hard or incommodyous. Their fare is indyfferent good, borne at the
chardges of the weal publyque, because they be commen servants to the commen
wealth. But their charges in all places of the land is not borne a like. For in
some parts that is bestowed upon them is gathered of alms. And though that
way be uncertain, yet the people be so full of mercy and pytie, that none is
fownde more profitable or plentyfull. In some places certey^ landis be
appointed here unto: of the revenues whereof they befownde. And in some places
every man geuyth a certain trybute for the same use and purpose. Again in
some parts of the land thies seruyng men (for so be thies damned persons
called) do no common work, but as every private man needs laborours, so he
comes into the markette place, and there hiereth some of them for meat and
drink, and a certain limityd wayges by the day, sumwhaat cheper then he
should hire a free man. It is also lawful for them to chastyce the slowth of
thies serving men with stryppes. By this means they never lack work, and
besides their meat and drink every one of them brings daily sum thing
into the common treasoury. All and every one of them be apparrayled in one
color. Their heddys be not polled or shaven, but rownded a little above the
ee^es. And the typpe of the one ear is cut of. Every one of them may take meat
and drink of their frindes, and also a cote of their own color: but to
receive monye is death, as well to the geuer, as to the receyuour. And no
less ieopardie it is for a free man to receive money of a serving man for
any manner of cause: and likewise for serving men to touch weapons. The
seruyng me^ of every several shyere be dystyncte and known from other by
their several and dystyncte badges: which to cast away is death: as it is
also to be seen owte of the precy^cte of their own sheire, or to talk with a
serving man of another shyere. An^ it is no less danger to them for to in
te^de to run away, then to do yt in deed. Yea and to concele such an
enterpryes in a serving man yt is death, in a free man seruytude. Of the
contrary part, to him that opens and v^^ereth such cownselles be decreyde
large gifts* to a free man a great sum of money, to a serving man
freedom: and to them both forgeuynes and pardone of that they were of
council in that pretense. So that yt can never be so good for them to goo
forward in their evil purpose, as by repentance to turn back. This is the
l^we and order in this behalf, as I have showed you. Wherein what humanytye is
vsede, how far yt is from crueltye, and how commodyous yt is, you do
plainly perceue: For as much as the end of their wrath and punyshemente
intends nothing else, but the distruc^yon of vices, and saving of men: with
so using and ordering them, that theye can not choose but be good, and what
harm so ever theye did before, in the ^eresydewe of their lyffe to make
amendys for the same. Moreover ^t is so little feared, that they should torn
again to their vycyous condy^yons, that wayefarynge men will for their
sauegarde choose them to their guydes before annye other, in every shepre
chaungynge and taking new. For if they would commytte robberye, theye have
nothing abowte them meat for that purpose. They may towch^ no weapons:
money fownde abowte them should betraye the robberye. They should be no
sooner taken with the manner, but furthwyth they should be punysshed. Another
theye can have annye hoope at all to skape away by flyenge. For how should a
man, that in no part of his apparel is like other men, fly preuely^ and
unknown, oneles he would run away naked? How be yt so also flyinge he
should be dyscryued by his rounding and his ^are ma^ke: But yt is a thing to
be dowted, that they will lay their heddes together, and conspire against the
weal publyque. No no I warraunte you. For the seruyng men of one shere alone
could never hoope to bring to pass such an enterprise, wythowte
sollycytynge, entysynge, and allurynge the serving men of many other shyeres
to take their parts. Which thing is to them so impossyble, that they may not
as much as speak or talk togethers, or salute one an other. No it is not to
be thought that they would make their own country men and companyons of their
cownsell in such a matter, which they know well should be ieopardye to the
concelour thereof, and great commodytye and goodness to the openner of the same:
where as on the other part, there is none of them al hoopeles or in dyspayre to
recover again his freedom, by humble obedience, by pacyent suffrynge, and by
geauyng good tokens and lyklyhode of himself, that he will ever after that,
live like a true and an honest man. For every year diverse be restoryd again
to their freedom: through the commendatyon of their patience. Wha^ I had thus
spoken, saying moreover that I could see no cause why this order might not be
had in England with much more proffyte, then the Justice which y^ lawier so
highly praised: Nay (quod the lawier) this could never be so stablished in
England, but that it must neades bring the weal public into great ieopardie
and hasarde. And as he was thus saying he shaked his head, and made a wrie
mouth, and so hel^ his peace. And all that were there present, with one assent
agreid to his saying. Well (quod the Cardinallpunc; yet it were hard to judge
withowte a proffe whether this order would do well here or no* But when y^
sentence of d^athe is given, if than the king should command e^ecution to be
differry^ and spared, and would prove this order and fassion: taking away the
privileges of all saintuaries: if the^ y^ proffe would declare the thing to be
good and profitable, tha^ it were well done that it were stablisshed: Else the
condemned and repriued parso^s may as well and as justly be put to death after
this proffe, as when they were first cast. Another any ieoperdye can in the
mean space grow hereof. Yea and me thinks that thies vagabou^des may very
well be ordered after the same fassion, against whom we have hitherto made so
many laws, and so little prevailed. When the Cardinal had thus said, than every
man gave great praise to my sayings, which a little before they had
disallowed. But most of all was esteemed that which was spoken of vagaboundes,
because it was the cardinals own addition. I can not tell whether it were
best to rehearse the communicatio^ y^ followed, for it was not very sad. But yet
you shall here it: for there was no evil in it, and partly it parteined to the
matter before said. There chau^sed to stond by a certain jesting parasite, or
scoffer, which would seem to resemble and cownterfeit y^ ^oole. But he did in
such wise counterfeyt, that he was almost y^ very same in de^d that he labored
to represe^t: he so studied with words and saynges brought forth so out of
time and place to make sport and move laughter, y^ he himself was oftener
laughed at the^ his iestes were. Yet the foolish fellow brought out now and
then such indifferent and reasonable stuff, that he made the proverb true,
which says he y^ shoteth often at y^ last shall hit y^ mark. So y^ when one of
y^ company said y^ thorough my communicatio^ a good ordr^ was found for thieves,
and y^ the Cardinal also had well provided for vagabou^des, so y^ only remained
some good provision to be made for the^ y^ through siknes and age were fallen
into poverty, and were become so impotente and v^weldye, that they were not
able to work for their living: Tush (quod he) let me alon with them: you
shall see me do well enough with them. For I had rather then any good that
this kind of people were dreuen sum^hether out of my sight, they have so sore
troubled me many times and often, when they have with their lamentable ^eares
begged money of me: and yet they could never to mimind so tune their so^g,
that thereby they ever got of me me one farthynge. For ever more the one of
thies two chanced: either that I would not, or else that I could not, because
I had it not. Therefore now they be waxed wise: when they see me goo bye,
because they will not leese their labor they let me go and say not one
word to me. So they look for nothing of me, no in good sothe no more the^ if
I were a priest* But I will make a law, that all thies beggars shall be
distribute, and bestowed into hou^es of religion. The men shall be made lay
brethren, as they call the^, and the women nu^nes. Here at the Cardenall
^miled, and allowed it (...), yea and all the residue in good earnest. But a
certain treare graduate in divinity to^e such pleasur and delight in this
ieste of prie^tes and monks, that he also, bei^ge else a man of grislye and
sterue grauitye, began merilye and wantonlye to ieste and taunt. Nay (quod
he) you shall not so be rid and dispatched of beggars, oneles you make some
provision also for us frears. Why (quod the iester) that is done a^lredy: for
mi lord him self set a very go^d order for you, when he decreed y^ vagabou^des
should be kept strayt, and set to work* for you be the great^st and ^eriest
vagabou^des that be. This jest also when they saw the Cardinal not disprove it,
every man took it gladly, saving only the Frear. For he (and that no marueil)
when he was thus towchyd one the quick, and hit on the gawl so fret so fumed
and chafi^ at it, and was in such a rage, y^ he could not refrayn himself from
chiding skolding, railing and reuiling. He called the fellow ribbald, villay^,
i^nell, backbiter, s^lau^derer, and the so^^e of perdition: citing therewith
terrible threatening out of holy scriptur. The^ y^ ie^ting skoffer began to
play y^, scoffer indede, and verily he was good at y^, for he could play apart
in y^ play no man better. Patie^t iour self good master Freare (quod he) and
be not angry, for scriptur says: in your patience you shall save your sowles.
Then the Freare (for I will rehearse his oune very words) No gailous, wretch*
I a^ not angry (quod he) or at the least wise, I do not sin: for the
psalmiste saith-be yo^ angry and sin not. The^ the Cardinal spoke gently to
the Freare, and desiered him to quyete himself. No my lord (quod he) I speak
not but of a good zeal as I ought: for holly me^ had a good zeal. Wherefore it
is said: y^ zeal of thy house has eaten me. And it is so^g in the church. The
skorners of Helizeus, whiles he went up into y^ house of god felt the zeal of
the bald, as peradue^tur this skorning villain ribauld shall feel. You do it
(quod y^ cardinal) perchance of a good mind and affection: but me thinks
you should do, I ca^ not tell whether more holily, certes more wisely, if you
would not set your wit to a fools wit, and with a fool take in hand a
foolish contention. No forsoeth my lord (quod he) I should not do more
wiselye. For Solomon the wise says: Answer a fool according to his
folishnes, like as I do now, and do show him y^ pit y^ he shall fall into, if
he take not head. For if many skorners of Helizeus, which was but one bald man,
felt y^ zeal of the balde, how much more shall one skorner of many frears
feel, among whom be many bald me^? And we have also the popes bulls, whereby
all that mock and skorne us be excommunicate, suspe^ded and acursed, The
cardinal seeing that none end would be made sent away the iester by a preuy beck,
and turned the co^municatio^ to an other matter. Sho^tly after when he was
risen from the table, he went to hear his sueters, and so dimissed us. Look
master More with how long and tedious a tale I have kept you, which suerly I
would have been ashamed to have done, but that you so earnestly desiered me,
and did after such a sort give ear unto hit, as though you would not that any
parcel of that communication should be left out. Which though I have done
sumwhat briefly, yet could I not choose but rehearse it, for the judgment of
the^, which when they had improued and disallowed my sayings, yet incontinent
hearing the Cardinal allow them, did themselfes also approve y^ same: so
impu^e^^ly flattering him, y^ they were nothing ashamed to admit, yea almost
in good earnest, his iesters folish inventions: because that he him self by
smiling at them did seem not to disprove the^. So that hereby you may right
well perceive how little y^ courtiers would regard and esteem me and my sayings.
I ensure you master Raphael (quod I) I took great delectation in hearing you:
all things that you said were spoken so wittily and so pleasau^tly. And me
thought my self to be in the mean time not only at home in my country, but
also through the pleasant remembrance of the Cardinal in whose housse I was
brought up of a child, to wax a child again. And fre^d Raphaell, though I
did bear very great love toward you before, yet seeing you do so earnestly
favor this man, you will not believe how much my love toward you is now
increased. But yet, all this notwithstanding, I can by no means change my
mind, but that I must needys believe y^ you, if you be disposed, and can find in
your heart to follow some princes court, shall with your good cownselles
greatly healpe and further the comme^ wealth. Wherefore there is nothing more
apperteynynge to your dewty, y^ is to say to y^ dewty of a good man. For where
as your Plato Iudgethe that weal publyques shall by this mea^es attain
perfect felicity, other if philosophers be kings, or else if kings give them
se^fes to the study of Philosophy, how far I pray you, shall commen
wealths then be from this felicity, if philosophers will vouchesaufe to
instruct kings with their good counsel? They be not so unkind (quod he) but
they would gladlye do it, yea many have done it all ready in books that they
have putfurth, i^ kings and princes would be wyllyng and ready to ^olowe good
counsel. But Plato doubteles did well forsee, oneles kings themselfes would
apply their minds to the study of philosophy, that else they would never
thoroughlye allow the counsel of philosophers, being themselfes before even
from their tender age infectyd, and corrupt with perverse, and evil opinions.
Which thing Plato himself prouyd true in king Dionise. If I should propose
to any king wholesome decrees, doing my endeavor to pluck out of his mind the
pernicious original causes of vice and noughtenes, think you not that I
should furth^ with other be driven away, or else made a la^ghy^ge stock?
Goo to suppose that I were with the French king, and there sitting in his
counsel whiles that in that most secret consultation, the king him self
there being present in his own p^^son^ they beat their brains, and search
the very bottomes of their wits to discuss by what craft and means the
king may still keep Myllayne, and draw to him again ^ugatyue Naples. And
then how to conquer the Venetians, and how to bring under his Jurisdiction
all Italye, then how to win the dominion of Fla^^ ders, Brabant, and of all
Burgundy: with diverse other lands, whole kingdoms he has long a goo in
mind and purpose invaded. Here whiles o^e counsels to conclude a leage of
peace with the Venetians, which s^al so long endure, as shall be thought (...)
and expedient for their purpose, and to make them also of their counsel, yea
and besides that to give them part of the pray, which afterward, when they
have brought they^ purpose abowte after their own minds they may require and
claym again. An other thinks best to hyere the Germaneynes. An other would
have the favor of the Swychers won with money. An others advise is to
appease the puyssaunte power of the emperors majesty with gold, as with a
most pleasant, and accep^able sacrifice. Whiles an other gives counsel to
make peace with the king of Arragone, and to restore unto him his own
kingdom of Nauarra as a full assurance of peace. An other cummeth in with
his.v. eggs, and aduyseth to howke in the king of Castle with sum hope of
affynytie or allyaunce, and to bring to their part certain peers of his
court for great pensions. Whiles they all stay at the chyefeste dowte of
all, what to do, in the mean time with England: and yet agree al in this to
make peace with the englismen, and with most suere and strong bonds to bind
that weak and feable frendshyppe, so that they must be called friends, and
had in suspicion as enemies: And that therefore the skottes must be had in a
reddines, as it were in a standing, reddie at all occasions, in au^ters the
English men should stir never so little, inco^tine^t to set upon them. And
moreover preui^ie and secretly, for openly it may not be done by the truce
that is taken, pr^^elye therefore I faye to make much of some peer of
England, that is bannyshed his country, which must cleyme title to the crown
of the realm, and affirm him self just inheritoure thereof, that by this
subtle means they may hold to them the king, in whom else they have but
small trust and affiaunce. Here I say, where so great and high matters be in
consultation, where so many noble and wise men counsel their king only to
war, here if I sely man should rise up and will them to t^rne over the
leaf, and learn a new lesson, sayng that my counsel is not to meddle with
Italy, but to tarrye still at home, and that the kingdom of france alone is
all most greater, then that it may well^ be governed of one man: so that the
king should not ^ede to study how to get more: And then should propose
unto them the decrees of the people that be called the Achoriens, which be
situate over against the Island of Vtopia on the sowthealte side. Thies
Achorien^ ones made war in their kings qua^^el for to get him an other
kingdom, which he laid clayne unto, and auaunced himself right inheritoure
to the crown thereof, by the title of an old aliaunce. At the last when they
had gotten it, an saw that they had even as much vexation and trouble in
keeping it, as they had in gettyng it, and that other there new conquered
subjects by sondrye occasions were making daily insurrections to rebel
against them, or else that other countries were contynually with diverse inrodes
and forraginges inuadinge them: so that they were ever fyghtinge other for
the^, or against them, and never could break up* their camps: Seeing them
selfs in the mean season pylled and impoueryshed: their money carried out of
the Realm; their own me^ ky^led to maintain the glory of an other nation*
when they had no war, peace nothing better then war, by reason that their
people in war had ^^^red themselfes to corrupt and wicked manners: that they
had taken a delycte and pleasure in robby^ge and stealyng that through
manslaughter they had gathered boldenes to mischief: that their laws were
had in contemp^e, and nothing set by or regarded: that their king being
troubled with the chardge and governance of two kingdoms, could not nor was
not able perfectly to discharge his office toward them both: seeing again
that all thies euelles and troubles were endeles: at the last laid there heads
together, and like faithful and louinge subjects gave to their king free
choice and liberty to keep still the ^ne of this.ij. kingdoms, whether he
would: allegyng that he was not able to keep both, and that they were mo the^
might well be governed of half a king: for as much as no man would be content to
take him for his mulettour y^ keeps an other man's moyles besides his. So this
good prince was co^streyned to be content with his old kingdom, and to give
over the new to o^^ of his friends. Which shortelie after was viole^tlie
dreue^ out. Furthermore if I should declare unto them, that all this busy
preparaunce to war, whereby so many nations for his sake should be brought into
a troublesome hurley-burley when all his coffe^s were emptied, his treasures
wasted and his people destroyed, should at the length through some mischau^ce be
in vai^e and to none effect: and that therefore it were best for him to content
him self with his own kingdom of france, as his forfathers and predecessors
did before him: to make much of it, to enriche it, and to make it as
flourisshing as he could, to endeavor himself to love his subjects, and again
to be beloved of the^, willingly to live with the^ peaceably to govern them, and
with other kingdoms not to meddle, saying that which he has all reddy is
(...) enough for him, yea and more then he can well turn him to: this my^^e
advise master More how thy^ke you it would be hard and taken* So God help me
not very thankefully (quod I). Well let us pro^ede then (quod he). Suppose that
some king and his counsel were together whettinge their wit^es and deuisinge
what subtell craft they might inue^te to enryche the king with great
treasures of money. First one councelleth to raise and enhaunce the va^^acion
of money when the ^ing must pay any: and again to call down the value of
coy^e, to less the^ it is worth, when he must receive or gather any. For th^s
great sommes shall be paid with a ly^yll money, and where little is due much
shall be received. An other counsels to fay^e war, that when under this
color and pretense the king has gathered great abundance of money, he may
when it shall please him make peace with great solempnitie and holy ceremonies
to blind the eyes of the poor communaltie, as taking pity and compassion God
wot upon man's blood like a loving and a merciful prince. An other puts
the king in remembrance of certain old and moughteeaten laws, that of long
time have not been put in execution, which because no man can remember that
they were made, every man has transgressed. The fynes of thies laws he
cou^selleth the king to require: for there is no way so proffytable, nor more
honorable, as the which has a show and color of justice. An other aduyseth
him to forbid many things under great penalties and fines, specially such
things as is for the peoples profit not be used, and afterward to dispense for
money with the^, which by this prohibicion sustain loss and damage. For by
this means the favor of the people is won, and proffite rises two ways.
First by taking forfaytes of them whom covetousness of gaynes has brought in
danger of this statute, and also by selling preuyleges and licenses, which
the better that the prince is forsothe, the deerer he sells them: as one that
is loathe to grant to any pryuate person any thing that is against the
proffyt of his people. And therefore may sell none but at an exceeding dear
price. An other gives the king counsel to endaunger unto his grace the
judges of the Reyalme, that he may have them ever on his side, which must in
every matter despute and reason for the kings rygth. And they must be called
into the kings palace, and be desired to argue and discuss his matters in his
own presence. So there shall be no matter of his so openly wrong and unjust,
wherein one or other of them, other because he wy^l have sumthyng to allege and
obiecte, or y^ he is ashamed to say that which is said already, or else to
pike a thank with his prince, will not find some hole open to set a s^are in,
wherewith to take the contrary part in a trippe. Thus whiles the judges
cannot agree among themselfes, reasoning and arguing of y^ which is plain
enough, and bringing the manifest trewthe in dowte: in the mean season y^ king
may take a fyt occasion to understand the law as shall most make for his
aduau^tage, where unto al other for shame or for fear will agree. Then the
Judges may be bold to pronounce of the kings side. For he that gives
sentence for the king cannot be without a good excuse. For it shall be sufficient
for him to have equity of his part, or the bar^ words of the law, or a
wrythen and wr^sted understanding of the same, or else which with good and
just Judges is of greater force then all laws be, the kings indisputable
prerogative. To conclude, all the counselors agree and consent together with
the rich Crassus, that no abundance of gold can be sufficient for a prince,
which must keep and maynteyne an army: furthermore that a king, though he
would, can do nothing unjustly. For all that all men have, yea also the men
the^ selfs be all his. And that every man has so much of his own as y^ kings
gentilnes has not taken from him.

And that it shall be most for y^ kings advantage that his subjects have very
little or nothing in their possession, as whose sauegarde does herein consiste,
that his people do not wax wanton and wealthy through riches and liberty,
because where thies things be, there me^ be not wont patientlye to obey
hard unjust and unlawful commandments. Where as on the other part neade
and poverty does hold down and keep under stowte courages, and makes them
patie^t perforce, taking from them bold and rebellynge stomakes. Here again
if I should rise up, and boldelye affirm that all thies counselles be to the
king dishonor and reproach, whoes honor and ^auitie is more and rather
supported and vpholden by the wealth and riches of his people, then by his own
treasures, and if I should declare that the co^minaltie chueseth their king for
their own sake and not for his sake: for this intent that through his labor
and study they might al li^e wealthily sauffe from wrongs and injuries: and
that therefore the king ought to take more care for the wealth of his people,
then for his own wealth, even as the office and dewtie of a shephearde is, in
that he is a shepherd, to feade his sheep rather then himself. For as towchynge
this, that they think the defense and mayntenaunce of peace to consiste in the
poverty of the people, the thing it self shows that they be far out of the
way. For where shall a man find more wra^gling quarelling brawling and
chiding, then among beggars? Who be more disierous of new mutations and
alterations, then they that be not content with the present state of their
life? Or finally who be bolder stomaked to bring all in hurly burly (thereby
trustyng to get sum wyndfall) then they that have now nothing to leese? And if
so be that there were any king, that were so smallye regarded, or so behated of
his subjects, that other ways he could not keep the^ in awe, but only by
open wrongs, by pollinge and shauinge, and by brynging^ them to beggerie,
sewerly it were better for him to fors^ke his kingdom, then to hold it by
this means: whereby though the name of a king be kept, yet the majesty is
lost. For it is against the dignity of a king to have rule over beggars, but
rather over rich and welthie men. Of this mind was the hardy and couragius
Fabrice, when he said that he had rather be a ruler of rich men then be rich
himself. And verelye one man to live in pleasure and wealth, whiles all other
weep and smarte for it, that is the part not of a king but of a iayler. To be
short as he is a folyshe physician that cannot cure his patientes disease
onles he cast him in an other syckenes, so he that cannot amend the lives of
his subjects, but be taking from them the wealth and commodity of life, he
must needs grant that he knows not the feate how to govern f^e men. But
let him rather a mende his own life, renounce dishonest pleasures, and forsake
pride. For thies be the chief vices that cause him to run in the contempt or
hatered of his people. Let him live of his own, hurtinge no man. Let him do
cost not above his power. Let him restreyne wyckednes. Let him preuente vices,
and take a way the occasions of offenses be well orderyng his subjects, and
not by sufferyng wickedness to increase afterward to be punyshed. Let him not be
to hasty in calling again laws, which a custom has abrogated:
specially such as have been long forgotten and never lacked nor neaded. And
let him never under the cloak and pretense of transgression take such fynes
and forfaytes, as no Judge will suffer a private person to take, as unjust
and full of gile. Here if I should bring forth before them the law of the
Macariens, which be not far distau^t from Vtopia: whose king the day of
his coronacion is bound by a solemn Oath, that he shall never at any time
have in his treasure above a thousand pound of gold or silver. They say a
very good king, which took more care for the wealth and commodity of his
country, then for thenrychinge of himself, made this law to be a stop and a
bar to kings for heaping and hording up so much money as might impoueryshe
their people. For he forsawe that this some of treasure would suffice to
supporte the king in battle against his own people, if they should chance to
rebel: and also to maintein his wars against the invasions of his forreyn
enemies. Again he perceived the same stock of money to be to little and
insufficient to encourage and able him wrong fullye to take a way other men's
goods, which was the chief cause why the law was made. An other cause was
this. He thought that by this provision his people should not lack money,
wherewith to maynteyne their daily occupieng and chaffayre. And seeing the
king could not chewse but lay out and bestow all that came in above the
prescript some of his stock, he thought he would seek no occasions to do his
subjects injury. Such a king shall be feared of evil men, and loved of good
men. Thies and such other informatyo^s if I should use emonge men holy
encliued and given to the contrary part, how deaffe hearers thyncke you should
I have? Deaffe hearers douteles (quod I) And in good faith no marueyle. And to
speak as I think, truly I can not a low that such communicatyon shall be
used, or such cownsell given, as you be suere shall never be regarded nor
received. For how can so strange informations be profitable, or how can they
be beaten into their headdes, whose minds be all reddye prevented with clean
contrary persuasyons? This schole philosophy is not unpleasant emonge
fryndes in famylier communication, but in the counselles of kings, where
great matters be debated and reasoned with great aucthorytye, thies things
have no place. That is yt which I mente (q^^d he) when I said phylosophye
had no place among kings. In deed (quod I) this schole philosophy has
not: which thinks all things mete for every place. But there is an other
philosophye more cyuyle, which knows as ye would say her ^wne stage, and
thereafter ordering and behauynge herself in the play^ that she has in
hand, playethe her part accordynglye with co^lynes, vtterynge nothing owte
of dew order and fassyon. And this is the phylosophye that you must use.
O^els whiles a commodye of Plau^us is playinge, and the vile bondemen skoffynge
and tryffelynge among themselfes, if you should suddenly come upon the stage
in a philosophers apparel, and rehearse owte of Octauia the place wherein
Seneca dysputeth with Nero: had it not been better for you to have played the
domme person, then by rehersynge that, which served another for the time nor
place to have made such a tragycall comedye or gallym alfreye? For by
bringing in other stuff that nothing apperteyneth to the present matter,
you must nedys mar and pervert the play that is in hand, though the stuff
that you bring be much better. What part soever you have taken upon you
play that as well as yow^ can and make the best of yt: And do not therefore
dysturbe and bring owte of order the hole matter, because that an othere
which is meryere and bette^e cummethe to yowre remembrance. So the case
stondethe in a common wealth, and so yt is in the consultatyons of Kings and
princes. Yt evil opynyons and noughty persuasions can not be utterly and quyte
pluckede owte of their hearts, if you can not even as you would remedy vices,
which use and custom has confirmed: yet for this cause you must not leave
and forsake the common wealth: you must not forsake y^ ship in a tempeste,
because you can not rule and keep down the wyndes. No nor you must not
labor to drive into their heads new and strange in formatyons, which you
know well shall be nothing regarded with them that be of clean contrary
minds. But you must with a crafty wile and a subtell train study and
endeavor your self as much as in you lyethe to handle the matter wyttelye and
handsomelye for the purpose and that which you can not turn to good, so to
order it that it be not very badde. For it is not possible for all things to
be well, onles all men were good. Which I think will not be yet this good many
years. By this means (quod he) nothing else will be brought to pass, but
whiles that I goo abowte to remedy the madness of others, I should be eue^ as
mad as they. For if I would speak things that be true, I must ^eades
speak such things: but as for to speak false things, whether that be a
philosophers part or no I can not tell, truly it is not my part. Howebeit this
communicatyon of mine, though peradventure it may seem vnplesaunte to them,
yett can I not see why it should seem strange, or foolisshelye new fangled.
If so be that I should speak those things that Plato fayneth in his weal
public: or that the vtopians do in theires, thies things though they were
(as they be in deed) better, yet they might seem spoken out of place. For
as much as here among us, every man has his possessions several to
himself, and there all things be common. But what was in my communication
contained, that might not, and ought not in any place to be spoken? Saving
that to them which have throughlye decreed and determined with them selfs to
rome hedlonges the contrary way it can not be acceptable and plesaunt, because
it calls them back, and shows the^ the ieopardies. Verilye if all things
that evil and vitiouse manners have caused to seem inconueniente and naught
should be refused, as things unmeet and reprochefull, the^ we must among
Christen people wyncke at the most part of all those things which Christ
taught us, and so streytlye forbadde them to be wyncked at, that those things
also which he whispered in the ^ares of his dyscyples he commanded to be
proclaimed in open howses. And yet the most part of the^ is moore di^^ident
from the manners of the world now a days then my communicatyon was. But
preachers slye and wily me^ followynge your cownsell (as I suppose) because
they saw men euel willing to frame their manners to Christ's rule, they have
wrested and wriede his doctrine, and like a rule of lead have applied yt to
mennys manners: that by some means at the least way, they might agree to
gether. Whereby I can not see what good they have done: but that men may more
sickerlye be evil. And I truly should prevail even as much in kings
counselles. For other I must say other ways then they say, and then I were
as good to say nothing, or else I must say the same that they say, and (as
Mitio says in Terence) help to further their madness. For that craftye wyle
and subtle train of yours, I can not perceive to what purpose it serves,
wherewyth you would have me to studdy and endeavor my self, if all things
can not be made good, yet to handle them wittily and handsomely for the
purpose, y^ as far forth as is possible they may not be very evil. For
there is no place to disse^ble in, nor to wincke in* Noughtye cownselles must
be openly allowed, and very pestylent decrees must be approved. He shall be
cowntede worse then a spy, yea almost as ^uell as a trayt^ure, that with a
faynte heart does praise evil and noyesome decrees. Moreover ^ man can have
no occasyon too do^ good chauncynge into the company of them, which will
sonere make naught a good man, they be made good themselfes: through whose
evil company he shall be marred, or else if he remain good and innocent, yett
the wyckednes and folysshene^ of others shall be imputed to him, and laid in his
neck. So that yt is impossyble with that craftye wyele, and subtell train to
turn a^ny thing to better. Wherefore Plato by a goodly simplitude declares,
why wise men refreyn to meddle in the common wealth. For when they see the
people swarm in to the streets and daily wett to the skin with ray^e, and yett
can not persuade them to goo out of the rain, and to take their houses:
knowing well that if they should goo owte to them, they should nothing
prevail, nor win ought by it, but be wett also in the rain, they do keep
them selfs within their howses, being content that they be saffe them
selfs, seeing they can not remedy the follye of the people. How be it
dowteles master Moore (to speak truly as my mind gives me) where soever
possessions be pryuate, where ^oneye bears all the stroke, it is hard and
almost impossyble that there the weal publyque may iustelye be governed and
prosperouslye floryshe: Onles you think thus: that Justice is there executed
where all things come into the hands of evil men, or that prosperytye their
floryssheth where all is divided among a few: which few nevertheless do
not lead their lives very wealthely, and the resydewe live myserablye
wretchedlye and beggerlye. Wherefore when I consider with my self and weye in
my mind the wise and godly ordynaunces of the Vtopyans, among whom with
very few laws all things be so well and wealthelye ordered; that virtue ie
had in price and estimatyon, and yet all things being there common* every man
ha^h abundaunce of every thing* Agaynt on the other part, when I compare with
them so many natyons ever making new laws, yet none of them all well and
suffycyentlye furnysshed with laws: where every man calls that he has
gotten his own proper and pryuate goods* where so many new laws daily made
be not suffycyente for every man to enjoy defend and know from an other man's
that which he calls his own: which thing the infinyte controversies in the
law, that daily rise never to be ended, play^ly declare to be true: Thies
things (I say) when I consider with me self, I hold well with Plato, and
(...) no thing marueyll that he would make no laws for them that refused
those laws, whereby all men should have and enjoy equal portions of well ^hes
and commodities. For the wi^e man did easily forsee, that this is the one and
only way to the wealth of among us have been found by chance which no
wit cold ever have devised. As towchynge the auncyetnes (quod he) of common
wealths, than you might better judge, if you had red the histories and
chronicles of y^ land, which if were may believe, cities were there, before
there were men here. Now what thing soever hitherto by wit has been
devised, or found by chance: y^ might be as well there as here. But I think
verily, though it were so that w^ did pass them in wit: yet in study and
laboursome endeavor they far pass us. For (as there Cronicles testify)
before our arrival there they never hard any thing of us, whom they call the
vltraequinoctial^es: sauinge that o^es about. M. C. C. years ago, a certain
^hyppe was lost by the I Will of Vtopia which was driven thither by tempest.
Certain Romans and Egyptyans were cast on land. Which after that never
went thence. Mark now what profit they took of this one occasion through
delygence and earneste ^rauaile. There was no craft nor scy^^ce within the
impery of Rome, whereof any proffite co^ld rise, but they other learned it of
thies strangers, or else of them taking occa^ion to search for yt* fownde it
owte. So great proffyte was it to them that ever annye went thither from
hence. But if annye like chance before this has brought any man from thence
hither, that is as quyte out of remembrance, as this also perchance in time
to come shall be forgotten that ever I was there. And like as they quickelye,
almost at the first meting, made their own, what so ever is among us
wealthely devised: so I suppose it would belong before we would receive any
thing that am^nge them is better instytuted then among us. And this I suppose
is the chief cause why their common wealths be wysel^ere governed and do
florysh in more wealth then ours, though we ^other in wit nor in riches be
there inferiors. Therefore gentle master Raphaell (quod I (I pray you and
beseech you descrybe unto us the Island. And study ^ot to be short: but declare
largely in order their grounds, there ryuers, their cities, their people,
their manners, their ordenau^ces, there laws and to be short al things that
you shall think us desierous to know. And you shall think us desierous to
k^owe. And you shall think us defierous to know whatsoever we know not yet.
There is nothing (quod he (that I will do gladlier. For all these things I
have fresh in mind. But y^ matter requires leisure. Let us go in therefore
(quod I) to dinner: afterward we will bestow the time at our pleasure. Content
(quod he) be it. So we went in and dyned. When diner was done we came into yt
same place again, and sat us down upon the same benche, commanding our
servants that no man should trowble us. Then I and master Peter Giles
desiered master Raphaell to perform his promise. He therefore saying us
desierous and willingeto harken to him, when he had sit still and paused a
little while, musing and bethinkynge himself, thus he began to speak.

The end of the First book.
The second Book of the communication of Raphael Hythlodaye, concerning the
best state of a common wealth: co^teynyng the description of Vtopia, with a
large declaration of the Godly government, and of all the good laws and
orders of the same Island.
THe Island of Vtopia, conteyneth in breadthe in the myddell part of it (for
there it is brodest) CC. miles. Which bredthe continues through the most
part of the land. Saving that by little and little it comes in, and waxes
narrower toward both the ends. Which fetching about a circuit or compass
of.v c. miles, do fassion the hole Island like to the new moan. Between this
two corners the sea runs in, diuydyng them a sonder by the distau^ce of.xi.
miles or there aboutes, and there surmou^teth into a large and wide sea, which
by reason that the land of every fyde compasses it about, and shiltreth it
from the winds, is not rough, nor mountith not with great waves, but almost
^loweth quiclye not much unlike a great standing powle: and makes almost all the space within the bellye of the land in manner of a haven: and to the great
commodity of the Inhabitauntes receaueth in ships toward every part of
the ^ande. The forefrontes or frontiers of the.ij. corners, what with fordys
and shelues, and what with rocks be ^ery ieoperdous and dangerous. In the
middel distaunce between the^ both stands up above the water a great rock,
which therefore is nothing perilous because it is in ^ight. Upon the top of
this rock is afaire and a strong tower builded, which they hold with a
garrison of me^. Other roc^es there be, that ly^ hid under the water, and
therefore be dangerous. The cha^^elles be known one^y to themselves. And
therefore it seldom cha^nceth that any stranger onele^ he be guided by a
Vtopian can come i^ to this haven. In so much that they themselves could
s^aselie enter without ieoperdie, but that their way i^ directed and ruled by
certain land marke^ standing on the shore. By tur^ing translatynge and
remouinge this marks into other places they may destroy their enemies nauies
be they neu^r so many. The out side of the land is also full of havens, but
the landing is so suerly defenced, what by nature and what by workmanshyp of
man's hand, that a few defenders may drive back many armies Howebeit as they
say, and as the fassion of the place it self does partly show, it was not
ever compassed about with the sea. But king Vtopus whose name as co^querour y^
Ila^d beereth. (For before that time it was called Abra^a) which also brought
the rude and wild people to that excellent perfection, in all good fassions,
humanity, and civil ge^tilnes, wherein they now go beyond al y^ people of the
world: eue^ at his first arriuinge and enteringe upon the land, forth with
obteynynge the victory, caused.xv. miles space of vplandyshe ground, where the
sea had ^o passage, to be cut and dygged up. And so brought the sea round
about the land. He set to this work not only the inhabitauntes of the Island
(because they should not think it done in cont^melye and despyte) but also all
his own soldiers. Thus the work being diuyded into so great a number of
workmen was with exceeding marvelous speed dyspatched. In so much that the
borderers, which at the first began to mock and to gieste at this vain
enterprise, then turned their laughter to marueyle at the success, and to
fear. There be in the Island.liiij. large and fair cities or shiere towns,
agreyng all together in one tongue, in like manners, institucions, and laws.
They be all set and situate a like, and in all points fashioned a like, as
farfurth as the place or plotte suffers.

Of thies cities they that be nighest to gether be.xxiiij. miles a sonder.
Again there is none of them distaunt from the next above one days iorneye a
foot.

There cum yearly to Amaurote out of every city.iij. old men wise and well
experienced, there to entreat and debate, of the common matters of the land.
For this city (because it stands just in the mids of the Island, and is
therefore most mete for the ambassadors of all parts of the realm) is taken
for the chief and head city. The precin^tes and bounds of the shieres be so
commodiously appointed out, and set forth for the cities, that never a one of
them all has of any side less then xx. miles of ground, and of some side
also much more, as of that part where the cities be of farther distaunce a
son^er. None of the cities desire to enlarge the bounds and lymites of their
shieres. For they count them selfs rather the good husbands, then the owners
of their lands. They have in the country in all parts of the shiere howses
or fermes builded, well appointed and furnyshed with all sorts of instruments
and tools belongyng to husbandry. Thies houses be inhabited of the cytezens,
which cum thither to dwell by course. No howsholde or ^erme i^ the country
has fewer then.xl. perso^es men and women, besides two bo^^en men, which be
all under the rule and order of the good man, and the good wife of the house,
being both very sage and discrete persons. And every.xxx. fermes or famelies
have one head ruler, which is called a Phy^arche, being as it were a head
baylyffe. Out of every one of thies famelies or fermes cummeth every year into
the city.xx. persons which have conty^ewed.ij. years before in the country.
In their place so many fresh be sent thither o^t of the city, which of them
that have been there a year all ready, and be therefore expert and conninge in
husbandry, shall be instr^cted and taught. And they the next year shall teach
other. This order is used for fear that other skarsenes of victualles or some
other like incommoditie should chance, through lack of knowledge: if they
should be al together new and fresh and vnexperte in husbandry. This manner
and fassion of yearlye chaunginge and ^enewinge the occupiers of husbandry,
though it be solemn and customablie used, to thin^ent that no man shall be
constrained against his will to contynewe long in that hard and sharp kind
of life* yet many of them have such a pleasure and delete in husbandrye, that
they obtain a longer sp^ce of years. Thies husbandmen plow^ and till the
ground, and bryde up cat^tell, and make ready wood, which they carrye to
the city other by land, or by water, as they may most co^^e^yently. They
bring up a great multitude of pulleyne, and that by a marvelous policy. For
the hens do not sit upon the eggs: but by keeping them in a certain equal
heat, they bring life into them, and hatche them. The chykens, as soon as they
be come owte of the shell, follow men and women in stead of the hens. They
bring up very few horses: nor non, but very fearce ones: and for none other
use or purpose, but only to exercise their youth in riding, and fea^es of
arms. For oxen be put to all the labor of plowynge and drawyng. Which they
grant to be not so good as horses as sodeyne brunt, and (as we say) a^ a
dead lift, but yet they hold opinion, that oxen will abide and suffer much
more labor and pain, then horses will. And they think that they be not in
danger and subject unto so many dysseases, and that they be kept and
maynteyned with much less cost and charge: and finally that they be good for
meat when they be past labor. They sow corn only for bread* For their
drink is other wine made of grapes, or else of apples, or pears: or else it is
clean water. And many times methe made of honey or liqueresse sodde in water,
for thereof they have great store. And though they know certeynlye (for they
know it perfectly in deed) how much victayles the city with the hole country
or shiere round a ^oute it does spe^de* yet they sow much more corn, and
bryed up much more cattle, then serves for their own use, And the over plus
they part among their borderers. What soever necessary things be lacking in
the country, all such stuff they fetch out of the city: where without any
exchange they easelye obtain it of the magistrates of the city. For every
month many of them goo into the city on the hollye day.

When their harvest day draws nere, and is at hand, then the Philarches,
which be the head officers and bayliffes of husbandrye send word to the
magistrates of the city what nu^bre of harvest men is needful to be sent to
them out of the city. The which company of harvest men being there ready at
the day appointed, almost in one fair day dispatcheth all the harvest
work.

Of the cities and namely of Amauro^te.
AS for their Cities, he that knows one of them knows them all: they be all
so like one to an other, as ferfurth as the nature of the place permytteth. I
will descrybe therefore to you one or other of them, for it skylleth not
greatly which, but which rather then Amaurote? Of them all this is the
worthiest and of most dignity. For the resydwe knowledge it for the head
City, because there is the council house. Nor to me any of them al is better
beloved, as wherein I lived five hole years together. The city of Amaurote
stands upon the side of a low hill in fashion almost four square. For the
bredeth of it begins a little benethe the top of the hill, and still
contyneweth by y^ space of two miles until it cum to the river of A^yder. The
lenghte of it which lies by the ryuers side is sumwhat more. The ^yuere of
A^yder rysethe.xxiiij. miles above Amanrote owte of a little spring. But being
increasede by other small ^^oodes and bro^kes that run into yt, and among
othere.ij. sumwhat bygge ons, before the city yt is half a mile broad, and
farther brother. And.lx. miles beyond the city yt falls into the Ocean sea.
By all that space that lyethe between the sea and the city, and a good sort of
miles also above the City the water ebbethe and flowethe.vi. hours togethere
with a swyfte tide. When the sea flowethe in for the lenghte of xxx. miles yt
fyllethe all the A^yder with salt water, and dryuethe back the fresshe water
of the river. And sumwhat furthere yt chaungethe the swetenes of the fresh
water with saltnes. But a letell beyond that the river waxes swet, and
runs forby the city fresh and pleisaunt. And when the sea ebbeth, and goyth
back again the fresh water follows yt almost even to the very fall in to
the sea. There goes a bridge over the river made not of pyles or of timber,
but of stonewarke with gorgious and substanciall arche^s at that part of the
city that is farthest from the sea^ to the intent that ships may goo alonge
forbie all the side of the city without let. They have also an other ryuere
which in deed is not very great. But it runs gentelly and pleasauntlye. For
it ryseth even out of the same hill that the city stands upon, and runs
down a slope through the mids of the city into A^yder. And because it
ryseth a little without the city, the Ama^rotians have enclosed the head
spring of it with strong fences and bulwarks, and so have joined it to the
city. This is done to the intent that the water should not be stopped, nor
turned a way, or poisoned, if their enemies should chance to come upon them.
From thence the water is deryued and brought down in cannellis of brycke
diverse ways into the lower parts of the city. Where that cannot be done by
reason that the place will not suffer it, there they gather the rain water in
great cisternes, which does them as good service. The city is compassed
about with a high and thycke wall full of turrettes and bulwarks. A deye
dyche* but deape and broad and ouergrowen with busshes briers and thorns,
goes about.iij. sides or quarters of the city. To the fowrth side the ^yue^
it self serves for a dytche. The streets be appointed and set forth very
commodious and handsome both for carriage and also against the wyndes. The
houses be of fair and gorgious buyldyng, and in the street side they stand
joined to gether in a long row through the h^^e streate without any
partition or separacion. The streets be twent^ fo^e broad. On the back side of
the houses through the hole length of the st^ete lie large ga^deynes which
be^closed in ^ound^ about with* the back part of the streets. ^uery house
has two doors, one into the street and a posternne door on the backsyde into
the gardyne. Thyes doors, be made with two leaves never locked nor bolted so
easy to be opened that they will follow the least drawing of a finger and
shut again by themselfes. Every man that will may goo in, for there is
nothing within the howses that is pryuate, or annye man's own. And every.x.
year they change their howses by lotte. They set great stoore be their
gardens. In them they have vyneyardes, all manner of fruit, herbs and
flowers, so pleisaunte, so well furnished, and so fynelye kept, that I never
saw thing more fr^tefull, nor better trymmed in anny place. Their study and
delygence herin ^ummeth not only of pleasure, but also of a certain stryffe
and conte^tyon that is between street and street concerning the try^^mynge
husbanding and furnyshyng if their gardeyns: every man for his omne part. And
verily you shall not lightly find in all the city annye thing, that is more
commodyous, other for the proffyte of the citizins, or for pleasure. And
therefore it may seem that the first fownder of the c^^y minded nothing so
much, as h^ did thies gardeyns. For they say that king Vtopus himself even at
the first begenning appointed, and drew forth the platte form of y^ city into
this fasion and figure that it has now, but the gallaunt garnishing, and the
bewtiful setting f^rth of it, whereunto he saw that one ma^s age would not
suffice: yt he left to his posterity. For their Cronicles, which they keep
written with all delige^t circu^spection, containing the history of M.vijC.lx.
years, even from the first conquest of the Island, record and witness that
the howses in the begi^ning were very low, and like homelye cot^ges or poor
shepparde howses, made at all adventures of every rude pyece of wood that
came first to hands, with mudde walls and rydged rooffes thatched over with
straw. But now y^ houses be curiously builded after a gorgiouse and gallaunt
sort, with.iij. storries one over another. The owte sides of the walls be made
other of hard Fly^te or of plauster orelles of ^rycke, and the ynner sides be
well strengthened with timber work* The rooffes be plain and flat, covered
with a certain kind of plaster that is of no cost, and yet so tempered that
no fire can hurt or perythe it, and withstandeth the violence of the weether
better then any lead* They keep the wind out of their windows with glass,
for it is there much used, and sumwhere also with fine lynnen clothe dipped in
oil or ambre, and that for two commodities. For by this means more light
cummeth in, and the wind is better kept out.

Of the Magystrates.
EVerye thyrty families or fermes chewse them year lie an offycer, which in
their old language is called the Syphogra^^te, and by a newer name the
Phylarche. Every ten Syphoagrauntes, with all their 300 families be under
an offycer which was ones called the Tra^^^ore, now the chief Phylarche.
Moreover as concerning the electyon of the Prince, all the Syphoagrau^tes
which be i^ number.200. first be sworue to chewse him whom they think most
mete and expedyente. Then by a secret electyon they name prince one of
those.iiij. whom the people before named unto them. For owte of the.iiij.
quarters of the city there be iiij. chosen, owte of every quarter one, to
stand for the election: Which be put up to the counsel. The princes office
contineweth all his liffe time, ^nles he be deposed or put dow^e for suspision
of tirannye. They chewse the tranibores yearlye, but lightlye they change them
not. All the other offices be but for one year. The Tranibores every third
day, and sumtymes, if neade be, oftener come into the council house with the
prince. Their council is concerning the common wealth. (...) there be annye
controuersyes among the commoners, which be very few, they dyspatche and
end them by and by. They take ever.ij. Siphogrant^^^ to them in cowncell, and
every day a new coupel. And yt is prouydede that no thing towchynge the
common wealth shall be confyrmed and ratifyed, on les yt have been reasonede of
and debatede.iij. days in the cowncell, before yt be decreed. It is death to
have annye consultaryon for the common wealth owte of the cownsell, or the
place of the common electyon. This statute, they say, was made to thentente,
that the prince and Tra^ibores might ^ot easily conspire together to oppress
the people by tyranny, and to change the state of the weal public.
Therefore matters of great weyghte and importance be brought to the electyou
house of the syphograuntes, which open the matter to their familyes. And
afterward, when they have consulted among them selfs, they show their deuyse
to the cowncell. Sumtyme the matter is brought before the cowncell of the hole
Island. Furthermore this custom also the cowncell uses, to dyspute or reason
of no matter the same day that it is first proposed or putt furthe, but to
dyfferre it to the next sitting of the cownsell. Because that no man when he
has resshelye there spoken that cummeth first to his tongues end, shall then
afterward rather study for reasons wherewyth to defend and confyrme his
first folyshe sentence, than for the commodytye of the common: wealth as one
rather willing the harm or hynderaunce of the weal publyque then annye loss
or dymyn^tyon of his own existymatyon. And as one that would not for shame
(which is a very folyshe shame) be cowntede annye thing ouerseen in the
matter at the first, Who at the first owghte to have spoken rather wisely
then hastily or rashelye.

Of scyences Crafts and Occupatyons.
HVsbandrye is a scye^^^ common to them all ingenerall, both men and women,
wherein they be all expert and cunning* In this they be all instruct even
from their youth: partly in schools with traditions and precepts, and partly
in the country nighe the city, brought up as it were in playing, not on lie
beholdynge the use of it, but by occasyon of exercisinge their bodies
practicing it al^o. Besides husba^dry, which (as I said) is common to them
all, every one of them learneth one or other ^e^erall and particular science,
as his own proper craft. That is most commonly other clotheworkinge in wo^^^
or s^are, or masonrie, or the smythes craft, or the carpentes scye^ce. For
there is none other occupacyon that any number to speak of does use there. For
their garments, which through (...) one fassion, (^a^ynge that there is a
difference between the man's garmente and the woman's between the married and the
unmarried) and this one continues for ever more unchanged, semely and comely
to the eye, no let to the mouynge and weloynge of the body, also fit both
for winter and summer, as for thies garments (I say) every familye makes
their own. But of the other foreseyde crafts every man learneth one. And
not only the men but also the women. But the women as the weaker sort be put
to the easere crafts: they work wull and flax. The other more laborsome
sciences be committed to the men. For the most part every man is brought up
in his fathers craft. For most commonly they be naturally thereto bente and
inclined. But if a man's mind stand to anny other, he is by adoption put into
a famelye of that occupatio^ which he does most fantasy. Whom not only his
father, but also the magistrates do diligently look to, that he be putt to a
discrete and an hon^st householder. Yea and if anny person, when he has learned
one craft, be desierous to learn also another, he is likewise suffrede and
permytted.

When he has learned both, he occupyethe whether he will: onles the city
have more neade of the one then of the other. The chyefe and almost the only
office of the Syphograuntes is to see and take heed that no man sytte idle. But
that every one a pplye his own craft with earneste delygence. And yet for
all that not to be weryed from earlye in the morning to late in the enennynge
with contynuall work, like laboring and toplynge beasts. For this is worse
then the miserable and wretced condytyon of bondemen. Which never thelesse is
almost every where the lyffe of woorkemen and artyfycers, sanynge in vtopia.
For they dyuydinge the day and the night into.xxiiij. just hours, appoynte
and assygne only.vi of those hours to work.iij. before none, upon the which
they goo streyghte to dinner: and after dinner, when they have rested, ij.
hours, then they work.iij: and upon that they goo to supper. About.viij. of
the clock in the evening (cowntynge one of the clock at the first hour
after none) they go to bed.viij. hours they give to sleep. All the void
time, that is between the huores of work sleep and meat, that they be
suffered to bestow, every man as he lyketh best him felfe. Not to thyntente
they should myspende this time in ryote, or sloughfullenes. But being then
lycensed from the labor of their ow^e occupacyons, to bestow the time well
and thriftely upon some other good science, as shall please them. For yt is a
solemn custom there, to have lectures daily earlye in the morning, where to
be present they only be constreined that be namelye chosen and appointed to
learning. How be yt a great multitude of every sort of people, both men
and women goo to hear lectures, some one and some an other, as every man's
nature is inclyned. Yet, this notwithstonding, if any man had rathere bestow
this time upon his own occupatyon, (as yt chances in many, whose minds
rise not in the contemplatyon of annye science lyberal) he is not let, nor
prohibited, but is also praised and commended as profitable to the common
wealth: After supper they bestow one hour in play: in somer in their
gardeynes: in winter in their comme^ halles, where they dyne and suppe. There
they exercise them selfs in musyke, or else in honest and wholesome
communicai^on. Diceplaye and such other folish and pernicious games they know
not, but they use.ij. games not much unlike the chesse. The one is the battle
of nombers. Wherein one number stealethe away another. The other is wherein
vices fight with virtues, as it were in battle array, or a set fyld. In the
which game is very properlye showed both the striffe and discord that vices
have among themselfes, and again their unity and concord against virtues:
And also what vices be repugnaunt to what virtues: with what power and strenght
they assail them openly: by what wieles and subteltye they assaute them
secretelye: with what help and aid the virtues resist, and overcome the
puissaunce of the vices: by what craft they frustate their purposes: and
finally by what slight or means the one gets the victory. But here lease
you be deceived, one thing you must look more narrowly upon. For saying they
bestow but.vi. hours in woork, perchance you may think that the lack of
some necessary things hereof may ensewe. But this is nothing so. For that
small time is notonly enough, but also to much for the stoore and abundaunce
of all things that be requisite, other for the necessity, or commodity of
liffe. The which thing you also shall perceive, if you weye and cons^der with
your selfs how great a part of the people in other contreis lives idle.
First almoost all women, which be the half of the hole number: or else if the
women be annye where occupied, their most comonlye in their stead the men be
idle. Besides this how great, and how idle a company is their of prystes, and
relygyous men, as they call them? put there to all rich men, specially all
landed men, which commonly be called gentylmen, and noble men. Take into this
number also their servants. I mean all that flock of stout bragging russhe
bucklers. Join to them also sturdy and valiant beggars, clokinge their idle
leffe under the color of some disease or sickness. And truly you shall find
them much fewer then you thought, by whose labor all these things be gotten,
that men use and live bye. Now consider with your self, of thies few that
do work, how few be occupied in neeessary works. For where money bears
all y^ swing, there many vain and superfluous occupations must nedys be used,
to serve only for ryotous superfluyte, and dishonest pleasure. For the same
multitude that now is occupied in work, if they were divided into so few
occupations, as the necessary use of nature requires: in so great plentye of
things as then of necessity would ensue, doubtless the prices would be to little
for the artifycers to maynteyne their lyuynges. But if all thyes, that be now
bisiede about unprofitable occupations, with all the hole flock of them that
lyueydellye and slouthfullye, which consume and waste every one of them more
of thies things that come by other men's labor, then.ij. of the work men
themselfes do: if all thyes (I say) were set to profitable occupatyons,
you easelye perceive how little time would be enoughe, yea and to much to
stoore us with all things that may be requysyte other for necessytye, or for
commodytye, yea or for pleasure, so that the same pleasure be true and
natural. And this in Vtopia the thing yt self makes manifest and plain.
For there in all the city, with the hole contreye, or shyere adioynynge to yt,
^caselye.500. persons of all the hole number of men and women, that be another
to old, nor to weal to work, be licensed from labor. Among them be the
Siphograu^tes (which though they be by the laws exemple and pryuyleged from
labor) yet they exemp^e not themselfes: to the intent they may the rather by
their example provoke other to work. The same vacation from labor do they
also enjoy, to whom the people persuaded by the commendation of the priests
and secret election of the Siphograntes have given a perpetual license from
labor to learning. But if anny one of them prove not according to the
expectation and hoope of him conceived, he is forth with plucked back to the
company of artificers. And contrary wise, often yt chances that a
handicraftes man does so earnestly bestow his vacaunte and spare hours in
learning, and through dilygence so profytte therein, that he is taken from his
handy occupation, and promoted to the company of the learned. Out of this order
of the learned be chosen ambassadors, priests, Tranibores, and finallye the
prince him self. Whom they in their old tongue call Barzanes, and by a newer
name, Adanus. The residewe of the people being another idle, another occupied
about unprofitable exercises, it may be easily judged in how few hours how
much good work by them may be done, toward those things that I have
spoken of. This commodity they have also abo^e other, that in the most part of
necessary occupations they neade not so much work, as other nations do. For
first of all the buildinge or repayring of houses asks every where so many
men's continual labor, because that the vnthyfty heir suffers the howses
that his father builded in contynewa^nce of time to fall in decay. So that
which he might have vpholden with little cost, his successoure is constreynede
to build yt again a new, to his great chardge. Yea many times also the
house that stood one man in much money, anothere is of so nyce and so
delycate a mind that he settethe nothing by yt. And yt being neglected, and
therefore shortelye falling into ruin, he buyldethe up anothere in an
othere place with no less cost and chardge. But emonge the Vtopyans where all
things be set in a good order, and the common wealth in a good stay, yt
very seldom chances, that they choose a new plotte to build an house upon.
And they do not only find spedy and quick remedies for present fautes: but
also preuente them that be like to fall. And by this means their houses
continewe and last very long with little labor and small reparacio^s in so
much that y^ kind of woorkemen sumtimes have almost nothing to do. But that
they be commanded to hew timbre at home, and to square and trime up stones,
to the intent that if annye work chance, it may the spedelier rise. Now
Sire in their apparel mark I pray you how few woorkemen they neade. first
of all whiles they be at work they be covered homely with leather or skins
that will last.vij. years. When they go furthe a broad they cast upon them a
cloak, which hydeth the other homelye apparel. Thyes clookes thoroughe owte
the hole Island be all of one color, and that is the natural color of y^
wul. They therefore do not only spend much less wullen clothe then is spente
in othere contreys, but also the same stands them in much less cost. But
lynen clothe is made with less labor, and is therefore had more in use.
But in lynen clothe only whytenese, in wullen oulye clenlynes is regardede. As
for the smalnese or fynesse of the threde, that is no thing passed for. And
this is the cause wherefore in other places.iiij. or.v clothe gowns of diverse
colors, and as many sylke cootes be not enoughe for one man. Yea and if he be
of the delycate and nyse sort.x. be to few: where as there one garmente will
serve a man most commenlye.ij. years. For why should he desire moo? seeing
if he had them, he should not be the better hapt or covered from cold, another
in his apparel any whyt the cumlyer. Wherefore, seeing they be all exercysed
in profitable occupatyons, and that few artyfycers in the same crafts be
suffycyente, this is the cause that plentye of all things being emonge them,
they do sumtymes bring furthe an innumerable company of people to amend the
high ways if annye be broken. Many times also when they have no such work
to be occupied obout, an open proclamation is made that they shall bestow
fewer hours in work. For the magistrates do not exercise their citizens
against their wills in vnneadfull labors. For why in the institution of
that weal public this end is only and chiefly pretended and minded, that
what time may possibly be spared from the necessary occupations and affairs
of the commen wealth, all that the cytizeins should withdraw from the bodily
service to y^ free liberty of ye mind and garnisshing of ye same. Forherin they
suppose the felicity of this liffe to consist

Of their living and mutual conversation together
But now will I declare how the citizens use themselves one toward another:
what familiar occupieng and enterteynement there is among ye people, and what
fasion they use in distributinge every thing. First ye city consists of
families, ye families most co^monlie be made of kinredes. For the women when
they be married at a laufull age, they goo into their husbands houses. But the
male children, with all the hole male of spring continewe still in their own
family, and be governed of the eldest and auncientest father, onles he dote
for age: for then the next to him in age, is put in his rowme. But to thi^te^t
the prescript number of the citezens should nether decrease, nor above measure
increase, it is ordained that no famylie which in every city be.vi. thousand
in the hole, besides them of the country, shall at ones have fewer children of
the age of.xiiij. years or there about then.x. or mo then.xvi. for of
children under this age no number can be appointed. This measure or number is
easily observed and kept, by puttinge them that in fuller families be above the
number into families of smaller increase. But if chance be that in the hole
city the stoore increase above the just number, therewith they fill up the
lack of other cities. But if so be that the multitude throughout the hole
Island pass and excede the dew number, then they chewse out of every city
certain cytezens, and build up a town under their own laws in the next
land where the inhabitauntes have much waste and unoccupied ground,
receauinge also of the inhabitau^tes to them if they will join and dwell with
them. They thus ioy^ing and dwelli^g together, do easelye agree in one fassion
of living, and that to the great wealth of both the peoples. For they so bring
the matter about by their laws, that the ground which before was nether good
^or profitable for the one nor for the other is now sufficient and fruitful
enough for them both. But if the inhabitauntes of that land will not dwell
with them to be ordered by their laws, then they drive them out of those
hounds which they have limited and appointed out for themselves. And if they
resist and rebel, then they make war against them. For they count this the
most just cause of war, when any people holds a piece of ground void and
vacaunt to no good nor profitable use, keeping other from the use and possession
of it, which notwithstanding by the law of nature ought thereof to be
nowryshed and relieved. If any chance do so much dimynishe the number of any
of their cities that it cannot be filled up again without the diminishynge of
the just number of the other cities (which they say chanced but twyse syns
the beginning of the land through a great pestilente plage) then they make
up the number with cytezens fetched out of their own forreyne towns, for they
had rather suffer their forreyn towns to decay and peryshe, then annye
city of their own Island to be dimynyshed. But now again to the
conversation of the cytezens among themselfes. The eldeste (as I said)
rueleth the family. The wy^es be ministers to their husbands, the children
to their parents, and to be short the younger to their elders. Every City
is divided into four equal parts. In the mids of every quarter there is a
market place of all manner of things. Thither the works of every family be
brought in to certain houses. And every kind of thing is laid up several
in barnes or store houses. From hence the father of every famelie or every
householder fetches whatsoever he and his have neade of, and carries it away
with him without money, without exchau^ge, without annye gage or pledge. For
why should any thing be denied unto him: seeing there is abundaunce of all
things, and th^^ it is not to be feared lest any man will ask more then he
neadeth? For why should it be thought yt that man would ask more then
enough, which is sewer never to lack? Certeynly in all kinds of ly^ynge
creatures other fere of lack does cause covetousness and rauyne, or in man only
pride, which counts it a gloryouse thing to pass and excel other in the
superfluous and vain ostentacion of things. The which kind of vice among
the Vtopians can have no place. Next to the market places that I spoke of,
stand meat markettes: whether be brought not only all sorts of herbs, and
the fruits of trees with bread, but also fish, and all manner of.iiij. footed
beasts, and wild foul that be man's meat. But first the fylthynes and ordure
thereof i^ clean washed away in the runnynge river without the city in places
appointed mete for the same purpose. From thence the beasts brought in killed,
and clean washed by the hands of their bondemen. For they permyite not their
fry citezens to accustom there selfs to the killing of beasts through the
use whereof they think that clemency the genteleste affection of our nature
does by little and little decay and peryshe. Another they suffer any thing that
is filthy lothesome or vnclenlye, to be brought into the city, least the air
by the stenche thereof infected and corrupt, should cause pestilente diseases.
Moreover every street has certain great large halles set in equal distaunce
one from an other, every one known by a sentrall name. In thies halles dwell
the Syphograuntes. And to every one of the same halles be appointed.xxx.
families, of either side.xv. The stewardes of every halle at a certain hour
come in to the meat markettes, where they receive meat according to the
number of their halles. But first and chiefly of all respect is had to the
sick, that be cured in the hospitalles. For in the circuit of the city a
little without the walls they have.iiij. hospitalles, so bygge so wide so ample
and so lardge that they may seem.iiij. little towns which were devised of y^
bygnes partly to thinte^t the sick, be they never so many in nu^bre, should
not lie to thronge or strayte, and therefore vneasely and incomodiously, and
partly that they which were taken and bolden with contagious diseases, such
as be wont by infection to crepe from one to an other, might be laid a part
far from the company of y^ residue. Thies holpitalles be so well appointed,
and with all things necessary to health so furnished, and more over so dilligent
atte^dau^ce through the continual presence of cu^uyng physicians is give* that
though no man be sent thither against his will, yet notwithstand inge there is
no sick person in all y^ city, that had not rather lie there the^ at home in
his own house. When the st^warde of the sick has received such meats as
the physicians have prescr^bed, then the best is equally deuide^ among the
halles, according to the company of every one, saving that there is had a
respect to the prince, the bishop, the tranibours and to ambassadors, and all
strangers, if there be any, which be very few and seldom. But they also
when they be there, have certain houses appointed and prepared for the^. To
thies halles at y^ set hours of dinner and supper cummith all the hole
Siphograuntie or ward warned by the noise of a brazen trumpet: except such
(...) be sick in y^ hospitalles or else in their own houses. How be it no man
is prohibited or forbid, after y^ halles be served, to fetch home meat out of
y^ market to his own house. For they know that no man will do it without a
cause reasonable. For though no man be prohibited to dyne at home, yet no man
does it willynglye: because it is counted a point of small honesty. And also
it were a follye to take the pain to dress a badde dy^er at home when they
may be welcome to good and fine fare so ^yghe hand at the hall. In this hal
all vile service all slavery and drudgerye, with all laboursome toil and
business is done by bondemen. But the women of every famelie by course have the
office and charge of cokerye for sethinge and dressynge the meat, and orderyng
al things thereto belonging. They sit at.iij. tables or moo, according to the
number of their company. The men sit upon the benche next the wall, and the
women against them on the other side of the table, that if any sodeyne evil
should chance to them, as many times happens to women with child, they may
rise without trouble or disturbaunce of any body, and go thence into the
nurcerie: The ^ourceis sit several alo^e with their young suckeling^s in a
certain pa^loure appointed and deputed to the same purpose, never witho^t fire
and clean water, nor yet without cradels, that when they will they may lay
down the young infauntes, and at their pleasure take them out of their
swathynge clothes and hold them to the fyere, and refreshe them with play.
Eeuery mother is nource to her own child, onles other death or sycke^es be
the let. When that chances, the wives of the Siphograuntes quyckelye provide
a no^rce. And that is not hard to be done. For they that can do it do proffer
themselfes to no service so gladlye as to that. Because that there this kind
of pity is much praised: and the child that is nouryshed ever after takes
his nource for his own natural mother. Also among the nourceis, sit all the
children that be under the age of v. years. All the other children of both
kinds, as well ^opes as gyrles that be vuder the age of marryage do other
serve at the tables, o^^ls if they be to young thereto, yet they stand by with
marvelous silence. That which is given to them from the table they eat, and
other several dy^ner ^yme they have none. The Siphograunt and his wife sits
in the mids of the high table, forasmuch as that is counted the honerablest
place, and because from thence all the hole company is in their sight. For that
table stands over wharte the over end of the halle. To them be joined.ii. of
the anctientest and eldest. For at every table they sit.iiij. at a m^esse. But
if there be a church standing in that Siphograu^tie or ward, then the priest
and his wife sits with the Siphograu^te, as chief in the company. On both
sides of them sytte young men, and next unto them again old men. And thus
through out all the house equal of age be set together and yet be myxte
with unequal ages. This they say was ordained to the intent that the sage
gravity and reverence of the elders should keep the yongers from wanton
license of words and behavior. For as much as nothing can be so secretly
spoken or done at the table, but either they that sit on the one side or on the
other must needs perceive it. The disshes be not set down in order from the
first place, but all the old me^ (whoes places be marked with some special
token to be known) be first served of there meat, and then the residue
equally. The old men divide their dainties as they think best to the younger
that sit of both sides the^. Thus the elders be not defrauded of their dew
honor, and nevertheless equal commodity comes to every one. They begin
every dynner and supper of reading sumthing y^ pertains to good manners and
virtue. But it is short, because no man shall be grieved therewith. Here of
thelders take occasion of honest communication, but another sad nor unpleasant.
Howbeit they do not spend all y^ hole dy^er time themselves (...) long and
tedious talks: but they gladly here also the young me^, yea and do purposly
provoke the^ to talk, to thentent yt they may have a proof of every ma^s wit
and towardnes or disposition to virtue, which commonly in y^ liberte of
feasti^g does show and ^tter it self. Their dyners be very short: but there
suppers be sumwhat longer, because that after dynner follows labor, after
supper sleep and natural rest, which they think to be of no more strength
and efficacy to wholesome and healthful digestion. No supper is passed without
music. Nor their bankettes lack no conceytes nor iouckettes. They burn
sweet gu^mes and speces for perfumes and pleasant sinelles, and sprincle about
sweet oyntmentes and waters, yea they leave nothing undone that makes for the
cheryng of the company. For they be much enclyued to this opinion: to think
no kind of pleasure forbidden, whereof cummeth no harm. Thus therefore and
after this sort they live togethers in the city, but in the country they that
dwell alone far from any neighbors, do dyne and suppe at home in their own
houses. For no famelie ther^ lacks any kind of victualles, as from whom
cummeth all that the cytezens eat and live bye.

Of their iourneyenge or trauaylynge a broad, with diverse other matters
cunnyngly reasoned and wittily discussed.
But if any be desierous to vysite other their fryndes that dwell in an other
City, or to se^ the place it self: they easelye obtain license of their
Siphograuntes and Tranibores, oneles there be some profitable let. No mau goes
out alone but a company is sent forth to gether with their princes letters,
which do testify that they have license to g^ that journey, and prescribes
also the day of their return. They have a wageyn given them, with a common
bondsman which drives the oxen and takes charge of the^. But onles they have
women in their company they send home the wageyn again, as an impediment and
a let. And though they carrye nothing forth wit the^, yet in all their journey
they lack nothing. For whersoeuer they come they be at home. If they tarry in a
place longer then one day, tha^ there every one of them falls to his own
occupation, and be very gentilly enterteined of the workmen and companies of
the same crafts. If any man of his own head and without leave, walk out of
his precinct and bounds, taken without the princes lettres, he is brought
again for a fugitive or a runaway with great shame and rebuke, and is shapely
punished. If he be taken in that fault again he is punished with bondage. If
any be desierous to walk a broad into the fields, or into the country that
belongs to the same city that he dwells in, obteynyng the good will of his
father, and the consent of his wife, he is not prohibited* But into what part
of y^ country soever he cu^meth, he has no meat geuin him until he have
wrought out his fore^o^es task, or else dispatched so much work as ^here is
wont to be wrought before supper. Observing this law and condition, he may go
whether he well within the bounds of his own city. For he shall be no les
profitable to the city, the^ if he were within it. Now you see how little
liberty they have to loyter, how they can have no cloak or pretense to
ydelnes. There be nether wyn tauernes nor ale houses, nor stews, nor any
occasion of vice or wickedness, no lurking corners, no places of wicked
cou^celles or unlawful assembles. But they be in y^ present sight, and under
the iyes of every man. So that of necessity they must other apply their
accustomed labors, or else recreate themselves with houest and laudable
pastymes. This fassion being used among the people, they must of necessity
have store and ple^tie of all things. And seeing they be al thereof parteners
equally, therefore cane no man there be poor or nedye. In the council of
Amanrot (whether, as I said, every city sends.iij. me^ a piece yearly)
as soon as it is perfectly known of what thyuges there is in every place
plenty, and again what things be s^a^t in any place: incontinent the lack
of the one is performed and filled up with the abundance of the other. And
this they do frelye without any benifite, taking nothing again of the^ to who^
the things is given, but those cities that have given of their store to any
other city that lacks, reguyrynge nothing again of the same city, do take
such things as they lack of an other city, to whom they gave nothing. So
the hole Island is as it were one famelie, or household. But when they have
made sufficient provision of stoore for them selfs (which they think not
done until they have provided for two yeared followynge, because of the
vncortentie of the next years proffe) then of those things whereof they have
abundaunce they carry furth^ into other contr^is great plenty as grain,
honnye, wulle, flax, wood, madder, purpledie felles, wax, tallowe, lether,
and living beasts. And the seventh part of all thies things they give
franckely and frelye to the poor of that country. The resydewe they fell at a
reasonable and mean price. By this trade of traffic or marcha^dise, they
bring into their own country, not only great ple^tie of gold and silver, but
also all such things as they lack at home, which is almost nothing but
Iron. And by reason they have long used this trade now they have more
abundaunce of thies things then any man will believe. Now therefore they care
not whether they sell for reddye money: or else upon trust to be paid at a
day and to have the most part in debtes. But in so doy^g they never follow
the credence of pryuat men: but the assur^aunce or warrauntrse of the hole
city, by instruments and writings made in that behalf accordinglye. When
the day of paymente is come and expyred, the city gathers up the debte of
the private dettours, and puts it into the common box, and so long has the
use and proffytte of it, until the vtopians their creditours demand it. The
most part of it they never ask. For that thing which is to them no
proffyte to take it from other to whom it is proffytable: they think it no
right nor conscience. But if the case so stand that they must lend part of
that money to an other people, then they requy^^ their debte: or when they
have war. For the which purpose only they keap at home al y^ treasure,
which they have, to be helped and so coured by yt other in extreme ieopardyes,
or in suddeyne dangers. But especyallye and chieflye to hiere therwyth and
that for unreasonable great wayges strange foldyours. For they had rather
put str^ungers in ieopardye then theyr^ own contreye men: knowinge that for
mon^ye enoughe their enemies themselfes many times may be bowghte and sold,
or else through treason be set togethers by the ears emonge themselfes. For
this cause they kype an inestymable treasure. But yet not as a treasure: but so
they have yt, and use yt, as in good faith I am ashamede to show: fearing
that my w^ordes shall not be believed. And this I have more cause to fear, for
that I know how ^yff^cultlye and hardelye I meselfe would have believed an
othere man telling the same, if I had not presentlye seen yt with my^e own
iyes. For yt must needs be, that how far a thing is dissonaunt and disagre
inge from the guyse and trade of the hearers, so far shall yt be owte of
their beleffe. How be yt a wise and in dyfferente estymer of things will not
greatly marueil perchance, seeing al their other laws and customs do so
much dyfferre from owres, if the use also of gold and silver among them be
applied, rather to their own fassyons then to owers. I mean in that they
occupye not money themselfes, but keep yt for that chance, which as yt may
happen, so yt may be that yt shall never come to pass. In the mean time
gold and sylue^, whereof money is made they do so use, as none of them
does more estyme yt, then the very nature of the thing deseruethe. And then
who does not plainly see how far yt is under Iron: as without the which
men can no better live them wythowte fyere and water. Whereas to gold and
silver nature has given no use, that ws may not well lack: if that the folly
of men had not set it in higher estym^cyon for the rare^^s sake. But of the
contrary part, nature as a most tender and loving mother, has placed the
best and most (...) cessarye things open a broad: as the ayere, the water,
and the earth it self. And has removed and hid farthest from us vain and
unprofitable things. Therefore if thies metalles among them should be fast
locked up in some tower, it might be suspected that the pryu^^ and the
cow^cell, as the people is ever foolyshelye ymagininge) i^tended by some
subtyltye to deceive the commons, and to take some proffette of (...) to
themselfes. Furthermore if they should make thereof plat and such other f^nely
and cunningly wrought stuff: if at any time they should have occasyon to
break it, and melte it again, and therwyth to pay their soldiers w^ges
they see and perceive very well that men would be loathe to part from those
things that they o^s begome to have pleasure and delytein. To remedy all this
they have fownde out a means, which as it is agreeable to al their other laws
and customs, so it is from ours where gold is so much set by, and so
delygently kept, very far discrepant and repugnaunt: and therefore
vncred^ble, but only to them that be wise. For where as they eat and drink
in earthen and glass vessels, which in deed be curiously and properly made,
and yet be of very small value: of gold and silver they make commonly chamber
pottes and other like vessels, that serve for most vile uses, not only in
their common halles, but in every man's private house. Furthermore of the same
mettalles they make great cheynes with fetters and gives wherein they tie their
bondmen. Finally who so ever for any offense be infamed, by their ears hang
ringes of gold: upon their fingers they were ringes of gold, and about their
necks chains of gold: and in conclusion their heads be tiede about with
gold. Thus by all means that may be they procure to have gold and silver
among them in reproach and infamy. And therefore thies ^^etalles, which other
nations do as grievously and sorroufully forgo, as in a manner from their own
lives: if they should all togethers at ones be taken from the vtopians, no man
there would think that he had lost the worth of one farthing. They gather also
peerles by the sea side, and Diamondes and Carbu^cles upon certain rocks, and
yet they seek not for them: but by chance finding them they cut and polish
the^. And therewith they deck their young infanntes. Which like as in the first
years of their childhod they make much and be fond and proud of such
orname^tes, so when they be a little more grown in years and discretion,
perceiving that none but children do were such toies and trifeles: they lay
them away even of their own shame fastenes wythowte annye biddyng of there
parents: even as our children when they wax bygge do cast away nuttes,
brouches, and puppettes. Therefore thyes laws and customs which be so far
dyfferente from all othere natyons, how diverse fanseys also and minds they
do cause, did I never so plainly perceive, as in the Ambassadoures of the
Anemolians. Thyes Ambassadoures came to Amaurote whiles I was there. And
because they came to entreat of great and weighty matters, those.iij.
citizeins a piece out of every city were commen thither before the^. But all the
Ambassadors of y^ next contreis, which had been there before, and knew the
fassions and manners of the Vtopians, among whom they perceived no honor
given to sumptuous and costelye apparel, silks to be contemned, gold also
to be enfamed and reprochefull, were wont to come thither in very homely and
simple a (...) parrell. But the Anemolianes because they dwell far thence,
and had very little acquaintance with the^: hearing that they were al
apparelled a like, and that very rudelye and homelye: thinking them not to
have the things which they did not wear: being therefore more proud then
wise: determined in the gorgiousnes of their apparel to represent very gods,
and with the bright shynynge and glisteringe of their gaye clothinge to dasell
the eyes of the silie poor vtopains. So there came in.iij. Ambassadors with.C.
servants all apparelled in chaungeable colors: the most of them in silks:
the Ambassadors themselfes (for at home in their own country they were noble
me^) in cloth of gold w^ great cheiues of gold* w^ gold ha^ging at their ears
with gold, ringes upon their fingers in brouches and aglettes of gold upon
their cappes, which glistered full of peerles and precious stones: to be short
tr^med, and aduorned with all those things, which among the vtopians were other
the punnishement of bond men, or the reproach of in famed persons, or else
trifels for young children to play with all. Therefore it would have done a man
good at his heart to have seen how proudelye they displeyed their pecockes
feathers how much they made of their painted sheathes, and how loftely they
set forth and advanced them selfs, when they compared their gallaunte
apparel with the poor raiment of the vtopia^s. For all the people were
swarmed forth into the streets. And on the other side it was no less pleasure
to consider how much they were deceived, and how far they missed of their
purpose: being contrary ways taken then they thought they should have been,
for to the iyes of all the vtopians, except very few, which had been in
other contreys for some reasonable cause, all that gorgeousnes of apparel seemed
shameful and reprochefull. In so much that they most reverently saluted the
vylest* and most abject of them for lords: passing over the Ambassadors
themselfes without any honor: judging them be their wearing of golden cheynes
to be bondeme. ^Yea you should have seen children also that had cast away their
peerles and precious stones, when they saw the like sticking upon the
Ambassadors cappes: dig and pushe their mothers under the sides saying thus
to them. Look mother how great a lubbor does yet were peerles and precious
stoones, as though he were a litel child still. But the mother, yea and that
also in good earnest: peace sone says she: I thynk he be some of the
Ambassadou^s fools. Some fownde fawte at their golden cheynes as to no use
nor purpose: being to small and weak, that a bondeman might easelye break
them, and again so wide and large that when it pleased him he might cast them
of, and run away at lybertye whether he would. But when the Ambassadoures
had been there a day or.ij. and saw so great abundaunce of gold so
lyghtelye estymed, yea in no less reproach then yt was with them in honor:
and besides that, more gold in the cheynes and gyues of one fugytyue bondeman,
then all the costelye ornaments of them.iij. was worth: they began to abate
their currage, and for very shame laid away all that gorgyouse arraye
whereof theye were so proud. And specyallye when they had talkede famylyerlye
with the Vtopyans, and had learnede all their fassyons and opynyo^s. For
they marueyle that annye men be so folyshe as to have delight and pleasure in
the glysterynge of a little tryfelynge stone, which may behold annye of the
stars, or else the soon yt self. Or that annye man is so mad as to
count him self the nobler for the smaller or fyner threde of wolle, which
self samewoll (be it now i^ neuere so fine a sponne threde) did ones a ^hepe
wear: and yet was she all that time no other thing then a sheep. They marueyle
al^o that gold; which of the own nature is a thing so unprofitable, is now
emonge all people in so high estymatyon, that man him self, by who^, yea and
for the use of whom yt is so much set by; is in much less estymatyon then
the gold yt self. In so much that a lumpyshe blockehedded churl* and which
has no more wit then an ass, yea and as full of noughtenes and folyshenes,
shall have nevertheless many wise and good men in subiectyon and bondage, only
for this, because he has a great heap of gold. Which if yt should be
taken from hyme by annye fortune* or by some subtle wyle of the law* (which
no less then fortune does raise up the low, and pluck down the high) and be
given to the most vile slave and abject dreuell of all his household, then
shortly after he shall goo into the service of his servant, as an
augmentation or an overplus besyd his money. But they much more marueill at and
detest the madeues of them, which to those rich men, in whose debte and
danger they be not, do give almost divine honowres, ^or ^on other
consideration, but because they be rich: and yet knowing them to be such
nigeshepenuy fathers, that they be sure as long as they live, not the worth of
one farthinge of that heap of gold shall come to them. Thies and such like
opinions have they conceived, partly by education, being brought up in that
common wealth, whose laws and customs be far different from thies kinds of
folly, and partly by good litterature and learning. For though there be not
many in every city, which be exempte and discharged of all other labors and
appointed only to learning, that is to say: such in whom even from their
very childhode they have perceived a singular to wardnes, a ^yne wit, and a
mind apt to good learning: yet all in their childhode be instruct in
learning. And the better part of the people both men and women through owte
all their hole lyffe do bestow in learning those spare hours, which we
said they have vaca^te from bodily labors. They be taught learning in
their own natyue tongue. For yt is both copious in words, and also
pleasant to the ear: and for the vtteraunce of a man's mind very perfect
and sure. The most part of all that side of the wordle uses the same
la^gage, sauinge that among the Vtopians yt is fyneste and puryste, and
according to the dyuersytye of the contreys yt is dyuerslye alterede. Of all
thyes Philosophers, whose names be here famous in this part of the wordle to
us known, before owre cummynge thither not as much as the fame of annye of
them was comen among them, and yett in Musycke, Logycke, Arythmetyke, and
(...) they have fownde owte in a manner all that our auncyente Philosophers
have ^awghte. But as they in all things be almost equal to our old
auncyente clerks, so our new Logiciens in subtle inuen^yons have far
passed and gone beyond them. For they have not devised one of all those rules
of restryctyons, amplyfy catyons and supposytyons, very wittelye invented in
the small Logycalles, which hear our children in every place do learn.
Furthermore they were never yet able to find out the second in^entyons: in so
much that none of them all could ever see man himself in commen, as they
call him, though he be (as you know) bygger then ever was annye gyaunte, yea
and poynted to of us even with our finger. But they be in the course of the
stars, and the mouynges of the heavenly spheres very expert and cunning.
They have also wyttelye excogytated and divised instruments of ^iuers
fassyons: wherein is exactly comprehended and contained the mouynges and
sytuatyons of the son, the moon, and of all the other stars which appear
in their horyzon. But as for the amityes and dissentyons of the planettes, and
all that deceytefull diuynatyon by the stars, they never as much as dreamed
thereof. Raynes, winds, and other courses of tempests they know before by
certain tokens which they have learned by long use and observation. But of the
causes of all thies things, and of the ebbinge, flowinge, and ^altenes of the
sea, and fynallye of the orygynall beginning and nature of heaven and of the
wordle, they hold partelye the same opynyons that our old philosophers hold,
and partelye as our philosophers varye emonge themselfes, so they also whiles
they bring new reasons of things do disagree from all them, and yet emonge
themselfes in all points they do not accord. In that part of philosophy
which entreats of manners and virtue their reasons and opyuyons agree with
ours. They dyspute of the good qualytyes of the ^ye, shall have no reward
after hy^ death? But now sir they think not felicity to rest in all
pleasure, but o^lye in that pleasure that is good and honest, and that hereto
as to perfet blessedness our nature is allured and drawn even of virtue, whereto
only they that be of the contrary opinion do attribute felici^ie. For they
define virtue to be a life ordered according to nature, and that we ^e hereunto
ordained of god. And that he does follow the course of nature, which in
desiering and refusyng things is ruled by reason. Furthermore that reason does
chiefelie and pryncipallye kendle in men the love and ve^eration of the deuyne
majesty. Of whoes goodness it is that we be, and that we be inpossibilitie to
attain felicite. And that secondarely it moves and provoke us to lead our
life out of care in joy and mirth, and to help all other in respect of the
sosiete or nature to obtain the same. For there was never man so earnest and
paynefull a follower of virtue, and hate^ of pleasure, that would so inioyne
you labors watchinges and fastinges, but he would also exhort you to ease and
lighten to your power, the lack and myserye of others praysyng the same as a
deed of humanity and pity. Then if it be a point of humanity for man to
bring health and comfort to man and specially (which is a virtue most
peculiarlye belonging to man) tomitigate and assuage the grief of others, and
by taking from them the sorrow and heaviness of life, to restore them to joy,
that is to say to pleasure: why may it not then be said that nature does
provoke every man to do the same to himself? For a joyful life, that is to
say, a pleasant life is other evil: and if it be so, then thou should not
only help no man thereto, but rather as much as in the lies help all men
from it as noisome and h^rtefull, or else if thou not only may, but also of
dewtie art bound to procure it to others, why not chiefly to theself? To
whom thou art bound to show as much favor as to other. For when natu^
bids the to be good and gentle to other, ^he commands the not to be
cruel and ungentle to the self. Therefore eue^ very nature (say they)
prescribith to us a joyful life, that is to say, pleasure as the end of all
our operations. And they defy^e virtue to be life ordered accordy^g to the
prescrypt of nature. But in that that nature does allure and provoke (...) one
to healpe another to live merilye (which suerlye ^he does not without a good
cause: for no man is so far above the lot of man's state or condition that
nature does carke and care for him only which equallye favors all that be
comprehended under the communion of one shape form and fassion) verily she
commands the to use diligent circumspection that thou do not so seek for
thine own commodities, y^ thou procure others inco^modities. Wherefore their
opinion is that not only couenauntes and bargaynes made among private men
ought to be well and faythfullye fulfilled observed and kept, but also commen
laws, which other a good prince has justly publyshed, or else the people
another oppressed with (...), another deceived by fraud and gyell, has by their
common consent constitute and ratifyed, concerning the particion of the
commodities of life, that is to say the matter of pleasure. Thies laws not
offendid, it is wisdom that thou look to thine own wealth. And to do the same
for the common wealth is no less then thy duty, if thou bear any reverent
love or any natural zeal and affection to thy native country. But to go about
to let an other man of his pleasure whiles thou procurest thine own, that is
open wrong. Contrary wise to withdraw somethynge from they self to give to
other that is a point of humanity and ge^tyl^es: which never takes a way
so much commodity, as it brings again. For it is recompensed with the
return of benefytes, and the conscience of the good deed with the
remembrance of the thankful love and be^euolence of them to whom thou have
done it, does bring more pleasure to thy mind, then that which thou have
withholden from thy self could have brought to the body. Finallye (which to a
godly disposed and a religious mind is easy to be persuaded) God recompenseth
the gift of a short and small pleasure with great and everlasting joy.
Therefore the matter diligently wayde and considered, thus they think, that
all our actions and in the^ the virtues themselves be referred at the last to
pleasure* as their end and felicity. Pleasure they call every motion and
state of the body or mind, wherein man has naturally delectatio^. Appetite
they join to nature. And that not without a good cause. For like as not only
the ^enses* but also right reason coueteth whatsoever is naturally pleasant,
so y^ it may be gotten without wrong or injury, not letting or debarring a
greater pleasur, nor causing painful labor, eue^ so those things that me^ by
vai^e ymagination do feign against nature to be pleasant (as though it lay in
their power to change y^ things as they do y^ names of things) al such
pleasurs they believe to be o^ so small help and furtheraunce to felicity,
that they count the^ great let and hinderau^ce. Because that in whom they have
ones taken place, all his mind they possess with a false opinion of pleasure.
So that there is no place left for true and natural delectacions. For there be
many things, which of their own nature conteyne no plesauntnes: yea the
most part of them much grief and sorrow. And yet through the perverse and
malicious flickering inticeme^tes, of lewd and vnho^este desires, be takeen
not only for special and sovereign pleasures, but also be counted among the
chief causes of life. In this cou^terfeat kind of pleasure they put the^ that
I speak of before. Which the better gown they have on the better men they
think the^ selfs. In the which thing they do twyse err. For they be no
less deceived in that they think their gown the better, than they be in that
they think themselfes the better. For if you consider the profitable use of
the garmente, why should wulle of a fyner s^onne threde, be though better,
then the w^l of a course sponne threde? Yet they as though the one did pass
the other by nature, and not by their mistakyng, auaunce themselfes and think
the price of their own persons thereby greatly increased. And therefore the
honor which in a course gown they durst not have lokyd for, they require
as it were of dewtie for their fy^er gowns sake. And if they be passed by
without reverence, they take it angerlye and disdaynfully. And again is it not
a like mad^es to take a pride in vain and unprofitable honors? For what
natural of true pleasure do thou take of an other man's bare head of bowed
knees? Will this ease the pain of thy knees, or remedy the phre^sie of the
head? In this image of counterfeyte pleasure, they be of a marvelous madness,
which for the opinion of nobility rejoice much in their own co^^eite.
Because it was their fortune to come of such auncetours, whoes stock of long
time has been counted rich (for now nobility is nothing else) specially
rich in lands. And though their auncetours left them not one foot of land,
or else they themselfes have pyssed it against the walls, yet they think
themselfes not the less noble therefore of one hear. In this number also they
count them that take pleasure and delight (as I said) in gemmes and precious
stones, and think themselves almost gods, if they chance to get and
excellent one, specially of that kind which in that time of their own
contreye me^ (...) had in highest estimation. For one kind of stone keeps not
his pryce^tyll in all contreis* and at all times. Nor they bye them not but
taken out of the gold and bare. No nor so another before they have made the
selle^ ^o swear that he will warraunte and assure it to be a true stone and
not co^^terfeyt geme. Such ^are they take lest ^ counterfeit stone should
deceive their eyes in the stead of a right stone. But why should tho^ not
take ^uen as much pleasure in beholdynge a counterfette stone which thine eye
cannot discern from a right stone? They should both be of like value to the,
even as to a blind man. What shall I say of them that keep superfluous
riches, to take delectacion only in the beholdynge, and not in the use or
occupyenge thereof? Do they take true pleasure, or else be they deceived with
false pleasure? Or of them that be in a contrary vice, hydynge the gold which
they shall never occupy nor peradventure never see more? And whiles they take
care least they shall le^se it, do leese it in deed. For what is it else,
when they hyde it in the ground, taking it both from their own use, and
percha^nce from all other men's also? And yet thou when thou haste hid thye
treasure as one out of all care hoppest for joy. The which treasure if it
should chance to be stoolen, and thou ignorant of the theft should ^ye
ten years after: all that ten years space that thou ly^edest after thy
money was stolen* what matter was it to the whether it had been taken a way
or else sauffe as thou lefteste it? Truly both ways like proffyt came to
the: To thyes so foolyshe pleasures they ioyn^dycers, whoes madness they know
by hear say and not by use. Hu^ters also, and hawkers: For what pleasure is
there (say^ they) i^ casting the dice upon a table. Which y^ have done so
often, that i^ their were any pleasure in it, yet the often use might make
the werye thereof? Or what delight can there be, and not rather dyspleasure in
hea^ynge the barkynge and howlynge of dogs? Or what greater pleasure is there
to be felt, when a dogg^ follows an hare, then when a dog follows a
dog: for one thing is done in both, that is to say, runninge* if thou haste
pleasure therein, But i^ the hope slaughter* and the expect^tion of tearing
(...) pieces the beas^e does please the: thou should rather be moved with
pity to see a seely innocent hare murdered of ^^dogge: the weak of the
stronger, the fearful of the fea^^^, the innocente of y^ (...) and
unmercifully. Therefore all this exercise of hunting, as a thing v^worthye to
be used of free m^n, the Vtopians have rejected to their bochers, to the which
craft (as we said before) they appointe there bondmen. For they count
huntyng the loweste vyleste and most abiecte part of bocherye, and the other
parts of it more profitable and more honest, as which do bring much more
commodity, and do kill beasts only for necessytie. Where as the hunter
seeks nothing but pleasure of the seely and woeful beasts slaughter and
murder. The which pleasure in beholding death they think does rise in the
very beasts, other of cruel affection of mind; orels to be changed in
continuance of time into cruelty, by long use of so cruel a pleasure. Thies
therefore and all such like, which be innumerable, though the common sort of
people does take them for pleasures, yet they, seeing there is no natural
pleasauntnes in them, to playnelye determine them to have no affinity with
true and right pleasure. For as touching that they do co^monlye mo^e the sense
with delectacion (which seems to be a work of pleasure) this does nothing
diminishe their opinion. For not the nature of the thing, but there perverse
and lewd custom is y^ cause hereof. Which causes them to accept bitter or
so w^e things for sweet things. Even as women with child in their viciate
and corrupt taste think pitche and ^allowe sweter then any honney. Howbeit no
man's iudge^ent depraved and corrupt, other by sic^^nes, or by custom can
change the ^^ture of pleasure, more then it can do the nature of other
things. They make di^ers ky^des of true pleasures. For some they attribute to
the soul, and some to the body. To the soul they give intellygence, and that
delectation that cummeth of the contemplation of truth. Here unto is joined
the pleasant remembrance of the good life past. The pleasure of the body
they de^ide (...) ^. parts. The first is when delectatio^ i^ sensibly felt
and perceived. Which many times chau^ceth by the renewing and re^^esshyng of
thoes parts which owre natural heat dries up. This cumm^th by meat and
drink. And sumtymes whiles those things be voided, whereof is in y^ ^ody over
great a^undau^ce. This pleasure is felt when we do our natural easemente,
or when we be doing the act of generatyon, or when the ytchynge of annye
(...) is eased with rubbing or stratchinge. Sumtimes pleasure rises
exhibitinge to any membre nothing that it ^esireth, nor taking from it any
pain that it feels, which for all that tikleth and mo^eth our senses with a
certain secret^ efficacy, but with a manifest motion, and turns them to it.
As is that which cummeth of music. The second part of bodily pleasure they
say is that which consists and rests in the quiet and upright state of the
body. And that truly is every man's own propre health entermyngled and
dysturbed with ^o grieffe. For this, if yt be not let nor assaulted with no
greiffe i^ (...) of yt self, though yt be moved with no external or outward
pleasure. For though it be not so plain and manyfeste to the sense, as the
gredye lust of eating and dryncky^ge, yet nevertheless many take it for the
chyefeste pleasure. All the Vtopyans grant yt to be a right great pleasure,
and as you would say the foundatyon and grownde of all pleasures, as which
even alo^e is able to make the state and condytyon of lyffe delectable and
pleasant. And yt being ones taken away, there is no place left for annye
pleasure. For to be wythowte greyffe not having health, that they call
vnsensybylyte and not pleasure. The Vtopians have long agoo rejected and
condemned the opinion of them, which said that sted fast and quyete health
(for this questyon also has been dylygentelye debated emonge them) owghte not
therefore to be cownted a pleasure, because they say yt can not be presentlye
and sensyblye perceived and felt by some owtwarde motion. But of the contrary
part now they agree almost all in this, that health is a most souereygne
pleasure. For saying that in syckenes (say they) is grie^^^, which is a mortal
ennemie to pleasure, eue^ as sick^es is to health, why should not then pleasure
be in the quietn^s of health? For they say it makes nothing to this matter,
whether you say that sickness is a grief, or that in sickness is grief, for
all cummeth to one purpose. For whether health be a pleasure it self, or a
necessary cause of pleasure, as tyer is of heat: truly both ways it
follows, that they cannot be without pleasure that be in perfyt health.
Furthermore whiles we eat (say they) then health which began to be appayred
fyghteth by the help of food against hunger. In the which fight whiles
health by little and little gets the upper hand, that same procedyng, and
(as ye would say) that onwardnes to the wont strength mynistreth that
pleasure, wherbye we be so refresshed. Health therefore, which in the
conflycte is joyful, shall it not be merye when it has gotten the victory?
But as soon as it has recovered thee pristynat^ strength, which thing
(...) in all the fight it coueted, shall it inco^tine^t be astonished? Nor shall
it not know nor embrace y^ own wealth and goodness? For that it is said
health can not be felt, this, they think, is nothing true. For what man
waking say they, f^leth not himself in health: but he that is not? Is there
annye man so possessed with stonyshe insensibilitie, or with the steping
sickness, that he will not grant health to be acceptable to him and delectable?
But what other thing is delectation, than that which by an other name is
called pleasure? They embrace chiefly the pleasures of the mind. For them they
cownte the chiefist (...) most principal of all. The ch^yfe part of them they
think does come of the exercise of virtue and conscience of good lyffe. Of
thies pleasures that the boddye ministers they give the pr^^mynence to health.
For the delight of eating and drincking, and whatsoever has (...) like
pleasauntnes they determyne to be pleasures much to be desiered, but no other
ways than for healthes sake. For such things of their (...) nature be not
pleasant, but in that they resyste syckenes pre^elye stealing one, Therefore
like as yt is a wise man's part rather to a^oyde sycke^es, then to wyshe for
(...), and rather to drive away and put to flyghte careful greyffes, then to
call for comfort: so yt is much better not to neade this kind of pleasure,
then in fealynge the contrary greyffe to be eased of the same. The which
kind of pleasure if annye ^an take for his felycytye, that man must needs
grant that then he shall be in most felycytye, if he live that lyffe which
is led in contynuall honger, thirst, itchynge, eating, drinking,
scratchynge, and rubbing. The which lyffe how not only foul yt is, but
also miserable, and wretched, who perceauethe not? Thyes dowteles be the
baseste pleasures of all, as v^pure and imperfect. For they never cum but
accompanied with their contrary greiffes. As with y^ pleasure of eatinge is
joined hunger, and that after no very egal sort. For of thies (...) the gryeffe
is both the more vehement and also of longer continuance. For it rysethe
before the pleasure, and ends not until the pleasure dye with it. Wherefore
such pleasures they think not greatly to be set by, but in y^ they be
necessary. Howbeit they have delight also in thies, and tha^kfully knouledge y^
tender love of mother nature, which with most pleasant delectation allureth
her children to y^, which of necessitye they be driven often use. For how
wretched and miserable should our liffe be, if thies daily greiffes of hunger
and thrust could not be dreue^ away, b^t with bitter potions, and sower
medicines, as the other deseases be, where with we be seldomer troubled? But
bewtye, strength, nemblenes, thies as peculiare and pleasant gifts of
nature they make much of. But those pleasures which be received by the ears,
the iyes, and the nose, which nature wills to be proper and peculiar to man
(for no other kind of living beasts does behold the fayrene^ and the beauty of
the wordle, or is (...) with a^ny respect of savors, bu^ only for the
diversity of meats* ^other perceaueth the concordaunt and discor^ante
distaunces of ^oundes, and tu^es) thies pleasures (I say) they accept and
allow as certain pleasant reioysinges of liffe. But in all things this
ca^tell they use, that a less pleasure hi^der not a bigger, and that y^
pleasur be no cause of dyspleasur / which they think to follow of necessytye
if the pleasure be vnhoueste. But yet to despise the co^lynes of bewtye, to
waste the bodylye strength, to turn nymblenes into s^o^ghishnes, to consume
and make feeble the boddye with fasting, to do iuiury to health, and to reject
the other pleasant motyous of nature (onles a man neglecte thies his
commodytyes, whiles he does with a fervent zeal procure the wealth of others,
or the common proffytte, for the which pleasure forborne he is in hope of a
greater pleasure of GOD) else for a vain shaddowe of virtue, for the wealth
and proffette of no man to punyshe himself, or to the intent he may be able
^^^^ragiouslye to suffer aduersityes which perchance shall never come to him:
this to do they think it ^ point of extreme mad^es, and a to^en of a man
cruelly minded to warde^ himself, and unkind toward nature, as one so
dysdaynynge to be in her danger, that he (...) and refuses all her benefytes.
This is their sentence and opinion of virtue and pleasure. And they believe
that by man's reason (...) ca^ be fownde trewer then this, onles annye godlyer
be inspyred into man from heaven. Wherein whethe^ they belyue well or no, another
the time ^othe suffer us to discuss, another it is ^owe necessary. For we have
taken upon us to show and declare theyrlore^ and or de^aunces, and not to
def^nde them. But this thing I believe verily: how soever thies decrees be,
that their is in no place of the wordle, no^ther a more excellent people,
nothers more flouryshynge commen wealth. They be light and quycke of boddy
full of actiuity and nymblenes, and of more strength the^ a ma^wold judge them
by their stature, which (...) ^ll that is not to low. And though theyrt
soil be not very frute^^ll, nor their air very wholesome, yet against the
air they so defend them with temperate dyete, and so order and husband
their ground with dylygente travail, that in no contreye is greatter
increase, and plentye of (...) and cattle, nor men's bodies of longer liffe,
and subject or apt to fewet defeases. There therefore a man may see well and
diligently exploited and furnished, not only those things which husbandmen
do (...) in other countries: as by craft and c^^ming to remedy the harrennes
of y^ ground: but also a hole wood by the hands of the people plucked up by
the rotes in one place and set agay^t in an other place. Wherein was had
regar^ and consideration not of plenty but of commodious carriage, that wood
and timber might be nigher to the ^ea, or the rivers, or the cities. For it is
less^ labor and business to carrye grayue far by land then wood. The people
be gentle, merye, quycke, and syne wytted, delytynge in quyet^es, and when need
requires, able to abide and suffer much bodily labor. Else they be not
greatelye desyerous and fond of yt: but in the exercise and studdye of the
mind they be ^euer werye. When they had hard me speak of the Greek
lytterarature or learning (for in Latyue their was nothing that I thougthe
they would grea^elye allow, besides hystorpeus and Poets) they made
wonderful earneste and importunate suit unto me, that I would teach and
instruct them in that tongue and learning. I began therefore to read: unto
them, at the first iruelye more because I would not seem to refuse the
labor, then that I hooped that they would annye thing proffytte therein. But
when I had gone forward a little and perceived incontyuente by their dylygence
that my labor should not be bestowed in vain, for they begaune so easelye to
fassyo^ their letters, so plainly to pronounce y^ words, so quyckely to
learn by heart, and so suerly to rehearse the same, that I marueled at it,
saving that the most part of them were fine, and chosen wits, and of ripe
age, pyked out of the company of the learned men, which not only of their
own face and voluntarye will but also by the commandment of the cowncell,
undertook to learue this langage. Therefore in less then.iij. years space their
was nothing in the Greek tongue that they lackede. They were able to read good
authors (...) anny stay^, if the book were not false. This kind of learning,
as I suppose they took so much the sou^^er, because, it is sum what allyaunte
to them. For I think that this nation took their beginning of the Greeks,
because their speech which in all other points is not much unlike the persian
tongue, keeps dyue^s sig^es and too^^ens of the greek la^gage in the names of
their cities and of their magystrates. They have of me (for when I was
determined to enter into my.iiij. voyage I cast into the ship in the stead
of marchandyse a pretye fardell of books: because I inteuded to come again
rather never than shortelye) the most part of Platoes works, more of
Aristotle's, also Theophrastus of Plants, but in diverse places (which I am
sorye for) imperfect. For whiles we were saylynge, a mormo^e^^ chanced upon
the book, as yt was neglygentlye laid by, which wa^ tonlye playinge
therewyth, plucked owte certain leaves, and toor^ them in pieces. Of them that
have written the grammar they have only Lascaris. For Theodorus I carried not
with me, nor never a dyctyonarye but Hesichius and Dioscorides. They set
great stoore by Plutarches books. And they be delyted with Lucianes merye
conceytes and iestes. Of y^ Poettes they have Aristophanes Homer, Euripides,
and Sophocles in Aldus small prynte. Of the Historyans they have Thucidides,
Herodotus, and Herodian. Also my companion Tricius Apinatus carried with him
physic books, certain small works of Hippo crates, and Galenes Microtechue.
The which book they have in great esty^atyon. For though there he almost no
nation under heaven that has less need of Physic then they, yet this
notwithst^ndyng Physic is no where in greater honor. Because they count the
knowledge of yt emonge the goodlieste, and most profitable parts of
Philosophy. For whiles they by the help of this Philosophy search owte the
secret mysteryes of nature, they think that they not only receive there by
wonderful great pleasur, but also obteyn great thanks and favor of the
auctoure and maker thereof. Whom they think according to the fassyon of other
artyfycers to have set furthe the marvelous and gorgious frame of the world
for man to behold. Whom only he has made of wit and capacytye to
consydre and understand the excellencye of so great a work. And therefore
say they does he bear more good will and love to the curyous and diligent
beholder and vewere of his work and maruelour at the same, then he does to
him, which like a very beast wythowte wit and reason, or as one wythowte
sense or mouynge, has no regard to so great and so wonderful a spectacle.
The wits the refore of the Vtopians inurede and exercysed in learning, he
marueious quycke in the inuentyon of feats, helping annye thing to the
advantage and wealth of lyffe. Howebeyt.ij. feats theye may thank us for.
That is the science of imprintyng and the craf^e of making paper. And yet not
only us but chyefelye and pryncypallye themselfes. For when we shewede to
them Aldus his pryute in books of paper, and told them of the stuff whereof
paper is made, and of the feat of grauynge letters, speaking sumwhat more then
we cold plainly declare (for there was none of us that knew perfectlye
other the one or the other) they furthwyth very wyttelye coniectured the
thing. And where as before they wrote only in skynnes, in barks of tryes,
and in rides, now they have attempted to make paper and to imprint letters. And
though at the first yt prou^^ not all of the best, yet by often assay inge
the same they shortelye got the feate of both. And have so brought the
matter abowte, that if they had copyes of Greek authors, they could lack no
books. But now they have no moore, then I rehearsed before, saving that by
pryntynge of books they have multyplyed and increased the same into many
thowsande of copyes: Who soever cummeth thither to see the land, being
excellent in annye gift of wit, or through much and song iournyenge well
experiensed and seen in the knowledge of many countries (for the which cause
we were very welcome to them) him they receive and interteyne wonders
gentyllye, and louynglye. For they have delight to hear what is done in every
land, howebeyt very few marchaunte men come thythere. For what should they
bring thither? onles yt were Iron, or else gold and silver, which they had
rathere carrye home again. Also such things as arre to be carried owte of
their land, they think yt more wisdom to carrye that gee^ furthe
themselfes, then that othere should come thither to fetch yt, to thentente
they may the better know the owte lands of every side them, and keep in ure
the feat and knouledge of saylinge.

Of Bondemen, sick persons, wedlock, and diverse other matters.
THey another make bondemen of prisoners taken in battayll, oneles yt be in
battaylle that the fowghte themselfes, nor bondemens children, nor to be short
annye man whom they can get owte of an othere countreye, though he were
their a bondeman. But other such as among themselfes for heinous offenses be
punnyshed with bondage, or else such as in the Cytyes of other lands for
great trespasses be condemned to death. And of this sort of hondemen they
have most stoore. Formanye of them they bring home sumtymes payinge very
little for them, yea most commonly getting them for gramercye. Thyes sorts
of bondemen they keep not only in contynuall work and labor, but alsoo in
bands. But their own men they handle hardeste, whom they Judge mored
esperate and to have deser^ede greater punnysshemente, because they being so
godly brought up to virtue in so excellent a common wealth, cowlde not for
all that be refreyned from mysdoynge. An other kind of bondemen they have,
when a vile drudge being a poor laborer in an other cowntreye does chewse of
his own free will to be a bondeman ^monge them. Thyes they handle and order
honestelye, and enterteyne almooste as gentyllye, as their own^ free
cytyzeyns, saving that they put them to a little more labor, as thereto
accustomede. If annye such be dysposed to depart thens (which seldom is
seen) they another hold him against his will, another send him away with
emptye hands. The sp^ke (as I said) they see to with great affectyon, and
let nothing at all pass concerning other Physycke or good dyete, whereby
they may be restored again to their health. Them that be sick of iucurable
dyseases they comfort with sitting by them, with talking with them and to be
sh^^te with all manner of helps that may be. But if the disease be not o^elye
incurable, but also full of contynuall pain and angnyshe: then the priess^s
and the m^gistrates exhort the man, sey^ge he is not able to do annye duty
of lyffe, and by ouerlyuing his own death is noisome and yrke some to other,
and grievous to himself: that he will determyne with himself no longer to
cheryshe that pestilent and peynefull disease. And seeing his life is to him
but a tourmente, that he will not be vnwyllynge too dye, but rather take a
good hope to him, and other dyspatche himself owte of that paynfull lyffe, as
owte of a prison, or a rack of tormente, o^ ^lles suffer him self wyllynglye
to be rydde owte of yt by other. And in so d^ynge they tell him he shall do
wyselye, seeing by his death he shall lyse no commodytye, but ends his pain.
And bycaufe with at act he shall follow the cownsell of the pryestes, that is
to say of the interpreters of gods will and pleasure, they show him that he
shall do ^yke a godly and a virtuous man: They that be thus persuaded fynyshe
their lives wylly^glye othere with hunger, or else dye in their steape
wythowte annye fealnige of death. Bu^ they cause none such to dye agaynte his
will, nor they use no less dilygence and attendaunce about him: beleuynge this
to be an honorable death. Else he that kylleth him self before that the
prpestes and the cownsell have allowed the cause of his death, him as unworthy
both of the earth and of fire, they cast unburied into some stinkyng marrish.
The woman is not married before the be xviij. years old. The man is.iiij. years
elder before he mary. If other the man or the woman be proved to have bodily
offended before their marriage, with an other, he or she whether it be is
sharply punyshed. And both the offenders be forbidden ever after in all their
life to marrye: oneles the fault be forgeuen by the princes pardone. But both
the good man and the good wife of the house where that offense was done, as
being slack and neglygent in lokyng to there chardge, be in danger of great
reproach and infamye. That offense is so sharpelye punyshed, because they
perceive, that onles they he diligently kept from the liberty of this vice,
few will join together in the love of marriage, wherein all the life must be
led with one, and also all the griefs and displeasures that come therewith
must patiently be taken and borne. Furthermore in cheusyng wyfes and husbands
they observe earnestly and ^^raytelye a custom which seemed to us very fond
and folysh. For a sad and ^n honest matrone shows the wom^^ be she maid or
widdowe (...) to the wower. And likewise a sage and discrete man exhibyteth the
wowere naked to the woman. At this custom we laughed and disalowed (...)
foolyshe. But they on the other part do greatly wonder at the follye of all
other nations, which in byinge a c^lte* where as a little money is in hassarde,
be so charye and circumspe^te, that though he ^e almost all bare, yet they
will not bye him, oneles* the saddel and all the harneys be taken of, least
v^der those couerynges be hid some galle^^ soore. And yet in chewsynge a wife,
which shall be other pleasure, or dyspleasure to them all their life after,
they be so recheles, that all the resydewe of the woomans body, being co^ered
with cloothes, they esteem here scaselye be one handebredeth (for they can se
no more but her face) and so do join her to them not without great ieoperdie
of evil agrei^g together, if any thing in her body afterward do offend and
myslyke them. For all men be not so wise as to have respect to the virtuous
conditions of the party. And the endowme^tes of the body cause the virtues of
the mynd^ more to be esteemed and regarded: ^ea even in the marriages of w^se
men. We rely so foul deformit^e may be hid under thoes coueringes, that it
may quite alienate and take away the ^^ans mind from his wife, when it shall
not be lawful for their bodies to be sep^rate again. If such deformity
happen by any chance after the marriage is co^sumate and finyshed: well, there
is no remedy but patience. Every man must take his fortune well a worth. But
it were well done that a law were made wherebye all such deceytes might be
eschewed, and aduoyded before hand. And this were they constre y^ed more
earnestlye to look upon, because they only of the the nations in that part
of the world be content every man with one wife a piece. And matrymoney is
there never broken, but by death, except adulterye break the bond, or else
the intolerable waiward manners of either party. For if either of them find
themself for any su^he cause grieved: they may by the license of the council
change and take an other. But the other party lives ever after in infamye
and out of wedlock. But for the husband to put away his wife for no fault,
but for that some myshappe is fallen to her body, this by no mea^es they will
suffer. For they judge it a great point of cruelty that any* body in their
most need of help and comfort, should be cast of and forsaken, and that
old age which both bry^geth sy^knes with it, and is a syckenes it self,
should vnkyndlye and vnfaythfullye be delte withal. But now and then it
chaunseth, where as the man and the woman cannot well agree between themselfes,
both of the^ fyndy^ge other with whom they hope to live more quyetlye and
meryly, that they by the full consent of them both be divorced a sonder and
new ma^ied to other. But that not without the authority of the council.
Which agrees to no dyuorses, before they and their wyfes have diligently tried
and examyned the matter. Yea and the^ also they be loath to consent to it,
because they know this to be the next way to break love between man and
wife, to be in easy hope of a new marriage. Breakers of wedlock be punyshed
with most greuo^s bondage. And if both the offenders were married, the^ the
parties which in that behalf have suffered wrong be divorced from the
auoutrers if they will, and be married together, or else to who^ they lust. But
if either of them both do still contynewe in love toward so unkind a
bedfellowe, the use of wedlock is not to them forbidden, if the party be
disposed to follow in toylinge and drudgerye the person, which for that
offense is condemned to bondage. And very often it chances that the
repe^tau^ce of the one and the earnest diligence of the other, does so move
the prince with pytie and compassion, that he restores the bo^de perso^e from
servitude to liberty and fredom again. But if the same party be taken
^ftsones in y^ fault, there is no otherway but death. To other trespaces there
is no pres^ript punishment appointed by any law. But according to the
hey^ouse^es of the offense, or contrary, so the punyshemente is moderated by
the discretion of the council. The husbands chastise their wyfes: and the
parents their children, oneles they have done any so horrible an offense,
that the open punyshemente thereof makes much for the aduauncemente of
honest ma^ers. But most commenlye the most heinous faults be punyshed with
the in commodity of bondage. For that they suppose to be to the offenders no
less grief, and to the common wealth more profitable, then if they should
hastily put the^ to death, and make them out of the way. For there cummeth
more profit of their labor, then of their death, and by their example
they fear other the longer from like offenses. But if they being thus used
do rebel and kick agay^e, then forsothe they be stayne as desperace and
wild beasts, whom ^o there prison nor chay^e could restrain and keep under.
But they which take their bondage patientlye be not left all hopeles. For
after they have been broken and tamed with long myseries, if then they show
such repen^aunce, wherebye it may be perceived that they be soryer for their
offense then for their punyshemente: sumtymes by the Pry^ces prerogatyue, and
sumtymes by the voice and consent of the people, their bondage other is
mitigated, or else clean remytted and forgiven. He that moves to aduo^trye is
in no less danger and ieoperdie, then if he had committed aduontrye in
deed. For in all offenses they count the intent and pretensed purpose as
evil as y^ act or deed it self. For they think that no let owghte to
excuse him, that did his best too have no let. They set great store by
fools. And as it is great reproach to do to annye of them hurt or injury, so
they prohibit not to take pleasure of foolyshnes. For that they thy^ke does
much good to the fools. And if any man be so sad and stern, that he cannot
laughe another at their words nor at their deeds, none of them be committed to
his tuition: for fear lest he would not order them gentilly and favorably
enough: to whom they should bring no delectation (for other good^es in them is
none) much less any proffyt should they yield him. To mock a man for his
deformity, or for that he lacks any part or lymme of his body, is counted
great dishonestie and reproach not to him that is mocked, but to him that
mocketh. Which unwisely does imbrayde any man of that as a vice, which was not
in his p^wre to eschew. Also as they count and reken very little wit to be
in him that regards not natural beauty and comlines, so to help the same
with pay^tinges is taken for a vay^e and a wanton pride, not without great
infamye. For they know even by very experience, that no comeli^es of beauty
does so hyghly commend and auaunce the wives in the conceyte of there
husbands, as honest conditions and lowlines. For as love is oftentimes won
with beauty, so it is not kept preserved and continued, but by virtue and
obedience. They do not only fear their people from doing evil by
punyshmentes, but also allure them to virtue with rewards of ho^oure. Therefore
they set up in the market place the images of notable men, and of such as have
been great and bounteful benefactors to the commonwealth, for ye perpetual
memory of their good acts: and also that the glory and ^enowme of the
auncetors may stir and p^ouoke their posterity to virtue. He that
inordina^lie and ambitiously desires p^omotions is left all hopeles for ever
a^^eynyng any promotion as long as he lives. They live together lovingly. For
no magistrate is ^ther haw^e or ^erefull. Fathers they be called, and like
fathers they use themselfes. The citezens (as it is their dewtie) do willingly
exhibit unto them dew honor without any co^pulsion. Nor the prince himself
is not known from the other by his apparel nor by a crown or diade me or cappe
of maintenau^ce, but by a littell sheffe of corn carried before him. And so a
taper of wax is borne before y^ bishop, whereby only he is known. They have
but few laws. For to people so instruct and institute very few do suffice.
Yea this thing they chieflye reprove among other nations, that innumerable
books of laws and expositio^s upon the same be not sufficient. But they think
it against al right and justice that me^ should be bound to thoes laws, which
other be in number ^o then be able to be readde or else blinder and darher, then
that any man can well understand them. Furthermore they utterly exclude and
bannyshe all proctours and sergeauntes at the law: which craftily handell
matters, and subtelly dispute of the laws. For they think it most mete, that
every man ^huld plead his own matter, and tell the same tale before the judge,
that he would tell to his man of law. So shall there be less circumstau^ce of
words, and the trwth shall sooner cu^ to light, whiles ye judge with a discrete
judgment does way y^ words of him whom no lawier has instruct with deciet,
and whiles he helps and bears out simple wits agayn^t the false and
malicious circu^^ertions of crafty children. This is hard to be observed in
other countries in so infinity a number of blind and intricate laws. But in
Vtopia every man is a cunnyng lawier. For as I said they have very few
laws: and the playnner and grosser that any interpretation is: that they
allow as most just. For all laws (say they) be made and publysshed only
to thenthente, that by them every man should be put in remembrance of his
duty. But the craftye and subtle interpretation of them can put very few
in that remembrance (for they be but few that do perceive them) where as the
simple the plain and gross meaning of the laws is open to every man. Else as
touching the vulgar sort of the people, which be both most in ^umbre, and
have most neade to know their duties, were it not as good for them that no
law were made at all, as when it is made, to bring so blind an
interpretacion upon it, that without great wit and long arguing no man can
discuss it? To the findinge out whereof another the gross judgment of the
people can attain, not her the hole life of them that be occupied in woorkynge
for their lyuynges can suffyse thereto. Thies virtues of the Vtopians have
caused their next neighbors and borderers, which live fre and under no
subjection (for the Vtopians long agoo have delyue^ed many of them from
tyranny) to take magistrates of them some for a year, and some for five
years space. Which when the time of their office is expired, they br^^ge
home again with honor and praise, and take new ons again with them into
their country. Thies nations have vndowtedlye very well and holsomlye
provided for their common wealths. For seeing that both the ma^yng and the
marrynge of the weal public does depend and hang of the manners of the
rulers and magistrates, what officers could they more wyselye have chosen,
the^ thoes which cannot be led from honestye by brybes (for to them that
shortly after shall depart the^s into their own countreye money should be
unprofitable) nor yet be moved other with favor, or malice toward annye man,
as being strangers and unacquainted with the people. The which two vices of
affection and auryce where they take place in judgments, incontynente they
break justice, the strongeste and suereste bond of a common wealth. Thies
peoples which fetch their officers and rulers from them the Vtopians call
their fellows. And other to whom they have been beneficial, they call
their friends. As towchynge leages, which in other places between country and
country be so often concluded, broken, and made again, they never make none
with any nation. For to what purpose serve leagues say they? As though nature
had not set sufficient love between man and man. And who so regards not
nature think you that he will pass for words? They be brought into this
opinion chiefly because y^ in thoes parties of y^ wordle leagues between
princes be wont to be kept and observed very slenderly. For here in Europ^, and
especially in thies parts where the faith and religion of Christ reygneth,
the majesty of leagues is every where esteemed holly and inviolable: partlye
through the justice and goodness of princes, and partelye through the reverence
of great bishops. Which like as they make no promysse themselfes but they
do very religiouslye perform the same so they exhort all princes in any
wise to abide by their promises, and them that refuse or deny so to do, by
their pontifical power and aucthorytie they compel thereto. And surely they
think well that it might seem a very reprochefull thing, if in the ^eagues
of them which by a pecu^iare name ^e called faithful faith should have no
place. But in that newefo^nde part of the world which is scaselye so far
from us beyond the ly^e equinoctial, as owre life and manners be disside^te
from theirs, no trust nor confydence is in leagues. But the mo and holyer
cerymonies the league is knyt^e up with, the so^er it is broken: by some
cauillation found in the words, which many times of purpose be so
craftelye put in, and placed, that the bands can never be so sure nor so
strong, but they will find some hole open to crepe owte at, and to break
both league and trewthe. The which crafty dealing, yea the which fraud and
deceyte, if they should know it to be practysed among pryuate men in their
bargaynes and contractes, they would incontinent cry owte at it with a sower
conntena^nce, as an offense most detestable, and worthy to be punnyshed with a
shameful death: yea even very they that auaunce themselfes authors of like
council given to princes. Wherefore it may well be thought other that all
justice is but a basse and a low virtue, and which avaleth it self far
under the high dignity of kings. Or at the least wise, that there be two
justices, the one mete for the inferioure sort of the people, goinge a foot
and cr^pynge by ^owe on the ground, and bound down on every side with many
bands, because it shall not run at rouers. The other a pryncely virtue, which
like as it is of much higher majesty then the other poor justice, so also it
is of much more liberty, as to the which nothing is unlawful that it
lusts after. Thies manners of princes (as I said) which be there so evil
kepers of leagues cause the Vtopians, as I suppose, to make no leagues at all,
which perchance would change their mind i^ they lived here. Howebeit they
think that tho^ghe leagues be never so faythfullye observed and kept, yet the
custom of making leagues was very euel be gonne. For this causes me^ (as
though ^ations which be separate a sondre by the space of a little hyl or a
river, were co^pled together by ^o societe or bond of nature) to think them
selfs borne adversaries and enemies one to an other, and that it is lawful
for the one to seek the death and destruction of the other, it leagues were
not: yea and that after the leagues be accorded, f^yndeshyppe does not grow
and increase: But the license of robbynge and stealing does still remain, as
far^urthe as for lack of forsight and aduisement in writing the words of
the league anny sentence or clause to the contrary is not therein suffycyentlye
comprehended. But they be of a contrary opinion. That is that no man ought to
be counted an enemy, which has done no i^iury. And that the felowshyppe of
nature is a strong league: and that men be better and more surely knitte
togethers by love and bene^ole^ce, the^ by couenau^tes of leagues, by hearty
affection of mind then by words.

Of warfare*
War or battle a^ a thing very ^rast^lye, and yet to no kind of beasts in
so much use as it is to man, they do detest and abhor. And contrary to the
custom almost of all other natyons, they cow^te nothing so much against
glory, as glory gotten in war. And therefore though they do daily practice
and exercise themselfes in the discypline of war, and that not only the men
but also the women upon certain appointed days, lest they should ^e to seek
in the feat of arms if nead should require, yet they never to goo to battle,
but other in the defense of their own cowntreye or to dry^e ow^e of their
friends land the enemies that be comen in, or by their power to deliver from
the yocke and bondage of tyran^ye so^^e people that be oppressed with tyranny.
Which thing they do of mere pytye and compassion. Howebeit they send
healpe to their fryndes not ever in their defense. But sumtimes also to
requyte and revenge injuries before to them done. But this they do no^ ^^les
their counsel and advise in the matter be asked whiles yt is yet new and
fresh. For if they find the cause probable, and if the contrary part will
not restore again such things as be of them iustelye demanded, then they be
the chyeffe auctores and makers of the war. Which they do not only as often
as ^y i^rodes and in^asions of soldiers prays and booties be dreuen away, but
then also much more mortally, when their frindes merchants in any land other
under y^ pretense of unjust laws, orels by the wresting and wrong
understanding of good laws do sustain an unjust accusation under the color
of justice. Another the battle which the vtopians fowghte for the Nephelogetes
against the Alaopolitanes a little before our time was made for annye other
cause, but that the Nephelogete marchaunte men as the vtopians thought suffered
wrong of the Alaopolita^es* under the pretense of right. But whether it were
right or wrong, it was with so cruel and mortal war revenged, the countr^is
round about ioy^ing their healpe and power to the puysaunce and malice of both
parties, that most fl^rishing and wealthy peoples being some of the^
shrewedely shaken, and some of them sharply beaten, the mischeues were not
finisshed nor ended, until the Alaopolitanes at the last were yielded up as
bondmen into the jurisdiction of the Nephelogetes. For the vtopians fought not
this war for themselfes. And yet the Nephelogetes before the war, when the
Alaopolitanes flourished in wealth were nothing to be compared with the^. So
egerly the Vtopians prosequ^te the injuries done to there frindes yea in money
matters, and not their own likewise. For if they by co^eyne or gyle be wiped
beside their gooddes, so that no violence be done to their bodies, they wreake
their anger by absteining from occupieng with that nation until they have made
satisfaction. Not for because they set less stoore by their own cytyzeyns,
then by their frindes: but that they take the loss of their fryndes money
more heuely then the loss of their own. Because that their frindes marchaunte
men, forasmuch as that they leise is their own private goo^des, sustain
great damage by the loss. But their own citizeyns leise nothing but of the
comme^ gooddes, and of y^ which was at home plentif^ll and almost superfluous,
else had it not been sent forth. Therefore no man feels the loss. And for
this cause they think it to cruel an act to revenge that loss with the
death of many, the incommoditie of the which loss no man feels another in
his li^fe, another in his living. But if it chance that any of their men in
any other countreye be may^ed or ^ylled, whether it be done by a comme^ or a
private council, knowing and trying out the treuth of the matter by their
ambassadors, o^les the offe^ders be rendered unto them in recompense of the
injury, they willl not be appeased: but inconti^ent they proclayme war
against the^ The offenders yielded they punnishe other with death or with
bondage. They be not only sorye, but also ashamed to atchieue the victory with
much blood shed, co^^tinge it great follye to bye pretyo^s wares to dear. They
rejoice and auaunte themselfes if they vaynquyshe and oppress their enemies
by craft and deceyt. And for that act they make a general tryumphe, and as if
the matter were manfullye handeled they s^tt up a pyller of stone in the place
where they so vanquysshed their enn^myes in token of the vyctory. For then
they glory then they booste and crack that they have played the men in deed,
when they have so over commen, as no other living creature but only man
could: that is to say by the might and pusyaunce of wit. For with boddelye
strength (say they) bears, lions, ^oores, wulffes, dogs and other wild
beasts do fight. And as the most part of them do pass us in strength
and fyerce courrage, so in wit and reason we be much stronger then they
all. Their chyefe and princypall purpose in war is to obtain that thing,
which if they had before obtained they would not have moved battle. But if
that be not possible, they take so cruel vengeance of them which be in the
fault, that ever after they be aferde to do the like. This y^ their cheyffe
and pryncypall intent, which they immedyatelye and first of all prosequute,
and set forewarde* But yet in, that they be more cyrcumspecte in avoiding
and eschewynge* ieopardyes, then they be desy^rous of praise and renown.
Therefore immediatl^ after that war is ones sole^ply denounced, they procure
many proclamatio^s signed with their own commen seal to be set up preuilie
at one time in their enemies land, in places most frequented. In thyes
proclamatyons they promysse great rewards to him that w^ll kill their e^emies
prince and sumwhat less gifts, but them very great also for every head of
them* whose names be in the said proclamacions contained. They be those whom
they count their chieffe adversaries, next unto the prince. What soever is
prescribed unto him that kills any of the proclaimed persons, that is d^bled
to him y^ brings any of the same to them alive, yea and to the proclaimed
persons the^ selfs, if they will change their minds and come into them
taking their pa^tes, they profer the same great rewards with pardon, and
suerty of their liaues. Therefore it quickly c^mmeth to pass that they have al
other men in suspicion, and be unfaithful and mistrusting among themselfes one
to another, liu^^g in great fear and in no lose ieopardye. For it is well
known that diverse times the most part of them, and specially the prince him
self has been betra^ed of the^ in whom they put their most hoope and trust.
So that there is no ma^^r of act nor deed that gifts and rewards do not
enforce me^ unto. And in rewards they keep no measure. But remembering and
considering into how great hasard and ieopardie they call them, endeavor
themselfes to recompen^e the greatenes of the danger with like great
benefits. And therefore they promise not only wonderful great abundaunce of
gold, but also lands of great revenues lyenge in most sauffe places emonge
their fryndes. And their promysses they perform faithfully wythowte annye
(...) or couyne. This custom of byinge and selling adversaries among other
people is dysallowed, as acruell act of a basse and a cowardys^e mind. But
they in this behalf think themselfes much praise woorthye, as who like wise
men by this means dyspatche great wars wythowte annye battle or skyruyshe.
Yea they cownte yt also a deed of pyty and mercy, because that by the death
of a few offenders the lives of a great ^^mber of ynuocentes as well of their
own me^ as also of their enemies be rau^somed and saved, which i^ fighting
should have been sleane. For they do no less pytye the basse and commen
sor^e of their enemies people, then they do their own: knowing that they be
driven to war against their wylles by the furyous madness of their princes
and heads. If by none of thies means the matter go forward, as they would
have yt, then they procure occasyons of debate, and dyssentyon to be spredde
emonge their enemies. As by bringing the princes brother, or some of the
noble men in hoope to obtain the kyngedome. If this way prevail not, then
they reyse up the people that be next neygheboures and borderers to their
enemies, and them they set in their necks* under the color of some old
title of right, such as kings do never lack. To them they promysse their
help and aid in their war. And as for money they give them abundance. But
of their own cytyzeyns they send to them few or none. Whom they make so
much of, and love so intyerlye, that they wol^e not be willing to chaung auye
of the^ for their adversaries prince. But their gold and silver, because they
keep yt all for this only purpose, they lay it owte frankly and freely: as who
should live even as wealthely, if they had bestowed it every pennye. Yea
and besides their riches, which they keep at home, they have also a^ in
fy^yte treasure abroad, by reason that (as I said before) many natyons be in
their debte. Therefore they hyere soldyours out of all countries and send
them to battle, but cheiflye of the Zapo^etes. This people is.500. miles from
Vtopia eastewarde. They be hydeous savage and fyerce, dwelling in wild woods
and high mountains, where they were bredde and brought up. They be of an hard
nature, able to abide and sustain heat, cold, and labor, abhorrynge from all
delycate deyntyes, occupyenge no husbandrye nor ty^lage of the ground, homelye
and rude both in the buildinge of their houses and in their apparel, given
unto no goodness, but only to the breed and bringynge up of cattle. The
most part of their living is by hunting and stealing. They be borne
only to war, which they dylygentlye and ^arnestlye seek for. And when they
have gotten yt, they be wonders glad thereof. They goo furthe of their
countreye in great companyes together, and who soever lacks souldyours,
there they proffer their service for small wages. This is only the craft
that they have to get their living by. They maynteyne their life, by sekyng
their death. For them whomewyth they be in wayges they fight hardelye
fyerslye, and faythefullye. But they bind themselfes for no certain time. But
upon this condytion they enter into bonds, that the next day they will take
part with the other side for greatter wayges, and the next day after that
they will be ready to come back again for a little more money. There be few
wars there away, wherein is not a great number of them in both parties.
Therefore yt daily chauncethe that nigh kynsefolke which were hiered
togetheron one part, and there very fryndelye and famylyerly used themselfes
one with an other, shortly after being separate into contrary parts, run
one against an other enuyouslye and fyercelye: and forgetting both kyndred
and frendeshyp, thruste their swords one in another. And that for none other
cause, but that they be hyered of contrary princes for a little money. Which
they do so hyghelye regard and esteame, that they will easelye be provoked to
change parts for a halfpenye more wayges by the day. So quyckelye they have
taken a smacke in couetesenes. Which for all that is to them no proffyte. For
that they get by syghtynge, ymmmedyatelye they spend vnthryftelye and
wretchedlye in ryott. This people fight for the Vtopyans against all natyo^s,
because they give them greatter wayges, then annye other natyon will. For the
Vtopians like as they seek good men to use well, so they seek thyes evil and
vycyous men to abuse. Whom when neade requires with promises of great
rewards they putt furthe into great ieopardyes. From whens the most part of
them never cummeth again to ask their rewards. But to them that remain on
li^e they pay y^ which they promissed faithfully, that they may be the more
willinge to put them selfs in like dangers another time. Nor y^ Vtopians
pass not how many of the^ they bring to destruction. For they believe y^ they
should do a very good dead for all mankind, if they could rid out of ye
wordle all that foul stinkinge den of that most wicked and cursed people.
Next unto thies they use the soldiers of them whom they fight for. And then
the help of their other frindes. And last of al they join to their own
citizeins. Among whom they give to one of tried virtue and prowes the rewle
goouernaunce and conductyon of the holy army. Under him they appoynte ij.
other, which whiles he is sauffe be both pryuate and owte of office. But if
he be taken or slain, the one of the other.ij. succedeth him, as yt were by in
herytaunce. And if the second miscarry then the third takes his rowme, least
that (as the chance of battle is uncertain and dowtefull) the yeopardye or
death of the capytayne should bring the hole army in hasarde. They choose
soldyers owte of every city those which putt furthe themselfes wyllynglye.
For they thruste no man furthe into war against his will. Because they
believe, if annye man be fearful and faynte hearted of nature, he will not
only do no manfull and hardye act him self, but also by occasyon of
cowardenes to his fellows. But if annye battle be made against their own
countreye, then they putt thyes cowardes so that they be strong bodyed in
ships emonge other bold hearted men. Or else they dyspose the^ upon the
walls, from whens they may not fly. Thus what for shame that their enemies
be at hand, and what for because they be withowt hope of runnynge away, they
forgette all feere. And many times extreme necessytye turns cowardnes into
prowes and manlynes. But as none of the^ is thrust forth of his country into
war against his will, so women that be willing to accompanye their
h^sba^des in times of war be not prohybyted or stopped. Yea they provoke and
e^horte them to yt with praises. And in set fylde the wives do stand every
one by here own husbands side. Also every man is compassed next abowte with
his own children, kins fol^es and alliance. That they, whom nature chiefelye
moves to mutual succoure, thus stondynge together, may help one an other.
It is a great reproach and dishonestie for the husband to come home wythowte
his wiffe, or the wiffe without her husband, or ye son without his father.
And therefore if the other part stick so hard by it, that the ba^tell come to
their hands, it is fought with great slaughter and bloodshed, eue^ to the
utter destruction of both parts. For as they make all the means and shyf^es
that may be to keep themselfes from the necessitye of fighting, so that they
may dispatche ye battle by their hiered soldyours: so when there is no remedy
but yt they must neades fight themselfes then they do as corragiouslye fall
to it, as before, whiles they might, they did wyselye avoid i^. Nor they be
not most fierce at the first bro^te. But in continuance by little and little
their fierce corrage increases, with so stubborn and obstynate minds, that
they will rather die then give back an ynche. For that suertye of living,
which every man has at home being joined with no careful anxietye or
remembrance how their posterity shall live after them (for this pensifenes
oftentimes breaks and abateth courageous stomakes) makes them stowte and
hardy, and dysdaynful to be conquered. Moreover their knowledge in cheualrye
and feats of arms puts them in a good hope. Finally the wholesome and
virtuous opinions, wherein they were brought up eue^ from their childhode,
partly through learning, and partelye through the good ordenaunces and laws
of their weal public augmente and increase their manfull currage. By
reason whereof they another set so little store by their lives that they will
rasshely and unadvisedly cast them away: nor they be not so far in lewd and
fond love therewith, that they will shamefully couete to keep them, when
honesty bids leave the^. When the battle is hottest and in all places most
fierce and fervent, a bend of chosen and picked young men, which besworne to
live and dye togethers, take upon them to destroy their adversaries
captain, him they invade now with preuy wyeles, now by open strength. At him
they strike both nere and far of. He is assailed with a long and a continewal
assault, fresh men still coming in the w^ried men's places. And seldom it
chau^ceth (onles he save himself by flying) that he is not other slain, or
^ls taken prisoner, and yielded to his enemies alive. If they win the fyelde,
they persecute not their enemies with the violent rage of slaughter. For they
had rather take them alive then kill the^. Another they do so follow the chase
and pursuit of their enemies, but they leave behy^de them one part of their
host in battayl arraye under their s^andardys. In so much that if all their
hole army be discumfetyd and ouercum saving the rerewarde, and that they
therewith achieue the victory, the^ they had rather let all their enemies
escape, then to follow them out of array. For they remember it has chanced
unto themselfes more the^ o^es: the hole power and strength of their host
being vanquished and put to flight, whiles their enemies rejoicing in the
victory have persecuted them flying some one way and some an other, few of
their men lying in an ambusshe, there reddy at all occasions, have soday^ly
risen upon them thus dispersed and scattered out of array, and through
presumption of safetye unadvisedly pursuynge the chase: and have incontinent
changed the fortune of the hole battayll: and spyte of there tethes wrestynge
out of their hands the sure and v^dowted victory, being a little before
conquered have for their part co^quired the co^querers. It is hard to say
whether they be craftier in laynge an ambusshe, or wittier in ^duoydynge
the same. You would think they i^tende to f^ye* whem they ^eane nothing
less. And contrary wise when they go about that purpose* you would believe it
were y^ least part of their thought. For it they perceive themselfes other
ouermatched in number, or closed in to narrow a place, then they remove their
camp other in the ^yght season with silence, or by some policy they deceive
their enemies, or in the day time they retiere back so softely, that it is
no less ieoperdie to meddle with them when they give back then when they
preese on. They fence and fortify their camp sewerlye with a deape and a
broad trenche. The earth thereof is cast inward. Nor they do not set drudgeis
and slaves a work about it. It is done by the hands of the soldiers them
selfs. All the hole army works upon it: except them that watch in harneis
before the trenche for sodeyne auentures. Therefore by the labor of so many a
large trenche closinge in a great compass of ground is made in less time
the^ any man would believe. Their armoure or har^ei^ which they wear is sure
and strong to receive strokes, and handsome for all mo^inges and gestures of
the body, in somuche that it is not unwieldy to swymme in. For in the
discipline of their warefare among other feats they learn to swim in
harneis. Their weapons be arrows afar of: which they shote both strongely
and suerly, not only fotemen but also horsemen. At hand strokes they use not
swords but polla^es which be mortal, as well in sharpenes as in weyghte, both
for foynes and down strokes. Engines for war they deuyse and inuente wonders
wittely. Which when they be made they keep very secret, least if they should
be known before neade require, they should be but laughed at, and serve to no
purpose. But in making them hereunto they have chief respect, that they be
both easy to be carried and handsome to be moved and turned about. Truce taken
with their enemies for a short time they do so fermelye and faithfully keape,
that they will not break it: no not though they be their unto provoked. They
do not waste nor destroy there enemies land with forraginges, nor they burn
not up their corn. Yea they save it as much as may be from being onerrune
and trodden down other with men or horses, thinking that it grows for their
own use and proffyt. They hurt no man that is unarmed onles he be an espiall.
All cities that be yielded unto them, they defend. And such as they win by
force of assaute they no there dispoyle nor sack, but them that withstode and
dyswaded the yeldynge up of the same they put to death, the other soldiers
they punnyshe with bondage. All the weak multitude they leave untouched. If
they know that a^ye cytezeins counseled to yield and render up the city, to
them they give part of the condemned men's goods. The resydewe they
distribute and give freely among them, whose help they had in the same war.
For none of them selfs takes any portion of the pray. But when the battayll
is fynyshed and ended, they put their friends to never a penny cost of all the
chardges that they were at, but lay it upon their necks that be conquered.
Them they burde^ne with the hole chardge of their expe^ceis, which they
demand of them partelye in money to be kept for like use of battayll, and
partelye in sands of great revenues to be paid unto them yearlye for ever.
Such revenues they have now in ma^ye countries. Which by little and little
rysyng of diverse and sundry causes be increased above.vij. hundredth thousand
ducates by the year. Thither they send forth some of their citezei^s as
Lieuete^auntes, to live their sumptuously like men of honor and renown. And
yet this notwithstanding much money is saved, which comes to the common
treasory: onles it so chance, that they had rather trust y^ country with the
money. Which many times they do so long until they have neade to occupy it.
And it seldom happens, y^ they demand al* Of thies lands they assign part
unto the^, which at their request and exhortacion put thems^lfes in such
ieoperdies as I spoke of before. If any prince stir up war against them,
intendyng to invade their land, they mete him incontinent out of their own
borders with great power and strength. For they never lightly make war in
their own countries. Nor they be never brought into so extreme necessity as
to take help out of forreyne lands into thire own Island.

Of the religyons in Vtopia.
THere be diverse kinds of religion not only in sundry parts of the Island,
but also in diverse places of every city. Some worship for God the sun: some
the moon, some some other of the planetes. There be that give worship to a man
that was o^es of excellent virtue or of famous glory, not only as God, but
also as the chiefest and highest God. But the most and the wysest part
(reiectynge all thies) believe that there is a certain Godly power unknown,
everlasting, incomprehensible, inexplicable, far above the capacity and
retche of manswitte, dispersed through out all the world, not in byg^es, but
in virtue and power. Him they call the father of all. To him allone they
attrybute the begynnynges, the encreasynges, the procedynges, the chaunges, and
the ends of all things. Another they give divine honors to any other then to
him. Yea all the other also, though they be in diverse opinions, yet in this
point they agree all togethers with the wisest sort in beleuynge that there is
one chief and pryncipall God the maker and ruler of the hole world: whom
they all commonly in their country language call Mythra. But in this they
disagre that among some he is counted one, and among some an other. For every
one of them, whatsoever that is which he takes for the chief God, thinks
it to be the very same nature, to whose only deuyne might and majesty the some
and soueraintie of al things by the consent of all people is attributed and
given. How be it they al begin by little and little to forsake and fall from
this variety of superstitions, and to agree togethers in that religion which
semethe by reason to pass and excel the resydewe. And it is not to be dowted
but all the other would long agoo have been abolyshed, but that whatsoever
unprosperous thing happened to any of them as he was minded to change his
religion, the fearefulnes of people did take it not as a thing cummynge by
chance, but as sent from God out of heaven. As though the God whose honor
he was forsakynge, would revenge that wicked purpose against him. But after
they hard us speak of the name of Christ, of his doctrine, laws, miracles,
and of the no less wonderful constancy of so many martyrs, whose blood
wyllynglye shed brought ^ great number of nations through out all parts of
the world into their sect: you will not believe with how glad minds,
they agreed unto the same: whether it were by the secret inspiration of God,
or else for that they thought it next unto that opinion which among them is
counted the chiefest. How be it I think this was no small healpe and
furtheraunce in the matter that they hard us say that Christ instytuted
among his all things commen: and that the same community does yet remain
amongst the rightest Christian companies. Verily how soever it came to pass,
many of them consented togethers in our religion, and were washed in the
hollye water of baptism. But because among us four (for no moo of us was
left alive two of our compa^ye being dead) there was no priest, which I am
right sorye for, they being entered and instructed in all other points of
our relygion, lack o^elye those Sacraments, which here none but priests do
minister. How be it they understand and perceive them, and be very desierous
of the same. Yea they reason and dispute the matter earnestly among themfelfes,
whether without the s^ndyng of a christian bishop one chosen out of their
own people may receive the order of priesthode. And truly they were minded to
choose one. But at my departure from them they had chosen none. They also
which do not agree to Christ's religion fear no man from it, nor speak
against any man that has received it. Saving that one of our company in my
presence was sharply punyshed. He as soon as he was baptized began against our
wills with more earnest affection then wisdom to reason of Christ's religion*
and began to wax so hot in his matter that he did not only prefer our
relygion before all other, but also did utterly despise an co^dempne al other,
calling them profane, and the followers of them wicked and deuelishe, and the
children of everlasting dampnation. When he had thus long reasoned the matter
they laid hold on him, acc^sed him, and condemned him into exyle, not as a
despyser of religion, but as a sedicious person, and a rayser up of dissension
among the people. For this is one of the auncientest laws among them: that
no man shall be blamed for reasonynge in the mayntenaunce of his own religion.
For king Vtopus even at the first beginning, hearing that the inhabitau^tes of
the land were before his coming thither at con^ynuall dissension and strife
among themselfes for their religions: perceiving also that this
co^mondissention whiles every several sect took several parties in
fyghting for their country, was the only occasion of his conquest over them
all, assoue as he had gotten the victory: First of all he made a decrie, that
it should be lawful for every man to favor and follow what religion he
would, and that he might do the best he cold to bring other to his opinion, so
that he did it peaceably, gentelye, quyetly, and soberlye, without hastye and
contentious rebuking and inuehyng against other. If he could not by fair and
gentle speech i^duce them unto his opinion, yet he should use no kind of
violence, and refrain from displeasaunt and seditious words. To him that
would vehemently and feruentlye in this cause strive and contend was decreid
bannish me^t or bondage. This law did king Vtopus make not only for the
maintenau^ce of peace which he saw through continual contention and mortal
hatred utterly extinguished: but also because he thought this decrye should make
for the furtheraunce of religion. Whereof he durst define and determine nothing
unadvisedly, as dowting whether god des^eryng manifold and diverse sorts of
honor, would inspire sondrie men with sondrie kinds of religion. And this
suerly he thought a very unmeet and folishe thing, and a point of arrogant
presumption to compel all other by violence and threatenynges to agree to
the same that thou beleuest to be ^rewe. ^urthermore though there be one
religion which alone is true, and all other vain and superstitious, yet did
he well forsee (so that the matter were handeled with reason, and sober
modesty) that the trewthe of the own power would at the last issue owte and
come to light. But if contention and debate in that behalf should
continuallye be used, as the woorste men be most obstynate and stubburne, and
in their evil opynion most constante: he perceived that then the best and
holiest religion would be trodden under foot and destroyed by most vain
superstitions, even as good corn is by thorns and weydes ouergrowen and
choked. Therefore all this matter he left undiscussed, and gave to every man
free liberty and choice to believe what he would. Sauinge that he earnestly
and straytelye chardged them, that no man should conceive so vile and base an
opinion of the dignity of man's nature as to think that the sowles do dye and
perish with the body: or that the world runs at al auentures governed by
no divine pro^idence. And therefore they believe that after this life vices be
extreamelye punyshed and virtues bountyfully rewarded. Him that is of a
contrary opinion they count not in the number of me^, as one that has aualed
the high nature of his soul to the vielnes of brute beasts bodies: much
less in the number of their citiziens, whoes laws and ordenau^ces if it were
not for fear he would nothing at al esteem. For you may be suer that he will
study other with craft preuely to mock, orels violently to break the commen
laws of his country, in whom remains no further fear the^ of the laws,
nor no further hope then of the body. Wherefore he that is thus minded is
depryued of all honors, excluded from all offices and reiecte from all common
administrations in the weal publyque. And thus he is of all sort despised as
of an unprofitable and of a base and vile nature. How be it they put him to no
punyshemente, because they be persuaded y^ it is in no man's power to believe
what he list. No nor they constrayne him not with threatninges to dissemble his
mind and show countenance contr^ry to his thought. For deceit and falshed
and all manner of lies, as next unto fra^de, they do meruelouslye deteste and
abhor. But they suffer him not to dispute in his opinion and that o^lyeemong
the commen people. For elle^ a part among the the pryestes and me^ of gravity
they do not only suffer but also exhort him to dispute and argue: hoopinge
that at the last that madness will give place to reason. There be also other,
and of them no small number, which be not forbidden to speak their minds, as
grounding their opinion upon some reason, being in their gli^ine another evil
nor vicious. Their heresye is much contrary to the other. For they believe that
the souls of brute beasts be immortal and everlasting. But nothi^ge to be
compared with owers in dignity, another ordained and predestinate to like
felicity. For all they believe certainly and sewerly that man's bless shall be
so great, that they do morn and lamente every man's sickness but no man's
death, oneles it be one whom they see depart from his liffe carfully, and
against his will. For this they take for a very evil token as though the soul
being in dyspayre and vexed in conscience, through some preuy and secret
forefeilyng of the punnishment now at hand were af^rde to* depart. And they
think he shall not be welcome to God which when he is called runs not to
him gladly, but is drawn by force and sore against his will. They therefore
that see this kind of death do adhorre it, and them that so die they buy
with sorrow and silence. And when they have prayed God to be merciful to the
soul, and mercifully to pardon the ^nfirmities thereof they cover ye dead
coorse with earth. Contrary wise all that depart merely and full of good
hoope, for the^ no man mo^rnethe, but followethe the heerse with joyful
synging, commending the souls to god with great affection. And at the last not
with mourning sorrow but with a great ^^uere^ce they bourne y^ bodies. And in
ye same place they set up a pillar of stone, with the dead man's titles therein
graued. When they be come home they rehearse his virtuous ma^ers and his good
deeds. But no part of his liffe is soooft or gladly talked of as his merry
death. They think that this remembrance of their virtue and goodness does
veheme^tely provoke and enforce the quick to virtue. And y^ nothing ca^ be
more pleasant and acceptable to the dead. Whom they suppose to be present
among them when they talk of them, though to the dull and feoble eyesight of
mortal me^ they be inuisibly. For it were an vncon^enient thing that the
blessed should not be at liberty to goo whether they would. And it were a
point of great unkindness in the^ to have utterly cast away the desyer of
vysytynge and seeing their frindes, to whom they were in their life time
joined by mutual love and charytye. Which in goodme^ after their death they
cownte to be rat^^ encreasede then dymynyshede. They believe therefore that the
dead be presentlye conuersaunte among y^ quick, as beholders and witnesses of
all their words and deeds. Therefore they go more corragiously to their
business as ha^ing a trust and affiaunce in such overseers. And this same belefe
of y^ present co^uersacio^ of their forefathers and auncetours emonge them
fearethe them from all secret dishonesty. They utterly ^espise and mock sothe
sayings and diuinacions of things to come by the flighte or voices of birds,
and all other diuinations of vain superstition, which in other countries be in
great observation. But they highly esteame and worship miracles that come by
no help of nature, as works and witnesses of the present powr^ of God. And
such they say do chance there very often. And su^times in great and
dowtefull matters by commen intercession and prayers they procure and obtain
them with a suer hoope and confidence and a steadfast beleffe. They think that
the contemplacion of nature and the praise thereof cumminge, is to God a very
acceptable honor. Yet there be many so earnestly bent and affectioned to
religion, that they pass no thing for learning nor give their minds to no
knowledge of things. But ydelnes they utterly forsake and esch^e, thinkinge
felicity after this liffe to be gotten and obtained by busy labors and good
exercises. Some therefore of them attend upon the sick, some amend high
ways, cleanse ditches, repair bridges, dig turfes, gravel and stones, fell
and cleave wood, bring wood cor^e and other things into the cities in carts,
and serve not only in commen works, but also in pryuate labors as
seruanntes, yea more then bondme^. For what so ever unpleasant, hard, and
vile work is any where, from the which labor, lothsu^^es, and desper^tion
does fraye other, all that they take upon them willingly and gladly, procuring
quyete and rest to other remaining in continual work and labor themfelfes,
not embrayding others there with. They another reprove other men's lives nor
glory in their own. Thies me^ the more seruiseable they behave them selfs
the moore they be honored of all men. Yet they be divided into.ij. sects. The
one is of them that live single and chaste absteining not only from the company
of women, but also from the eating of flesh, and some of them from al manner of
beasts. Which utterly reiectynge the pleasures of this present lyffe as
hurtefull, be all hollye set upon the dessire of the lyffe to come by watchynge
and sweating hoping shortly to obtain it, being in the mean season meerye
and lustye. The other sect is no less desyerous of labor, but they e^brace
matrimony, not despising the solace thereof, thinking that they ca^ not be
discharged of their bon^den duetyes toward nature without labor and tiole,
nor toward their nati^e countreye wythowte procreacion of children. They
abstain from no pleasure that does nothing hinder them from labor. They
love the flesh of fourefoted beasts, because they believe that by that meat
they be made hardier and stronger to work. The Vtopians count this sect the
wiser, but y^ other the hollier. Which in that they prefer single liffe
before matrimony, and that sharp liffe before an easier liffe, if herin they
grounded upon reason they would mock them. But now forasmuch as they say they be
led to it by religion, they honor and worship the^. And thies be they whom
in their language by a peculyare name they call Buthresca^, the which word
by interpretation signifies to us men of relig^on or religious men. They have
pryestes of exceeding hollines, and therefore very few. For there be but.xiij.
in every city according to the number of their churches, saving when they go
forth to battle. For than.vij. of them goo furthe with the army: in whose
steades so many new be made at home. But the other at their return home
again reentre every one into his own place, they that be above the number
v^tyll such time as they succeed into the places of the other at their dyi^ge
be in the mean season continuallye in company with the bishop. For he is
the chyeffe head of the^ all. They be chosen of the people as the other
magistrates be, by secret voices for y^ auoy^ they be consecrate of their own
company. They be overseers of all deuyne matters, orderers of religious, and as
it were Iugers and masters of manners. And it is a great dishonestye and shame
to be rebuked or spoken to by anny of the^ for dissolute and incontine^t
living. But as it is their office to give good exhortations and cow^sell, so it
is y^ de^ty of the prince and y^ other magistrates to correct and punnyshe
offe^ders, saving that the priests whom they find exceading vicious livers,
the^ they excomm^^icate from having any interest in divine matters. And there
is almoost no punnishment emonge them more feared. For they run in very
great infamy, and he inwardly tormented with a secret fear of religion, and
shall dot long escape free with their bodies. For onles they, by quycke
repentance approve the amendment of their lyffes to the priests, they be
taken and punnished of the cownsell as wicked and irreligious. Both childhode
and youth is instructed, and tought of them. Nor they be not more deligente to
instruct them in learning then in virtue and good manners. For they use with
very great endeavor and deligence to put into the heads of their children
whiles they be yet tender and pliaunt good opinions and profitable for the
conservation of their weal public. Which when they be ones rooted in
children do remain with them all their life after: and be wonders profitable
for the defense and maintenance of the state of the common weal the. Which
never decaieth but through vi^is risinge of evil opinyons. The pryestes onles
they be women (for that kind i^ not excluded from pryesthode, howebeit few be
chosen, and none but widows and old women) the me^ priests I say take to
their wifes the chiefest women in all their countreye. For to no office among
the vtopians is more honor and preeminence given. In so much that if they
committ any offense, they be under no common judgment, but be left only to god
and themselves. For they think it not lawful to touch him with man's hand,
be he never so vityous, which after so singular a sort was dedicate and
consecrate to god as a holly offering. This manner may they easily observe,
because they have so few priests and do choose the^ with such circu^spection.
For it scasely ever chances that y^ most ver^uo^s among virtuous which in
respect only of his virtue is auaunced to so high a dignity, can fall to vice
and wickedness. And if it should cha^^ce in deed (as man's nature is mutable and
frail) yet by reason they be so few and promoted to no might nor power, but
only honor, it were not to be feared that any great damage by them should
happen and e^sue to the common wealth. They have so rare and few priests least
if the honor were communicate to many y^ dignity of y^ order which among them
now is so highly esteemed should run in contempt. Specially because they
think it hard to find many so good, as to be meet for that dignity, to the
execution and discharge where of it is not sufficie^te to be endued with mean
virtues. Further more thies priests be not more esteemed of their own country
me^, then they be of foreign and straung countries. Which thing may hereby
plainly appear. And I think also y^ this is the cause of it. For whiles y^
arms be fighting together in open feld, they a little beside not far of knele
upon their knees in their hallowed vestimentes, holding up their hands to
heaven, praying first of all for peace, next for vyctory of their own part,
but to neither part a bluddy vyctory. If their host get the upper hand they
run in to the main battle, and restrain their own men from sleying and
cr^ellye pursuynge their vanquyshed e^nemies. Which enemies if they do but
see them and speak to them, yt is enough for the sauegarde of their lives.
And the towchynge of their clothes defe^deth and saves al their gooddes from
ra^yne and spoil. This thing has auaunced the^ to so great wourshyp and true
majesty among al nato^is, yt many times they have as well preserved their own
citizens from y^ cruel force of their enemies, as they have their enemies from
the^ furyous rage of their own men. For yt is well known that when their
own army has reculed, and in dyspayre turned back, and run away, their
ennemies fyerslye pursuing with slaughter and spoil, then the priests cumming
betwine have stayed the murder, and parted both the hosts. So that peace has
be^e made and concluded between both parts upon equal and indyfferent
condytions. For there was never anny natyon, so fires, so cruel and rude, but
they had the^ in such reverence, that they cownted their bodies hallowed and
sanctyfyed and therefore not to be violentlye and irreverently towched. They
keep hollye day the first and the last day of every month and year,
deuydynge the year into mo^ethes, which they measure by the course of the
moon, as they do the year by the course of the son. The first days they
call in their language Cynemer^es, and the last Trape^^ernes, the which
words may be interpreted primifeste and finifest or else in our speech first
feast and last feast. Their churches be very gorgyous, and not only of fine
and curious workema^ship, but also (which in the fewenes of the^ was necessary)
very wide and large, and able to receive a great company of people. But they be
all sumwhat dark. Howbeit that was not done through ignorance in buylding,
but as they say by the cownsell of the priests. Because they thought y^ over
much light does disperse men's cogitations, where as in dim and doutefull
light they be gathered together, and more earnestly fixed upon religion and
devotion, which because it is not there of one sort among all men, and yet all
the kinds and fassions of it, though they be sundry and manifold, agree
together in the honor of the divine nature, as going diverse ways to one
end, there fore nothing is seen nor hard, in y^ churches, which seems, not to
agree indifferently with them all. If there be a distinct kind of sacrifice
peculiare to any several sect, that they execute at home in their own
houses. The common sacrifices be so ordered that they be no derogatyon nor
preiudyce to a^^ye of the pryuate sacryfyces and religions. Therefore no image
of annye god is se^ne in the church, to the intent it may be free for every
man to conceive god by their religion after what likeness and similitude they
will. They call upon no peculiar name of god but only Mithra. In the which word
they all agree together in one nature of y^ divine majesty whatsoever it be.
No prayers be used but such as every man may boldelye pronownce wythowt the
offending of anny sect. They come therefore to the church, the last day of
every month and year in the evening yet fasting, there to give thanckes to
GOD for that they have prosperouslye passed over the year or monethe, whereof
that hollye day is the last day. The next day they come to the church
earlye in the morning, to pray to GOD that they may have good fortune and
success all the new year or monethe, which they do begin of that same
hollye day. But in the holly days that be the la^^e days of the months and
years, before they come to the church the wiffes fall down prostrat before
their husbands feet at home, and the chidren before the feet of their
pa^entes confessing and acknowleginge that they have off^nded other by some
actual deed, or by omissio^ of their dewty, and desire pardon for their
offense. Thus if any cloud of preuy displeasure was risen at home, by this
satisfaction it is over blown, that they may be present at the sacrifices with
pure and charitable minds. For they be aferd to come there with troubled
co^scie^ces. There fore if they know themselfes to bear any hatred or grudge
toward any man, they presume not to come to y^ sacrifices before they have
reconcyled themselfes and purged their conscyences, for fear of great
vengeance and punyshemente for their offense. When they come thither the men
goo into the right side of the churthe and the the women into y^ left side.
There they place themselfes in such order that all they which be of the male
kind in every household sit before the goodma^ of y^ house, and they of the
female kind before the goodwyfe. Thus it is forsene that all their gestures
and behauiours be marked and observed abroad of the^, by whose aucthoritye and
discipline they be governed at home. This also they diligently see unto, that
the yo^ger evermore be coupled with his ^lder, lest it children be joined
together they ^hold pass over that time in childish wanto^nes, wherein they
ought principallye to conceive a religious and deuou^ feere toward god: which
is the chieffe and almost yt only incitatio^ to virtue. They kill no living
beast in sacrifice, nor they think not that the merciful clemency of god has
delight in blood and slaughter, which has given liffe to beasts to the intent
they should live. They burn fra^ckensence and other sweet savors, and light
also a great number of wax candelles and ^apers, not supposinge this geere to
be any thing auaylable to the divine nature as another the prayers of men. But
this unhurtful and harmeles kind of worship pleases the^. And by thies sweet
sauoures and lights, and other such ceremonies me^ feel themselves secretly
lifted up, and encouraged to devotion with more willing and ^eruent hearts.
The people wears in the church white apparel. The priest is clothed in
chaungeable colors. Which in workemanshyp be excellent, but in stuff not
very precious. For their vestementes be another embrodered with gold, nor set
with precious stones. But they be wrought so fynely and connyngly with diverse
feathers of fowls, that the estimacion of no costelye stuff is able to
cou^teruaile the price of the work. Furthermore in thies birds feathers, and
in the dew order of the^, which is observed in their setting, they say is
contained certain deuyne mysteries. The interpretation whereof known, which is
diligently tawght by the pri^stes, they be put in remembrance of the
bountyfull benefits of God toward them: and of the love and honor which of
their behalf is dew to God: and also of their duties one toward an other.
When the priest first comes out of the vestrie thus apparelled, they fall
down incontinent every one reue^ently to the ground with so still silence on
every part, that the very fassion of the thing strikes into them a certain
fear of God, as though he were there personally present. When they have lieu
a little space on the ground, the priest gives them a sign for to rise. The^
they sing praises unto God, which they inter^nix^ with instruments of music,
for the most part of other fassions then thies that we use in this part of
the world. And like as some of owrs be much sweter then theirs, so some of
theirs do far pass owrs. But in one thing dowteles they goo exceeding
far beyond us. For all their music, both that they play upon
instruments, and that they si^ge with man's voice does so resemble and express
natural affections, the sownd and tune is so applied and made agreeable to the
thing, that whether it be a prayer, or else a dytty of gladness, of patience,
of trouble, of mourning, or of anger: the fassion of the melodye does so
represente the meaning of the thing, that it does wonderfullye move, stire,
pearce, and inflame the hearers my^des. At the last the people and the priest
together rehearse solemn prayers in words, expreslye pronounced, so made
that every man may priuatelye apply to himself that which is commonly
spoken of all. In thies prayers every man recogniseth and knowledgeth God to
be his maker, his gouernoure, and the principal can se of all other goodness,
thankyng him for so many benfites received at his hand. But namelye that
through the favor of God he has chanced into that publyque weal, which is
most happy and welt bye, and has chosen that religion which he hops to be
most true. In the which thing if he do annye thing err, or if there be
annye other better then either of them is, being moore acceptable to GOD, he
desiereth him that he will of his goodness let him have knowledge thereof, as
one that is ready too follow what way soever he will lead him. But if this
form and fassion of a commen wealth be best, and his own religion most
true and perfect, then he desires God to give him a constaunte stedfastnes in
the same, and to bring all other people to the same order of living, and to
the same opinion of God: onles there be any thing that in this dyuersitie of
religions does delight his unsearchable pleasure. To be short he prays him
that after his death he may come to him. But how soon or late that he dare
not assygne or determine. Howebeit, if it might stand with his majesty's
pleasure, he would be much gladder to dye a paynfull death and so to go to
God, the^ by long living in worldly prosperytie to be away from him. When
this prayer is said they fall down to the ground again, and a little after
they rise up and go to dynner. And the resydewe of the day they pass over in
plays, and exercise of cheualrye. Now I have declared and descrybyd unto
you, as truly as I could the form and order of that commen wealth, which
verily in my judgment is not only the best, but also that which alone of
good right may claim and take vp^^ it the name of a commen wealth or publyque
weal. For in other place^ they speak still of the comme^ wealth. But every
man procures his own pryuate wealth. Here where nothing is pryuate, the
commen affairs be ear^estly ^oked upon. And truly on both parts they have
good cause so to do as they do. For in other countries who knows not that he
shall sterue for honger, onles he make some several provision for himself,
though the commen wealth floryshe never so much in riches? And therefore he
is compelled even of very necessity to have regard to him self rather then
to the people, that is to say to other. Contrarywyse there where all things
be commen to every man, it is not to be dowted that any man shall lack any
thing necessary for his pryuate uses: so that the commen store houses and
barues be sufficientlye stored. For there nothing is distrybuted after (...)
nyggyshe sort, another there is any poor man or beggar. And though no man have
any thing, yet every man is rich. For what can be more ^ychethen to live
ioyfullye and merylye without all grief and pensifenes? Not caryng for his
own living, nor vexed or trowbled with his wyfes importunate complayntes, not
drydynge poverty to his son, nor sorrowyng for his dowghters dowrey. Yea
they take no care at all for the living and wealth of themselfes and al
theirs, of their wyfes, their children, their ^ephewes, their childrens
children, and all the succession that ever shall follow in their posterity.
And yet besides this there is no less provision for them that were ones
laborers, and be now weak and impotent, then for them that do now labor
and take pain. H^ere now would I see if any man dare be so bold as to
compare with this equytie, the justice of other nations. Among whom, I forsake
God, if I can find any sign or token of equity and justice. For what justice
is this, that a rich goldsmythe or an usurer, or to be short any of them,
which other do nothing at all, or else that which they do is such, that it
is not very necessary to the common wealth, should have a pleasant and a
welthy ^yuynge, other by Idilnes, or by unnecessary busynes? When in the mean
time poor laborers, carters, pro^smythes, carpenters, and plowmen, by so
great and continual toil as drawyng and bearyng beasts be skant able to
sustain, and again so necessary toil that with out it no commen wealth were
able to continewe and e^dure one year, do yet get so hard and poor a living
and live so wretched and miserable a life, that the state and condition of the
laboring beasts may seem much better and welthier. For they be not put to
so contynuall labor, nor their living is not much worse, yea to them much
pleasaunter, taking no thowghte in the mean season for the time to come. But
thies seilie poor wretches be presently tormented with barreyne and
unfruitful labor. And the remembrance of their poor indigent and begerlye
old age kylleth them up. For their daily wages is so little that it will not
suffice for the same day, much less it yeldeth any overplus, that may daily
be laid up for the relyefe of old age. Is not this an unjust and an unkind
publyque weal, which gives great fees and rewards to gentelmen as they call
them, and to goldsmythes, and to such other, which be other ydell persons or
else only flatterers, and deuysers of vain pleasures? And of the contrary
part makes no gentle provision for poor plowmen, coliars, laborers, carters,
yronsmythes, and carpenters: without whom no commen wealth can co^tinewe? But
when it has abused the labors of their lusty and flowringe age at the last
when they be oppressed with old age and syckenes: being nedye poor and
indigent of all things, then forgetting their so many paynfull watchynges,
not remembrynge their so many and so great benefytes, recompenseth and
acquyteth them most unkindly with miserable And yet besides this the rich men
not only by private fraud, but also by commen laws do every day pluck and
snatche away from the poor some part of their daily living. So where as it
seemed before unjust to recompense with unkindness their pains that have been
beneficial to the public weal, now they have to this their wrong and
unjust dealinge (which is yet a much worse point) given the name of
justice, yea and that by force of a law. Therefore when I consider and way in my
mind all thies commen wealths which now a days any where do flourish, so god
helpeme, I can perceive nothing but a certain conspiracy of rich men
procuringe their own commodities under the name and title of the common
wealth. They invent and devise all means and crafts first how to kipe safely
without fear of lesing that they have unjustly gathered together, and next how
to hire and abuse the work and labor of the poor for as little money as may
be. Thies deuyses when the rich men have decreed to be kept and observed for
the common wealths sake, that is to say for the wealth also of ye poor
people then they be made laws. But thies most wicked and vicious men, when
they have by their insatiable covetousness divided among the^ selfs all those
things which would have suffised all men, yet how far be they from the
wealth and felicity of the vtopian commen wealth? Out of the which in that all
the desire of money with the use thereof is utterly secluded and bannisshed,
how great a heap of cares is cut away? How great an occasion of wickedness and
mischief is plucked up by the ^otes? For who knows not that fraud, theft,
rauine, brauling, quarelling, brabling, strisse, chiding, co^tentio^, murder,
treason, poisoning, which by daily punishme^tes are rather reue^ged then
refrained, do dye when money di^th? And also that fear, grief, care,
labors, and watchinges do perish eue^ the very same moment that money
perissheth? Yea poverty it self which only seemed to lack money, if money were
goue, it also would decrease and vanishe away. And that you may perceive this
more plainly, consider withyour selfs some barrein and unfruitful year,
wherein many thousands of people have starued for ho^ger. I dare be bold to
say, y^ in the end of that pen^ry so much corn or grain might have been found
in y^ rich men's barnes if they had been searched as being divided among the^,
whom famine and pestilence has killed, no man at all should have felt that
plage and pe^^ry. So easily might m^gett their living, if that same worthy
princess lady money did not alon stop up the way between us and our living,
which a gods name was very excelle^tly devised and inverted, that by her the
way thereto should be opened. I am sewer the rich men perceive this, nor they
be not ignoraunte how much better yt werre to lack ^oo necessary thing then
to abunde with overmuch superfluy^e, to be rydde owte of in numerable cares and
trowbles, then to be beseiged with great riches. And I dowte not that other
the respect of every man's private commodity, or else the aucthority of our
savior Christ (which for his great wisdom could not but know what were best,
and for his inestimable goodness cold not but counsel to that which he knew to
be best) would have brought all the wordle long agoo into the laws often his
weal public, if it were no y^ one only beast the prince and mother of all
mischief pride, does wi^hstonde and let it. She measures not wealth and
prosperity by here own commodities, but by the miseri^es and inco^modities of
other. She would not by her good will be made a gods, if there were no
wretches left, whom she might b^ lady over to mock and scorn: over whose
miseries her felicity might shine whose poverty she might vex, torment, and
increase by gorgiously setting furthe her riches. This hell hound ^^epeth in to
men's hearts: and plucketh the^ back from entering the right pathe of liffe,
and is so depely roted in men's breasts that she can not be plucked out. This
form and fassion of a weal public, which I would gladly wisshe unto all
nations: I am glad yet that it has chanced to y^ Vtopians, which have
followed those institutions of liffe, whereby they have laid such fondations of
their common wealth, as shall co^tinew and last not only wealthely, but also as
far as ma^s wit may judge and conjecture shall endure for ever. For saying
the chief causes of ambition and sedition with other vices be plucked up by
the roots and abandoned at home there can be no ieopardye of domestical
dissension, which alone has cast under foot and brought to naught the well
fortefied and strongly defenced wealth and riches of many cities. But for
as much as perfect concord remains, and wholesome laws be executed at home, the
envy of all foreign princes be not able to shake or move y^ empire, though they
have many times long ago gone about to do it, being evermore dreuen back.
Thus when Raphaell had made an end of his tale, though many things came
to my mind which in the manners and laws of that people seemed to be instituted
and founded of no good reason, not only in ye fassio^ of their cheualry and in
their sacrifices and religions, and in other of their laws, but also, yea and
chieffely in that which is the pri^cipall fondacion of al their o^dinaunces,
that is to say in the community of their liffe and living, without anny
occupieng of money, by the which thing only all nobility, magnificence
wourship honor and majesty, the true ornaments and honors as the common
opinion is of a common wealth utterly be overthrown and destroyed: yet because
I knew that he was weary of talkinge, and was not sure whether he could abide
that any thing should be said against his mind: specially because I
remembered that he had reprehended this fault in other which be, aferd least
they should seem not to be wise enough, o^les they could find some fault in
other men's inventions: therefore I praising both their institutions and his
communication, took him by the hand and led him into supper: saying that we
would choose an other time to way and examine the same matters, and to talk with
him more at lardge therein. Which would to God it might ones come to pass. In
the mean time as I can not agree and consent to all things that he said, being
else without dowte a man singulerly well learned, and also in all wordely
matters exactely and profoundely experienced, so must I needs confess and
grant that many things be in the vtopian weal public, which in our cities I
may rather wisshe for then hoope after.

Thus ends the afternones talk of Raphaell Hythlodaye concerning the laws
and institutions of the Island of Vtopia.
Imprinted at London by Abraham Vele, dwelling in Paul's churcheyarde at the
sign of the Lamb. Anno. 1551.


