AN HOMILY UPON THESE WORDS of Saint Matthew, Chap. 16. v. 18.

Tu es Petrus. WRITTEN FIRST in French by that Honorable and learned personage,
Monsieur Du PLESSIS MORNAY. AND TRANSLATED into English by I. V.

AT OXFORD. Printed by Joseph Barnes, Printer to the University. 1615.

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful and Reverend Mr DOCTOR PRIDEAVX Rector of Exceter
College, my most Respected good Master.
RIght Worshipful and Reverend Sir, I am bold to present unto your Worsh: my
most endebted service, under the veil of this little book. It is the pen, and
word must serve you, not the sword: what though my quil be dull, and the
glorious light of the original of this work be clowded and obscured by mine
unskillful translation: yet aba^don you it not utterly, but looking on the
luster of the setting sun, that Aged Head, that begot this, think that the
obscurity here cannot be so Aegyptian-like, but that some rays may
nevertheless have power to shine? The Author is a true Champion of the
Militant-Reformed-French Church, long trained up under her sta^derd. For having
already valiantly fought both with pen and sword, he is yet ambitious in her
service: either violently to chase the old Goose out of the Capitol: or to
Mist. Iniquit in epist. ad Regem Mag. Brita.
find a glorious tomb in the snow of the Alps. Let him be an Apology for
my boldness, and a persuasion to humbly entreat your Worship to accept this
small duty of mine; which if you shall be pleased so kindly to do, as I with
all humility do offer it: you will so encourage me, that if higher means be
wanting I shall further strive in this kind hereafter to show my self in all
manner of service.

Your Worships most humble and faithful servant, I. V.

AN HOMILY UPON these words of S. Matthew chapt. 16. verse. 18. Tu es Petrus, etc.
whom do men say that J the son of man am? The man, verse. 13.
in whom for outward apparancy, they saw nothing but man: and they answered
him, Some say that thou art John Baptist, verse. 14.
Some Elias, and others Jeremias, or one of the Prophets, for without doubt
through that humanity, and that infirmity they saw some virtues, and puissance
shine in him above the perfections of man. But whom say ye (says he) that Jam?
verse. 15.
To which Simm Peter somewhat forwarder then the rest, (were it in regard of
his zeal, or in respect of his knowledge) frames this reply. Thou art Christ
the son of the living God. Not one of the Prophets; verse. 16.
they were his Heralds; but the end of all the Prophets: not John Baptist; he
was his forerunner: but that eternal word, of which he was but the voice which
cried in the wilderness, the son of the living God, begotten from all
eternity, promised in the beginning of time, exhibited in the fulness of times,
for the ransom, the life, and the everlasting salvation of the world, even of
those whom it pleased God to redeem from the corruption and perdition of the
world; And to that, what says our Savior? What says that son of the living
God, whose divine word in so high a subject, promises nothing humane, nothing
terrestrial, nothing which tends not to everlasting salvation, and the
kingdom of heaven? Blessed art thou Simon Bar-^ona, so^ flesh and blood has
not revealed it unto thee, verse. 17.
hence therefore all carnal, all temporal imaginations, But my father which
is in heaven, my father which by me in this revelation, and this faith
dispenses his heavenly graces, But J say also unto thee (says he) that thou
art Peter, verse. 18.
such a one would I have thee to be called, and such a one would I have thee to
be indeed; the names which I impose are vocations, with the names I can change
the nature and quality of things, Upon this rock J will build my church, and
the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. These last words are those
which we are to expound, which admit diverse interpretations, and therefore we
will search out that which shall be most agreeable to our purpose in hand, and
shall hold best analogy, proportion and correspondencie with this holy
catechism.

2 Thou art Peter (says he) and upon this rock I will build my Church* Here
a question offers it self to be decided, to wit, whether our Savior in
these words, intended to build his Church upon Simon, by him surnamed Peter, or
upon himself Christ the Son of the living God, acknowledged and confessed by
Peter. Concerning which we must observe that our Savior then when he changed
his name, said unto him, Ioh. 1.42.
Thou shall be called Cephas which is by interpretation a stone, and that in
the Syriaque tongue, which our Savior used, some ambiguity may be found, in
as much as that the word Cephas without any alteration of the letters
signifies both Peter the surname of Simon, and likewise a stone. But our
Evangelist, or (to say rather) the spirit of God which both spoke and wrote in
him, being willing to ease us somewhat in resolving the difficulty, would give
us no cause to mistake one Cephas for an other, either to stumble at this Peter
or that stone, but tells us in the authentic Greek, (...) which in our
vulgar translation canonized by the council of Trent is, Tu es Petrus and
super hanc petram, not (...) or suprate Petrum, upon this stone, and not upon
this Peter: otherwise what had it been to him if he had said (...) for (...),
and how many difficulties, what tumults also and bloody discords has he
prevented by it? And if the maine scope of these words (as some would have
them) were merely to give authority unto S. Peter, wherefore did our
Evangelist here leave us to our selves and raise a scruple in this changing of
Peter, and in the difference which he puts between the one, and the other to
stir us up to a contention, but that it was to resolve us absolutely of this,
that seeing this changing proceeding from the spirit of God was not in vain,
Christ by a consequence did build his Church upon himself the son of the
eternal God, which was the living rock, and not upon a man subject to
passion and mortality, how excellent so ever he were, and therefore not upon
Peter. And indeed he which shall look narrowly into it, will find that
according to the fashion of the Hebrews this (...) in these words (...) is
rather a particle adversatiue then comunctiue, as if our Savior should have
said unto him; Behold Simon the son of Jona, thou that of Simon which thou
were, I have made Cephas; of dust, ashes, and slime which thou were naturally
unprofitable for the building which I prepared, through a singular grace I have
made Peter, a living stone, a stone which hereafter may have a place, and that
a notable one in the building. But see likewise an other matter; it is upon thy
confession that Christ is the son of God, which thou have confessed, upon
that stone which thou see, upon that which I show thee, will I build my
Church. In the same sense that he said destroy this temple, Joh. 2.19.
speaking of his body, and showed it unto the Jews, he said likewise upon this
rock, upon me the eternal rock will I build my church, and showed himself
both to Peter and his other disciples.

3 But against so many preiudicated contrarieties, thou would not have me
for an interpreter, whom then would thou willingly accept? our Lord
Christ, shall he be authentic with thee which here speaks, or else
Peter to whom he speaks? Hear therefore Christ speaking to the principal
sacrificers and ancients of the Temple, Did ye never read in the Scriptures,
Mat. 21.42.
That stone which the builders refused, the same is become the head of the
corner. In conscience speaks he this of Peter, or of himself? Has he not a
reference unto that place of the Prophet Esaias, Thus says the Lord God, Esaias
28.16.
behold I lay in Sion for a foundation, a stone, a tried stone, a precious
corner stone, a sare foundation, he that believes shall not make have, that
is, he shall not stumble like those that fall. Verse 17.
Judgment also will I lay to the line, and righteousness to the p^unmet, etc.
Was there ever any ancient or modern Greek or Latin which understood it
otherwise then of Gods Anointed, his Messiah? Harken moreover unto Peter
himself, because some would interest Peter against us in this passage, 1.
Pet. 2.4.
Approach you near unto Christ (says he) which is a luung stone disallowed
indeed of men, but chosen of God, and precious, this is that stone which we
seek, but would you see what rank Peter holds? ye as lively stones,
Verse 5.
lively indeed through that quickening stone, that stone lifted up on high, are
built up a spiritual house, an holy Preiesthood to offer up spiritual
sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. In conscience again in the
language of this holy Apostle think thou that he presumed to be the
foundation of this spiritual edifice? esteemed he not himself to be honored
and graced sufficiently in that he was set upon that stone, nay would he not
have took it as a co^tumely offered him, if any should have alleged unto him
in prejudice of that which was spoken of Christ alone, these words Tu es
Petrus, Thou art Peter? And indeed Saint Paul in one word tells us this, That
other foundation can no man lay, 1. Cor. 3.11.
then that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. Christ then is the foundation, the
living rock which we seek, and not Peter; but upon this foundation, the
master builders do lay there fundamental stones, whereof S. Paul, which was
one of them, in the same place speaks in these words, Verse. 10.
According to the grace of God which is given unto me, as a w^se master builder
I have laid the foundation, and another builds thereon; a foundation then
was laid, and a foundation upon which others lay on: the one, is Christ the
living and quickening stone: the other, all faithful Christians, living stones
by him quickened; amongst which both Peter and Paul may by good right hold place
both of living stones, as being faithful, and as being Ministers of the holy
Gospel, and of shilfull builders, according to that which he says in another
place, that the faithful. we built upon the foundation of the Apostles and
Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20.21.
Jesus Christ himself being the chief corner stone, In whom (says he) all
the building fitly framed together, grows unto (...) holy Temple in the Lord:
if upon Christ the chief corner stone, then not upon Peter; if upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, yet again upon Christ, if you
understand it of that stone upon which they did lie, and if of those stones,
which in the nature of master builders were laid thereupon, yet truly no more
upon Peter, then upon any other of the Apostles. And to say the truth, all the
Fathers, both Greek, and Latin, have found no other sense, who very often
do tell us, upon this rock (that is to say) upon the confession of Peter, upon
Christ confessed by Peter, Peter ^imselfe being founded upon Christ, Peter (say
they) was no more authorized in this passage then the other Apostles, for
whom he spoke, and who had the same belief; and if any of them in any place
chanced to say upon Peter, he interprets and tempers himself elsewhere, even
Saint Augustine retracted and corrected himself, for having understood Petras
for petra, Peter for the stone.

4. The nature of this building which is now in controversy, will clear
the truth of this interpretation, for this Church, the Church so properly
called, the mystical body of Christ, composed of all the elect, which shall
be unto the end of the world (for of that only it may be said, that the gates
of hell, that all the assaults and stratagems of Satan cannot prevail against
it) upon what, how, and by whom is it builtisurely upon the confession of
Peter, upon Christ confessed to be the Son of God by Peter, by the Apostles,
and by all the faithful; for without Christ, the eternal Son of God, there
is no Church, there is no place where to fix the corner stone of the Church,
according to that boasting of Saint Paul, God forbid that I should glory save
in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, Gal. 6.14.
by who^ the world is crucified unto me and I unto the world: for in the death
and sufferings of Christ consists the being and the well being, the life and
the safegarde of the Church, and how was it built? Certainly this manner of
speech, like as are many others in the New Testament, is taken out of the Old;
under the law is mentioned the building of the temple, and under the Gospel
this term yet does continue to build the Church. And as that was built of dead
stones, so this of living stones, living Cephas's which are gathered together,
joined and inserted into the work, outwardly by the preaching of the Apostles,
and other servants of God, every one of them in their time, inwardly by the
efficacy which the holy Ghost gave to that word and through the blessing which
God displaied by his graces upon the^, which he employed in his work, opening
both the ear and the heart of those to who^ it was preached, that they might
hear it with reverence and receive it with obedience. And therefore it is said
in the Acts, Act. 9.31.
that the Churches throughout Judea, Galilee, and Samaria were edified, to wit,
by the preaching of the word, that was the outward means, and in the comfort
of the holy Ghost were multiplied, there was the inward. Now as for the inward,
what man is he, be he never so arrogant, that days boast of it, and as
concerning the outward, what shall he be, be it what measure of grace it will
that he has received of God, that it can suffice him, not only for the whole
world, but even for the smallest province; Add that the Church being
perpetual, and Peter mortal, there can be no proportion between the labor
of Peter which concludes with his life, and the building of the Church which
is perpetuated through all ages, otherwise it should have fallen to ruin and
tumbled down in the person of Peter; But thou will object what order or what
means has Christ left us for his outward ministry? hear the Apostle, when
be ascended up on high, he led captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men,
what gifts? Ephesians. 4.8.
he gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some
Pastors and teachers, why? for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work of
the ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, till we all come in the
unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the son of God unto a perfect
man, unto the measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Do thou not
see how he has provided to bring his work even to its perfection? and that
without mentioning at all either of Peter for his princely Apostle, or any
other ministerial head of the Church? and where S. Paul speaks so expressly
and so punctually in handling this matter, ought we to supply his sense, nay
rather are we not bound to hold our peace? committing that which remains to
the managing of our Lord the master of the house, who always in the palm of
his hand does bear its portraiture, and conducts it with his spirit, and
having said to his Apostles parting from beneath, Preach you to all nations,
baptize you etc. that is to say, perform your duty every one of you in his
place, Mat. 28.20.
every one in your vocation; and this holy ministry, he added for their
inward means, And lo I am with you always even unto the end of the world:
Christ you see the son of God of the same essence with his father nor less
jelous of his glory, and therefore, given is not to another, or to any
creature, which he should have done, if on another he should have caused, or
suffered to depend the salvation of his Church.

5 Let us say moreover, that al Scripture (as the Apostle teaches us) is given
us for the consolation of the faithful, 2. Tim 3.16.
and we cannot deny that the scope of these words of Christ is to fortify his
Disciples against the temptations and persecutions which they were to expect by
reason of the infallible continuance of the Church. Tell me therefore thou
Disciple of Christ, where sindest thou most comfort in thy perplexities, where
most refreshings in thy soul, when one tells thee that the Church of Christ is
founded upon the faith of Peter, or upon the true rock which he did here
confess, upon Cephas a mortal man, yet a sinner, subject to the like
infirmities that we are, the congealed rock which the wether consumes, or
upon the son of God that eternal rock, that rock which notwithstanding its
firmness, dissolved into the waters of comfort to quench thy thirst, and
distilled in honey to nourish thee in a desert and barren country? Verily if
thou stand yet vnresolved in thy choice, harken unto Christ and consider S.
Peter himself: hear what Christ says of an house built upon this rock. The
rain descended and the slouds came, Math. 7.25.
and the winds blew and beat upon the house, and it fell not, the reason
follows, for it was founded upon a rock. The other quite otherwise being
built upon the unstable sands (and what more unstable then a man) that fell
(says he) and great was the fall of it: V. 27.
both sustained the same violence both the same floods, and the same tempest^
but see where the difference consisted, not in the stuff, not in the
fastening, not in the mass, but only in the foundation, only in the
situation. On the other side mark S. Peter that great Apostle of Christ, but
always a man, who in this Chapter four verses from this whereof we treat, V.
23.
took our Savior apart, and was so hardy as to rebuke him, because he would
needs go up unto Jerusalem: Insomuch that our Savior in his holy anger was
constrained to tell him, Mat. 16.
Get thee behind me Satan, thou art an offense unto me, for thou savorest not
the things that be of God. If he was an offense or a stumbling block to
Christ, how could he choose but be a cause of falling unto the Church? But
see him again upon the point of combat, after so many protestations of his
constancy; yea execrations, how he denies Christ with curses, Christ whom
before he had so heartily confessed: and that being far from danger, at the
voice of a chambermaid and of one simple dore-keeper; and can thou yet
imagine him to be hardy enough to withstand the gates of Hell, which here
yields himself conquered to a maid of Caiphas? But it is not said that the
gates of hell shall not prevail against him, but against it, against the
Church, against him only as he is a member of Christ, and a member of that
Church.

6 But here some perhaps will shake their heads, as If I have applied my self
too much unto the letter, understanding only the plain song, insinuating that
there is another tablature, another mystery in it. Who ought to remember
themselus of that rule which the fathers give us, that there where we find
one literal and natural sense arising which instructs our faith and
manners, and affords no place to any absurdity, none to any inconvenient or
contrary sense, we must there sit down, without searching farther through
figures, or allegories, for he which dives lower is in danger to trouble the
clear water and stir the mudde. Nevertheles let us see what it is that they
can say, what that Philosophers stone is, which they pretend in these words,
Thou art Peter, but withal let us have our eyes about us, to discern the
false coin. Tu es Petrus, that is to say in the Roman speech (I am sure
neither in Greek nor Latin) thou art Bishop of Rome, and upon thee, as thou
art such a one, I will build the Roman Church, and not only upon thee, not
alone upon thee Peter, for there shall be no more Bishops of Rome of that
name, but upon thee Gregory, upon thee Adrian, Alexander, Julius etc. upon
every Bishop of Rome, good or bad, holy or profane, Christian or Atheist, be he
what he will, I will build the Church, Catholic or universal, visible in the
Roman, infallible in all kinds, and thee so much the more as being the head
thereof. Here Christian, thou see how to supply both Rome and the Bishop of
Rome, and stand amazed at it, contrary to the intention of him which gave it,
and him which craved it. And indeed, have thou no pity to see the word of
Christ so racked, being now made a snare to the simple, a laughing-stocke to
the profane, and blasphemy to the meredulous. But let us proceed on a little
further; under this I ordain thee Monarch both of things temporal, and things
spiritual, sovereign king and Bishop together; of spiritual, to control the
old and new Testament, to dispense against the Gospel, and against the
Apostle, to make new articles of faith, to be above all councels, and when thou
traylest men by thousands into hell, I would have no man question thee why do
thou this? Of temporal to dispose of all the world, to distribute it at thy
pleasure, as if it were thine own heritage, to reign over kings, to arraigne
and indite them, to depose them, to absolve their subjects from their oath of
allegiance, to expose their estates for a pray, their persons to murder, to
bestow their kingdoms on whom it shall please thee, and lastly to change their
tenures to fealty, or convert their territories to thine own demaines. Pity
will here stricke thee into honor, though hardly can thou believe it. But
the Jesuits boast consists in this, that of this they are not ashamed. The
books of Mariana, of Eudaemon Johannes, of Becanus, of Suarez, and of a
thousand others do swell with these assertions: the Cardinals make them
authentic, Bellarmine writing against the King of England, and Baronius
against the Venetians. And the Pope menaceth with fire the edicts of our
Parliament, which burn them, and the Sorbone with excommunications, if she
rest not contented with them. Poor deluded Christian, thou never could well
imagine a protection, or multiplication whereby to reap more profit then an
hundred from one, and lo here thou may gain above a thousand from one
stone: and at this day this ^an article of faith, and such a one, that to
defend it and overshadow it, there is nothing which the court of Rome leaves
unattempted; so that to retain it, it passes not greatly to forgo half her
controversies; yea to renounce the holy Scriptures, and the articles of all the
Creeds. Would thou fame see an experiment hereof, thou good Catholic) Go,
confess thy self unto a Jesuit, say unto him, father I am in some scruple,
whether I may purchase my salvation in the Church of Rome or not? I doubt of
Purgatory, of prayer for the dead, because I have not evidently read them in
the Scriptures. After he has checked thee for reading of them, who enforces
thee, says he, to pray for the^? and indeed you shall never see Jesuits in
places of burial, and in the Abbayes which they possess, they little regard
the intention of the first founders, but convert the profit to other uses.
Another says unto him, Father I have no devotion to pray unto Saints, because
I see no example thereof neither in the old nor new Testament; After he has
demanded of thee, who in Gods name has taught thee so much: it is not free
for thee (will he say) either to pray, or not to pray unto them if thou will?
who will so nee^ly press and co^trole thee? pray to God and abide in the
Church. Likewise of the Images, do thou not observe that in our Churches we
have few or none, and those we have are plain, and little garni head? But let
an Huguenote come and say thus unto them, I would willingly accommodate my
self unto you; many reasons, and much more interests do carry me on; but I
cannot believe this real presence; less can I be persuaded to adore the
host, least thereby I fall into Idolatry; to how many of such kind of men have
they said, stand not upon that, that belief will come to you at leisure. In
Spain it self they observe not men so narrowly, for some adore the host
standing; Turn a new lease, and albeit that thou be a good Catholic, yet
if thou say unto them, Father, I doubt somewhat of the pre-eminence of the
Pope, and of that Monarchy, whether it has so large an extent as some make it
to have; these terms of his being Gods vicegerent, of his omnipotency, do
wound my conscience; they are straight in an vproare, an inexpiable blasphemy,
and an Anatheme. If thou think but to dull the edge of this blade, or bend
this temporal sword; if thou receavest not the thrust of it with thy naked
breast, thou art a dead man; had thou says enough to remove mountains from
one place to another, had thou as much charity as to suffer thy self to be
burnt for thy brethren, yet the Ocean were it turned all into holy water, could
not expiate thee, there is no peace for thee in this life, nor remission in the
world to come.

7 This article notwithstanding cannot be drawn from this place: and besides,
to it, all that which follows i^ the Scripture is contrary; for between
these words Tu es Petrus, etc. and Paulus Quintus is Monarch of things both
temporal and spiritua. what depthes have they to fill, how many Theses to
prove, and syllogismes to compose? as first, that Peter was at Rome, that
there he constituted his Apostolical Sea, that as being Bishop of Rome Christ
conferred upon him that Monarchy: that he ^aue him authorititie to bequeath it
to his successors, and that this Pope which now lives succeeds him in his
Chair, his vocation, and his doctrine; of which they shall never be able
sufficiently to confirm the least: And as for the Scripture it is altogether
contrary unto it. For concerning the spiritual power, Christ intending that
which we here handle, cuts of the question which arose from the ambition of the
sons of Zebedie, Mat. 20.26.
whosoever will be great amongst you, let him be your Minister, etc. And the
Disciples which often moved this doubt, Mat. 9.34.
who should be the greatest amongst them, one while upon the way, another
while upon the point of his passion, presupposed not that it was Peter, because
they had not yet apprehended the mystery which some pretend to find in this
passage, but co^sh ained ^ur Savior to propose unto them, Mark. 9.33. Luk^ ^
^6.
sometimes the conditions of a little child for their example, sometim^ to
menace the^ with ruin, if here on earth they ent^rtained aspiring cogitations,
sometimes to suggest unto them that ^anc^^e which they should hold on high in
his kingdom, and all but to diver* them from these imaginary Monarchies. S.
Paul likewise speaks freely. That he built upon no other man's* ^^n. 1^
foundation, that he was nothing inferiou^ unto Peter, Gal. 2. ^^.
and that he withstood him to the face: but Peter himself, after the
resurrection of our Lord, then when it behoved his Vicar most o^ al, to
manifest himselt unto the world, provided not pleno^ure for the Apostleship of
Judas, Act. 1.15.
was not president in the Council of the Apostles h^ld at Jerusalem, but on
the contrary side submitted himself to be sent, took commission from his
brethren the Apostles, and rendered him self as companion of the elders to feed
the flock. 1 Pet. 5.1.
The elders says ^e which are amongst you, I exhort, who am also an elder etc:
feed the flock of God which is among you taking the oversight thereof, etc:
not as being L^rds over Gods heritage,(...), but being examples to the sh^ke,
and when the chief shephend shall appear, ye shall recei^e a crowd^ of glo^^
which fad^th not away. Where we note that he remembered himself often (...) the
lesson of that sovereign Past^^ our Lord Jesus, who had said unto them, Mat.
^0.25.
the princes of the Gentiles exerc^se d^minion in or them,(...), but it shall
not be so with you, for he used the same verb. And as for the temporal power
he told them and declared unto them throughout, that his kingdom was not of
the world, and the servant (says he) is not greater then his master, not
therefore the kingdom of his pretended Vicar, be he the Bishop of Rome, or S.
Peter himself. And S. Paul excludes no person, Ro^. 13.1.
let every soul (says he) be subject unto the higher powers, that is to say,
(say the fathers) whosoever thou be, Prophet, Evangelist, or Apostle. And S.
Peter himself at the greatest strength of his pretended empire, bids us, fear
God, and honor the king. 1. Pet. 2.17.
And what king- Nero a persecutor of the Church, a Tyrant of the common wealth,
and plague of mankind; now if he had a materia^l sword, till when reserved he
it, till when kept he his thunderbolts?

8 Also we do see, from that natural and ancient interpretation which we
proposed above, what consol^ti^ns have redounded unto the Christian Church, and
to all his members: on the other side from this later, since the time that
Gregory the 7. called Hildebrand, vented it, there proceeded nothing but
extreme desolations, the subject revolted against the prince, the brother
against the brother, the son against the father, the clergy against the
laymen, the priesthood against the empire, supplantations, treasons,
butcheries, through the fields and the cities, pretended zeales, maskes of
religion, bloody tragedies. And since that in our days men have pressed it
unto the last issue, they have extracted its quintessence through the limbicke
of the Jesuits and we know to whom we are bound for it, who have seen this
kingdom mantled with ashes and blood; and in 20. years two Kings assasinated
(God preserve the third) a thing not seen in ten ages before.

9 Here one perhaps will demand how so prodigious a doctrine as this is, has
found a place, and that upon one word only of Christ's? mark the cunning. A
great workman to show a trick of his art, builds a whole peace, setting out
and testing upon one stone only (this they call Promp llo^^ he interlaceth and
indent, the incisions and ioyntures within, presents it unto thee, and traceth
thee with false joints without, to st^^ke thee to an astonishment, and to
conceal his structure. Satan here does just the same, endeavoring as an ape
to imitate the son of God. To cousen the world, he enterpriseth to build his
sinagogue (the principle work of his art) upon this one poor word, Peter,
that he may raise it above, and fasten his stones one within another to wit the
Princes with the Bishops, the people against the Princes, he beautifies his
building with the ambition of prelates, with the superstition of princes, with
the ignorance of the common people, and puts all these pieces into his work.
And those false joints consist in monopolies, in sleights of flattery, in the
profanations of the name of Christ, in derision of his Gospel, even of the
Son of God, ^^l^d upon the Cross for our sakes: these they disguise, these
they cover from our view with passages of the holy Scriptures, with them they
bring their work unto the roof, even to the weathercocke. And such kind of
words are these, Tu es Petrus, such are Pasce oues meas, such, occide, and
mandica, with many others. Ask any good Doctor of the Sorbon what the meaning
of these words is, Pasce oues meas, feed my sheep; he will read his Saint
Augustine, and his Ordinary Gloss, and then he will tell thee, feed them,
verbo and exemplo, both with word and example. The good man knows not that in
the Roman language it is as much to say now adays secandum s^^s^n currentem,
Act. 10.13.
as the m^^i^et goes, manage the Kings and Princes with the switch. Ask
another what signifies that voice spoken of Peter, in the Acts, O^^^h and
ma^d^^, kill and eat, he will remember himself of that vessel descending from
heaven, which was presented unto him in a vision, in the which were all sorts
of living creatures, both o^ the land and water; and of the interpretation
which Saint Peter, being taught by the Spirit of God, gave unto it: that the
time of calling the Gentiles was come, that he should not say any were that
(...), Ve s. 28.
or make a di^ference between lew and Greek, Greek and I^^banan; he knows
not the secret which Cardinal Baronius has fo^d here, Kill and devour those
creatures, the Kings and Princes, which perform not that which thou have
enjoined them, for thus do they profane these words, and in the mean time
behold the books which at this day are most famous, and in greatest
authority, see how under the skin of the Lamb of God, are hid Wolves and
Lions, which counterfeit a sweet voice, in horrible howlings, under the
pretense of that spiritual sword of Christ's word, they forge this temporal
sword, and maintain it with their denoted and execrable knives.

10 So th^n we see how through the (...) of Satan we have been carried upon a
sleep, from our saving rock transported upon the dismal rock of Ta^p^^^s,
and that under the color of a wrested interpretation, mischieuously invented,
by st^lth insinuated, lightly ^e^^^^^d, which has passed amongst the simple,
as being the cry of the city in a popular error, (for what is it but a prime
imagination given to our children, to conceive the bells to ^ing, and Heluetian
tabours to play whatsoever they imagine: and it is a like illusion to us, to
make us see in such places of the Scripture as these, all that which shall make
for them: and nevertheless we contend about it, as upon an article of faith,
and combat more thereon, then upon all the Creed besides. Wherefore let us
hold us to the ancient exposition, as being more simple, I am sure, more safe,
and let us not fear at al, that Saint Peter can sustain any damage thereby.
Our Savior Christ demanded of S. Peter, and ^e answered him, Thou art Christ
the son of the living God. Thou art Christ the anointed of the Lord,
promised from the beginning of ages unto our fathers, declared from time to
time by his prophets, expected in our time* for the salvation of the world, not
a temporal Monarch, such a one as these Pharisees prefigure, but the eternal
Son of God, only able to satisfy his justice, to move his compassion, to
secure us from his wrath, to purchase us and to merit us his grace; and what
answer does out Lord make him, I say unto thee that thou art Peter, that I
have chosen thee to make thee a living stone in the building which I have
prepared me in my church. But where shall I build in my father has revealed
unto thee one secret, and I will teach thee another, grace upon grace. Verily
upon that Christ, upon that son of God which thou have confessed, that Jesus
which thou see, a quickening stone an immovable and eternal rock, to stand
against the th^derbolts of the an e the raging^ of the ^ea, the shakings of the
earth, the powers of hell, be it ^eated where it will, it shall be above it,
fixed, and founded in the midst of heaven: and ^^r sixteen hundred years
after, the history of the church adds credit unto this: fear not, Christian,
whatsoever thou see, be not dismayed. The Church sometimes scantled to 8
persons in the arc, peopled afterward the whole earth; sometimes enclosed in
the sepulcher, as was her head, through her head was tendered up and fully
restored. Christ has said it, that eternal word; Christ has done it, that
son by whom the father made the world; Heb. 13.8.
Christ will do it yeasterday and to day (says the Apostle) and the same for
ever; to whom with the father and the holy ghost, be honor and glory world
without end; (...) Amen.

FINIS.

