George Morgan plaintiff, William Megges, Richard Bowdler, William Turnor,
Thomas Ihones, Sir John Bourcher, William Essington, and Robert Barlow,
Defendants.
And betwixt Richard Bowdler plaintiff, and George Morgan defendant.
1609. May 6. Bowdler, Turnor, Ihones, and Sir John Bourcher, Farmed the Alum
works of his Majesty, and Essington, and Barlow, were partners with them
therein.

These men wanting monyes to supply the works, agreed that Bowdler, (who had
formerly lived at Myddelborow,) and had servants, and Factors resident there,
should be the Agent, to procure monyes there at intrest, and by way of exchange.

Megges, being Father in law, and Brother in law, to Bowdler, to give aid
thereunto, lent Bowdler his name, and credit, without lymitation, to take up
monyes, and subscribe his name to bills of Exchange, whereby Megges, and
Bowdler, became as one, And by this means all the defendants, were all, as one
joint body, and known both in England, and Foreign parts, by the name of the
Alum Company, or of Bowdler and Company.

1609. October. Bowdler and Company, made choice of the plaintiff Morgan to be
their Factor at Myddelborow, in their employment, and when ever Morgans credit
would not serve, to procure monyes enough to pay their bills of Exchange, and
supply their occasions, he wrote to them of it, by dyrecting his letters, to
Richard Bowdler and Company, and what ever he wrote of therein to be
performed by Megges, Turnor, or any other of them, the same was from time, to
time, performed, by them, as if the letters, had been written to each of them
in particular, Bowdler being authorized to receive, and write letters, and to
receive and take Morgans accounts.

To this end Megges, Turnor, Bowdler, and the rest, weekly charged Morgan with
great sums of money by exchange: and to enable Morgans credit, to take up
monyes to pay those bills, they sent him several unlimited letters of credit,
and procuration, some in one kind, some in another, diverse of them being
registered, both in England, and elsewhere, at Public Notaryes under their
hands, and seals, for any man to read, and take coppies of that would (as
very many did) thereby declaring to all men, that whosoever trusted their
Factor Morgan resident in Myddelborow, they all thereby obliged themselves, as
principal debtors for repayment thereof.

This employment of Morgans being only to pay bills, and to take up monyes by
exchange wherewith to pay it, was such as must (of Necessity) have, and
accordingly had, Weekly, Interchangeable letters and accounts, and every 4. 5.
or 6. months (or oftener if the same were required) Morgan sent Bowdler and
Company, a general account, comprehending all those former weekly accounts.

1611. Febr. 5. Morgan came into England, and accounted for all things (for
which he had not formerly accounted) and then was made free of London by
Bowdler, and received up his Indenture of Apprentiship, and friends bonds; And
Bowdler publicly acknowledged, Morgans faithful service, which according to
the custom of London, is as a release for all time past: And Morgan, by their
persuasion, returned back to Myddelborow, into his former employment.

1612. May. 20. This continued from October 1609. until the 20. of May 1612.
that all the partners (but Megges) failed and became, insoluent.

1612. May. 23. Morgan delivered to Bowdler and Company his last general
account, entitled, Bowdler or Alum Account, according to his books of
account, and therein set down the particulars of 37794. pounds, 4. shillings,
and 7. pence, Flemish money, which is, 22600. pounds starling, then owing by
them by exchange, and intrest, for the said account, whereof 6251. pounds, 10.
shillings, and 2. pence Flemish, which is, 3460. pounds starling, was due to
Morgan. And for the residue Morgan was then engaged for them as their Factor.

1612. May. 29. This account was axamined, and allowed of, and Bowdler sealed
Morgan A general release.

1612. May. 31. All the defendants, but Megges, procured a protection from his
Majesty as joint copartners in the Alum business, and that being expired, after
procured diverse others successively.

Morgan demanding payment of Megges, he denied and forswore his hand to all the
bills of Exchange produced for above 40000. pound, alleging Bowdler had
counterfetted the same, without his consent, or authority, although since,
Morgan having paid diverse of those bills, he has confessed in his Answer to
Morgans bill, that he gave Bowdler leave, and the rather then confessed
(because the bills were paid,) but until he had assurance that Morgan had paid
them, he forswore all.

1614. The defendants, exhibited an account to the King as partners in the
Alum business, and thereby procured payment of 36100. pounds starling,
besides 50000. pounds received for Alum sold by them, whereof, 15000. pound
was for intrest, factoridge, and (loss by exchange) therein expressed.

1615. and 1616. The defendants, ended with their creditors, and all of them
appeared to the world (save only Bowdler) who still absented himself.

1616. Noue. 21. Morgan urging them to pay what was due unto him, by his said
last account of 23. of May 1612. and to free him of the said engagements,
Bowdler in stead of payment, exhibits his bill in Chancery to be relieved for
3000. pound, error in Morgans accounts, as he pretended in 1609. 1610. 1611.
and 1612.

1617. April. 7. Morgan exhibits his bill against them all, (as one joint
body,) to be relieved of those debts, and engagements, mentioned in the said
account of 23. of May 1612.

The defendants, delay him by Tricks to Answer, some by demurrers, and some
by imperfect Answers, and about December 1617. Bowdler and the rest,
petitioned to the Master of the Rolls, to have the matter referred to five
Merchants Adventurers, to which Morgan consented.

1617. December. 20. An order and Commission was directed to Robert Palmer, and
four other Merchants Adventurers.

First, to take the defendants, Megges and Bowdlers Answers, to Morgans bill to
all things whereunto they had demurred.

Secondly, to examine all parties and witnesses, upon oath, and to hear and
determine, or certify.

Thirdly, that they should forbear to meddle, concerning a bond of 900. which
Morgan sealed to Megges (as surety for Bowdler,) and for which he had Bowdlers
bond of 1000. pound to save him harmless.

1617. December. 30. Six of the defendants, entered bonds to perform such order of
Court, as should be made upon their certificate, by virtue of the said
Commission. viz. Megges, in 4000. pounds. Turnor, in 4000. pounds. Bowdler, in
5000. pounds. Ihones, in 2000. pounds. Essing^^^, in ^000. pounds. Barlow, in
2000. pounds. Sir John Bourcher promised to perform but refused to seal^ a
bond as the others did.


1618. Octo. 7. This Commission expired, and no end made, the Commissioners
persuaded Morgan to enter bond to stand to their Award, which he consented to
do, Provided, all the said parties, would do the like: whereupon only
Megges, Bowdler, and Turnor, sealed bonds to stand to their Award. But, Ihones,
Essington, Barlow, and Sir John Bourcher, refusing, (and Morgan disliking the
carriage of the said Arbitrators.)

1618. October. 15. Morgan obtained A new Commission, wherein six other grave
Merchants were added to those five Arbitrators, with the like directions as the
former Commission of the 20. of December. 1617.

But they refused to proseede as Commissioners, and Morgan being bound to
perform their Award, and but only three of the defendants.

1618. Ianua. 5. They made an Award, and ordered Morgan to pay Bowdler 579.
pounds, and six shillings, Also Morgan to cease all suits against, Megges,
Ihones, Essington, Barlow, and Sir John Bourcher, because (they say) they
neither ought to pay, or perform, any thing to Morgan, yet neither Ihones,
Essington, Barlow, or Sir John ^^^^her, did ever submit themselves to stand to
their Award: With diverse other things, not referred to them.

1618. Ianua. 21. Upon motion in Court, his Lordship ordered that the
p^^formance of the said Award should be spared, and the cause to proceed to
examination of witnesses, and so iudicially in ordinary course, and that for
these 11. causes (amon^^t diverse other reasons,) hereafter following. viz.

First, They never took the Answers of Megges, and Bowdler, unto Morgans bill,
whereunto they had demurred, which was the first thing directed them in their
Commission to be performed.

Secondly, They did never examine any parties or witnesses, during all their
proceedings, but only John Grenowes, who is Cousin German to Bowdler, (a man
deeply engaged for Bowdler.) And being at the same time Bowdlers Factor in
other employment, and chargeable for those monyes himself, swears to free
himself by cha^ging Morgan therewith.

Thirdly, For that but three of the seven defendants did, or would submit
themselves, or seal bonds, to stand to their Award, yet they charged Morgan
for all seven of them, and Awarded Morgan to cease all suits against them.

Fourthly, For that they charged Morgan not only for the 4. defendants, (who
never entered bonds to perform their Award,) but also for 3. others, viz.
Pasfield, Grenowes, and Aynscombe, Bowdlers Factors, who were all mere
strangers, both to the suit, and also to their Award, or Arbiterment.

Fifthly, They allowed Bowdler diverse great sums which they pretended Morgan
received for Bowdler in 1607. and 1608. which is before the time that Bowdler
demands relief by his own bill, for his bill is but for pretended errors in
1609. 1610. 1611. and 1612.

Sixthly, They Awarded Morgan to allow Bowdler great sums, which Bowdler never
demanded of him, by his bill, or otherwise, and for which Morgan never heard
of until after their Award, whereby he could give no Answer to them.

Seventhly, They allow Bowdler above. 8000. pounds more then ever he demanded
in his bill, for his bill is but for 3000. pounds, and they allow him above
11000. pounds starling.

Eighthly, They awarded Bowdler, Turnor, and Company, to free Morgan from Master
Peter Courten and above 40. other of their creditors in all, for above 18000.
starling, yet they never mention who that company was: And for those that
truly were that company, namely, Megges, Ihones, Essington, Barlow, and Sir
John Bourcher, although none of them but Megges ever entered bonds to Morgan to
stand to their Award, (or Morgan to them) yet they Awarded Morgan to cease all
suit against every one of them by name, and ordered that none of them ought to
pay or perform any thing to Morgan.) Yet they never ordered that all they, or
any of them should cease all suits against Morgan, neither did they declare
that Morgan neither ought to pay or perform any thing to them.

Ninthly, And for that bond of 900. pound, which Morgan sealed to Megges, for
Bowdlers debt, which bond did arise, by reason Megges pretended his bills of
exchange to be counterfetted by Bowdler, (with which bond they were in their
Commission expressly forbidden to meddle,) Nevertheless, they awarded Morgan
to seal releases to Megges, and Bowdler, and thereby Morgan should discharge
Bowdlers counterbond of 1000. pound, to save him harmless from that bond of
900. pound, (without giving Morgan any allowance for it.) Yet they never
Awarded Megges either to seal Morgan a release, or to deliver him up the said
bond of 900. pound. By which means Morgan should acquit his counterbond for
nothing, and yet be left liable to pay Megges the 900. pound for Bowdlers debt.

Tenthly, They Awarded Morgan to pay the 579. pounds, 6. shillings, within
three months, yet they limit Bowdler, Turnor, and Company no time to free
Morgan from Master Peter Courten, and the other Creditors, which is for above,
18000. pound starling engagements, so as Morgan should first pay his ready
money to Bowdler, and then he should be the less able to prosecute law
against them for his own money, and to be freed of the said engagements, a
great part of which engagements, Morgan has since been enforced to pay for
them.

Lastly, They never pursued the directions of their Commission in any one
particular, but proceeded most erroniously, in diverse other things as well as
these, (but all they did, was still to Morgans prejudice.)

1618. Ianua. 28. Upon hearing counsel at large on both sides the said order
of 21. January was confirmed for the 11. causes aforesaid, and it was ordered
that the said Arbitrators should redeliuer Morgan all the bonds, bills of
exchange, and letters, deliuerd into their hands by him, whereby to make his
proofs in Court.

1618. Febr. 6. The five Arbitrators wrote to the Lord Chauncellor, and went in
person to him. And petitioned to him, that they might not certify the
particulars of their Award, and used all means they could that their own
Award might stand in force.

1618. Febr. 19. and 22. It was again orderd they should redeliuer back all
Morgans bonds, bills of exchange, letters, and other writings (which they
received of him,) yet the Arbitrators would not obey any of these orders.

1618. Febr. 25. Bowdler informed by petition, that all those bonds and bills so
demanded, were either counterfeted or satisfied, by making them paid in
Account, And Bowdler procured it referred to Sir Robert Rich Knight, one of the
Masters of the Chauncery, whether the same ought to be redeliuered to Morgan or
not.

1618. March. 16. All the Arbitrators came home to him, and after hearing of
all parties, and their council, on both sides, he certifieth, none were
counterfeit, or satisfied, (as Bowdler alleged,) and therefore they ought to
be redelyuerd back to Morgan (according to diverse former orders) whereby to
make his proofs in Court.

1619. April. 15. and June. 16. It was again ordered they should certify the
particulars of their Award, which they still refused until Morgan forced them
by an attachment, the 20. July. 1619.

1619. Aug. 5. They certified the particulars of their Award, which was in a
certificate of 140. sheets of paper, wherein they allow Bowdler above 8000.
pounds more then ever he demanded in his own bill, besides diverse other
strange errors, according as are herein formerly expressed: And the better to
credit, and countenance the same, they certify, Master William Towerson and
Master Ralph Freeman, were privy to all their said proceedings.

SInce which time, Megges, Bowdler, and Turnor, have answered unto what before
they had demurred, above 60. witnesses have been examined in Court, after
publication, and many hearings, and after certificates of Masters of the Court,
that the defendants owed to Morgan, and others 37794. pounds, 4. shillings and
7. pence Flemish, which is, 22600. pounds starling according to Morgans said
last account, ending the 23. of May 1612. for which he stood engaged for the
said Alum business.

1619. December. 18. His Lordship spent the whole day, both forenoone, and
afternoon, in hearing the said Award and certificates, and of all proceedings
in the cause, And after to satisfy himself and the world, as his Lordship
then declared, (although God knows he little satisfied Morgan thereby.) In
stead of pronouncing judgment, and a final decree, his Lordship nominated for
new Commissioners, viz. 2. Masters of the Chancery.
Sir William Bird, Knight. Sir Robert Rich, Knight.
2. Aldermen of London.
Sir Thomas Middelton, Knight, Master Robert Johnson,
2. Merchants of London.
Master William Towerson, Master Ralph Freeman,


Which 2. Merchants the said Arbitrators had certified were privy to all their
proceedings in making their said Award.

These 6. Commissioners assisted with the Auditors of the Chancery, were to
examine all the said Arbitrators Award, and the reasons thereof, as also all
accounts, letters, and all proceedings from the beginning.

1619. March. 13. After above 30. m^^tings by them, and three months spent in
presence of all (...) and their council, And after their often conference with
the said Arbitrators, They all 7. jointly certified, that the defendants did
owe to their Factor Morgan, and others to whom he stood engaged for them by his
last accomp^^nding the 23. of May 1612. the said 37794. pounds, 4. shillings,
7. pence Flemish, which is, 22600. starling, according as had been formerly
certified, whereof,

viz. 3100. pounds starling, was due to Morgan by foot of his said last account.

4386. pounds, 1. shilling, and 10. pence, starling more which Morgan had since
been enforced to pay of the said engagements.

14900. pounds starling more, remaining yet unsatisfied to Master Peter Courten
and others all, which makes the said 37794. pounds, 4. shillings, and 7. pence
Flemish, or 22600. starling, aforesaid.

1620. May. 6. This being heard again all the forenoone, in open Court, in
presence of all parties, and their Council, as also at other times, neither
Party, nor Council, denied the truth of the said certificate, (as by the order
appears) but because they endeavored to shift from being liable to the said
decree, Therefore they obtained an order that they might make (new proofs,) by
virtue whereof they have after all the said hearings, examined many witnesses
by way of supplimentall proof, as also they have examined Morgan himself upon
many interrogatories.

1620. June, 19. and 26. After all which the cause being again heard in open
Court, in presence of all parties and their council it was finally decreed,
that Megges, Bowdler, and Ihones, should pay Morgan 7486. pounds, 1. shilling,
10. pence starling principal debt, due the 23. May 1612. for the general
Alum Account, and all intrest and damage, as yet respited by his Lordship.
Also Morgan is to be freed by them for 14900. pounds starling engagement for
them. And it is not yet fully ended, whether the other four, namely Turnor, Sir
John Burcher, Essington, and Barlow, shall be liable to the said decree or not.

Which decree is accordingly 9. months since sealed and inrowled, yet no part
thereof performed, Megges not being to be found, Ihones submitted himself to
the prison of the Fleet, Bowdler appears under protection of a Parliament man,
and paies no man, he stands outlawed, and ever since May 1612. he lived
either under protection, or in obscurity, and has conuaied a great estate in
trust into the hands of Megges, his Father in law, the Lady Cambell his Mother
and diverse others.

1620. December. 5. All process of Court as well ordinary as extraordinary being
spent, against the said Megges, and Bowdler, according to the ordinary course
of the Court, his Lordship after all according to the usual course of the
Court, Fined them two at 1000. pound a man for their many several contempts,
and not yielding obedience to the said decree.

1. FOr as much as the said Megges, partners, and farmors, were all one joint
body in the said Alum business*

2. For that all but Megges had several protections from his Majesty as one
joint company:

3. For that all of them exhibited an account to his Majesty as one body, and
thereby received of his Majesty 36100. pounds starling, accordingly.

4. For that the petitioner Morgans ingagem ents did arise only by being
Factor for them all, for that Alum business, as for one joint body.

5. For that all the petitioners demands appear to be due by bills of exchange
in writing, either underwritten, or accepted, by the said partners.

6. And for that the truth of the petitioners cause not only appears, by a
joint report made by 2. Masters of the Chancery, 2. Aldermen of London, 2.
Merchants of London, assisted with the Auditors of the Chancery:

Nota. As also upon many other several Reports, all grounded upon depositions,
accounts, and writings proved in Court, and after 6. deliberate hearings in
open Court, after that they had Supplimentall proof, and examined the
Petitioner upon in ^^rrogatories. And the same finally Decreed by ^^e Lord
Chancellor:

THe most humble petition of Morgan is, that the said decree may be
established, and confirmed by act of Parliament, and as the said partners were
all one (...) to receive of his Majesty and others, and to engage the
petitioner, so they may be as one joint body to satisfy him, and that all
their lands and goods, which they are or shall be ^^^eafter possessed of, may
be made all liable thereunto.

And although they have made fraudulent conueyances of their estates, yet if
the same be hereafter discovered, that then all such conueyances be made void.

Here follows Bowdler and Company, their Objections to the decree, and
Morgans answer thereunto.

Objection. Bowdler did forbear to examine witnesses because he relied upon
the Award, and certificate of the Arbitratorsand thereby he pretends to be
prejudiced.

Answer. From November. 1616. that Bowdler, exhibited his bill, unto the 5.
January, 1618. that the Award was made, which is 2. years and a quarter he
never examined any man, only John Grenowes, his Cousin German, and after the
Award was suspended, and directions by the Court, to proceed to examination of
witnesses, and so to a judicial hearing, in ordinary course, which was in
January 1618. until the 1. of November 1619. that publication was granted, he
examined not one witness: but then Bowdler upon his own petition brought his
own cause to hearing, which was in all 3. years and a month. In all which
time he might have examined witnesses if he would, if he had had any to
examine, (as he had not) only he makes that a color for his bad dealing.

Objection. That all the depositions taken by the Arbitrators, Robert Palmor
and the rest, were suppressed, and not read before the 6. Commissioners, namely,
2. Masters, 2. Aldermen, 2. Merchants.

Answer. They had no depositions (but only John Grenowes) to read for
Bowdler; and his depositions were often read and disproued by 2. 3. or 4. other
witnesses.

Objection. By the order of Reference dated 18. December. 1619. it appears,
Bowdler desired Morgan might be bound by any Account Bowdler could produce, if
the same were under Morgans S^ruants hand: which was granted, but with this
Prouiso: That the said Account so to be produced, must be an Account formerly
allowed of by Morgan, to be his own account, or else to be proved by 2.
witnesses that it was so allowed of by him, which witnesses should be neither
Arbitrators, nor parties: and because he pretends none else were present,
therefore it was impossible, as he says, that he should make any such proof.

Answer. Morgan never did, or will deny any Account, or letter under his own
hand, but he will not be bound by any thing under any man's hand that has been
his Servant; except the said Account, or letters, were written or made by
Morgan himself, or by his consent, Because Bowdler and Company failed in May
1612. and Morgan then accounted with them, and always wrote out his Accounts
and letters himself; and since Morgan has had no dealings with him, nor given
him, or any of them any Account. Besides, since that time Morgan had a Servant,
namely, John Quarles, who is Bowdlers Cousin German, (whom Bowdler enticed out
of Morgans service) if he should go frame new false Accounts, and Bowdler say
they were Morgans Accounts, so any man might be defeated of all: And therefore
that prouis^ was justly made in that order.

Objection. Bowdler alleges, the Arbitrators certify, Morgan confessed and
yielded to diverse parcels before them; which now he denies to allow unto him.

Answer. Morgan denies any such confession: but if he had yielded to some
small matters whereby to have an end of such great troubles; yet now having no
end, but more trouble, he has no reason to yield to more loss then needs
must: Besides, all which they certify Morgan did confess or yield unto,
amounts not unto 400. pounds.

Objection. By the decree, the whole debt is laid but upon 3. of the
defendants, which ought to have been upon all seven of them, and so the easier
paid.

Answer. Morgan says, all 7. ought to be liable to pay him; and so desires
that they may, and then they may enterpleade amongst themselves, how to divide
the payment thereof.

SO as if all Bowdler and Company their Allegations were true (as they are most
false)

First, all which John Grenowes deposes unto, amounts not unto 1480. pounds.

Nota. Secondly, all the pretended confessions of Morgan, amount not unto 375.
pounds. Both which is but 1855. pounds. And Bowdler by his own bill demands
but 3000. pounds. whereof this 1855. pound is part.

Yet under color of these false pretenses of error, although all amounts unto
but 1855. pounds starling, Morgan has thereby above 8000. pounds starling,
principal debt, detained from him, due 9. years past, besides all Interest,
and damage for the same, which is in all proved to be abo^^ 21000. pound
starling, besides his Engagements for them to Master Peter Courten, and others,
amounting unto 14900. pounds starling more.


