A brief treatise of Oaths exacted by Ordinaries and Ecclesiastical Judges,
to answer generally to all such Articles or Interrogatories, as pleases them
to propound. And of their forced and constrained Oaths ex officio, wherein is
proved that the same are unlawful.

A brief treatise of Oaths, exacted by Ordinaries and Ecclesiastical Judges,
to answer generally to all such Articles or Interrogarories as pleases them
to propound. And of their forced and constrained Oaths ex officio, wherein is
proved that the same are unlawful.
FOrasmuch as the matter whereof we mean to entreat is concerning Oaths. It
will be very necessary for the better understanding thereof, first to
consider what an oath is, and the nature thereof: By whom it was instituted,
and to what use, end and purpose: How many kinds of lawful oaths there are,
and how they ought to behave themselves that either require or receive an oath.

An Oath therefore (as learned Divines have defined) is a calling or taking to
record or witness of the sacred Name of God, or of God him self by the use
of his holy Name, for the confirmation of the truth of such things which we
speak, or for the true performance of our promise. Or more briefly: An oath
is a confirmation of the will of man by the testimony of God.

The same of his own nature, in as much as it proceeds from a right faith is
very good, for thereby we acknowledge all things to be thoroughlie known
unto God, and that he is a lover of truth, and a revenger of perjurie. It
serves also to the honor of Almighty God, because thereby we extol and
magnify his most holy Name, Hebrews cap. 6. Deuterono. cap. 6.13.
and consesse the excellency of his great Majesty: for that men swear by him
that is greater. It is a part of his divine service, and commanded by him. And
the same is to be used only for the setting forth of the glory of God, and
for the profit and benefit of men.

(...) thereof was from and by God him self, for the help and relief of our
necessity, either for the Assurance of such duties, couenauntes, contractes
and promises as we owe or make: or to procure faith or credit (certainty of
proof failing) to the truth which we affirm: That an end of controversies
may be had. For (as it is written in the same chapter of the Epistle to the
Hebrews) An oath for confirmation is amongst men An end of all strife.

Oaths are of two sorts, that is to say, private and public.
Private oaths are made between private persons concerning their particular
affairs. As for the assurance of duties, couenauntes, agreementes or promises,
or to procure faith and credit to be given to that which is meant to be
persuaded. Of which kind of oaths we have many examples in the sacred
Histories, as in the book of Genesis cap. 24. and cap. 31. 1. Sam. cap. 20. 1.
Regum cap. 18. Hierem. cap. 38. and many other which for breuities sake I
omit.

Public oaths are of diverse and sundry sorts. As where Kings and Princes
swear for the establishment of their leagues and conclusions of peace.

Or where the Prince and people swear each to other: The Prince to rule and
reign justly: The people in due alleageaunce to obey faithfully. This kind
of oathe was used 2. Sam. cap. 5. between David the king and th'Elders of
Israel. In the book of Judges we read also how th'Elders of Gilead swear
subjection unto Iephtah.

An other kind of public oathe we see 2. Cron. cap. 15 where king Asa made
the people of Israel to take an oath for the true worship and scruice of
Almighty God, and the observation of his Law. An oath not much different was
that in Ezra cap. 10.

That is also a public oath which the Magistrates, Judges and Officers of
Justice take for the true and sincere administration of the Law. So is also
the oath of Soldiers and men of war, swearing obedience to their Generals,
Captains and Commanders.

An other kind of public oath is that likewise which the Judge or Magistrate
ministers unto such as are called to depose and testify the truth in causes
of suite and controversy, depending in Courts or places of Justice.

And that also which either of the adversaries take in the same suites, or the
defendant for the final ending and detetmination of the controversy, which of
some is termed a judicial oath, and being offered by the defendant, it is of
necessity to the plaintiff, for that he cannot refuse to accept of the same.

Of this last sort, among the laws Judicial it is written thus: Exodus ca. ^2.
If any man deliver to his neigh bout to keep Affe or Ox or Sheep, or any
beast, and it dye or be hurt, or be taken by force, and no man see it, An oath
of the Lord shall be the mean between them twain, that he put not his hand unto
his neighbors good, And the owner of it shall accept the oath, and the other
shall not make it good.

Concerning him that is to take an oath, The deponent.
he is taught by the holy Ghost first to swear in truth. That is to say
truly without falsehood, deceit, or dissimulation, the heart and mouth
agreeing in one: Hiere. ca. 4.
for since God is the author and lover of truth, and the Devil is a liar,
and the father of lies, there can not be a greater dishonor or indignity
offered to the sacred Majesty of God, then to make his most fearful and
reverend name, a witness of falshoode or deceit, neither let any man think
that by crafty or subtle swearing he can avoid the detestable sin of
perjurie. For fraus distringit non dissoluit perjurium, fraud strayneth
harder, it dissolueth not the perjurie as the learned Tullie very well said.

Secondly, Hier. ca. 4.
he that takes an oath ought to swear in judgment, that is to say, with
good discretion, soberlie, well advised and assured of that he will affirm or
deny upon his oath, Not ignorauntlie, rashly, vainlie, or in causes of no
moment or necessity for such vain and foolish swearing is expreslie forbidden
by the commandment, wherein also God threatens, That he will not hold him
guilt les, that takes his name in vain, that is, will surely punish him that
so abuses his name. The same also in the new Testament is by Christ him self
condemned. Moreover the holy Ghost by the Preacher well advises every man not
to be rash with his mouth, nor to suffer his heart to be hasty to utter any
thing before God, for that (says he) God is in the Heavens, and thou art on
the earth.

In justice or righteousness also ought an oath to be taken, that is in things
just and lawful, not repugnaunt to the will or commandment of God. For
although it be true that is said, Non est obligatorium contra bonos mores
praestitum iuramentum, yet by swearing to do the thing that is unjust or
unlawful, the glorious name of God is dishonored. And such a speech says
Ecclesiasticus, is compassed about with death. Briefly, the respect of every
deponent should be, that God by his oath may be magnified, the truth in
question confirmed, justice maintained, and that Innocents (by fraudulent
practizes circumvented) may be freed and delivered from peril and danger.

Touching such as have power and authority to require or command an oath,
The Magistrate.
they ought also to be very careful and circumspect that they impose not the
same but in causes of weight and necessity, which is never to be intended but
when the honor and glory of God is to be maintained, or the good of the
common wealth, or of our neighbor furthered. For if it be a Principle De
minimit non curat lex, by good reason the Magistrates and ministers of law
should spare to use that which is most holy and precious in causes of less
price or moment, for daily experience shows, that the frequent use of
things reverent (such is the corruption of our nature) causes them to be of
none account. Furthermore, they ought to be well advised that they require it
not of me^ of suspected faith or credit; or of persons defamed in life and
conversation. For an oath offered to such (without greater necessity) argues
a lightness and want of good discretion in the Magistrate, who thereby
wittinglie does minister an occasion of perjurie, which if it follow, how
great is the fault? Moreover, that they charge no man by oath to do the thing
impossible or beyond his power. For impossibilium nulla est obligatio, nor any
thing that is unlawful, inconvenient, or ungodly. Neither force any man to
swear rashly or unadvisedly. For if the vain and inconsiderate swearer
shall nor be unpunished, how shall the procurer escape Gods vengeance? That
they abuse not the simplicity of the Deponent by intricate, captious, or
subtle questions: 1. These. ca. 4
for let no man (says the holy Apostle Saint Paul) beguile or craftelie
circumuent his brother, for the Lord is an auenger of all such things.
Finally in the ministering of an oath the Magistrates ought to respect all
those things which the party deposing ought to have before his eyes, that is
the glory of God, the maintenance of truth, and the good of our brethren.

These things granted, which cannot be denied, it consequently follows that
the forcing of Oaths by Ordinaries and Judges Ecclesiastical generally to
answer unto all such questions or interrogatories as they shall demand or
minister touching either the thoughts, words or deeds of him that is to
depose, is contrary to the honorable institution, lawful use, and true end
of an oathe. And that whosoever by color of authority, threatening speeches,
duresse of imprisonment, or other pain co^straineth any man to swear in such
manner, does highly offend against th'inviolable rules before remembered.

For first as it has been said, the ordeyning and institution of an oath was
to help and relieve the necessity of men in the causes before rehearsed. But
there is no necessity or vigent cause why such a general oath should either be
required or take, since the same is neither for assurance of duty, covenant,
contract or promise, neither yet for confirmation of truth in any cause or
matter of controversy. If it be alleged that the same is requisite for the
enquiring and finding out of suspected faults, whereof there is no proof, and
to search and try the evil minds and corrupt consciences of dangerous
dissemblers, and so necessary for the government both of the Church and
common wealth. By this allegation first all such are justly reproved, who
having practiced and put in ure this general oath, where otherwise there was
sufficiency of proof. And yet thereby nothing is said for the maintenance of
their doings in that behalf, since by the like reason there should be erected
a Court of Inquisition more then Spanish to sifte and ransacke by oath the most
secret thoughts and consciences of all men in general, enforcing them either
to accuse them selves (not as in the Papisticall shrift; where secrecy was
enjoined) to their public shame, reproach and condemnation, or else for the
avoiding of such mischief and inconvenience, to commit most wilful and
damnable perjurie. But as this I suppose in all good men's opinions, were
intolerable, so of the other I assure my self there can be no sound rule,
sufficient president or example alleged: Except peradventure the proceeding of
the high Priest, the Scribes and Elders of the Jews in their Consistory
against our Savior Christ, shall be vouched and maintained for a sufficient
president in that beehalfe, who maliciously apposing and examining him
concerning his doctrine (although not by oath) would gladly have picked out and
drawn from him self some matter of accusation, whereby to have condemned him.
But the answer and authority of Christ (I doubt not) will be allowed among
Christians, both for sound and sufficient to refell and condemn the practice
of those malignaunt Priests, who knowing their subtle purpose and intent,
referred them to his auditors, and being injustlie stricken, replied: If I
have evil spoken, bear witness of the evil, but if I have well spoken, why
smitest thou me, justifying hereby his former answer, and forcing
therewithal his adversaries to seek for witnesses to testify against him.

The true use and end of an oath is, as aforesaid, That due honor may be given
unto God, the truth confirmed, Justice maintained, innocence protected, and
an end had of strife and contention. But how is God glorified hereby, or not
rather dishonored, when as his sacred institution is so greatly perverted, and
an oath forced to an other course and purpose, then he in his divine wisdom
has appointed, as by that which has and shall be spoken, does and shall
manifestly appear. The truth in controversy is not thereby confirmed, since
there is no issue joined in this case between parties affirming and denying,
and how can justice by such an oath be maintained, when as the cause for which
the oath is urged, stands not in lawful course of judgment? for as it is
well said of a learned man: Bracton.
Iudicium est in qualibet action trinus actus trium personarum: Iudicis,
actoris, and rei, secundum quod large accipi possunt huinsmodi personae, quod
duae sunt ad minus inter quos vertatur co^ tentio, and tertia persona ad minus
qui iudicet, alioquin no^ erit iudicium, cum istae personae sunt parts
principales in iudicio, fine quibus iudicium consistere non potest. Then
whenever any fault or matter of offense by means of this kind of compulsary
oath happens to be disclosed, either we must say that the Judge, who imposes
the oath, is him self against all order of justice, the party accuser, 8. H.
6. fol. 18. 5. Reg. Eli.
and so both Judge and Promoter, which all good laws forbid: Or else the
Deponent must of necessity sustain two principal parts in judgment, that
is to be both Actor and Reus, Accusor and accused, whereby the three principal
parties, by the rule aforesaid, faylinge true judgment, by no means may
consist. Furthermore, by this kind of oath it can not be truly said, that
Innocents circumuented by fraud or practice, are cleared, since there is no
complaint or accusation judiciallie exhibited. Except we shall affirm that the
Judge or Magistrate by enforcing such an oathe, does him self play the patt
of a subtle circumventor and accusor, which as it is a most wicked sin in any
man, so in the person of a public Magistrate (whose actions should be
sincere) the same is most detestable. And finally, how can an end of
controversy ensue by such an oathe, whereas no quarrel or complaint is any
way dependinge. Nay rather the same is often times the cause of stirring up of
debate and contention in stead of former quietness, being principally used not
to make an end of controversies, but to procure some accusation, and that by
the secret malice of some undermining or malignant adversary or calumniatour.

Again, since an oath is to be taken in judgment, that is with good
aduisement and consideration of the matter, wherein the Deponent is to call the
Name of God to witness, and that whosoever otherwise takes an oath, does
therein vainelie and indiscreetlie abuse the Name of God. How can this
general oath be either rightly urged or received without great offense to his
divine Majesty, forasmuch as the party deposing is not before he swear, made
acquainted nor understands what questions or interrogatories shall be
demanded, but by his oath has fast bound and subjected him self to the
discretion or indiscretion of another, that is the Judge Ecclesiastical, who
having straightly tied and snared this seely subject, may now use or abuse
him at his will and pleasure, either against law enforcing him by the band of
his oath to accuse him self even of his most secret and inward thoughts, or
contrary to christian charity, yea humanity it self, constrayning him to
inform against his natural parents, dearest friends, and nearest neighbors,
or to bewray with grief of heart such matters of secrecy, as otherwise were
inconvenient and peradventure not honest to be revealed. In which hard
proceeding besides the great hazard and peril of wilful perjurie without all
necessity of an oath, great trouble of mind and scruple of conscience must
needs ensue, when as the Deponent on the one side, considering the weight and
heavy burden of his oath, fears to conceal any thing: and on the other
side finding him felfe thereby entrapped, shrinketh to make answer to the
questions propounded. Whereof you may behold a most miserable and lamentable
spectacle in the book of Acts and monumentes, where in a large table is set
forth the great iniquity and rigorous dealing of Longland Bishop of Lincoln,
in the time of the late Prince of famous memory, King H. the eight. Which
bloody Bishop by forced and violent oaths and captious interrogatories,
constrained the children to accuse their parents, the parents their natural
children, the wife her husband, the husband his wife, one brother and sister
an other, some of these seely souls of sworn becomminge forsworn, while
they made dainty to accuse such as they dearly affected. Of which blind
ignorance (or rather murderous minds) and intolerable iniquity of Romish
Bish. and barbarous abuse of an oath, that godly man of worthy memory
Master John Fox justly complains. For what might be added more to extreme
cruelty, save only this one point of detestable inhumanitie (which also was
pursuaunt as a part of that tragical church-gouernement) to compel the
children to set fire to their condemned parents. Which example of cruelty
says that good man, as it is contrary both to God and nature, so has it not
been seen or heard of in the memory of the heathen.

That wicked king Herod (as it is recorded by the holy Evangelists Mathewe
and Mark) voluntarily promised, and that with an oath, to give the dancing
daughter of Herodias his harlot, whatsoever she should demand. As this
unadvised oath proceeding of vain pleasure and delight upon the wicked
demand of that Damsel wrought much grief of mind in the king, so was it
the cause of the sudden dispatche and murder of that just man John the
Baptist. And although it may truly be said that Herod was not bound by his
oath to have accomplished so foul and wicked a deed, yet can it not be
denied but that the same was a rash and inconsiderate oath, and so an offense
against the Majesty of Almighty God. And what difference is there I pray you
between the oath of Herod and that which now we have in question, the one
being to perform or grant whatsoever should be required: and the other, to
answer to all questions that shall be demanded, since there may be as
unlawful and as dishonest questions ministered, as ungodly requests made or
desired.

Again, it would not be forgotten that in all the volume the sacred scriptures
(to my remembrance) there is no one president or example to be showed of any
such general oath taken by any godly man in private, or exacted by any
Magistrate in public, neither yet any rule, law, or commandment for the
same.

But against this our last assertion may happily be alleged by some
favorer of this foul abuse, the manner of trial by adjuration of the
suspected wife, that is the law of jelousie. The inquisition and expiation of
manslaughter, where the author is unknown, and the examination of Achan: all
which nevertheless make nothing for these general oaths, or those enjoined
ex officio, as by the consideration of the laws and history it self shall
easily appear. For as concerning the law of jelousie, although the wife were
to be tried by oath and adjuration in that manner and with those circumstances
as is there prescribed, either to satisfy the restless head of her jelous
husband, if she were guyltlesse, or to receive by the wonderful workinge of
that accursed water, if she were saultie condign punishment for her heinous
offense, both of perjurie and adultery, yet is it very manifest in this case
that the wife is not sommoned or cited by the Priest or Magistrate ex officio,
but brought unto him by her accusing husband, who upon offense conceived
offering up his complaint, and thereupon the woman is called for, and put to her
purgation, well knowing her accusor, and having perfect notice before she
swear of the crime objected. Moreover, who is so simple that sees not how
weak an argument or conclusion this were. God has appointed an oath to be
taken by the wife in this especial and singular case of jelousie for the
satisfaction of the suspicious mind of the husband, Ergo every Judge
Ecclesiastical to satisfy his jelous suspicion or imagination of any crime,
may appose by oath and compel men to their purgation. For by as good reason
the Ordinary or Judge Ecclesiastical may also upon every such oath denounce
a curse of consumption and rotting to the party deposing in such and the same
manner as there is prescribed.

And as touching the inquisition for murder or manslaughter before remembered,
it is ordained, that the Elders of that City, which upon measure taken falls
out to be next unto the slain man, should wash their hands over a beheaded
Heyfer, protesting and saying in the presence of the Priests: Our hands have
not shed this blood, neither have our eyes seen the slear. O Lord be
merciful unto thy people Israel, whom thou have redeemed, and lay no innocent
blood to the charge of this people, etc. How any thing here may prove the
exacting of oaths to be lawful, I see not. A man is slain, th'offendour
unknown, th'Elders by this especial law of expiation do protest as
aforesaid. But where is an oath in this case given to any particular person?
If this protestation shall be thought in some sort to conteruaile an oath of
purgation, yet where is there any protestation or oath required or taken to
answer generally to such Interrogatories as shall be propounded upon unknown,
secret, or barelie suspected matter? Nay we see evidently, the fact and
felony (to the offense both of God and man) to be public and apparaunt,
th'offendor only lies hidden and unknown. On the contrary, those Inquisitors
ex officio, have the man before them whom they will examine, but the matter for
the most part is secreat and concealed which they enquire after, and many times
there is no matter at all but bare and naked suspicion or fame of a cry me
never committed.

Concerning Achan and the proceeding against him, we see by the sacred history
how the offense in general is by God him self made manifest unto Joshua the
Prince of the people (vz) That an excommunicate or cursed thing was taken and
concealed, etc. th'offendour was only to be found out. Inquisition being had
by lot or otherwise, (God assisting) Achan is deprehended as guilty. What
followed? He is by Joshua examined of the particular, using these words: My
son, I beseech thee give glory to the Lord God of Israel, and make
confession unto him, and show me now what thou have done, hide it not from
me. Hereupon the detected Achan confesses the truth in particular. But where
does it appear that he was deposed, or by what conceived words or form of
oath does he swear? Except we shall say, there is no difference between the
entreaty or charge of the Magistrate, remembering the glory of God, and an
oath taken and pronounced by th'offendour to confess the truth. Which
granted, it must consequently follow, that whosoever is in that manner
charged and confesses not the truth, although he have no will to swear, is
both a liar and a person perjured, which were a hard conclusion. Nay rather
such kind of charge as adiuro te, as a learned man says. Non est alium ad
iurandum inducere, Thomas Aquinas
sed per similitu dinem juramenti alium ad aliud age^dum inducere. And such
speeches are also used for commandments in the name of the Divine Majesty,
Act. cap. 19.1. These. ca. 5
as we read done by the Exorcistes, and by Sain Paul, who charge the
Thessal. in the Lord, that his Epistle be read unto all the brethren the
Saints. Otherwise if every such kind of speech should straight way make an
oath, then would it follow (wdich were absurd) that the Devil made our
Savior to swear at such time as he said, I charge thee by God, that thou
torment me not.

I know very well what that learned and excellent light of Gods Church Master
Calvin says in his book of Institution of christian Religion, That is, how
Josua minding to drive Achan to confess the truth, said: My son give glory
to the Lord God of Israel, meaning thereby that the Lord is grieuouslie
dishonored, if a man swear falsely by him. And this manner of speech says
he, was used among the Jews, so often as any was called to take an oath, as
appears by the like protestation that the Pharisees use in the Gospel of
Saint John. In the book also of Ezra we read the same phrase (Give praise
unto the Lord) as some in English have translated it, Cap. 9.
but according to the Latin translation of the learned Tremelius and Iunius,
the words are, aedite confessionem Jehouae Deo. So that although it be
granted that where an oath was given for the confession of the truth, there
the Magistrate used those words (Give glory unto God, putting the party in
mind thereby of the Majesty of Almighty God) yet follows it not that in
every place where we find the same speech, there the party to whom it was
spoken, had taken an oath to confess the matter whereof he was demanded. But
be it granted that Achan made his confession by oath, yet nothing will ensue
thereof to justify the dealings of those Inquisitors ex officio. For if those
rough and rigorous exactors of an oath followinge only this legal course of
inquisition set forth in this sacred history, That is after an offense
committed so grievous and dangerous to the public estate, and the same made
known and notorious, would then only seek out the party offending, and
that by due and lawful course of trial: and having found him, then after so
mylde and courteous a manner, and in the name of God entreat, or (if they think
good) depose him to reveal the truth in particular: No man (I suppose) would
find him self grieved with their proceedings. But this their unjust dealinge
in this great abuse of an oath, can not by authority of the holy scriptures
be any way defended or mainteyned. Wisely therefore and with good discretion
did that godly man William Thorp in the time of King Henry the fourth, William
Thorp.
being willed by that bloody persecutor of the true Christians Archb.
Arundell, to lay his hand upon the book, and swear faithfully to submit him
self to his correction, and to stand unto and fulfill his ordinance, desired
first to know, wherefore he should be corrected, and unto what ordinance he
was to be obliged, which being declared to this effect, that he should forsake
all the opinions of the sects of Lollardes (in deed the true Christians) that
he should preach no more unto the people, and that he should from thenceforth
become an accusor of such as him self was. He utterly refused to take any
such oath, least thereby he should have fallen into many foul and heinous
sins and offenses against God, as the abjuringe of true Religion, the
forsaking of his lawful calling against his conscience, and to his public
reproach to become a bloody accusor, or (as he him self says) an appeallor
of his brethren, every Bishops epsy, and the somner of all England, deeply
detesting such a bad office, as unmeet for a Minister of the word: nay
altogether unbeseeming a faithful Christian, If any man will say as this
Archbish. that a subject ought not to suppose that his Prelat will command him
any unlawful thing, but should repose him self in the good discretion and
upright dealing of his ordinary, without further answer: Let the subtle
practice of this one Prelate, and the cruel and the accursed dealinges of that
barbarous By. Longlande stand at this present for a sufficient caveat to
every man that shall depose, to take heed how he give overmuch credit to
such glosinge and deceyuable speeches, least too late he find it true, that
fair words make fools feign. Neythet is this any sufficient allegation to
say, that the party Deponent is no further bound to answer then the law
requires, how general soever his oath be, since it is false, for the
conscience of such a Deponent to stand upon terms and questions, how far
by law, and by what law he is bound to answer.

Will you hear also what that godly and blessed Martyr Master John Lambert
says concerning the Exactinge of such kind of oaths, John Lam bert.
after he had acknowledged it lawful at the commandment of a Judge to take
an oathe, to say the truth, wishing the Magistrates nevertheless to minister
oaths with great discretion and good aduisement, and exhorting them to
forbear and spare them in trifling causes and matters of no necessity, least
by too much haunt, first contempt, than perjurie, do creep in. He proceeds
further to this effect. This have I showed says he, because it pitieth me to
hear and see the contrary used in some of our Nation, and such also as name
themselves spiritual men, and should be head ministers of the Church, who
incontinently as any man comes before them, anon they call for a book, and
do move him to swear without any futher respite, yea and they will charg him
by virtue of the contents of the Euangely, to make true relation of all they
shall demand him, he not knowing what they will demand, neither whether it
be lawful to show them the truth of their demand or no, for such things
there be that are not lawful to be showed. As if I were accused of
fornication, and none could be found in me, or if they should require me to
swear to bewraye another that I have known to offend in that vice, I suppose
it were expedient to hold me still and not to follow their will, for it
should be contrary to charity, if I should so assent to bewray them that I
need not, and to whom perhaps (though I have known them to offend, yet
trusting of their amendment) I have promised before to keep their fault
secret. Yea moreover such Judges sometimes not knowing by any due proof, that
such as have to do before them are culpable, will enforce them by an oath to
detect them selves in opening before them their hearts. In this so doing I
cannot see that men need to condescend in their requests: for as it is in the
law, Nemo tenetur prodere scipsum. And in another place of the law it is
written: Cogitationis poenam nemo patiatur. To this agrees the common
proverb, Cogitationes liberae sunt a vectigalibus, Thoughts be free from
toll. By which wise speech of this good man we may see condemned, and that for
just cause and upon sound reasons th'indiscreete and unlawful enforcing of
this kind of oathe, serving to no good, nay rather to bad ends and purposes.
We read also how Bonner that infamous bloudsucker, unworthy the name of a
Bishop, hunting (as the woolfe for his pray) after matter of accusation,
among many other his mischievous and detestable factes, offered also this oath
ex officio unto the fellow prisoners of that holy and worthy Martyr Master
Philpot, saying after the rash and indiscrete manner before remembered, Hold
them a book, you shall swear by the contents of that book, that you shall
(all manner of affection laid a part) say the truth of all such articles as
you shall be demanded concerning this man here present (meaning Master
Philpot.) But those wise and godly prisoners, well knowing and considering
how they ought to take an oath, answered to this unjust request: That they
would not swear, except they first knew where unto, and being thereupon
offered an oath, and that with threats of Excommunication to answer the
articles propounded against themselves, refused it also, saying: That they
would not accuse them selves. So that we see plainly by these examples, as
also by that ancient and godly writing entitled The prayer and complaint of
the Ploughman, that this kind of general oath and examinations ex officio
mero, were not first mishked by Jesuits and seminary Priests, and from them
derived to others that mislike government and would bring the Church to an
Anarchie, as the world has been borne in hand. But by true Christians, holy,
learned and Religious men, and that for good causes and considerations why they
should so do.

And I should much marvel, were it not that the world has ever been set in
wickedness, how any that profess the holy name and title of Christianity,
durst at any time put in practice within this Realm or elsewhere, so profane
and more then heathenishe manner of Inquisition, not only repugnaunt to God
and Christian Religion, but contrary also to the rules and cannons of the
Antichristian church of Rome. Which laws (if I be not deceived) are more just
and less unjust a great deal, then such as have taken upon them to judge by
coulor of the same. So that in a sort it may be verified of them which was
sometimes spoken of the people of Athens, that having just and good laws, they
nevertheless behaved them selves as bad and dishonest men. For it is said by
some of their Canonistes, Canonists
Procedere ex officio mero, est quando Iudex a seipso and ex officio assumit
informationes contra delinquentem, and contra eum procedit, and hoc est quod
dicitur procedere per viam inquisitionis. Et recte loquendo, inquirere contra
aliquem, ^ul. Cla. in proe. crim. ^ fin. 3. quaest. verse. quaero quibu^.
non est ei transfer Inquisitionem, sed recipere testes seu informationes
contra eum. And moreover, Formare inquisitionem contra aliquem, est facere
processum informatiuum assumendo informationes and iudicia contra eum super
alique delicto. So that to proceed by inquisition, is not to make the party
by oath or examination to be his own accusor, but to accept and receive
information and witnesses against him.

And in what sort and manner the proceeding ought to be, is also declared to
this effect: Iudex nunquam debet procedere ex officio, and sic per viam
inquisitionis, nisi aliquod precedat quod appareat viam inquisitioni scilicet,
vel defamatio, vel quaerela partis, vel denunciatio, vel huiufmodi, aeliter
processus erit, nullus ipso jure neque in hoc intenduntur notificationes factae
extra judicialiter, neque illae quae fiunt incerto autore, and suppresso nomine
notificantis. By which words manifestly appears, that no Judge
Ecclesiastical ought to proceed by way of inquisition, except there precede a
defamation of the party complaint, or information against him, intelligence of
faults and offenses out of course of judgment, or by uncertain author, or
suppressed name, is wholly by the Law rejected, but by the executors thereof
altogether admitted.

Another also thereunto agreeing, says: Io. pet. de ferr. in prae. sub rubr.
form. inqui sitionis and fama publ.
That the inquisition is not orderly done, but where infamia praecedat, vel
talia judicia sufficientia quae probentur per testes idoneos. And to prove the
fame or infamy, there is required testes multi, the reason, quia dicta
paucorum non infamant. Secondly, they must be graves and honesti, non
maleuoli, nec inimici partis. Thirdly, they must be such as are conversant in
the place where the party has lived, whereby they may be acquainted with the
order and manner of his life and conversation, whereupon chiefelie rises the
true judgment of his good or evil fame. Fourthlie, those witnesses ought to
be received judiciallie. Fiftlie, they must be deposed. And sixtlie, they are
to render a wife and sufficient cause of their knowledge of the infamy. The
Judge in no cause (if he would of his own knowledge say, the party is
infamous) is to be received or believed, the reason is, for that the law will
quod secundum acta and probata justitia ministretur. And the ground and
foundation of the inquisition must not be extorted or wrested from the party,
but, lawfully proved as aforesaid by sufficient witnesses. Notwithstanding
all which laws, what contrary courses have been practiced by Ordinaries and
Clergy men, many have felt, and every man knows too well. So that
concerning their judicial Courts and Consistories, the saying of the Poet is
verified, Victa iacet pietas, and virgo caede madentes vltima coelestium terras
astraea reliquit.

But since that more then two quaternions of learned Canonistes have of late
taken the pains to set down the undoubted grounds of the law
Ecclesiastical (as they say) according to which the proceedings have been used
time out of mind, in all the Courts Ecclesiastical of this Realm, and all
other proceedings have been at all times reformable by appellations, Let us
hear also what they say concerning this matter.

These Doctors first grant it to be good and sound law, That no man may be
urged to bewray him self in hidden and secret crimes, or simply therein to
accuse himself. They confess further, that if any man besides the Ordinary
will prosequute in their Courts, making himself party to prove a crime
whereof there is suspicion: The party conuented in that case, albeit he must
answer on his oath to other articles not principally touching the very crime
objected, is not bound by law to answer upon oath any articles of the very
crime it self. Nevertheless say they, when by circumstaunces once known a
broad, secret crimes are become vehemently to be suspected, and offensive
to the well disposed, and dangerous to be suffered, then are they meet by
inquiry and all good means to be discovered, to the end they may be
reformed, and the party delinquent brought to penitencie, and others
discouraged to commit the like.

The ways and means how suspicion and fame of crimes come to the Ordinaries
ears, they say are these, many bruites of credible persons called in the
law clamosa infinuatio, and presentmentes of Churchwardens and Sydemen: which
presentmentes if they be not direct thorough ignorance of the presentours or
insufficient in the law to prove a fame (yet some scandal therevppon
growinge) how little by like is not respected, th'Ordinarie by law
Ecclesiastical and good discretion may examine other witnesses, being
neighbors, warning the party suspected to be present. The fame once proved
(say they) or the first presentement sufficient than th'ordinarie of duty,
and for the public trust reposed in him is, to proceed against the infamed,
although no other man will, which by law is termed proceeding by inquiry,
especial ex officie, they add a reason for confirmation Ne maleficia
remanoant impunita, vtque Prouincia purgetur malis hominibus.

And in this sort, if the Ordinary proceed ex officio, and the party deny
the crime objected, then by law he is enjoined his purgation. At which time
of purgation (say they) he must directly answer in clearing or conuincing
him self de veritate vel falsitate ipsius criminis objecti, and his
compurgators are to swear de credulitate (weying his fear of God and
conversation of former times) That they believe he has taken a true oath,
which if they all do, then he is holden clear or dismissed. But if he fail
in his purgation, then fictione juris he is taken to be guilty and to be
reformed.

They show likewise a reason of diversity between the proceeding in the case
ex officio, And that which is by suite of the party, That is, Licet nemo
tenetur seipsum prodere, tamen proditus per famam tenetur seipsum ostendere
vtrum possit suam innocentiam ostendere, and seipsum purgare. And a reason of
that reason is added, because penaunces enjoined by the ordinary, are not
taken in law to be poenae but medicinae, or tending to the reformation of the
delinquent. The Example of others and satisfaction of the Church offended: And
so they conclude upon all their reasons, that the suspected are not to make
scruple to discover themselves after fame.

This being the true and only course of proceeding by Ordinaries and
Ecclesiastical Judges in causes criminal, where is then become the exacting
of those general oaths so often used to answer all Interrogatories that
shall be ministered, and that before notice or understanding (for the most part)
of the crime objected. And the extortinge by oath of the ground and foundation
of the inquisitio^ from the party conuented, does it not appear by the
resolution of these learned men, that the same have no good or sufficient (...)
by the law, how long or much soever by cou^^t and pretense of law and
justice they have bin practiced or imposed.

And as concerning their proceedings exofficio to forced p^^^gations approved
(as they seem to affirm) both by (...) Ecclesiastical and title of
prescription, if we look (...) thereto, and take good view thereof, what other
thing ^^all we find then hard and unjust dealing toward men, and great abuse
of the Name and Maicstie of Almighty God, cloaked and shadowed nevertheless
under the glorious and painted glosses of beautifullshewes and feyned pretenses
of purging of Provinces, Reformation of delinquentes necessary examples,
discharge of public trust, and satisfaction of the offended church, honest
and honorable terms in deed, but ill applied to this purpose.

For first, as concerning the injustice offered unto men, if it be a true and
sound principle or Maxim in law, not denied by themselves, That Nemo tenetur
seipsum prodere, where should the benefit thereof be had or taken but in their
Courts and Co^sistories. But if it should be granted that this rule fails
where a man is proditus per famam, does not that as a gloase confoundinge the
text wholly and altogether destroy that rule or principle, except for some
relief this narrow shifte may be used. That the fame nevertheless stands
in force where any other then the Ordinary assumeth to prove that crime.

But in this case also they have so weakened this maxim, that scarcely will it
stand for a minome, affirminge (if I mistake them not) that the infamed must
answer on his oath to other articles not principally touching the very
crimes objected. For what should be meant by other articles but such as
concern circumstaunces and inducementes to the crime, And is not this to go
like the crabb oblique, and to proceed the same way, although not to tread
the direct steps? But why there should be any distaunce between the suyte
or instance of the party and the proceeding ex officio, I know not the
reason. Alleged therefore is this, Penaunces enjoined by Ordinaries are not
taken to be panae but medicinae, what their law presumes is not sufficient
reason to prove their law reasonable, but what they are in deed is to be
weyed. And shall they be medicines only, where proceeding is ex officio? Or
tend they in that case alone to the reformation of the delinquent, The Example
of others, and satisfaction of the Church? May not all this as well be verefied
where the crime is complained of, and punished at th'instaunce of the party?
And shall not penance although it be but the standing in a sheet, as well as
the standing on the pillorie, respect of public shame and reproache (grievous
and odious unto all men) be accounted for a punishment? True it is, all
corrections are or should be medicines for the amendment of manners. But does
it therefore follow that the same be no pains or punishments?

As concerning the offense to God by the abuse of his Name and Majesty, Have we
not learned before that to offer an oath unto persons defamed in life and
conversation, and specially concerning the matter of his own corrupt life
argues a lightness and want of good discretion in the Magistrate, who thereby
wittinglie does minister an occasion of perjurie? And are not all those on
whom these purgations are imposed, men greatly defamed, and vehemently
suspected of the crimes objected, for as these Doctors affirm the law when
secret crimes by circumstaunces known abroad, are become vehemently
suspected, offensive and dangerous, then are they first enquired of. The
proceeding also by inquisition beginning upon fame, proved not slenderly, but
by presentment upon oath, or by deposed witnesses, being many honest, void of
malice, neighbors to the party, and rendering a wise and sufficient reason of
their knowledge concerning the same, And how then may a Judge in such a case
with any good conscience to Godward, or to the satisfaction of his church,
force an oath upon such a one for the final end of the cause? Is not the
peril and presumption of perjurie very great and pregnaunt? Know we not that
all, or the most part of men liking the counsel (dedecus magis quam periculum
vites) will rather hazard their souls then put their bodies to shame and
reproach: presume the law never so much that after fame they should not make
scruple to discover them selves. If the like course of purgatio^ should be used
at the common law upon Indightmentes of fellonie, or other criminal causes,
what doubt were to be made, but that perjurie in short time would ouerflowe
the whole land: and shall we not think, that the same is not frequent in
these kinds of purgations? But say they, the party is not trusted alone, he
brings with him his many compurgators, who depose also de credulitate, waying
his fear of God and former conversation. Be it so, the matter thereby is no
whit amended, but rather made worse and impaired. For what do those
compurgators but by lending their oaths, justify in effect him to be honest,
whom fame and the former deponentes have proved to be dishonest, and very
near (the circumstances considered) convinced of the crime objected. Why
rather do not these Ordinaries which challendge and assume to them selves the
goodly name and title of spiritual men, if they respect the honor of God, and
regard the souls of men, free the people from these pernicious oaths and
deadly purgations, and proceed to their sentence of condemnation, not by
feyned offices and fictions of law; but by good proof and lawful witnesses?
And again, absolve the party defamed, where such sufficient proof does
fail them, why should they think much to offer to the laity in their
Ecclesiastical Courts, the like good measure, and upright and sincere justice,
that they themselves find and obtain in the courts temporal of this Realm,
Where neither they nor any other are forced ex officio Iudicis, by strayning
oaths and strong purgations, not healthful but hurtful to bewray or accuse
them selves. Perhaps this counsel would be received, if it were as profitable
as good and honest, but according to the proverb auro loquente tacendum est.
For it is no small gain and lucre that daily rises and accreweth to the
Clergy and Courts Ecclesiastical, by slander, fame, rumor, and false
report: in respect whereof these fair names of Office and discharge of public
duty, are so cunningly pretexed, and these poysoninge purgations so
dangerously given for preservatives. A matter being since well known unto
the world, Carolus 5
and by the Princes of Germany in the Counsel of Norenberg, among many other
abuses and corruptions, most monstrous, complained of to this effect: It
happens oftentimes say they, that men and women through sinister and false
reports and slanders, are brought before the Official or Ecclesiastical
Judge, as men guilty, and shall not be declared innocent before they have
cleared themselves by an oath, which purgation so made, they are restored to
their former estimation. And albeit the damages and costs ought to be
repaide unto such as be so falselie accused, yet are the innocents them selves
forced to pay two Gilders and a quarter for their letters of absolution. And
this is the cause why the Officialls and other Ecclesiastical Judges, do so
greatly follow the action of such unlawful, false, and slanderous
accusations, challenging the hearing thereof only to them selves. Which thing
no doubt (say they) redowneth to the great and most singular hurt and
detriment of all men. For often times it happens that Women falling together in
contention through anger, hatred, or some other affection, do speak evil of,
or slander one another, and outrage so much, that the one often times accuses
the other either of Adultery or Witcherie: which being brought before the
Official, she which through anger had so slaundered the other, is forced by
an oath to excuse and purge herself, that what soever injurious or slanderous
word she had spoken, came not of any deliberate purpose or intent, but through
wrath and displeasure. In like manner the other which is accused either of
adultery or sorcerie, is commanded by an oath to declare her innoce^cie: so
that it is evident unto all men, that in such cases whether they be guilty or
not guilty, they must swear if they will keep their good name and fame
whereby not only the unlawful lucre of gain and money is fought, but also
wilful perjurie forced, etc. Thus these honorable persons you see have made it
clear what is chiefelie intended by these canonical purgations, pretend the
Clergy what soever they will, and how such forced oaths are not only
offensive unto God, but injurious also unto men. Therefore leaving these men to
who^ the favor of gain is so sweet, together with their famous law, the
matter which we endeavor to prove is, that those general oaths and oaths
ex officio publicly heretofore much practiced by Ordinaries and
Ecclesiastical Judges, are altogether unlawful (whether by the Canonical
sanctions or law cannon, I care not) but by the laws of God and of this
Realm. And therefore since we have sufficiently spoken of the law of God,
now least peraduerture it may be said, that such Catholic oaths are
warraunted by the common laws or statutes of this Realm, or by the use and
practice of some Courts of Justice, therein let us consider hereof also, and
deliver both our laws and the Justice of our land from so foul a slander.

Concerning the common laws of this Realm, we may find an oath diversely
allowed of and used in causes of suyte judiciallie depending. But such a
general oathe or such like ex officio at any time either offered by Magistrate
or taken or made by subject of this land, by authority of the common law,
can never be proved, I am sure, either by good record or sound report of the
same. Long it were and tedious to remember the particular cases, when and where
an oath is required by the laws and statutes of this Realm. But this may be
said in general, and that truly, to the great honor and high commendations
of our gouuernement, that the same common laws have not imposed or appointed
an oathe to be used otherwise then according to the right institution thereof,
and the godly rules before remembered: yea moreover this may truly be
affirmed, that the common law of this Kingdom, yea the common wealth it self
has ever rejected and impugned as a thing unlawful and injurious, this manner
of swearing, whereof we now entreat, as by that we shall hereafter say, may
evidently appear.

Touching the oaths imposed or admitted at the common law by Judges or
Magistrates (for of them only we are to speak.) First it is used as by good
reason in all Courts of Justice established for determination of causes in
suite or controversy, either between the Prince and subject, or the subjectes
them selves, to require an oath of all such as are called or produced to
testify their knowledge concerning the matter or point in issue, whereby the
truth may appear, and the cause receive an end.

The defendent also in diverse personal actions voluntatilie offering an oathe
for his clear discharge, Wager of law.
is admitted by course of the law thereunto, which manner of proceeding is
termed the doing of his law, and seems to have been grounded upon the
judicialles before rehearsed, given by God unto his people the Isralites, as by
the observation of the cases hereafter mentioned, may be gathered. For in an
action of debt brought for money due by reason of some simple contract, or in
an action of detinue of goods and chattelles, the oath of the defendent in the
one case, that he owes not the money, and in the other, that he deteineth not
the things required, is allowed for a final end and bar unto the pleadant.
For in the former case the repayment of the money may be private and in
secret, and so in the other the delivery of the goods. And although the
baylment and delivery of the pleadaunt goods to the defendent were by the
hands of a third person, or testified by writing, yet these are no causes to
put the defendent from his oath, or wager of his law, for as much as the
answer is not to the baylment or delivery, but to the deteiner or
withholding, and in the action of debt, although the defendent either hanging
the action or otherwise had confessed the contract, yet is he to be admitted to
his law or oath, in so much as the point in suite is not the contract but the
debt. 7. H. 4. fo. 7. 9. E. 4. fo. 24


But in an action of account supposinge the receipt by the hands of a stranger
or third person, the law is otherwise: for here the thing delivered is not
preciselie in demand, but an account only thereof required. And the receipt
being the cause of action to which a third person is privy as a witness (the
oath of the defendent as a thing not of necessity) is rejected. For that
reason was the defendent put from his wager of law. Anno 31. Ed. 1. where the
case was this: An action of detenewe was brought for a Challice, the defendent
pleaded how the pleadaunt delivered the same in gage for vj. marks, and that
upon the repayment thereof he was ready to deliver the Challice, the pleadent
replying that he had repayed the money by the hands of one such, the defendent
offering his oath to the contrary, was nor admitted thereunto, inasmuch as
there was a witness of the repayment, by whose testimony the truth might be
known.

And as the common law is thus on the part of the defendent, so is it likewise
for the pleadant, coming as it were in place of a defendent. Therefore Anno
21. Ed. 3. fol. 49. the case was that the defendent upon his account would
have discharged him self by certain tallyes, and so by his oath continued the
charge against the defendent. But Anno 29. Ed. 3. the defendent in account
alleged before the Auditors, payment to the pleadant by the hands of another,
and the pleadent offering his oath that he had not teceyued the money, was in
respect of the third person denied to wage his law. And the good discretion
and consideration which the law uses in the allowing and admitting of wager
of law, is not to be forgotten. Which law (least men of light credit or
doubtful faith, should take an oath) suffers no man to do his law, but
such only as is able to bring with him 11. other persons of ripe years and of
good name, to depose with him, that they think he swears truly.

Neither are the one parties or the other in any personal action by the courses
of the common law suffered to clear themselves by their oaths where they are
charged, either by their lawful writing or matter of record, for that these
are testimonies and proofs sufficient whereunto faith and credit ought to be
given, much more might be said in such particulars, but these may suffice to
show how in suites for goods, chattels, debtes, or personal duties, the
common laws of this Realm admit no idle, vain, suspicious or unnecessary
oaths, neither compel any man to swear concerning them, but upon cause
allow of the pl^and deserts volontarie and necessary oath for an end of the
controversy.

As touching the causes and controversies for lands and inheritaunces
depending in fuyte, either in admitting or requiring of oaths, some few cases
there be: Nevertheless where an oath for them is used, As if a Praecipe quod
reddat be brought of land wherein the tenant was not lawfully sommoned, he
may upon return of the process of graund cape, wage his law for none sommons,
and thereby (as not well executed) abate the demaundentes writ, in which case
an oath seems rightly to be admitted, since the cause is both of weight and
necessity to the tenant, this being the only way to relieve him against the
untrue return of the Sheriff, whereby his land for want of apparaunce was to
be recovered against him. For as the law seems to way a trial of this
sommons by 12. men is not allowable. And although it may be said, that the
tenant upon his loss by default might have a writ of deceit, and recover
again his land, 33. H. 6. fo.
yet that often times falls out to be a faint remedy, the death of such as
were returned sommoners depriving him of that advantage. In the case also of
deceit upon a recovery by default, the sommoners, viewers, and perueors, are
judiciallie examined by oath, whether they have duly according to the laws
of the land, executed and performed that which appertains unto them, who
in this case are used but as witnesses to search and sifte out by them the good
or evil dealing of the Sheriff by whom the execution of the writ and process
was committed. 41. Ed. 3. fo.
In like manner, if the plaint. in a scire facias. recover by default, and the
defendent bring this action of deceit against the Sheriff, the bailife and the
party that sued execution of the land, process shall be awarded against the
supposed garnishers, and upon their apparaunce they shall be examined (and that
by oath) concerning the manner of the garnishment, and the same being found
insufficient, the plaintiff shall be restored to his land with the prosites
mean.

We may find also in such real actions an oath required in another manner, but
yet to good purpose, that is, to take away unnecessary delays of Justice. For
if the tenant in a praecipe of land will cast an Essoyne of the Kings
service, the Essoygner shall swear, and that directly, the same to be no
feined excuse, otherwise the Essoyne shall not be allowed. Some few other
particular cases of like nature may peradventure be showed where an oath is
admitted or required in these real actions, but none I am sure tending to any
such purpose as these oaths commanded and enforced ex officio.

In criminal causes and suytes, Criminal causes.
whereby either the loss of life, liberty, member of the body, or good name,
may ensue (which among worldly things are most dear and precious unto men)
the common laws of this land have wholly forborne (and that for just
respects) to urge or impose an oath upon the accused. For in wisdom it was
foreseen that the frailty of man for the safety of life, the preservation of
liberty, credit, and estimation would not spare to profane even that which
is most holy, and by committing sinful perjurie, cast both soul and body
into eternal perdition.

This knew the subtle serpent our adversary full well in general, although
he were deceived in the particular, when as he said unto God concerning the
holy man Job: Skin for skin, Job cap. 2.
and whatsoever a man has, will he give for him self and for his life, but
stretch out thy hand (says Satan) and touch his bones and his flesh, and
see if he will not then blaspheme thee to thy face.

Moreover, every wise Magistrate may well conceive upon how weak and feeble
a foundation he shall ground his sentence, trusting to such an oath, when
before hand the suspicion and presumption of perjurie is so pregnant.
Therefore in causes capital or otherwise criminal, these our laws neither
urge by oathe nor force by torment any man to accuse or excuse him self, but
rejecte the oath as unbeseeming a well governed state or common wealth: And
condemn the torture as a thing most cruel and barbarous, whereof although they
need no other proof the^ the daily practice and proceedinges against parties
suspected of such offenses, yet concerning the inquisitions by torture, we may
see the same affirmed by that learned Judge Master Fortescue in his
commentaries of the Policy of this Kingdom, 49. Ed. 3.
And for the other there are sufficient authorities in the reports of the laws
them selves: therefore in the book of Assizes it appears, that diverse Jurors
were challenged as less indifferent, some for matters that founded to their
reproach and dishonestie, as that corruptly they had taken money of one of the
parties in the suite, whereupon it was ordered by the Justices, that such as
were challenged for causes not dishonest, should be sworn to declare the
truth, the other for the reason aforesaid, not to be examined at all, but the
challenge to be tried without their oath, The same law is again reported unto
us Anno 49. Ed. 3. fol. 1. Upon the like reason is the refolutio^ of the chief
Justices and of the Judges Saunders and Whiddon, 12. R. Eliz.
That if a bill of perjurie committed in the Chauncere against the form of the
statute made in the fifte year of her Majesty's reign, were exhibited in the
same Court, that the defendent should not be compelled to make answer upon
his oath either to bill or intertogatories, but that the parties ought to
descend to issue, and the trial to be had by Jury in the Kings Benche. I
shall not need to spend time in declaring after the parties in suite have
joined issue trial by Jury how many ways an oath is used about the trial
of such matters of fact, as the oath of Jurors them selves. and of their triars
upon challenge, or to speak any thing of the oath to be ministered unto suck as
require the suertie of peace, neither to discourse of the doing of homage or
fealty by the tenant to the Lord, since these and such like are well known to
every one, although but of mean judgment, to be necessarily used for the
better administration of Justice, and assurance of duties, making nothing at
all for those fantastical and officious oaths and examinations, proceeding
rather ab officio the verb, then ex officio the nowne.

Neither is it necessary to set forth at large where and in what particular
cases Oaths are appointed by Acts of Parliament of this Realm, as to
remember the diverse Oaths of Bishops, Counselors, Judges, Magistrates,
Officers, and Ministers of Law and Justice. The oath ordained for the
maintenance of the supremacy Royal, and abolishing of foreign jurisdiction.
The power of examination by oath by the statute of Anno 5. H. 4. and many
others, for that by perusal of the statutes, the same may unto him that will
search, easily appear. Upon consideration of all which acts of Parliament,
being in force, it may truly be affirmed that there is not so much as a bare
show or shadow of matter to give credit or allowaunce to these infinite
wrested and extorted oaths ex officio.

But it may be that some man in the defense of the cause and for allowance of
those oaths will allege the twice damned and repealed statute made upon the
sinister suggestion of the Clergy Anno 2. H 4. cap. 15. The statute against
haeresie 2. H. 5.
Which bloody and broyling law gave authority to Diocesans, to cause the
persons defamed or evidently suspected of supposed heresy, to be arrested,
and under safe custody to be deteyned in their Prisons, till they of the
articles laid to their charge, did cannonicallie purge them selves, or else
abjure it according to the laws of the Church. And did appoint the proceeding
and determination of the cause against the arrested, to be according to the
effect of the law and cannonicall decrees. For answer whereunto I say, that
although the sword by that stature law was committed into the hands of mad
men, and the seely lambs delivered over to the greedy and devouring woolues,
yet does it not appear by any apparaunt or express words of that law, that
any authority was thereby given or meant to be given to Ordinaries or Judges
Ecclesiastical, to impose any such general oathe, or otherwise to compel by
oath the prisonner to become his own accusor, for that (and especially in
cases of life and death) had been directly against the laws and justice of
this land. But if it be alleged, that the same was tacit and inclusiue
allowed by those words of cannonicall sanctions or decrees, and that there be
any such, yet the same decree being against the laws and decrees of God, as
before is proved, that statute was therein no binding law, neither gave
sufficient warraunt to put in execution any such corrupt course of proceeding,
since all laws and ordinances of man whatsoever, being repugnaunt to the laws
of God, are meerelie void and of none effect, as the learned Saint German in
his book of Doctor and Student has well observed, where he says, That every
man's law must be consonant to the law of God. And therefore the laws of
Princes, the commandments of Prelates, the statutes of Communalties, ne yet
the ordinances of the Church, is not righteous or obligatorie, Except it be
consonant and agreeable to the law of God.

But as concerning that statute, will you hear what is declared by Parliament
Anno 25. H. 8. The subjects of this Realm at that time lamentably show unto
their Sovereign Lord and King, Ca. 14.
how that statute was impetrate and obtained (I use the words of the law) by
the suggestion of the Clergy of this Realm, not declaring or defininge any
certain cases of heresy, that those words (canonical sanctions or decrees)
were so general, that uneath the most expert and best learned men of the
Realm (diligently lying in wait upon him self) could eschew and avoid the
penalty and danger of that act. And canonical sanctions if he should be
examined upon such captious Interrogatories (note I pray you) as is and has
been accustomed to be ministered by the Ordinaries of the Realm in cases where
they will suspect any person of heresy.

They moreover affirm, that it stands not with the right order of justice
nor good equity, that any person should be convict and put to the loss of his
life, good name, or goods, unless it were by due accusation and witness; or
by presentment, verdict, confession, or process of outlawrie: Declaringe
moreover, that by the laws of the Realm for treasons committed to the peril
of the Kings most Royal Majesty, upon whose suertie depends the wealth of
the whole Realm, no person can ne may be put to death, but by presentment,
verdict, or process of outlawrie: and therefore not reasonable that any
Ordinary by any suspicion conceived of his own fantafie, without due
accusation or presentment, should put any subject of this Realm, in the
infamy or slander of heresy, to the peril of life, loss of name, and
goods. They further show that there may be heresies and pains and
punishments declared and ordained in and by the canonical sanctions, and by
the laws and ordinances made by the Popes and Bishops of Rome, and by their
authorities, for holdinge, doing, preaching or speaking of things contrartie to
the said canonical sanctions, laws and ordinances, which be but humane,
mere repugnant and contrarious to the Prerogative of the Kings Imperial
Crown. Regal jurisdiction, laws, statutes, and ordinances of the Realm, by
reason whereof the people of the same for observing, maintayning, defending,
and due executing of the Kings laws, statutes, and prerogative Royal, by
authority of that act, may be brought into slander of heresy, to their great
infamy and danger and peril of their lives. So we see first how the
crafty and subtle Cleargiemen were the procurers of that statute law, to the
end that they might execute their cruelty, and how under cloked and covert
terms of canonical sanctions, they vnjustlie usurped jurisdiction over the
people, ministering unto them captious and snarling Interrogatories. And (as it
should seem by the histories) upon oath contrary to the true meaning of the
law and law makers, and against the right order of justice and all good
equity: impugning thereby the Royal Prerogative, The Imperial Crown, the
Princely Scepter, laws and Policy of this Kingdom. In consideration
whereof, and to take from them all coulor of law positive of this Realm, that
statute was then repealed, and a new form of inquiry of heresy by
indightment, presentment or due accusation by two lawful witnesses at the
least, was established.

And it is further to be noted, that although the Statute made Anno 31. H. 8.
commonly called the statute of six articles, was a very straight, sore,
extreme and terrible act, 31. H. 8. c. 14
as the statute of the repeal thereof speaks, yet find we not by that
law, or any other, these general oaths or examinations by oath ex officio of
persons suspected or accused for heresy or other crime Ecclesiastical, 1. Ed.
6. c. 16
to be enacted or allowed of, but rather by the courses and fourmes of enquire
and trial otherwise prescribed in this and other statutes, the same is
rejected and disallowed wholly as unjust and full of iniquity. For by this
statute of six articles, commissions are appointed to be directed to the
Archb. or Bishop of the Diocese, and to his Chauncellor or Commissarie, and
such other as the King should appoint, giuinge them power to take information
and accusation, (not by oath of the party conuented) but by the oaths and
depositions of two able and lawful persons at the least, or to enquire by the
oaths of xij. men. Giving also to the Ordinaries power and authority to
enquire in their visitations and Senis, and to take accusations and
informations as in form aforesaid, and not otherwise. The manner also of
process against the persons indighted, accused or presented, is there
prescribed. And the form of proceedinge upon apparaunce of the party
appointed to be not according to those unjust examinations by oath ex officio,
but according to the laws of the Realm, and the effect of that act.

And although at that time this statute law seemed just and equal, as
concerning the manner of inquiry and trial, yet time (disclosing all things)
made it appear that the same was not false, in respect that diverse secret and
untrue accusations and presentementes might be, and by all likelihoode were
maliciously conspired, and therefore it was enacted Anno 35. H. 8. cap. 5.
That no person should be arraigned or put to trial for or upon any
accusation, information or presentment, concerning any of the offenses
mentioned in the statute of 6. articles, but only upon such presentementes
and indightements as should be sound and made by the oaths of 12. men or
more, etc.

These things standing thus, how may any man justify or defend (much less
practice) those general oaths or examinations by oath ex officio by any
statute law of this Realm, being by them not only rejected, but utterly
condemned as not standing with the right order of Justice nor good equity,
especially the statute made Anno 25. H. 8. being in force and limitinge unto
Archb. and Bish. none other jurisdiction then such as they may use without
offense to the Prerogative Royal and the laws and customs of this Realm. Of
which laws and customs the common law is no part or portion. And as a
well-willer I would advise all Ordinaries and such as exercise Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, especially having taken the oathe ordained for the maintenance
of the Supremacy Royal, (wherein they swear to assist to their power, and
defend all jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminences and authorities granted
or belonging to the Queens Highness, her heirs and successors, or united and
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm) to take heed that they attempt
not to put in practice or exercise any such Oaths or examinations ex officio,
least happily they be not only found thereby to be impugnors of the Royal
Prerogatives, but discredited farther by the breach of their oath.

If it be said (for what will not be moved for a defense) that the King
heretofore gave in those co^missions besides the lettre and meaning of the
statute of 6. The Kings commission
Articles, power and authority by express words unto the Commissioners
Ecclesiastical to examine by oath the persons accused or presented. As that is
not likely, neither as I suppose can be proved, So (admitting it were true,
and that such kind of oaths were consonant to the law of God) yet were the
same no sufficient or lawful justification, inasmuch as we have proved, and
further shall prove such examinations and inquiries upon oath, to be injurious
both to the Prince and people of this Realm, and to impugn our government
and form of Justice. In which cases the Kings grant or commission is of no
force in law. For as Bracton well has written, Potestas Principis juris est
no^ injuriae, and cum ipso sit author juris, non debet inde injuriarum nasci
occasio vnde jura nascuntur. That the King by his Commission or grant, or
otherwise the^ by Parliament, may not change or alter the laws of this Realm,
nor the order, manner or form of administration of Justice, is rightly also
noted unto us by that grave and learned Judge Master Fortescue, saying: Non
potest Rex Angliae ad libitum suum leges mutare Regni sui Principatu, namque
nedum Regali sed and politico ipse suo populo dominatur. And by the book also
of Anno 11. H. 4. where it is agreed that neither the King by his grant, nor
the Pope by his Bulls (for all his triple Crown) can change or alter the
laws of the land, whereunto concur diverse other books of the report of the
law. Worthy also of remembrance is that saying of Justice Scroope Anno 1.
Ed. 3. fol. 26. If the King (says he) command any thing impossible that
which the law will in the case must be done? 49. Ed. 3. 36. H. 6.
if he command any thing contrary to law, his Justices ought not to do
it. Anno 42. Ed. 3. There was a Commission awarded out of the Chauncerie to
apprehende a certain subject of this Realm, and to seize his goods and
chattells, no enditement, suite of party, or other due process of law
precedent, and the same was by the Justices holden to be altogether void, as a
matter against the Policy of the Realm, and manner of execution of justice.
Likewise it appears in the same year, that a writ proceeding from the
Chauncerie, to enquire of Chaunperties, Conspiracies, etc. whereby one of the
Kings subjectes stood indighted, was by Justice Kneuet upon the resolution of
the rest of the Judges, damned and adjudged void in respect that such matters
are not inquireable by writ, but by Commission.

But it will be said of some (I verily suppose) that although neither the common
laws, nor statutes of this Realm, nor the Kings commission, do or can
warrant such manner of oath and examinations ex officio, yet the public
practice and use of the honorable Courts of Starchamber and Chauncerie, the
one in causes criminal, the other in suites civil of equity and conscience
concurring in one form of taking aunsweres and examinations by oath, do
fortify and confirm the thing which we impugn. Which speech as it may
seem at the first to give some coulor and show of credit to their cause, so
upon consideration had and due comparing the one with the other, it will soon
appear to be but a vanishing smoke, and shadow void of substance. For
first, if it should be granted, that such kind of oaths and examinations
were used in the Courts of Starchamber and Chauncerie, yet would it not follow
that the same might be practiced in the Courts and Consistories
Ecclesiastical, unless the like allowance thereto and consent of the whole
Realm might be proved also. And who knows not how weak a proof, examples,
and presidentes are where an express law or certain policy is to the
contrary. Therefore it is well said in the civil law, Jus non ex regula
sumatur, sed ex jure regula fiat. By better Logic might they conclude thus:
All answers are made upon oath in the Kings Courts of Starchamber and
Chau^cerie, Ergo the same course may be used in the Courts of the Kings Bench
and common place, which nevertheless were an absurd conclusion. It is very
true in deed, that these honorable Courts of Starchamber and Chauncerie
proceed not to the trial of causes by Jury, after the manner of the common
laws of this Realm, but give their judgementes and definitive sentence upon
the answer and examination of the defendent, affirmed by his corporal oathe,
and upon the depositions of witnesses. But who has ever seen in these Courts
any subject of this land, in a cause concerning him self, brought forth and
compelled to depose or make answer upon his oath, no bill of complainte or
information formerlie exhibited against him. Nay on the contrary, these
Courts observing the due form of Justice, enforce no man to answer, but
where he has a known accusor, and perfect understanding of the cause or
crime objected, and therewithal is permitted to have a coppie of the bill of
complainte or information (being not ore tenus,) And allowed moreover both
time convenient, and counsel learned well to consider and advise of his oathe
and answer. And if his adversaries complaint be either insufficient in form
or matter, or such as the Court has no jurisdiction to determine the defendent
upon demurrer, without oathe is dismissed, and that with costs. And admit
the accusation, such as every way is aunswerable, yet if the Interr. ministered,
be impertinent to the matter of complaint, the defendent without offense to
the Court, may refuse to make answer to the same. What similitude or likeness
then is there between the oaths and examinations used in these honorable
Courts, and those constreiners ex officio, since the former sort be orderly
taken in Courts of Justice, the other without all course of judgment, the one
where pl. and complaint are manifest, the other where neither accusor nor
matter of accusation do appear, the one oath made upon certain knowledge and
good aduisement, the other suddenly without all discretion upon uncertain
demaundes, the one wisely restrained to certain limittes and bounds, the other
foolishlie wandringe at the doubtful will of a sly and subtle apposer. Upon
the one the deponent answers to the accusation of his adversary, by the
other he is compelled oftentimes to be his own accusor and condemner: the
one enquireth an answer to matter in fact, done either to the injury of some
private person, or hurt of the public state, the other constreyneth the
revealing of words, deeds, and thoughts, though never offensive to any.

Than since it is apparaunt that these manner of oaths are altogether mere
strangers to our policy, The practice of the clergy.
and not so much as once countenaunced by any law, custom, statut or Court of
this Realm: How then and by whose means has this alien heretofore intruded
as a troublesome guest into the house of the common wealth? This partly as
before, has been declared with some grief of mind, by that godly servant
of Christ John Lambert, who notes the papisticall Clergy and religious men
of his time most irreligiouslie to have practiced the same. And no doubt the
Prelates of former ages, fayning and pretendinge such oaths to be necessary
for the government of the church, and to purge the Province of evil men, as
aforesaid. But in truth, finding it a fit instrument to maintain the
Romish Hierarchy, and to tyrannize over the consciences of good men, most
impiouslie violating the laws both of God and man, imposed this manner of
corrupt oath upon the people, and no mervaile, since there was no evil or
mischief that could be devised, either against the Prince, people or policy
of this land, which these kind of our Prelates have not attempted and put in
practice. For first disguising themselves under the visor and mask of
hypocrisy and feined holiness, and making merchandise of all things (even of
heaven and hell) purchased and acquired in short time (such was the blind
devotion of the superstitious laity) great and large Seignories, Lands and
possessions (the very mother and nource of pride, presumption and vain pomp
of this world) And not so satisfied, but vnsaitablie and most ambitiouslie
lusting after rule and dominion, spared not against their due alleadgance, to
ensest even the Kings and Princes of the land. Let the contention and strife
of Anselme, Archbishop of Canterbury with King Rufus, the manifold practizes
of Thomas, Becket against King Henry the second, the tragical life, and
pitiful end of King John, occasioned chiefly by the malicious means of the
Archbishop Stephen Langton, the treason of Archbishop Arundell against his
sovereign Lord and King Richard the second, and the pride and insolency of
Cardinal Woolsey against that renowned Prince King H. 8. among others, be
sufficient testimonies in this behalf. And as these pontifical Prelates with
others more, puffed up in swelling pride and ambition, struck at the head, so
the crewe of that Antichristian Clergy ceased not from time to time to
wrestle and make war even with the sinews and strength of the body politic
of this Realm, the laws I mean and customs of this kingdom, being the
principal stay and stop to their insolent and ambitious attemptes,
endeavoring them selves to writhe out and exempt them selves from their due
subjectio^ to the same, sometimes again encroching and usurping the right and
jurisdiction of the Kings courts, coueringe to draw all causes into their
costly and lingering Consistories. And oftentimes bringing in (to the prejudice
both of the Prince and the people) foreign decrees and constitutions, with the
corrupt Canons and ceremonies of the accursed sea of Rome. For proof whereof,
let the particular examples hereafter mentioned, serve, as a few amongst
many.

The Pope (says Polidore Virgill) made a law in the Counsel of Lions, that
the Clergy should not be taxed without his leave or commandment: which
law of immunitie, although it were of no force to bind within this Realm,
for that the same is not subject to any foreine made laws or constitutions not
suffered by the King, and voluntarily accepted and used by his people, as is
expreslie declared by the statute made Anno 25. H. 8. cap. 21. yet see the good
disposition and obedience of the Cleargiemen of this Realm in the time of King
Ed. 1. which Churchmen with great obstinacy refused to pay the subsidy
granted to the King. Robert, then Archbish. of Canterbury (head and primate
of that faction) wickedlie abusing this text of holy scripture to serve his
rebellious intent, obedire oportet Deo magis quam hominibus, The Pope and his
pursle being his best beloved Gods: How much better and more Bishoplike might
he have remembered, Date quae sunt Caesaris Caesari, and quae sunt Dei Deo. That
holy saint Hugh, sometimes Bishop of Lincoln, related amongst the Romish
Gods, puffed up with the like arrogancy in the time of the several Reigns of
King H. 2. and Richard the 1. and of King John, denied the payment of tribute
and subsidy, blustering and puffinge out: moreover like Cacus in his den his
smokie blastes of curse and excommunication against the Kings collectours, A
notable example of humility and obedience in a Popeholie Bishop. It is said
also by Master Frowick Anno 10. H. 7. That the Clergy had a Constitution,
that no Priest should be impleaded by the common law of this Realm, for any
cause whatsoever: whether he said truly therein, let the Canonistes judge.
But certain I am, the whole rabble of that Romish Clergy, did from time to
time their best endeavor to make them selves lawless altogether, as by the
grieuances exhibited by the Princes of Germany at the Counsel of Norrenberg
in the time of the Emperor Charles the fifte, may well appear. And this our
haughty Hugh of Lincoln, either emboldened by such a Cannon, or of his own
free courage, as a lusty champion of that irregular confederacy, drew out
his wooden dagger of excommunication against the Kings, Judges, and
Magistrates, secluding them as far as his folly might, from the fellowship
and company of Christians, because they had by course of law imposed a fine
upon a Proselite of theirs, newly crept into their unholy orders, for his
trespass committed in the Kings Forrestes. 27. H. 8.
So likewise the reverend Judge Master Fitzherbert, declared, that in the
time of King Henry the 6. a Bishop of Winchester, being outlawed for no less
fault then wilful murder, and his temporalities therefore seized into the
Kings hands, refused the judgment of law, and sued to the court of Room,
the Pope writing to the King in his behalf, answer was made; that the laws
of this Realm were such: whereupon as vanquished and driven from his shifts,
the Bishop submitted himself to the grace of the King (and though unworthy)
obtained pardon. We heard also in the 2. year of King H. 4. how the Popes
publication or collector took upon him by usurpation of authority, to take
both oath and obligation of a certain Vicar, to hold him self contented with
such endowment as the collector had appointed, the Parsonage being appropriate
to the Deanrie of Windsor, and how the Deane drew the Vicar into plea before
this new found Judge the Collector, for the breach both of his oath and
bond. Upon which wrong done to the Royal jurisdiction, the Vicar complaining,
had a Prohibition. In which case are principally to be noted, the unlawful
imposing of an oath by one that was no Magistrate, but quid domini facient
audent cum talia fures, and th'injurious pro sequting and drawing into plea of
the Kings subject before an incompetent Judge by this Deane a Clergy man of
the Realm. In like sort the Hospitallers and Templers, assuming to them
selves jurisdiction in prejudice of the King and of his Crown, drew the
subjectes of this Realm into suite before the Conseruators of their
Privileges, for causes perteyning to the jurisdiction of the Kings Courts,
for reformation whereof the statute of Westminster. the 2. cap. 43. was ordained.
How rigorous, injurious, and intolerable the dealinges ex officio by those
Prelates and Ordinaries were (whereof these examinations by extorted oath were
a principal part) the grievous complaint of the whole Communaltie of this
Realm in the 23. year of the reign of King H. 8. does sufficiently
declare. Whereby the King was informed, how these merciless Ordinaries by
their extraordinary and lawless power, cited and sommoned his subjects,
feyned and framed strange accusations against them, no accusers appearing,
examined them upon articles captiouslie devised for their purpose, and in the
end admitting no defense, and disallowing all purgation, forced them to
abjure, or condemned them to the fire, a most fearful and barbarous course of
inquisition. Unto which complaint those Pharisaicall Clergy men (who will not
enter Pilates common Hall, least they should be defiled, and yet cry out with
loud voice, Crucifige, crucifige, made (as to the King him self there it
seemed) a very weak and slender defense. And no maruayle, since wickedness
may more easily be committed, then well defended.

But will you see more fully and clearelie, behold as in a glass the
manifold usurpations, incrochmentes, injuries and oppressions committed and
done from time to time, by the Pope, Prince of that curssing and accursed
Clergy, and by his sworn and devoted Baalamites and shauelinges, against the
rightes and prerogatives of this Imperial Crown, the laws of this Monarchy,
and the liberties of the subjectes thereof, then read and consider the
grieuances of the commons exhibited against the Clergy Anno 21. H. 8. the
several statutes of Provision and Praemunire, the statutes of Mortmaine, with
the diverse kinds of prohibitions to the Courts and Consistories
Ecclesiastical. Among which you may find an especial prohibition with an
attachement thereupon devised against these injurious oaths and examinations,
as against abuses greatly offensive to the Crown and dignity Royal. Which
the better shall appear by the writtes them selves, which are in this form
set down in the Register, Prohibitio^.
Rex Vicecomiti salutem. Praecipimus tibi quod non permittas quod aliqui Laici
ad citationem talis Episcopi, aliquo loco conueniant de caetero ad aliquas
recognitiones faciendas, vel Sacramentum praestandum, nisi in casibus
Matrimonialibus and Testamentarijs, test, etc. And the Attachement is in this
manner: Rex Vic. salutem. Pone per vados, etc. talem Episcopum quod sit cora^
Justiciarijs nostris, etc. ostensurus, quare fecit summoniri, and per Censuras
Ecclesiasticas distringi laicos personas, vel. laicos homines and foeminas, ad
comparendum coram eo, ad praestandum juramentum pro voluntate sua ipsis
invitis, in grave praejudicium Coronae and dignit atis nostrae Regiae, necnon
contra consuetudinem Regni nostri, etc. By the consideration of which writtes,
and especially of these words, recognitiones and sacramentum pro voluntate
sua, and ipsis invitis, we may plainly perceive, how all these inquiries,
examinations, Hindes case and 18. R. Eliz. proves no less.
and sifting out of matters by oath and by way of inquisition in the Courts
Ecclesiastical, are by the Regal authority impugned, and that as prejudicial
to the Crown and dignity Royal, and the laws and customs of this Realm,
these words pro voluntate sua, expreslie deuoting unto us the usurped
officious power, and licentious pleasure, whereby contrary to all due course
of Justice they constrain an aoth. And these words (ipsis invitis)
manifestly painting out the rigorous, injurious, and compulsarie exacting of
the samo. Moreover, we see it declared by the statute of Marlebridge, cap. 23.
That no man may compel any freeholder of this Realm, to swear against his
will, without the Kings precept or commandment, that is, according to the
law and Justice of this Realm: for so are we taught to understand the same
by the book of Anno 2. R. 3. whereby it is evident, that unless these
Ordinaries could prove their forcing of oaths ex officio, to be warranted by
authority of the laws and justice of this land (as in truth they can not)
all their dealinges in such cases, are by the same laws utterly disallowed
and condemned.

But here (me thinks) some retchlesse or inconsiderate reader steppeth forth
and says, What is your meaning to circumscribe and include all authority of
ministringe oaths in the Courts Ecclesiastical within the straight limits
and bounds of causes Testamentarie and Matrimonial, how then shall all other
matters subject to their jurisdiction (being in number many, and in nature
diverse) receive due examination. For answer thereunto, this shortly may
suffice, That the state of the question which at this present we have in
hand, is not in what cases those Courts may give or impose an oath, but the
matter where of we now entreat is, concerning forced and constrained oaths ex
officio, and especially in that general manner before remembered. And as
touching the trial of causes by examination of witnesses judiciallie depending
between party and party in th'Ecclesiasticall Courts, it stands firm and
for found law, according to the said Prohi^^on, and the opinion of Master
Justice Fitzherbert, in his book of Justice of Peace, is, That those Judges
Ecclesiastical have no lawful power or authority to force or constrain by
censures of the Church or otherwise, any subject of this Realm, against his
will to testify upon his oathe, other then in the foresaid causes of Marriage
and Testamentes, although coming before them, as produced by the parties in
the suite, they may lawfully (as unto men voluntarily accepting the same)
minister an oath, otherwise it is plain extortion, and wrong unto the party.
And admit they would deny to depose, what prejudice were that to the Court
Christen, but rather a faylinge in proof in the party suing. And in this
state and sort stands the proof of causes by witnesses at the common law.
Nevertheless, since the statute made against wilful perjurie, the witness
served with process, and having his charges tendered, making default,
incurreth a pain pecuniarie. And why should the Clergy and Judges
Ecclesiastical think it much, to be ruled and restrained concerning their
jurisdiction by the Kings Prerogative, and the common laws of this Realm,
since what jurisdiction or authority soever they have or enjoye (matters of
the Divine law excepted) yea even in those especial causes of Testamentes,
Marriages, Diuorses, and Tithes, is no otherwise theirs, then by the goodness of
the Princes of this Realm, and by the laws and customs of the same, as the
statute of Anno 24. H. 8. cap, 12. well declares, and may be taken from them
and restored to the temporal Judges, especially the abuses of the Clergy
well descruing it at the will and pleasure of the Prince and people. But to
return again to our prohibition and attachment, it is evident thereby, that
all the sommons and citations which those Ecclesiastical Judges send forth
under these general terms, propter salute^ animarum, or, ex officio mero: And
all their arrestes, distresses, impeachmentes, excommunications, and
imprisonmentes thereupon ensuing, are altogether injurious, both to the Prince
and people. And of this opinion seems to be that learned Judge Master
Fitzherbert, who in his book De natura breuium, says upon these writtes in
this manner: By this appears, that these general citations which Bb. make to
cite men to appear before them pro salute animae, without expressing any cause
especial, are against the law. And true it is, for by the statute of Magna
Charta, Magna Charta.
(conteyninge many excellent laws of the liberties and free customs of this
Kingdom) It is ordained, that no free man be apprehended, imprisoned,
distrained or impeached, but by the law of the land: and by the statute made
Anno 5. Ed. 3. ca. 9. It is enacted, That no man shall be attached upon any
accusation contrary to the form of the great Charter, and the law of the
Realm. Moreover it is accorded by Parliament Anno 43. E. 3. ca. 9. for the
good government of the Communaltie, That no man be put to answer, without
presentment before Justices, or matter of record, or by due process, or by
writ original, after the ancient law of this Land. And how then shall
that kind of proceedinge ex officio by forced oaths, and the urging of this
general oath, and straight imprisoning of such as refuse to swear, be
justifiable. If these things were not, yet a man would have thought that at the
least the sharp and severe statutes of Provision and Praemunire, so offensive
to popish Polidore and such like, Praemunire.
should have stayed and stopped the violent course of those injurious
inquisitions, examinations, and wrested oaths ex officio. For, no doubt, the
Ordinaries and Cleargiemen practizing the same, are all offenders, and do
incur the forfaitures of those penal laws. For proof whereof, let us consider
the words of the statute of Praemunire, made Ann^ 16. Ri. 2. ca. 5. and the
judgments and expositions thereupon had, that statute reciting first the
grievous complaint of the whole Realm against the Pope of Rome, who impeached
many Patrons in the presentations to their Ecclesiastical benefices,
excommunicated the Bb. of this realm, for executing the kings writts de
Clerice admittendo, sought to translate some of them against their and the
Kings will, and diverse other inconveniences, in derogation of the Kings Crown
and Regalitie, provides remedy for those and such like mischiefs, in this
manner: That if any purchase, or pursue, or do to be purchased or pursued in
the Court of Rome, or elsewhere, any such translations, process and sentences
of excommunications, bulls, instruments, or any other things which touch
the King, against him, his Crown, and his Regalitie, or his Realm, or them
receive, or make thereof notification, or any other execution within the same
Realm or without, that they, their Notaries, Procurators, Mainteiners,
Abbetters, Fautors, and Counselors, shall be put out of the Kings protection,
and their lands and tenementes, goods and chattelles forfait to the King, etc.
Since the making of which statute, it has been held and adjudged for clear
law in the Kings Courts, That if any subject of the kings sue or impleade
an other in any Ecclesiastical Court of this Realm, for any cause or matter
appertayninge to the examination and judgment of the Courts of the common
law, or any judge Ecclesiastical presume to hold plea thereof, or deal in
any causes not belonginge to his jurisdiction, that they incur the danger
and penalty of praemunire, as by the book of 5. Ed. 4. fol. 6. and by
the opinion of the Court Anno 11. H. 7. remembered by Master Fitzherbert,
plainly does appear. According also thereunto is the case of Master
Barloo, late Bishop of Bathe, reported by Master Justice Brook, Which Bish.
in the time of King Edward the 6. depriving the Deane of Wells, whose
Deanrie was a donatiue, passing therein beyond the limits of his
jurisdiction, fell into the danger of praemunire. And being called into
question, and having no just defense, was feign to appeal to the Kings
mercy, and obtained a pardon. And that book of 5. E. 4. before remembered,
sets down the reason, noting these words of this statute (in curia Romana
vel alibi) In which words (alibi) says that book, is intended the Courts
of Bb. So that if a man be excommunicate in any of their Courts for a thing
which apperteyneth to the Royal May. that is to say (says that book) in a
matter of the common law, the party excommunicate shall have a praemunire
facias, and so was it adjudged. In which words among other, is specially to
be noted, that when so ever a wrong or injury is offered to the common law of
this land, there the King is said to be touched, and his Royal Majesty
impeached. For according to the Princely speech of that most Noble King Ed.
3. in the statute of Provision made in the 38. year of his reign, the Kings
Regalitie chiefly consists in this, To sustain his people in peace and
tranquillity, and to govern them according to the laws, vsages, and
franchises of this Land, whereunto he is bound by his sacred oath made at his
Coronation. If then by usurping cognizance of plea, in causes concerning the
common law, and the jurisdiction of the Kings Courts, the Ecclesiastical
Judges touch the King in Capite, do against him, his Crown, Regalitie and
Realm, and so co^sequentlie incur the forfeiture and penalties of Praemunire:
How much more do they touch the King, nay rather lay violent hands on him,
and impugn his Royal Throne and Scepter, who contrary to the Policy,
Justice, Laws, Customs, and Freedoms of this Kingdom, yea the law of God
it self, enforce and constrain by censure of excommunication and otherwise,
the Kings people to appear before them, and extort from them an oath to accuse
them selves. And for more plain demonstration (if plainer may be) put the case
that a Judge, Justice, or Commissioner, authorized by the King to execute
justice according to the laws of this Realm, should take upon him by color
of his office and authority to convent the Kings people before him, and upon
their apparaunce to offer unto them this general oath to answer unto all such
questions as him self should propounde, playing in causes criminal the part
both of accusor and Judge, or seekinge by oath and captious Interrogatories,
matter of accusation, whereupon to proceed to condemnation, and to commit the
party refusing such oath, to straight prison without bayse or mainprise, could
any man justify this his doing to stand with law or justice? Nay rather,
might not every man justly cry out against him, as against a subuerter of
law and judgment, and a hateful enemy to our policy and common wealth,
yea should not that be verified of him, which is recorded in the judgment
against Sir William Thorp, sometime chief Justice of England, for his corrupt
dealing, which is, that as much as in him lay, he had broken the oath which
the King is bound to keep toward his people. If all this may truly be
affirmed of such a one, how then shall the Ecclesiastical Judges, practizing
in their Courts and Tribunal Seats, the selfsame unjust and unlawful manner
of proceeding against the Kings people, escape the severe sentence of law,
pronouncing them offensive touchers, and violaters of the King, and injurious
dealers against his Regalitie, Crown and Kingdom, and so consequently worthy
to suffer the pains and penalties declared in this statute of Praemunire. That
this is no new opinion or construction, we find the resolution of that
learned man Saint German, in his book of Doctor and Student well agreeing,
where he writes in this manner: Jf any man be excommunicate in the spiritual
Court for debt, trespass, or such other thing, as belongs to the Kings Crown
and to his Royal dignity, there he ought to be assoyled without making any
satisfaction, for they not only offended the party, in calling him to
answer before them of such things as belong to the law of the Realm, but
also the King, who by reason of such suites, loses a great advantage, which
he might have of the writs, originalles, judicialls, fines, amerciamentes, and
such other thangs, if the suites had been in his Courts according to his
laws. He shows further, That if the Ecclesiastical Judges will not make
the party his letters of absolutio^ where he ought, the party shall have his
action against him. He affirms also, The Law to be according where a man
is accursed (he means excommunicate) for a thing that the Judge had no power
to accurse him in, notwithstanding that he may have his suite of praemunire
facias. Again we read how the late Cardinal Woolsey, the Popes Legate here
in England, erected a new Court or Consistory called The Court of the
Legate, in which he took upon him to prove Testamentes, and to hear and
determine causes in prejudice of the jurisdiction Ecclesiastical of this
Realm. And how by his usurped power Legatiue, he gave and bestowed benefices
by prevention, to the disinheritance of the Kings subjectes, and vifiting the
state Ecclesiastical, under coulor of reformation, gained to him self
exceeding great treasure. But this lofty height of unlawful authority, weak
and feeble in foundation, could not long continue, For in the one and twentieth
year of the reign of King Henry the eight, this proud priest with all his
glorious pomp and glittering show of all his Crosses, Silver Pillars, guylt
Axes, imbrodered Cloakbagges, and purple Hattes, was attainted by his own
confession, in a Praemunire, and the next year following, all the Lords
spiritual, having deserved the same pains and punishments for their unjust
maintenance and supportation, were called to answer in the Kings Benche,
and knowing them selves guilty, before their day of appearaunce, exhibited to
the King their humble submission, joyninge thereunto an offer of a 100000.
pound, to purchase their peace, which after much suite, the King accepted,
and by Parliament gave them a pardon. If then this Romish Legate, for assuming
to him self jurisdiction by authority Papal, in prejudice not of the Kings
Courts, but of the Courts Ecclesiastical (nevertheless to the hurt of the
Royal Majesty) and for disturbaunce of the rightes and inheritance of the
Kings subjectes, fell into the danger and penalty of Praemunire, and all the
Bishops and Ordinaries of this Realm likewise, through their maintayning
only and supporting the same, may we not safely conclude that the Bishops
and Ordinaries in these days usurping power and jurisdiction in like sort and
manner (although not in the same particulars) by coulor of Antichristian
decrees, or practizing those popish Cannons, the very head of that hellishe
Cerberus of Rome (as a learned man well termed them) and the sinews of his
tyrannical authority, repugnant to the Royal Majesty and Policy of this
Realm, that is to say, forcing vnjustlie the people of this land, to such
unlawful oaths and examinations as are before remembered (injuriouslie
touching thereby the Prince in her Regalitie, and her people in their lawful
liberty whereunto they are inheritable, matters of more weight and moment,
then the hinderaunce of the Bish. jurisdiction or loss of a presentment to a
benefice) do incur the penalties and forfaitures limited by the foresaid
statute of Praemunire.

If any man nevertheless urge and contend, that these things are justifiable
by force of the Popes testament (the Cannon and Pontifical law I mean) of
long time practiced, Cannon law.
and continually used within this Realm, giving a new probate and allowance
thereto, after so public and just condemnation, and fyring of them by that
famous Clearke and Doctor of the Church Martin Luther, Sleidan.
and by the great number of godly and learned men his associates, as laws and
ordinances contumelious against God, injurious to Magistrates, and especially
established to maintain Antichristian tyranny, let him know, that this
Kingdom is not bound or subject to any forreyne made laws or constitutions,
not suffered by the King, and voluntarily accepted, and of long time used by
his people, as it is well declared by the said statute of Anno 25. H. 8. whose
words are these: For where this your graces Realm recognizinge no superior
under God but only your Grace, has been and is free from subjection to any
man's laws, but only to such as have been devised, made and ordained within
this Realm, for the wealth of the same, or to such other as by sufferaunce of
your Grace, and your Progenitors, the people of this your Realm have taken at
their free liberty, by their own consent, to be used among them, and have
bound them selves by long use and custom, to the obseruaunce of the same, not
as to the obseruaunce of the laws of any foreign Prince, Potentate, or
Prelate, but as to the accustomed and ancient laws of this Realm,
originallie established as laws of the same, by the said sufferaunce,
consentes, and custom, and not otherwise, etc. So to prove any foreign made
law allowable within this Realm, there must concur Tolleration by the
King, voluntary acceptaunce of his people, and a long and a large time of
usage. None of which can be auerred in these manner of oaths and examinations.
For first it may not be said that the King suffers that whithe he expreslie
forbids by his writtes and process, as offensive to his Crown and
Regalitie. Neither can his people be said to have given voluntary consent
thereto, having always repyned and often complained and cried out against it,
as a thing intolerable and injurious to their lawful liberty, the custom
pretended, being ever impugned (and that justly) can create no lawefull
prescription, nor stand for an ancient law of this Realm, but being against
both law and reason, it is nothing else but an inveterate error or disorder.

If defense be sought by any Canon or Constitution, Canon.
(these oaths being so apparauntlie against this our state, common wealth and
government) I see not how any Ordinary, but to his reproache, may once open
his mouth therein, Provincial. Cap. 9.
considering that in the Parliament holden Anno 25. H. 8. The whole Clergy of
England not only for them then living, but for their successors also,
submitting them selves to the Kings Majesty, promised (in verbo Sacerdotij) if
that be ought worth, That they would never from thence forth presume to
attempt, allege, claim, or put in ure, or enact, promulge, or execute any
new Canons, Constitutions, Ordinances provincial or other, or by what soever
name they should be called in their convocation without the Kings most Royal
assent or license.

And considering also that in the same Parliament by their full consent, it is
enacted and provided, That no Canons, Constitutions, or Ordinances, should be
made or put in execution within this Realm, by the authority of the
convocation of the Clergy, which should be contratiant or repugnaunt to the
Kings Prerogative Royal or the customs, laws, or statutes of this Realm,
nor to the damage or hurt of the Kings Prerogative Royal, should still be
used and executed until, etc.

But notwithstanding all those provident and politic laws and statutes thus
for the good of the common wealth wisely established in the great Assembly of
the Realm, and notwithstanding also those solemn promises and protestations
made as aforesaid, and although in the 12. year of the reign of King Henry
the third, there was a most severe sentence of curse and anathematization
denounced in the presence of the King, and the Nobles of this Kingdom by
Boniface, then Archbishop of Canterbury, and many other Bishops, apparelled
in their Pontificalibus, against all such as thereafter should willingly, and
maliciously, by any craft or engine, violate, infringe, diminishe, or change
secretly or publicly, by deed, word, or counsel, any of the free
customs of this Kingdom, and especially those contained in the said great
Charter, yet the unbridled Clergy men in the Papisticall time, nothing
regarding the good estate of this our policy, neither yet terrified by their
own cursing censures, and execrations, nor by the severe laws of Praemunire,
most impudentlie (to satisfy their own licentious and lordly lusts) have
from time to time ascited and sommoned by their lawless process, and arrested
and attached by their malapart apparitours, messengers, and purseuauntes, the
free people of this Realm, by violence drawing them not only into their
public Courts and Consistories, but privately also into secret corners and
privy chambers, forcinge them there with roughe and rigorous terms of
disgrace and reproache, upon every bare surmise, and uncertain rumor, to take
a corporal oath to be examined upon articles captious and deceitful,
seekinge thereby most uncharitably for matters of accusation. Against whom if
any man durst (standing upon terms of his lawful liberty) but a little
repine and refuse to swear, streightway he must be committed to prison,
without bail or mainprise, there to abide pain fort et dure, depriuinge men
of that which is more precious then life it self, and as it is said in the
civil law, a Jewel inestimable, liberty I mean, more to be favored, then
any thing, as the same law speaks, tyrannizing in such cruel manner over
the poor and miserable people, in their vile and filthy Cole-houses,
murdering Towers and Turrettes, and in their dark and deadly Dungeons, as no
tongue or pen is sufficient to express. And whereas the prisons of this
Realm were ordained either for the punishment of such as are by due course of
law condemned, or for restraint of persons suspected, not bayleable for a time
convenient of examination and judicial proceeding. Those merciless
Magistrates void of all pity and compassion, after their sudden and raginge
commitments for the most part proceeded not to full examination and sentence,
but after long and miserable imprisonment, in so much as it was thought a great
favor, if after one years grievous and straight imprisonment, the poor
distressed party were called foroth to answer. At the time of which sitting
in their tribunal Seat (how gloriously soever they paint out their
sentences, to have God and Justice in their sight) these men, or rather
monsters, coveting more the destruction of mankind, then any amendment or
reformation of manners, fed with delight their fierce and cruel minds, with
the pitiefull sight of pyned, sickly, and wretched creatures, they them selves
in the mean time being fatt and well fed. And although the heathen
Emperors, Claudius Caligula, etc. who took delight to be present at the
bloody tortures and executions of their subjectes, and to hear their pitiful
groans and grievous sighs (commanding th'executioners so to strike, as the
condemned might feel himself to die) may worthily be termed fierce, cruel
and barbarous, according to that saying: Qui fruitur poena serus est, yet the
extreme cruelty of those men which termed them selves Catholics, and would
be accounted true Christians, was more horrible and detestable a great deal.
In so much as they by lingering torments of long and painful imprisonment,
exceeded the leisure used by the other in the time of execution, taking from
Death his due title of King of terrors, and making him a welcome friend, that
ends so many miseries. Add hereunto that the tyranny of those heathen men,
as fully satisfied, ceased with the life of the tormented, but the cruelty
and fury of those Catholics, as never wearied, condemned and put to fire the
dead bodies of those whom they before most treacherously had sline and
murdered. But as these good Pastors, or rather devouring Wolves, were in this
inexcusable manner most cruel against Christ's dear servants, so again in
some other things they were as vain and ridiculous. For in this matter of an
oath, they have devised (according to their toying fantasy) a certain
foolish figurative ceremony in the ministringe thereof. For the deponent
forsooth, must lay his three middle fingers stretched out right upon the
book, in signification of the holy trinity and Catholic faith, and his
thuinbe and little finger he must put downe-wardes under the book, in token
of damnation, both of body and soul, if hoe say not the truth: the thumb
belike, as the greater, representing the heavy mass of the body, and the
little finger, the light and incorporeall substance of the soul.

How superstitious also they were concerning this ceremony of the book
(little regardinge the true use and end of an oath) as appears by the
Allegorical exposition curiously set forth by one of their parsonate and
counterfeite Prelates, who says, That the circumstances in the act of an
Oath, are very great and weighty, inasmuch as he that swears by a book,
does three things. First, as though he should say, Let that which is written
in the book, never do me good, neither the new nor the old Law if I lie in
this mine oathe. Secondly, he puts his hand upon the book, as though
he should say: Nor the good work which I have done profit me ought before
the face of Christ, except I say the truth, which is founded in Christ.
Thirdly, he kisseth the book, as though he should say, Let never the prayers
and petitions which by my mouth I have uttered, avail me any thing to my
souls health, if I say not truly in this mine oath. Yet you must take this
I suppose, as meant only by this reverend father, where lay men, or the baser
sort of the Clergy, take an oath. For that blessed Bonner, not long since
has taught, as this trick of their law, as he termed it, that a Bishop may
swear (such is his privilege) inspectis Euangelijs and non tactis, bare sight
of the book without touch or kiss, will well enough serve his Lordshippes
turn. Again, the imposing of oaths upon the rotten bones, rags and
relics of their canonized and counterfeit saints, and upon the Image of the
Crucifige, is both foolish and idolatrous.

But to conclude, leaving these unjust and lawless men with their bad
practices and fond inventions, I doubt not, by these few, yet effectual
proofs and authorities, it does manifestly appear unto all men of upright
and sound judgment, That as well the imposinge as the taking of these general
oaths, is a profane abusinge of the holy Name of God. That the exacting of
Oaths ex officio, is a great indignity to the Crown and Scepter of this
Kingdom, and a wrong and injury to the freedom and liberty of the subjectes
thereof. That the same is not necessary or profitable to the Church and common
Wealth, but hurtful to them both, brought in only by the practice of the
Popish clergy, to the prejudice of the public peace and tranquillity of
this Realm, and that the same never had any good allowaunce by any law,
custom, ordinance or stature of this Kingdom, neither yet put in ure or use
by any civil Magistrate of this Land, but as it corruptly crept in among
many other abuses, by the sinister practice and pretenses of the Romish
Prelates and Celargie-men, so this their unlawful dealing has been from time
to time by lawful and just Authority impugned and restreined.

FINIS.

