THE DEFENSE of Death.

Containing a most excellent discourse of life and death, written in French
by Philip de Mornaye Gentleman.

And done into English by E. A.



Imprinted at London by John Allde for Edward Aggas dwelling in Paul's
Churchyard at the sign of the red Dragon. 1576.

To the right honorable, his singular good Lady, the most godly and virtuous
Lady, Margaret Countess of Darby, grace and peace in our Lord Jesus Christ.
Notwithstanding that the natural dispo sition (right Honourrable) of all
human creatures, ought most sufficiently to instruct us in the know ledge
of our own frailty, and so consequently enforce us unto a continual and
earnest desire of death, which assuredly is no other then a translation and
passage of our souls out of this transitory habitation, into an everlasting
and parmane^t house, exempt from manifold miseryes and inconveniences,
whereunto this our painful Pilgrimage is still subject, yet for as much as the
weakness and imperfection of our carnal understanding is such, as that it
cannot comprehend or perceive the infinite and inestimable benefits, which at
all times through death we do obtain, but rather does enforce us to fear
the same as some sharp tempest or grievous passage. I thought it not amiss to
translate out of France into this our native soil of England, this brief but
most excellent discourse, first written in French by a godly and learned
Christian, for the great comfort of all Christ's members: and now do on into
English for the benefit of such as therein will seek to reap any commodity,
the rehearsal of the contents vvherof by reason of the brevity of the same,
seems both needles and superfluous. Nevertheless seeking the protection of
some honorable personage, whose countenance and authority might sbeelde and
defend as well the rudeness of the translation, as also the raggidnes of the
style thereof, from the bitter tants and biting scofs of cru^l reprehension, and
thervvithall calling to mind not o^ ly your most honorable and virtuous
disposition and authority, but also the manifold benefits vvhich^ most
bountifully you have at all times upon me unworthy bestovved. I accounted it
my bounden duty, as only an acknovvledgi^g of the receipt of the same: to
present unto your honors favorable tuition, these fruits of my small labors,
with most humble request to accept of them as the excellency of the ar gument
deserves. Thus assuredly hoping in your most honorable vvunted clemency, and
trusting that here in you will vouchsafe to pardon this my so bold and rash
attempt, I shall alvvaies (according to my bounden duty) pray to the almighty,
long to maintain your Ho nors wealth and felicity, to your co^ fort and his
glory.

Your Honors most bounden and humble servant. E. A.

To the Reader.
AS CONCERNING the Argument of this discourse, it tends especially to the
overthrow of the continual presumption that we have to obtain in this life
the thing which since the transgression of our forefathers never was, neither
ever shall be, as is evident in the displaying of man, even from his beginning to
his ending.

Also as touching this word Fortune. (which in diverse parts of his
treatise is incident) I am to desire that it may be taken as an usual or ra
there importunate phrase of our language, the which in place of utter
abolishing the same does but overmuch use it, because that things commonly
chauncing contrary unto natural reason, or the common sense of man's wit,
have in imitating the language of the Heathen, by our ancestors, been
commonly attributed unto Lady Fortune.

Finally, in that I have brought in, in the end the heathen Philosopher Se
(...) uttering of his mind, I am likewise to require that it be not taken as
an argument of want of other sufficient and aucte^ticall testimony of the
most ancient Christian fathers touching this matter: but rather I would have
you to know, that I accounted him being a stranger, more fit with his
exclamations, earnestly to vvaken us out of our drousie nests, for that his
knowledge proceeded only of learned and natural judgment, conioy ned with
some experience which he had of the vain frailty of man's nature, and so to
seem to guide us into a better Haven, then him self could ever enter into, or
by his own example testify unto others.

Fare ye well.
A brief and most excellent Discourse upon life and death.
IT is a strange matter whereat I cannot sufficientlye mer^le, to behold how
the labourer to the end to cease from his labours' does even in manner hasten
the course of the Sun. The Mariner for the attaining unto the desired Haue^,
saileth forward amain, and from as far as he can espy the cost, to shoute
out for (...). And the Pilgrim or trauayler, to take no rest before his journey
be ended. And yet that man in the mean time being bound to perpetual
labor, tossed with continual tempests, and tyered with many rough and miery
pa^es: is nevertheless unwilling to look upon or come near to the end of
^is journey: sorrowful to see the Haven of his assured rest: and with horror and
fear to draw toward his lodging and peaceable dwelling place.

Our life resembles a right Penelopes web, which still must be wouen and wouen
again: a Sea habandoned to all winds, which sometime inward ly sometime
outwardly tormenteth it: and a troublesome path, through frost and extreme
heat: over steepie m^untaines and hollow valleys, among deserts and theeuish
places.

This is the communication that we do use, being at our woork, pulling at our
Ore, and passing through this miserable path and rough way. And yet when death
comes to finish our labors, when she stretches forth her arm to help us
into the Haven, and when after so many passages and troublesome hostryes, she
seeks to bring us into our true habitation: into a place of comfort and joy,
where we should take heart at the view of our land, and drawing toward our
happy dwelling place, should sing and rejoice: we would if we might have our
own wills, begin our woork again: return our Sails into the wind, and
voluntarily retire back into our journey. Then do we no longer remember our
pains, our shipwracks and p^ils are forgotten, we do reject all fear, either
of travail or thieves, and do account death as an extreme pain, fear it as a
Rouers ship bofe, and shun it as a theeuish place. We play as young children,
who having all day complained of sickness, do become whole at the sight of
the medicine: we resemble men vexed with the tooth ache, who all the week do
run about for help, and yet seeing the Barbor coming to pull out their
teeth, do feel no more pain: and are not unlike unto those dainty and
delicate persons, who at ye pricking of the Pleurisy cry out, and cannot
patiently abide the coming of the Surgeon, and (...) when they see him
whetting of his lau^ce to cut the throat of the disease, do pull their arm
back and creep into their bedes again, as if he minded to slay their own
persons. We stand in more fear of the Medicine, then of the disease: of the
Barbor, then of the pain: and of the pricking, then of the Impostume.

We stand in more awe of the bitter nesse of the medicine which is soon over
passed, then of a long and languishing pain: and do more tremble at the end of
our miseryes, then at the infinite number ber of those which in this life we do
sustain. But whereof (I pray you) proceeds this folly and simplicity, saving
only that we know not what it is, either of life or death. For we do fear
the thing that we should hope for, and do desire the thing whereof we should
be afeard. We term that thing life that is a continual death, and that death
which is the issue out of a living death, and an entry into everlasting life.

What goodness is there I pray you in this life, why we should so earnestly
seek the same? or what evil is there in death that we should so diligently
eschew the apprehention thereof? nay what evil is there not in this life, or
what goodness does not death comprehend?

Let us therefore examine all the points of this life. Our entrye is in
tears, our procee^ing in sweat and labor, and our ending in bitter sorrow.
High and low, rich and poor, none in the universal world can say him self
exempt from this condition. Man is wurse then (...) in these points. At his
birth he is not able to m^ue him self: in his first years he has no
pleasure, and brings nothing with him but sorrow and travail, and before the
years of discretion incurreth infinite dangers, and yet then in one respect is
more happy then afterward, which is that he (...) neither ^are nor consider
the same: neither is there any so ^aintharted, but that if he might still
continue a Child, he would never mistike of such a life: so that it is
manifest that it is not a commodity simply to live, but to live blessedly and
happyly. Let us proceed. Grows he? his labors do grow with him: scarce is
he escaped ye hands of his Nurces, or knows what play is: but by and by he is
committed to the hands of some scholemaster (I speak of those that be best and
most curiously brought up) then if he play, he is still in fear: if he study,
it is against his will. All this age, because he is in ye custodye of an other,
is to him a prison: he minds or aspyreth to nothing, but how to be set free
from ye subjection of other men, and so become master and guider of him
self^yea to his power he beueth forward his age eue^ with his shoulders, whereby
ye sooner to attain to his wished liberty. To be breef, he seeks only the end
of his noneage and entry into his youth. But I pray you what other is this
entry into youth, saving the death of his infa^cy: and afterward his coming
to man's age, the death of his youth: and the beginning of to morrow, then the
death of this day? so that in this wise he desires death, accounting life
miserable, and therefore cannot be esteemed happy or contented. Well, having his
liberty he has gotten his desire, he has attained to the age wherein
Hercules by Gods permissio^ had his choice of ye pa^ to virtue or vice, by the
conduct either of reason or of passion: he must enter into one of these
contrary ways. His passion presents to him a thousand pleasures, it lays
for him a thousand (...), and sets before him a thousand delights where by
to entrap him, yea he is almost decei ued. But I pray you what kind of plea
sures does he receive thereof? forsooth vicious pleasures, which keep him in
continual pain and unquietness, pleasures sub (...) to repentance, which like
unto gnawinges do boil a great while after: pleasures boughtwith pain and
danger, practiced an^ passed in a moment, and followed with a long and tedious
remorse of conscience. Such (if a man will examine them (is in few words, the
nature of woorldly pleasures. There is none so sweet, but that the bitterness of
the same does surmou^t it: none of so pleasant taste, but that it leaves a
more sower smack and grievous disdain behind it. Yea and which wurse is, none^
so moderate, but that it has his corosiue and punishment in it self.

I need not here rehearse such displeasures as no man can deny, as strife,
debate, wounds, murder, flight, diseases, and other hasards, which sometime his
own incontinencie, and sometimes the insolency of this unruly age brings him
into. So that the pleasures there of being but displeasures, or his sorrow
drunck as a mixtion with wormwood water, it plainly appears what greef and
bitterness he feels or tastes of. This to be breef, is the life of a young
man, who being gotten out of the lawful wardeshippe of either his Parents or
masters, yields and abandoneth him self unto all license, or rather indeed
bondage of his passion, which neither more nor less, but as an unclean
spirit that possesses him does still vex and (...) him, sometime into the
fire, other whiles into the water, an other time lifts him unto the top of a
Rock, and afterward throws him into the bottom of a valley.

Again if he accepts reason for his guide, then falls he into manifold
dangers. Then must he be ready to fight at the end of every feelde and at every
tract or step stand ready at defense, as one having his enemy round (...) him
and still vexing of him.

But what enemy? Even his own de sires, and what so ever he lyketh of far or
near. To be breef, the greatest enemy in the world, the very world it self,
yea, which is worse, a thousand false and dangerouse intellige^ces with in his
own person, besides other despe rate passions proceeding of his own flesh,
which in that age is in full force and power, watching the time, hour and
opportunity to entrap him, and to cast him hedlong into all kind of vice.

God only and no other enforces him to take this way, who guides his steps
even to the end, granting him victory in all his combats, and yet we (...)
how ^ew do enter into that path, and of those, how many afterward do retire
again?

Well, let him follow either the one way or the other, he must fully resolve
him self, either to yield to a tyrannous passion, or else to undertake a
perpetual and grievous warfare: yea, either to cast him self down he^long,
or else to bind and in manner commit his person to the stocks and torments:
either delicately to swim down the stream, or else forcibly with labor and
trauail to strive against the same.

Thus in few words on the one side, you see how the youngman who in his youth
has quaffed of by full cups the false and vain pleasures of this world,
(resembling drunckards the next day after their feasts and royotous banquets)
is either quite astonished, either so far out of taste and temper that he will
no more, or else is finally so quayled that he can no more, and then does never
afterward thin^k or speak of the same with out his great greef and sorrow.

On the otherside, you may also perceive how faint, weary, and as it were even
broken with this continual ^il he is, which valiantly has embraced reason,
and overcome his passions, in so much that he is either ready to yield, or else
content by death to acquit him self from farther peril. This is the commodity
and contentation of this flourishing age which Children do so ernestly aspire
unto, and old men repine at.

Next follows the age of perfect man, wherein each one hops of wisdom,
and taking his own ease. Perfect in deed it may be called, but in this only
respect, that all the imperfections of humain nature, which before, either
under ye simplicity of Childehood, or else under the lightness of youth lay
hidden, are therein revealed and do come to perfection. Wherefore we will
ouerpasse all such as worldly judgment accounts wise, happy or blessed, and
come to the rest.

Hitherto as you see, we have always played in fear, and inioyed short
pleasures, accompanied with long repentance.

But now comes to sight Covetousness and Ambition, which do promise unto us a
full contentation of goods, and a world of honors in case we will worship
them: whervppon, few (except the assured chosen Children of the almighty) can
escape, but either for love of the one, or else for hope of the other (as
being snared in their beautiful illusions) do throw them selves hedlong
from the pinnacle. What therefore is the end of all this contentation?

The couetouse man makes a thousand voiages by sea and by land, incur reth
infinite dangers of pirates and thieves, escapes wunderful perils and
Shipwracks, and lives in continual fear and danger, yea and often loses all
his time and labor, reaping naught else but diseases, goutes, with such other
like discommodities for the time to come. For the obtaining of his premeditated
ease, he now has forgone his quietness, and in seeking for money: has lost
his life. But admit be has obtained great wealth, that he has robbed the East
countries of their pearls, and dried up all the western mines, shall ^e the^
be at quiet, or will be think him felf satisfied? Admit also all his fraughts
and voyages be ended, and that through his passed travails with labor and
toil both of body and mind, he has sufficiently heaped and horded up for time
to come, is he not fallen out of one inconvenience into an other? This then is
no end but a change of his misery.

Aforetime he sought the obtaining of goods, now he seareth the loss of the
same: he got them through painful heat and trauail, he now possesses them in
quaking cold and trembling: he has incurred danger of rouers and thieves in
seeking for them: now thieves and murderres do on alsides assail him. He took
pains to dig and hale them out of the Earth: he now labors to hide them up
again. To be breef, after all his voiages and iorneyes he is entered into a
prison, and as a conclusion of all his bodily labors he has begun an
infinite trouble of mind. What therefore finally has this poor wretch obtained,
as a recompense of so many miseryes? Through the manifold illusions and
enchantments of this de uilish spirit of covetousness, be persw adeth him self
to have gotten some exquisite and rare Jewel, but is indeed handeled as one of
those poor wretches whom the Devil seduceth under color of aiding their
necessities, and yet having obtained bis purpose, leaves their hands yea and
Coffers full of leaves and Ashes, in stead of Erownes and such like. He
possesses or ra^er is possessed of a thing without force or vertne, able to
cure no disease: more vile and unprofitable then the least herb of the feeld.
With all his labor and pain, he has heaped up this vile mire and dirte,
where with all he is become so beastly as with that thing to Crown his head,
which naturally he should trede vuder his f^t. Well be it as be may, is he there
withal content? Nay contrariwise has he not less contentation then before?
Man cominonly commends those meats and drinks which do best nurish,
sustain, and keen nature in temper, but the quality of these is such, as the
more we eat or drink thereof: the sorer increases our hunger and thirst. It
is an assured dropsy and a false hunger (as we term it) a man shall sooner
burst then be satisfied. Yea which is more, such sway bears this thirst in
many that forcing the^ to dig the wels and with great pain to draw up the w^
^er: and does not afterward perinit them to drink of yt same. In the full r^er
they suffer thirst, and among the heaps of corn do perish through famine.
They ^aue goods but dare not use them, and do (in my opinion) enjoy things
wherein they cannot reiuyce. They have them, but neither for them selves neither
for any other, yea of all that they have, they have nothing, and yet do want
what so ever they have not. Wherefore we are to return to this point, that the
obtaining of all these false goods is no other, then travail of the body, the
possession whereof, is most commonly trouble of mind, and that so much the
greater, as the spirit is more sensible, subtle, and delicate then the body.
The first feeling therefore of the covetous man's misery begins when he
loses his goods, when shipwreck, spoil, enemies, and such like calamities
(whereunto al tra^sitory goods are subject) does ravish and carry them away:
then he weepeth, cries out and torme^teth him self like a little child y^ has
lost his babble and al to no purpose. It is un possible to persuade him, y^ all
worldly goods are transitory: he thi^keth him sel^ ^ot only spoiled but eue^
slain outright, and having fixed his whole trust in these vanities, the same
being lost he falls into despair, from the which be may hardly be revoked:
yea and so much as he wants of his gain, whereof he made a full account, he
thincketh him self to have lost: and all that yields him not great and
extraordinary commodity, seems in his eye to turn to his hinderance, whereby
we sometime see him fall into such despair, that to his power he hasteneth
the course of his own life.

To be brief, the recompense that Covetousness yields to his continual
scholars, resembles the rewards of the Devil his progenitor, namely that
having awhile gratified them with their profane desires, he finally either
delivers them over to the hangman, or else him self breaks their necks. I
mind not here to rehearce, such offenses and mischeefs as the covetous men do
abandon them selves unto for the obtaining of their goods whereof their
consciences do feel such a perpetual remorse as that they can never be quiet,
for it is sufficient that we understand that in this so violent an exercise
wherein most mortal men do stay and abuse them selves, the body is slain, the
mind vexed, and the soul condemned without any pleasure or contentation at
all.

Now then let us come to ambition which with desire of honor does fondly
bewitch the mightyest in the world: shall we there in find any more ease the^
in the other, or not rather less? The other deceives us in yielding in liew
or all rewards, only the vile dirt of the earth, this feeds us with nothing
but smoke and wind. The presents of this are vain, and the gifts of the other
course. In either of them we slide into a bottomless pit: how beit this of the
twain is the most dangerouse, notwith standing the water seems more pleasant
and clear. Among those that have embraced ambition, some do obtain great
estematio^ among Kings and Princes, other beco^e governors over armies, and so
others in their degree: their inferiors do salute, reverence, and worship
them: they are apparelled in purple, scarlet, and cloth of gold: in beholding
of them it seems there is no contentation in the world but theirs. But few
men know the weight of an ounce of thi^ their glory and honor, how much these
reuerences do cost them, or what is the price of all this rich array in their
Purses: for understanding the truth they would be loath to buy any so dear.

Some through long and tedious service have attained to this degree, some by
hazaroing their lives at all assaies, yea (...) at the cost of an arm or a
leg, and that at the appetite of a Prince, who perhaps accounts more of a
hundred Rods of land within his neighbors dominions, then of the life of an
hundred thousand such as they are, being heerin unhappy in that they serve
him who cares not for them and fools in that they thinck the^ selves in
reputation with him, which esteems so little of the loss of them for a
tri^e and thing of nothing. Others have gotten favor by flatterye, having of
long time inured their tungs to vndiscrese speeches and their hands to unlaw
full dealings, saying and doing what so ever their prince wills them,
whereunto a good heart could hardly be wun.

They have paraduenture patiently borne infinite injuries, spytings and
reuilinges; yea how familier so ever they seem with their prime, they do not
with standing resemble him who (...) the taming of a wild Lion, and through
long patience. with infinite baits and many scratchings and bitings have brought
him to some order, dare ueuertheles scarce deliver him any food with their
hand, still fering lest he should catch hold of ye same, and yet be he never so
ware is once a year intrapped and sufficiently rewarded for a long time. For
such for the most part is the end of all the princes darlings, who when he
has by long bre things exalted any so hie as y^ he should account him self at
his ^orneys end, the^ sudainly does he delight to cast ye same party down
hedlo^g again as low as he was at the first: yea and him who^ he has mightelye
enriched, he does afterward wri^g as a spu^ge. They also do love no^e but the^
selves, supposing each one to be created only for their service and pleasure,
These blind cortiers do persuade the^ selves to have many friends, and tobe
had in great estimation among many, not considering ye every man honoreth them
we like hearts, as they honor others. The mighty men do disdain the^, saluting
them only in scorn, the inferior sort do reverence them for ye they stand in
^eed of the^, and therein do worship their ^catio^, seat and apparel, not their
persons. And as for those which be equal among who^e amity ought to take
some place, they boil with envy, one slaundereth an other, each one trippeth
another, and do continually pine away either with their own disco^modities,
or at others advancement: for envy being in ^a ner an ache of the mind, is
the greatest greef that can be: and thus do you see those men quite deuoide
of amity, which among all wise men is ever accounted a most excellent and
souerain commodity. Yea you shall more plainly yet understand, that when
Fortune turns her back to them, all men do flee their companyes, and when
she snarreth at them, every man looks awry upon the^: so that being once
spoiled of their triumphant robes, no man will know them. Also contrariwise,
some Kuffian or infamous person shall be clothed in their apparel, who without
difference in virtue or title shall inherit their calling, possess all their
former honors, and puff them sell ues up in pride, like unto the Ass which
bare the Image of ye Goddess Isis, who was proud of so many courtesies as were
done to the same, and finally that Fortune rides them like Asses.

But thou will say, (at the least so long as she continues) they shall take
their ease, and enjoy their own conten tation: and who that has his pleasure
for three or four years more or less, is not accursed all his life time. Yes
assuredly, unless it be ease to live in continual fear of being thrown
from the step whereunto he has attained: or to desire with great trauail to
clyme still hyer and hyer. Those (my friend) who^e thou accountest at their
ease because thou see but the outsides of them, are far other wise within:
their inward parts are strong prysons, full of dungeons, holes, darchnesse,
serpents and torments. Thou think their lodgings large, which in their
opinions are very strait. Thou supposest them very high, but they account them
selves to be very low. Yea and often, he which but thinks him selfsick: is
wurse at ease then he which is sick in deed. And there be some, even Kings: who
think them selves but slaves, and indeed are nothing else, for we are nothing
but in opinion.

Thou see^t them accompanied with many soldiers, and the same whom they have
chose^ for their guard, do they mistrust. Alone or in company they are always
in fear: being alone they look behind them, and in company round about them.
They drinck in vessels of gold or silver, and that is the same rathen earth or
glass wherein men fill and drink poison. They have their beds very soft and
delicately trimmed up, neither may they hear a mouse ron through their
chamber, or suffer a fly to come near their faces: when as a poor contry man
sleeps by ye noise of a spring or in a market place, having no bed but earth,
nor covering but heaven: and yet these men among all their quietness and dainty
lodging, do nothing but turn and toss up and down in their beds, still
imagininge that they hear some stirring, yea even their rest takes no rest at
all.

To be brief, will thou know the difference between them and the hardest
entreated prisoners? Either of them are chained up, each of them bears a
weighty burden upon them, but in that the one is of Iron and the other of
Gold: so is the one chained but in body, and the other in mind.

The Prisoner draws his Irons after him, the Courtier is chained up in him
self. The Prisoner many tlmes is inwardly comforted through his bodily pains,
and sings in the chief of his miserye. The Courtier being tormented in his
mind does continually labor his body and cannot thereunto give any respite.

And as for the contentation which thou imaginest them to have, thou art far
wide. Thou iudgest and think them mighty because they be highly exalted,
but therein thou art as wise as he which accounts a dwarf sitting on the top
of a steeple or upon an high hill to be a tall man. Thou art so good a
Geometrician, that thou mesurest ye Image by his pillar, which to know the
true proportion, should be mesured alone, net there ne^ thou the hight of ye
thing, but of the place whereon it is fixed. Cast down therefore thy view and
thou shall perceive all to be as nothing. Thou iudgest them mighty (if
mightiness may be on Earth) which in respect of Heaven, is but as nothing.
But if thou could enter into their minds, thou would be of an other
opinion. For true greatness consists in despising all these vain points of
greatness whereunto they be slaves, which also in their opinion they have not
attained unto, for still they desire to clyme hyer, and seem to them selves
never to be hye enough.

You shall see one cast thus in his mind. If I might attain to such a degree,
then were I well content, there would I stay: Having attained thereunto, he
does scarce take breath, but would fain yet clime higher. That which when he
was below seemed to him the highest, is now in his opinion scarce one step. He
thinks him self low, be cause there be some hyer then he, but he considers
not him self to be on hye, for that there be many thousands lower then he. Yea,
in the end be clymeth so hye, that either his wind fails in the way, or else
he slippeth ^edlong down again: or in case with extreme pain he attaineth to
his desire, then is he as it were on the top of the Alps, but not above the
clouds, or past winds or tempest: but rather in the midest of the thunder and
lightning, or of what horrible and dangerous matter so ever the Air
engenders or conceiueth: which for the most part delights in thundering,
and bringing to dust their presnmptuous highness.

It may be you will (through the examples whereof, both Histories and man's
memory are replenished) grant me this point, and will say. Those men whom
nature has brought forth with the Crown on their heds, and septer in their
hands: those whom even from their birth she has placed in so eminent thrones,
and so have not labou red to clime thither, do seem without contradiction, to
be exe^pt from all these iniuryes, and so consequently may say them selves
happy.

It may be indeed, that they do least ^eel those discommodities, by reason of
their birth, nurishment, and bringing up, even as they who being borne near to
the river Nilus, do become deaf at the noise thereof, or in a prison, do not
complain of the restraint of liberty: or among the Cimmerians where is
continual night, do not desire the day: or on the Alps do not find them
selves so much grieved with mists, tempests of Snow, and such other like
wether.

But certainly they be not clearly exempt, when a sudden thunderbolte
cracketh one flower of their Crown, or in their hands breaks their Scepter.
When a wave of Snow wrappeth them up, or when a mist of sorrow and care does
perpetually blind their minds and understanding. They be crowned, but with a
Crown, which indeed is o^ thorns. They have a scepter in their hands but of a
reed, which more then any other earthly thing bends and obeys to every
wind: yea and every such Crown is so far wide from healing these diseases of
the mind, and every such Scepter from driving away and scaring the thoughts
and cares which flicker about men, that con trariwise it is the Crown and
Scepter which brings all the same about them. O Crown says the Persian
Emperor, who so knew how heavy thou art on the head, would not vouchs^, finding
thee even in the high way to take the up. This Prince seemed to him self to
give estates unto all the world, to distribute hap and mishap at his pleasure
unto men, and was able in outward show to set every man at ease and yet him
self does freely confess that in all the world (which he held in his hand)
was nothing but grief and miserye.

What also will all other men say in case they be disposed to utter their
minds? We will not rehearse those who have through a shameful death finished
their miserable lives, neither such as have seen their kingdoms buried before
their faces, and in great calamities hau^ long ouerlyued their mightiness,
yea even Denis of Sicil, who was better content with a handful of rods wherewith
to scurge the children of Corinth in a school: then with the scepter with the
which he had beaten all Sicil. And Silla who having robbed the whole commonwealth of Rome (which had spoiled the whole world) could never take any rest
until he had of his own accord deposed him self, to the incredible hasard of
all his authority and power. But let us require the opinion of king Solomon,
being endued with the singular graces of God, rich and mighty in all things,
who sought the tr^asures even in the Islands them selves: he by his manifest
Book will teach us, that having tried all the felicities of the earth, he has
found nothing but vanity, labor and trouble of mind.

Let us ask y^ Emperor Augustus, the peacable possessor of all the world. He
will be wail his life passed in infinite tra^ails, and will wish the quietness
of the meanest man in ye world, accou^ting that day most blessed wherein he
might dispatch him self of this insupportable greatness, to the end to live
quietly among the meaner sort of people. Of Tiberius his successor he will
confess, that he holds the Empire as a wulfe by the ears, and that if he
could without danger of being bitten he would willingly let go the same. He
will complain of Fortune, which has guided him so high, and then taken away
the Ladder, that he cannot afterward come down again. Dioclesian a worldly,
wise and virtuous Prince, will prefer his voluntary bannishment to Solon,
before the whole Roman Empire. To be brief, the Emperor Charles the fifth
(whom our age does account the happyest that lyned in many years) will
curse unto us his conquests, his victories, and his tryumphes, and will not be
ashamed to say, that he has found more ease in comparison in one day in his
vowed solitariness: then in all the rest of his triumphant life.

Shall we then account those blessed in this their imagined greatness, who do
account them selves accursed, seeking their felicity in the diminishing of
their estate, who also in the universal world cannot find any one convenient
place of rest for their greatness, neither any bed whereupon they may take
their quiet sleep?

Happy is he only who lives contented in his mind, and far more accurssed
then any, is he that can be content with nothing. Miserable then was Pirrus
King of Albanye, who sought for to conquer the whole world, whereby (says
he) to obtain quietness, and yet seeks so far for that thing which is so
near his hand. But far more miserable was Alexander, in ye he being borne
king of a migh tie Realm and almost conqueror of the whole world, sought for
other worlds where with to satisfy his foolish ambtion

But certainly they be not clearly exempt, when a sudden (...) cracketh one
^ower of their Crown, or in their hands breaket^ (...) S^pter. (...) a wave of
(...) wrappeth them up, or when a (...) of sorrow and care (...) ^nde their
minds and (...). They be crow^ed, but with a Cro^n, which indeed is of (...).
They have a scep^er in their (...) but of a r^d, which more then any (...)
bends and obeys to every win^: yea and every such Crown is so far wide from
healing those diseases of the mind, and ^uery such Scepter from dri^ing away
and scaring the (...) and cares w^ch (...), hat con (...) it is (...) Scepter
(...) all the (...) about t^m. (...) Persian Empero^, (...) ^o knew how ^uy
thou a^ o^ (...), (...), ^ him (...) all (...) ^ and yet him self does freely
confess that in all the world (which he held in his hand) was nothing but
grief and miserye.

What also will all other men say in case they be disposed to utter their
minds? We will not rehearse those who have through a shameful death finished
their miserable lives, neither such as have seen their kingdoms ^uried before
their faces, and in great calamities hau^ long ouerlyued their mightiness,
yea even Denis of Sicil, who was better content with a handful of rods wherewith
to scurge the children of Corinth in a school: then with the scepter with the
which he had beaten all Sicil. And Silla who having robbed the whole commonwealth of Rome (which had spoiled the whole world) could never take any rest
until he had of his own accord deposed him self, to the incredible hasard of
all his authority and power. But let us require the opinion of king Solomon,
being endued with the singular graces of God, rich and mighty in all things,
who sought the treasures even in the Islands them s^lues: he by his manifest
Book will ^each us, that having tried all the ^elicities of the earth, he has
found nothing but vanity, labor and trouble of mind.

Let us ask ye Emperor Augustus, the peacable possessor of all the world. He
will bewail his life passed in infinite trauails, and will wish the quietness
of the meanest man in ye world, accou^ting that day most blessed wherein he
might dispatch him self of this insupportable greatness, to the end to live
quietly among the meaner sort of people. Of Tiberius his successor he will
confess, that he holds the Empire as a wulfe by the ears, and that if he
could without danger of being bitten he would willingly let go the same. He
will complain of Fortune, which has guided him so high, and then taken away
the Ladder, that he cannot afterward come down again. Dioclesian a worldly,
wise and virtuous Prince, will prefer his voluntary bannishment to Solon,
before the whole Roman Empire. To be brief, the Emperor Charles the fifth
(whom our age does account the happyest that ly^ed in many years) will
curse unto us his conquests, his victories, and his tryumphes, and will not be
ashamed to say, that he has found more ease in comparison in one day in his
vowed solitariness: then in all the rest of his triumphant life.

Shall we then account those blessed in this their imagined greatness, who do
account them selves accursed, seeking their felicity in the diminishing of
their estate, who also in the universal world cannot find any one convenient
place of rest for their greatness, neither any bed whereupon they may take
their quiet sleep?

Happy is he only who lives contented in his mind, and far more accurssed
then any, is he that can be content with nothing. Miserable then was Pirrus
King of Albanye, who sought for to conquer the whole world, whereby (says
he) to obtain quietness, and yet seeks so far for that thing which is so
near his hand. But far more miserable was Alexander, in ye he being borne
king of a migh tie Realm and almost conqueror of the whole world, sought for
other worlds wherewith to satisfy his foolish ambtion and yet within three
days after was contented with six or seven foot of earth.

To be brief, if they be borne on the top of the Alps, they seek to clime
into Heaven. If they have conquered the Kings of the Earth, then have they so^e
quarrels to ple ade with God, and seek to diminish his dominions: they never
have any end or final term before that God laughing to scorn in their vain
driftes (when they think them selves on the highest staff of the Ladder) do
thunder down all this their presumption, breaks in pieces the Scepter in
their hands, and many times overthrows them with their own Crowns.

Finally, in few words to rehearse all the bliss that may be comprehended in
whatsoever ambition promises to them. They endure much evil to the end to
obtain evil. They suppose by climing higher toget from this evil, when as the
hight whereunto so painfully they do aspire, is the very root of the same.

I speak not here of the misery of those who all their lives having held
out their hates to catch ye liberalyties of courtlike Fortune, and yet can get
nothing, who so^times also eue^ with wunderfull hartburning, shall see some one
who having taken less pain shall receive the rewards out of their hands: who
through thrusting them selves for ward have lost the same, yea and peradventure
thrown into a third man's hand, who never stirred for the same: out of the
hands of those who with over straini^g of it have let it escape through their
fingers, and so lost it. Those men are of all men accounted accursed and are so
in deed, in as much as them selves do so think. Let it therefore suffice you,
that all the liberalities which the Devil throws among us out of his
windows are but bayts, that all his re wards are but snares, and that he
seeks to inioye us only, who do thrust our selves forward for such things,
as most accursed is he that has most hap in meeting with the same.

Well will some say, the covetous man has no commodity of all his goods, the
ambitious man has nothing but evils: either of them to say truth does indeed
frame to them selves an assured hell in this world. But may there not be some
one who tending to the law or remaining about the Prince, may peacibly enjoy
these goods without following these outrageous motions, and obtain some honor
with quietness and co^tentation of his mind? Surely in the first ages when as
their remained among men yet some sincerity, there might be such: but now that
they be framed as in these days we see the^, I ca^ perceive no means how it
should be. In these days dele you in any worldly affairs, either you must do
well or evil. If evil, God is your enemy and you have your conscience a
tormentor continually vex ing of you. If well, then are men your adversaries,
yea and that the mightyest among them, whose envy and evil will does watch
you, and whose cruelty and tyranny does perpetually threten you. Please the
people and you please a beast, in pleasing of whom you shall displease your
self. Please your self and you shall displease God. Please god, and you shall
incur a thousand worldly dangers and sustain a thousand disple asures: which is
the cause, that hearing the spee ches of the honester sort and of those which
be best contented in their degrees, be it that their speeches be premeditated,
or that through force of the truth they do escape them, you shall understand
this. One wishes he had changed his gown with his farmer, another affirms
it to be a goodly matter to have no such voca tion, another complains yt his
head is troubled with pallaice or courtlike mat ters from which he hops with all
speed to withdraw him self. To be brief, you shall find them all w ery of
their voca tion, nothing inuying the calling of others, notwithstanding yt if
you would seem to take the^ at their words ye most part could be content to
recant. All men are weary of those affairs whereunto his age is subject, and yet
wishes to be higher whereby he might exempt him self, notwithstanding that
otherwise he would so much as in him lay avoid all age and to his power flee
from ye same. What were we best therefore to do in this great con trariety and
confusion of minds, should we the better to obtain perfect quietness eschew the
company of men, and hide our selves in ye woods among wild beasts? to avoid
these heinous passions, should we depart from the flocks of reasonable
creatures? or to escape these worldly evils should we sequester our selves out
of the world? indeed if in so doing we could li^e quietly, it were something.

But alas, each one that would cannot so do, yea and such as do so, do not
therein find the rest which they seek for. Some would gladly do it, but shame
of the world restrains the^. Fools they are to be ashamed of him whom in
heart they do condemn, and more fools to take counsel of the greatest
enemy which they can or may have. To others it is alleged, that they must
serve the commonwealth, and yet they see not that those which give them such
Counsel, do serve none but them selves, and that the most part seek not
greatly the common wealth, unless they find some private commodity, whereupon
to take hold. Unto some it is said that by their good example they may amend
the rest, and yet do they not consider that a hundred helthful men, shall
rather take the plague in an infected City, yea even the Phisicians them
selves, rather then any one shall obtain health, that the entry into such a
City is properly to tempt God, that against an infected air there can be no
better preservative the^ to flee from the same. To be breef that so like as ye
sweet waters falling into the sea do abridge the bitterness of ye same, even
so little may one or two Lots do touching the reformation of a whole
Sodomiticall court. And as for the wiser sort, who no less careful for the
soul then the body, do seek for the same a sound and helthful air, far from
the infectio^ of evil waners, and who being led by the hand of some of Gods
Angels, do in good time after the example of Lot, withdraw them selves into
so^e little village of Segor far from all worldly corruption, into some
champion contrie, not near to any pestiferous town, there at their leisure to
entend to some science and earnest contemplations. To them being in no
dangerous place do I well agree: but in that them selves do carry infection
with them, they cannot well be exempt. They flee the court, the court still
follows them every way. They seek to escape the the world, and the world
pursues them even to death: hardly throughout the whole world, shall they
find any corner wherein ye world will not find the^, so earnestly does it
seek their destruction. Again if through the singular grace of God, they seem
for a while exempt out of these dangers, then are they continually vexed with
poverty, then is there some domisticall contention, which disquieth them, or
some kind of familiar spirit which tempts them.

To be short, the world by some means causes them to feel him. But the
wurst is that when we be past all these outward wars and travails, the^ do
we feel in our selves, so much the more vehemently an inward war and debate of
the flesh against the spirit, passion against reason, Earth against Heaven,
and the world fighting in us for the world, which finds it self
continually lodged in the bottom of our own hearts, on what side soever we
seek to flee from it.

I will say also thus much more, that there be some, who making profession of
eschuing worldly vanities, do in the same seek the commendation of the
world. Some do ^eeme to flee from it, and yet according to the Proverb, do
go backwarde to meet it. Yea there are some which do refuse honors, because
they would be desired to take the same: and others that do hide them selves,
only to cause men to seek to them. Thus does the world many times i^
disguised attire dwell in those which seem to flee from the world.

This then is an abuse, for if we follow the company of men, among the^ is his
court. If we seek ye wilderness, there has he his caves and dens, for in ye
desert it self did he tempt our lord Jesus Christ. If we retire into our
selves, there do we find him as filthy as any where else. We cannot in our
selves slay ye world, without our own deaths. We are in the world and the
world in us, to separate us therefore from ye world, we must separate our selves
and this seperatio^ is called death. We are I ween come forth of the
pestiferous city, but we consider not yt we have gathered the air into our
wicked co^plexions, yt we carry away the plague with us, yt our selves are
parcel of the same, whereupon through rocks, deserts, and mountains, it will
still follow and accompany us: having fled the infection of others, we have ye
infection in our selves. We have gone from among men, but we have not put man
from among us: this te^pestious sea tormented us, we were sick at our hearts,
and were desirous to vomit, and therefore to discharge our stomachs, we have
gone from Ship to Ship, from a great one to a little one. We promise our
selves quietness, but in vain, for still ye same wind blows, ye same waves
rise, and the same humors do move. Unto all me^ is there no other haven or
port of rest save only death. We lay sick in a Chamber on the street side, or
opening into ye market place, we removed into a backer chamber, where was no
such noise: but notwithstanding the noise was less, yet was the Ague no whit
diminished, neither thereby lost any part of his wunted heat. Let ^s change
bed, chamber, house, yea and Contrie so often as we list, yet shall we still
find the same unquietness because our selves are there, and that we seek not
so much to become other men, as to remove into other places. We seek
solitarines, to the end to anoy solitarines. we do say we flee and withdraw our
selves from among the wicked: but we take with us our covetousness, our
ambition, our royelous living, and all other our wicked affection, which
procure to us innumerable remorses of conscience, and a thousand times a day
do put us in mind of the roots and onions of Egypt. They do still go over
the ferry with us and therefore on each side of the water, are we at a
perpetual combat. But if we could discharge this train, which eats us and
gnaweth our spirits, undoubtedly we should have rest, not in solitarines only,
but even in the midst of ye preace of men. Breefly the life of man upon Earth
is a perpetual warfare.

Being delivered from outward enterprices, we are to take heed of inward
conspiracyes. The Grecians are gone aside, we have a Sinon in us which will
yield the place to them. We must continually wake and have always an eye to
the watch, holding our weapons in our hands, unless we be minded at all times
to be supprised and yielded at the pleasure of our enemies. And I pray you
which way may we in the end escape their danger? not through the woods, the
rivers, or the mountains, not by preasing among company, neither by running
into an hole. There is but one only way, and that is death, which finally
dividing our spirit from our flesh, the clean and pure part of o^r soul from
the unclean, which in us is still bent against us for the behoof of the
world, appeaseth through this sepe ration, that which being conjoined in one
self person, cannot without the utter choking up of ye spirit, remain with out
a perpetual quarrel and debate.

As for the contentation which might be in the solitary exercises of the wise,
as the reading of holy scriptures and profane books of all sciences and
discipline. I do well grant that this is a far other matter the^ these wild
huntings which makes wild most part of men vexed with these or such like
diseases of their mides, and yet must all needs pass under the arrest of the
wisest of all, wise Solomon, who allegeth yt all this comforted with the nature
of man, is no other the^ vanity and trauail of mind. Some do all their lives
learn to speak of amendment, and yet do never think of amending their lives.
Others do Logically dispute of reason and of art, and yet many times do lose
their natural reason them selves. Othersdo learn by Arithmetic to divide even
the least fractions, and yet cannot part one shilling with their needy brother.
Others by Geometry can measure ye feeldes, y^ towns, and the contry: and yet
unskillful in mesuring them selves. The Pusition can agree the voice, soundes
and tunes together: and yet has nothing in his heart which disagreeth not, or
any passion in his mind that is in his right tune. The Astronomer can look up:
and yet fall in the pit at hand, he can foretell the things to come: and yet
loose that which is present, he can often have his eye in Heaven: when his heart
is buried ver y low in earth. The Philosopher can dispute of ye nature of all
things: and yet knows not hi^ self. The Physician can heal others: and yet
be blind in his own disease, and can feel the least alteration of his pulses:
but not consider the hot burning Agues of his soul. The Historiographer know
eth the wars of Thebes or Troy: and yet is ignorant of things done within
him self. The Lawyer who makes laws to all the world: cannot prescrib^ any
law to him self. To be breef, ye D^uine can very well dispute of faith: but will
hear no talk of Charity, he can speak of GOD: but make no account of helping
of men. These sc^ces do continually forment the mind^, but not content the
same. The more that man knows, the more he d^reth to know. All this
knowledge appeaseth not the disagreement that man feels in him self, they
heal not the diseases of the mind, they make a man learned, but not good, and
cunning, but not wise, and this I say more, that the more a man knows, the
more he grants him self to be ignorant of, the fuller that his mi^de is, ye
emptier does he find ye same because that how much so ever of any science a
man can know in this world, it is nevertheless the lest part of that which he
is ignorant of: and therefore his whole skill consists i^ knowing his
ignorance, and all his perfection in marking his imperfections and he that
most knows and marketh, is in truth accounted most skilful and perfect
among men.

To be short, we must with Solomon return to this point that the beginning and
ending of wisdom is the fear of God, which wisdom is nevertheless in the
world cried down as mere folly, and pursued as a capital enemy, and as he
which fears God, need not to fear any evil, because all his evils are
converted into goodness, even so he must not look for any goodness in this world
having the devil his formal ene mie, whom the scripture terms the Prince of
this world.

Well, in what exercise so ever we pass away our time, see, age has overtaken
us before we were aware, who, whether we hide us among the prease of me^, or
that we do flee in any solitary place, will nevertheless be sure to find us
out. All men do make account therwithall to rest from all their labors, to
take no farther thought save only to keep them selves quiet and in health, and
yet behold contrary wise, this age is no other but a taste of all evils
aforesaid, and for the most part the cheifest flourishing time of all vice,
wherewith they have been occupied and detained all the course of their life: you
have therein the unprofitableness and weakness of childehood, yea and that is
worst, the same often joined with a superior authority. You are rewarded for
the excess and ryots of your youth, with the gout, palsy, stone, and such
other like ki^de of diseases, which take away your mem bers, one after another
with extreme pain. You are recompensed for the watching, thoughts and inward
trauails ration, that which being conjoined in one (...) person, cannot
without the utter c^king up of y^ spirit, remain with out a perpetual quarrel
and debate.

As for the consentation which might be in the (...) ^rcises of the wise, as
the readi^ of holy scriptu^s and prephane books (...) all (...) and discipline,
I do well gr^nt that this is a far other matter the these wild huntings which
makes wild most part of men vex^ with these or such like diseases of their
mides, and yet must all needs pass under the arrest of the wisest of all,
wise Solomon, who allegeth y^ all this comforted with the nature of man, is no
other the^ vanity and trauail of mind. Some do all their lives learn to
speak of amendment, and yet do never think of amending their lives. Others do
Logically dispute of reason and of art, and yet many times do lose their
natural reason them seiues. Others do learn by Arithmetic to deu^e even the
least fractions, and yet cannot part one shilling with their needy brother.
Others by Eeometrie can measure y^ feeldes, y^ towns, and the contry: and yet
unskillful in mesuring them selves. The Pusition can agree the voice, (...) and
(...) yet has nothing in his heart (...) dissagreeth not, or any (...) in his
(...) is in his right tune. The (...) can look up: and yet fall i^ the (...) at
(...) he can (...) the (...) loose that which is (...), (...) have his eye in
(...): (...) heart is (...). The Philosoph^ can (...) of y^ (...) all things:
and yet (...). The (...) others: and yet be b^inde in ^is (...), (...) can feel
the least a^teratio^ of his (...): (...) not consider (...) A^ues of his soul.
The (...) know ^th the wars of Thebes or Troy: (...) yet is ignorant of
things done (...) him self. The Lawyer who (...) laws to all the world: cannot
prescri^ any law to him self. To be breef, y^ (...) uine can very well dispute
of (...) will hear no talk of Chari^e, (...) speak of GOD: but make no (...)
count of helping of men. (...) ces do confinually forment (...), but not
content the same. The (...) that man knows, the more (...) to know. All this
knowledge appeaseth not the disagreement that man feels in him self, they
heal not the diseases of the mind, they make a man learned, but not good, and
cunning, but not wise, and this I say more, that the more a man knows, the
more he grants him self to be ignorant of, the fuller that his mide is, ye
emptier does he find ye same because that how much so ever of any science a
man can know in this world, it is nevertheless the lest part of that which he
is ignorant of: and therefore his whole skill con^eth in knowing his
ignorance, and all his perfection in marking his imperfections, and he that
most knows and marketh, is in truth accounted most skilful and perf^ct
among men.

To be short, we must with Solomon return to this point that the beginning and
ending of wisdom is the fear of God, which wisdom is nevertheless in the
world ^ryed down as mere folly, and pursued as a capital enemy, and as he
which fear^th God, need not to fear any evil, beca^ all his evils are
converted into goodness, ^uen so he must not look for any goodness in this world
having the devil his formal ene mie, whom the scripture terms the Prince of
this world.

Well, in what exercise so ever we pass away our time, see, age has overtaken
us before we were aware, who, whether we hide us among the prease of me^, or
that we do flee in any solitary place, will nevertheless be sure to find us
out. All men do make account therwithall to rest from all their labors, to
take no farther thought save only to keep them selves quiet and in health, and
yet behold contrariwise, this age is no other but a taste of all evils
aforesaid, and for the most part the cheifest flourishing time of all vice,
wherewith they have been occupied and detained all the course of their life: you
have therein the unprofitableness and weakness of childehood, yea and that is
worst, the same often joined with a superior authority. You are rewarded for
the excess and ryots of your youth, with the g^t, palsy, stone, and such
other like kide of diseases, which take away your mem bers, one after another
with extreme pain. You are recompented for the watching, thoughts and inward
trauails of your man's age, with the loss of the sight, the hearing, and of all
the other senses one after another, except only of the feeling of your pain.

There is no part of man which death takes not as apledge, thereby to assure
him selfof us as of an evil payer; which infinitely fears his term.

There will be by and by nothing remaining in manner a live, and yet do our
vices line in us, and do not only live, but also even in spite of nature do
daily, flourish a fresh again, The Couetouse man having in manner one foot in
the ground, is never the^sse ^il hoording up of treasure as if one day he were
assured to find the same again. The Ambitious man by his last will ordains
vnpro^able pomps for his funerals, and so procures his vice so live and
triumph eue^ after his death. The Ryotous man being unable to da^ce with his
feet, dau^ceth with his shoulders. All vices have lest him, but he cannot leave
the^. The child wish eth his youthful age, and the man is gree ued at the
same. In his youthful age he lived in hope of the age to come, and the man
^eeleth the present evil: soroweth at his false passed pleasures, and now ^deth
nothing in time to come to wish for. More foolish is he then the Child, for
that he bewaileth the time which cannot come again, and more miserable the^
the youthful man, in yt that after his miserable life which cannot be
accomplished without as miserable a death: he sees nothing but mere despair on
all sides.

And as for him who eue^ in his youth took upon him the battle against the
flesh and the world, who so painfully has indenored to dye to ye world, and
has for saken the same before his time: who also besides all these ordinary
evils ^ideth him self weried with this great and incurable disease of age, and
yet oftentimes not with standing his weakness finds his flesh stronger the^
his spirit: what goodness, I pray you, ca^ he heerin conceive, except only in
that he sees his death at hand, that he perceives his combats ended, and that
he knows him self ready through death to depart out of this trouble some
prison wherein he has been racked and tormented all the days of his life? I
will not beer speak of in^nite evils which do v^e men in all ages, as loss
of Fr^nds and Parents, banishments, exile, discurtesyes, with other such like,
common and ordinary in the world.

One man lamenteth the loss of his Children, an other is sorry that ever ^e had
any. One mourns for his wife, who is dead: an other wishes his would not
live so long. One complains that he is to deep in ye Court, an other that he
is not deep enough. The world ^th so many evils heaped up in it, that to write
of them all would require an other world as big as it is. Yea in case the
happyest man that we can find, would but way his blesses with his mishaps, he
would account him self most accursed: and some there be who think him happy,
and yet if they had but three days set in his place, they would resign the
same to the first commer: yea and which is more, if ye same man should but
consider, first of all the goods and commodities that ever he received: and
then. of the evil which he has endured for the obtaining of the same, and
having them, of the pain that he has taken to save and keep them (I speak
only of such commodities as may be kept, and not of those ye wither away in a
moment) he would surely with him self give this verdit of him self, that even
the keeping of the cheifest felicities in this world, is but labor, trauail
and infelicitie. Let us therefore conclude that infancy is but a foolish
simplicity: youth a vain heat: man's age a painful carefulnes: and age a
troublesome languishing, that our eyes are nothing but tears: our pleasures,
vexations of mind: our goods, racks and torments: our honors, weighty
vanities: and our rest, a disquietnes. Also that to pass from age to age, is
but to depart from one evil to an other: from a small one to a great, and
that it is always one billowe or wave driving of an other, until we come to
the Haven of death. Let us I say conclude, that this life is no other then a
desire of the life to come, a sorowing for the life past, a disdain of that
which we have tasted, and a desire of that that hitherto we have not felt, a
vain remembrance of the estate passed and an uncertain waiting for ye which is
to come. To be breef, that in all the life is nothing certain neither assured,
but only the certainty and assurance of death.

Well, behold now death comes to us: see, that which so long we have feared
does now draw near unto us. We must now therefore consider whether she be such
a thing as men make us to believe, and whether we ought so to flee from her as
ordinarily we do.

We are afeard as little Children of a Mastif, or of the Idols of Hecate. We
do abhor her, but that is only because we take her to be other then indeed
she is, namely sorrowful, withered and ougley, even such a one as it pleases
the Painters to present unto us upon the walls. We ^ee before her, and that is
because we being occupied with such vain imaginations, have no ^isure to look
upon her. Let us therefore stay and become constant. Let us even look upon her
face, and we shall find her far other then she is pain^ed out unto us, and
in a far other (...) then our mi^erable life. Death ends this life. This life
is but misery and a perpetual tempest. Death therefore is the issue of our
miseryes, and the incloser of the Haven wherein we shall be safe from all
winds. Shall we therefore fear lest taking us out of misery she should hale
us into the haven?

You will say that in death is pain, be it so, so is there also in the healing
of wounds, for such is the nature of human things, that one evil cannot be
healed but by an other. To cure a brusing there must be incision.

You will tell me that in this passage there is some difficulty, so is there no
Port or Haven but that the entry is narrow and troblesome. No goods are
bought in this world with other money then pain and trauatle. The entry is
indeed troublesome, if our selves do so make it, if we draw ^owarde it with a
formented mind, with a troubled understanding, or with a swer^ing and
unconstant thought. But let us bring tranquillity of mind, constancye, and
firm determination, and we shall find no danger, neither any kind of
difficulty. Again what greet does death cause us to suffer? What can she do
with whatsoever we do endure? We accuse her of all y^ evil y^ we feel in the
ending of our lives, and do not consider how many greater and more dange^ous
wounds and diseases we have endured without death. How many more ^ehement
greetes we have suffered in this life, during y^ extremities whereof we have
called her to our aid and help. Of all sorrows which our life do procure unto
us toward our last ends, we do exclaim and find fault with death, not
considering that life being begun and continued in all kind of sorrow, cannot
also without sorrow be en ded. We do not (I say) way with our selves, ye it is
the rest of our life, and not death that formenteth us, the end of our
Nauigatio^ that paineth us, and not the ^auen where into we should enter,
which also is no other then a Bulwark against all winds and tempests.

We do complain of death when indeed we should be wa^l our lives, as one who
having been long sick, and now re turning toward health, would accuse his health
for his last greefs, and not the relics of his sickness. I pray you what other
is death, then to be no longer lyning in this world? Felt we any greef before
we came into it? Not to be in the world at all, is it pnrely and simply any
pain? Do we at any time more resemble death, then in our s^eepe, and be we at
any time in more quietness then also at the time of the same? ^f then she be no
greef, wherefore should we accuse her of all those greefs which our life at the
departure thereof does minister unto us, unless we will also blame the time
wherein we were not in those sorrows which at our birth we began to endure? If
the coming into the world were in tears, why should we meruail that the issue
out of the same be so also? The beginning of our being, being the beginning
of our sorrows, is it to be meruailed that the end is alike? If our not being
in the former worlds has been exempt of sorrow, and now contrariwise our
being in this world be full of sorrow, whom shall we in reason accuse of these
our last sorrows whether our not being before time, or the rest of our present
being?

We thinck not that we dye before we yield the last gasp, and yet if we look
well we do daily in every hour and moment dye. We fear death as a thing
unaccustomed, and yet have nothing more common in us, for our life is but a
continual death: even so long as we live, so long do we die: as we do grow,
so does our life diminish. We let not one step so soon into life, but as soon
we set an other into death. Who so has lived a third part of his years, has
also passed a third part of his death, and who the tone half, is already half
dead. So much of our life as is passed, is dead: that which is present does
live and dye together, and that which is to come shall likewise dye. That that
is past is no more: that that is to come is not yet, and that that is present
both is and is not. To be brief, all this life is but death. It is as a
candle lighted in our bodies. In some y^ wind wastes it, in other some it
puts it out before it be half spent, and in other some it suffers it to
continue to the end: but be it as it will, according as it lights, so does it
burn, his light is a burning, his flame a vanishing smoke, and his last fire is
the vttermoste end of his cotton and the last drop of his moisture. Even so is
the life of man.

The life and death of man is all but one thing. If we call ye last breath
death, the like name must we give to all the rest before pasied, for they all
do proceed out of one place and are all of a like fashion. One only difference
is there between this li^e, and that which we call death, which is that during
the one, we have always to die, and after the other there remains nothing b^t
everlasting life.

To be breef, what soever he be which thinks death to be simply ye end of
man, yet onght he not to fear ye same: for who so is desirous of long life,
does also ask a continuing death, and who so fears present death, fears
(to speak uprightly) to have no longer respite to die. But un to us y^ are
brought up in an other manner of school, death also seems an other thing. We
need not as the heathen, have any comfort against death, but death should unto
us b^ a co^ort against all kind of affliction. We must not on^ ly with the^
strive, not to fear it, but rather inure our selves to hope after it. It is not
to us an issue unto sorrow and evil, but a path to all goodness. To us it is no
end of life, but an end of death and a beginning of everlasting life. Better
says Salomo^ is ye day of death, the^ the ^oure of birth, and why? because it
is not to us a last day, but y^ birth of an euerla sting day. We shall during
this bright nes no longer bewail ye time past, but shall still live in hope for
ye time to come. For all shall to us be time present, and this time present
shall never abandon us: We shall no longer consume in vain and sorrowful
pleasures, but shall be replenished with a true and firm joy. We shall no
longer labor to beap up the exhalations of the earth, for hea uen shall be ours.
This mass of Earth which accustomably drew us toward the earth, shall be in the
earth. We shall no longer strive to mount from step to step, and from honor to
honor: for we shall be exalted into Heaven abooue all worldly honors and from
abooue shall we laugh them to scorn that do wunder at us, which do strive
for the value of a point, and like Children fight together for less value then
an Aple. More combats shall we not sustain within our selves, for our flesh
shall be dead, but our spirit in full life: our passion buried, and our reason
set at liberty. Our soul being delivered out of this filthy and stinking
prison, wherein it has so long lurked and crouched, shall take air, and
acknowledging his ancient dwelling place, shall call again to mind his former
brightness and dignity. This flesh my friend which thou feel, and this body,
which thou touchest is not the soul: for the soul is borne in heaven, and
Heaven is his Country and air. In that he is enclosed in ye body, it is as it
were by exile and banishment. The soul properly is ye life and spirit. The
soul is rather a heavenly and celestial quality, exempt from all gross and
material substance, and this body such as it is, is no other then a bark or
shel over the spirit, and therefore must of necessity flee a sunder when we
come to our departure, if we will perfectly live or clearly behold^ the day. We
have as we thinck some life, and some feeling: but we are altogether impotent,
we can not stretch out our wings, neither can we take our flight into Heaven,
until this earthly mass of flesh be taken from of us. We do see, but through
deceitful spectacles. We have eyes, but covered with a filme. We think to
look, but it is in a dream, whereby we see nothing but lies. What soeu^r we
have or know, is but abuse and vanity: death only can restore to us both
life and sight, and yet are we so beastly as to think that she takes them from
us.

We are (say we) Christians: we do believe after this life, life everlasting.
We acknowledge that death is but a separation of the body and the soul, that
the soul shall return to his blessed rest, for to rejoice in God, who only is
all goodness, and that in the last day she shall again put on her body,
which then shall be no more subject to corruption. We do fill all our Books
with this goodly discourse, and yet coming to the point, the only name of
death, as the most horrible thing in the world, makes us to quake and
tremble. If we believe that, y^ we have said, what do we then fear? to be
happy? to be at quiet? to live in greater contentatio^ in one moment then ever
we could do in all our mortal life how long so ever it has been? Either we
must confess, will we, nil we, that we believe but to halues, that we have
nothing in us but words, and that all our discourses (even as of these valiant
table Knights) are but vaunts and vanities: and therefore see what we say.

We know, that departing out of this life we shall pass to a better, and
thereof we doubt not at all: but we fear the great passage that is between them
both, which we must overcome. O ^aint hearted me^. They will slay them selves for
the getting of their miserable life. They will suffer a thousand greefs and
wounds at the request of other men: they will pass a thousand dangers of death
without stumbling, for the getting of transitory goods whithe peradventure will
cause them to perish with the^, and yet having but one step or passage to go
over for y^ obtaining of their ease, not for a day but for ever, not any kind
of ease, but such an ease as man is not able to comprehend: do yet quake
thereat, their heart fails them at their needs, they be afraid and yet is the
cheef cause of this their fear, no other then the fear it self, Let them not
allege that they do learn to endure the sorrow, for that were but bace and a
simple cover for their scle^der faith. They had rather lan guish perpetually in
y^ pain of y^ ^oute, the Sciatica, y^ stone or such like, the^ at once to die
of a sweet death, which comprehends the least sorrow in ye world: they had
rather to die ^e^ber after member, and so as ye would say, to over lius their
senses, moouings and actions, the^ alto gither to die to ye end to live
eternally. Let the^ not aledge neither yt they would in this world learn to
live, for every man of him self is sufficiently taught that already: no man is
ignorant in that occupation. But we must learn in this world to dye, and for
the obtaining of one good death, we must in our selves dye daily, preparing us
as if the end of every day, were also the end of our life: whereas contrariwise
nothing does more offend our ears then to hear of death.

Oh senseless men, we do habandon our lives to th'ordinary hazards of war for
twenty shillings matter. In hope of some small botie, we be the first at the
assault, running into places from whence there is no hope of return, and that
ma ny times with the danger both of our bodies and souls. And yet for the
exempting of us out of all dangers, for the conquest of incomparable treasures,
and for the entry into everlasting life, we do refrain from setting forward
of one step wherein is no dificultie or danger at all, but only fear to witholde
us. Yea we do so stick there, that were it not that whether we will or no, we
must pass the said step, and God even against our wills will do us good,
hardely throughout all the whole world, we should find any one, how miserable
or wretched soever he were that willingly would pass that way. Others will say,
had I lived five or six score years, I could even be content, I care for no
longer life: but me thinks to die so young, it were against reason. I would
know the world before I go out of it. Ah poor ignorant man y^ thou art, in
this world there is no^e either young or old. Old age compared with that is
past, and with that that is to come, is but one only period: Having lived to
the age that now thou disiredst, all thy time passed will be as nothing, thou
will still gape after time to come. Of the time past thou shall have only a
greef, thou shall wait for time to come, and of time present thou shall reap no
contentation. Thou will be as ready to demand respite as be fore. Thou fliest
from thy creditor month after month, term after term, as ready to pay him
at ye last as at the first, and yet seeing you must needs pay him, as good at
the first as at the last. Thou have tasted all ye pleasures which the world
accounts of, none of them are dainty to thee, drink thou never so often, thou
art never the fuller, for this body which thou cariest is as the bottomless
pail of ye Danaides which can never be filled. It will be sooner worn out, the^
thou weary of using (or to speak more truly of abusing) the same.

Thou requirest long life, but only to lose it, to waste it out in tri^ing
pleasures, and to spend it in vain matters. Thou art Covetous in desiring, and
prodigal in spending. Tell not me that thou complainest of the Court, or of the
Pallaice, either that thou would yet do some more service to thy commonwealth or Contrie, or even to God him self. For he that has set thee on woork,
knows the time and hour that thou shall continue: he can guide thy woork
manship: if he should leave thee there any longer, it may be thou would mar
all.

If he be content liberally to pay thee for thy woork, and to give thee as
much wages for thy half days woork as if thou had wrought al day long: for
laboring til noone, as if thou had borne the heat of the whole day, have
not thou so much the more cause to thank and praise him?

But entering into thine own conscience Thou be wailest not the cause of the
Widow or of the Orphane, whom y^ have left at the point of judgment, neither
the end of ye son, the father, or the friend which thou protestest to
restore: The imbassage of the com mon wealth which thou were ready to take
upon thee, either else the service that thou desire to do to GOD, who
knows much better what service to reap of thee, then thou do thy self.

Thou be waylest thy houses and thy Gardens. Thou monest thy purposes and
imperfect devises. Thou lamentest thy life, in thine eye imperfect, which
neither days, years, ne worlds were able ^o finish, and yet thy self in the
least moment may end, if thou will but once earnestly thinck that it
skilleth not how they be ended, so they be well ended. And well to finish this
life is no other thing then willinglye to end it, following of our own
accor^es, the will and Conduct of God, and not to permit our selves tobe haled
after the necessity of our destiny. For to end it willingly, is to hope for
and not to fear death. To hope for it, is assuredly to wait for a better life
after this, and to wait for a better life is to fear God, whom whosoever ^areth,
need not certainly to fear any thing in this world, but to hope for all things
in the other. Death can not be other then gentle and acceptable to all that in
those points are thoroughly resolved, because they k^owe assuredly, that thereby
they shall enter in to an habitation of all goodness. The sorrow that might be
therein, shall be mixed with gentleness. The patient abiding shall be drunck
with hope. The sting of death it self shall be killed, for all this sting is
nothing but fear: and thus much (...) will say more, that not only all the evil
which we take to be in death, shall be as nothing unto them, but also they
shall laugh at the mishappes that others do fear in this life, and shall even
mock all their doubts. For I pray you what can he ^eare which hops to die?
Do his enemies thinck to drive him out of his cuntry? he knows y^ he has a
country in another place, from the which they cannot drive him, and that all
these Countries are but so many ny Innes, from whence they must depar^ part
whenever it pleases their hosf, shall he be cast into prison^ a straiter
prison or more filthy, dark, sul of racks and forments, can they not commit
him into, the^ his own body. Will they put him to death and so take him out of
this world? That is it that so long he has hoped for, and whereunto with all
his heart he has aspired, be it with fire, sword, famine, sickness or otherwise:
with in three years, three dates, or three hours, it is all one to him when or
by which gate he departs out of this miserable life, for his woork is all
done, all his provision is ready, and by the same gate that he goes out at,
shall he enter into a far more blessed and immortal life.

They cannot threaten him of worse then death, and that is it that he assures
him self of. The woorst they can do to him is to take away his life, and that
is the best thing that he can hope for. The thretnings of tirants are pro mises
to him, and his cheifest enemies weapons are drawn to his behoof, for he
knows that who so thretneth him with death, promises him life, and the most
mortal wounds that they can give him, (...) make him immortal. who that
fereth God fears not death, and he yt fears not death cares not for the
greatest iniuryes of this life.

Why, will you say, the^ by this account death is to be wished for, and therefore
for the avoiding ofso many mischeefs, and the obtaining of such infinite
commodities we should me thinks abridge our lives. Surely I dout not yt
notwithstanding allt his profit, any one will hasten any step forward, yea
although yt spirit should aspire the runto, yet the body that it has to draw,
will su^cie^tly restrain it. Now be it I mean not so to conclude, We ought
indeed to endeavor to slay our flesh in our selves, but to exempt our selves out
of the world, that is not permitted unto us. A Christian ought willingly to
depart this life: b^t he may not cowardly run away. God has ordained a
Christian to fight, and therefore he cannot without blame and reproach leave his
rank. But if it please this great Captain to call him home, then must he
willingly retire and freely obey. For the Christian is not for him self but for
God, of whom he holds his life to enjoy the same so long as it shall please
him, and to who me he must yield the fruits of the same. His life is at the
disposition of the owner, who at his pleasure may take it from him, but he may
not when he will give over the same.

Dyest thou young? thank God who as a good Sailer with a fresh wind has
soon conducted thee to the Haven. Dyest y^ old? praise him likewise, for that
having a small wind thou haste peradventure been less molested with waves,
neither think to haste^ or slack thy pace at thine own will, for yt (...) is
not at thy b^ck, and so in striving against the streme, thou shall peraduen
ture incur shipwreck. God calls one from woork in the morning, another at
noone, and another at night. God exercises one until he sweat, another
parcheth he in the Sun, and another does he even bake and wither up
altogether, and yet leaves he none of all his abroad, but gives them all
rest, paying them their wages in time convenient. Who that leaves his woork
before he be called loses the same, and he yt is im portunate before the time
forgoeth his wages. We must all depend upon his pleasure, who in the midst of
all our labors grants us rest.

To be brief, the trauayles of this life must not cause us to hate the same,
for that were but cowardice and want of heart. Neither must the pleasures of the
same procure us to love it, for that were but folly and vanity: but we must
use it to the service of God, who after the same shall give us assured rest,
and shall lead us into everlasting pleasures which perish not. We must not
also flee from death, for it were very childish to fear it and in fleeing away
to meet with the same. Again we must not seek it, for that were but rashness,
neither does every man die that will. There is as much desperatenes in the one
as cowardlines in the other, and in neither of both is there any kind of
magnanimity. Let it therefore suffice us to stay for it, and that steadfastly
and continually to ye end it never find us un provided. For as there is
nothing more certain then death, so also is there nothing more uncertain then
ye sorrow of the same, which is known to none but to one God, the only Author
of life, in whom we should all labor to live and dye.

Die to live and live to dye.
Certain collections gathered out of the works of the learned Philosopher
Seneca, concerning the same argument.
Out of his Epistles.
Epistle. 24.
CAll to mind I pray thee, that which thou have often heard and said, and
prove in effect whether thou have hard or said it in ernest or no. For to us
it were to great a shame to be cast in the teeth (as many times we are) that we
do deal only with the words, but not with ye woorks of Philosophy. I
remember that ere now I have heard thee entreat upon this common place. That
we fall not suddenly into death, but by little and little do walk tovvarde
the same. We dye indeed daily, for every day some part of our life wastes
away. What part of our life soever is past or to come, dea^ takes hold of y^
same, and still as we do grow, our life fades away. We lose first our
infancy, then our Childehod, and then our youth. All our time past even until
yesterday is perished: and this very day which now is in hand, do we divide
with death: and yet must we provide our selves both for the one and the
other. We must not to much love our lives, neither unreasonably hate the same.
We must finish them when reason warns us, and yet not rashly depart with the
same, but even let them freely run out their course.

The wise and valiant man must not flee from this life, but soberly depart
with all, and abooue all things eschew this vicious passion which has over
come many: namely over great desire of death.

Epistle. 26.
Verily I do speak to my self and do maintain and still examine my self, as
if the proof were at hand, and the day that shall pronounce sentence over all
my years, all ready comen. What soever hitherto we have done or said is
nothing, it is but vain and light ^ages of our courage, wrapped up in much
painting and deceit. Only death shall persuade me that I have profited in
Philosophy: I do there fore without fear make my self ready a against y^ day
wherein undoubtedly I may judge whether I have before tie fained, or whether such
injurious words and tau^ts as I have spoken against Fortune, have proceeded
of stout courage or not. Next to the reputation that men have of us she is
still doutful and ha^geth down on every side: therefore setting back our study,
let us examine our lives, for death shall pronounce sentence upon us, I mean
that the disputations, the learned sayings, the sentences collected out of the
precepts of y^ wise, and the eloquent speech do not set forth yt true force
of ye mind: for the most cowards are greatest brag gers, when thou fightest
against death it will appeer how much thou have profited. I account well of the
humain estate, and ^ear not this judgment which says. Thou art young, what
matter is that? years are not here accounted of. No man knows where death
waits for thee, watch you therefore for it in all places. Con sider says a
certain philosopher, which is most commodious for us, either that death should
come and take hold of us, or that we should go and embrace it. Herein
cousisteth knowledge.

It is an excellent matter to learn to dye, but peradventure will thou say
superfluous, because we can but once use the same. Nay this is ye cause why we
should rather ye more diligently learn and study for the same: for we must
continual study for it, because until the very instant we cannot try whether
we be perfect or no. He that wills thee to think upon death, wills thee to
remember liberty, and he that has learned to die has forgotten to serve. For
death is abooue all power, or at the least out of the jurisdiction of all
things. What cares he for Prisons, keepers or bolts. He has a door always
open. One on ly chain can bind us which is ye love of this life, the which
also indeed we should not quite cast away, but by little and little lessen the
same to the end, in case death should come, nothing might let or stop us from
him.

Epistle. 27.
ABooue all things we must endeavor to s^aye our vices before our selves, yea we
must leave all these vain pleasurs which notwithstanding they ^oo not greatly
annoy us, yet do soon wither and vade away. Virtue only is an assured, firm,
and perpetual pleasure, which surmounteth what soever stands before it, even
as does the brightness of the Sun all clouds.

Epistle, 30.
TO depart out of this world with a good will, when soever this inuita ble
hour shall come upon us (friend Lucilius) is a great matter, and a thing
which long time we ought to study for. For he that has not a desire to die,
desires not also to live, and our life has been granted us, with this
condition and clause yt we should dye. We must hasten toward death without
fear, because we are not better assured of any thing then of that, and
ordinarily we ^ope for things certain, but do fear such as be doutful. Death
unto all men alike is equal and inevitable: who there fore can complain of his
estate, seeing all men are partakers in the same? for the first part of
equity, is ^qualitie. And if thou seek not to fear death, the^ think
continually thereupon.

Epistle. 32.
OH what a goodly matter it is (...) provide for the end and accomplishment of
our (...), before death comes upon us? Oh when shall thou see the time
wherein thou shall know that thou have not to do with time, and so be quiet
and at rest, not careful for to morrow, but of thy self fully satisfied?

Epistle. 36.
IF a Child borne in Parthia is by and by taught how to bend his bow. In
Germany to cast a Dart, or in the time of our forfathers to manage an Horse
and come upon his enemy. All these things do the discipline of native soil
in^ne and command each one: But what of that? We must thereby consider y^
against all kinds of darts and enemies, there is nothing more convenient then
not to make any account of death, wherein each man douteth to find some
terrible matter which offends the minds and quaileth the courages of those
who naturally are endued with a self love. For otherwise we need not to
prepare and seek to free our selves from the thing whereunto we should
willigly of our own minds hasten, as unto that that is our own conservation.
Certainly no man learneth how in time of need tolye upon a bed of Roses, but
rather how he may strengthen him self against torments, lest if the case so
requires he should vt ter any thing contrary to his faith or promise. How in
time of necessity and being wonnded, he might ouerpasse a whole night without
sleep, and how le^ ning upon a pikes end he may abstain from drowsinesse, lest
the same prick him. Death comprehends no kind of discommoditie, for
otherwise there must be some disco^modious matter in it. If thou desire long
life, consider that no thing which hides it self out of thy ^ght and returns
again into the natural habitation, ^ro^ whence it is proceeded or ready to
proceed, does consume. The time of it is past, but it does not perish, nether
does death which we do so much fear and shun, take away life, but only gives
truce and (...). The day will come that will restore us to the light which many
(...) be afeard of, were it not that they will bring them a gain in such estate
as they shall not remember things past. Thou shall see that in this world
nothing perishes utterly, but descends and comes up again by course. Is
Summer gone? an other year brings it again. Is winter passed? within few
months it will return. Has night wrapped up the Sun? the Morning will discover
it again. The Stars do keep their first course. Some part of the Element
continually rises, and some goes down: to be breef, I will finally say this,
neither Children ne mad men do fear death: what shame then were it to us that
reason should not assure us as much as their folly and simplicity does them.

Epistle. 50.
THe swistnes of time is wunderful and so does it show it self especially to
those that do look behind them for she deceives them that be to ernest upon
present things, so light is the passage of a heavy long Flight. Our life time is
but one jot, yea less the^ a jot, and yet as little as it is, nature has so
parted and divided it, as if it were some long time. Of this io^e she has
divided one part into infancy, an other into youth, another into man's estate,
and a another into old age it self.

Thus may you see how many degrees she has comprehended in so small compass.
Now that I have discoursed this unto thee: this is a part of our life, of the
which we shall in time to come learn the shortness. I was not wunt to think
time swift, now does ye course thereof seem incredible, which makes me
meruail at those who of this small space do consume the most part in su
per^uous things. We must no longer stay at these trifles, for we have greater
matters in hand. Death follows me and life flees away. Teach me there fore
some remedy and instruct me so as that I may not flee from death, nor life
abandon me. Show me then ye the commodity of this life, consists not in the
time thereof but in the use: also that it may be (yea and often does come to
pass) that the longest liver has lived but a while, and he that has lived
but a while has lived very long. Nature has brought us into the world capable
of learning, and has given us imperfect reason, which may be made perfect.

Epistle, 57.
OUr bodies do swim down ye streme like rivers, what ever y^ (...) flees away
with the time. No part of y^ we see has any continuance, my self eue^ in
telling thee yt all things chageth and altreth. This says Heraclites, we all
go down together but go not al into one river, for the name of y^ river may well
continue, but the water is run away. The like similitude is in man though more
easy to to be perceued in a river, for with as swift a streme or course be we
carried away, wherefore I do meruail at our folly who are so far in love with
the thing that flees so fast, I speak of the body whose death we do so much
fear, although each moment ofour life is the death of other. Fear thou lest
y^ should come to pass which daily is accomplished? or should thou stand in
dout of once dying seeing daily by little and little death (...) thy days. etc.

Epistle. 62.
I Do labor that each day may be to me as all my life, and yet do I not take
hold of it as of my last; but surely as if if might be my last. This letter
do I write unto thee as if during yt writing thereof death would call me away.
I am ready to depart and yet do delight in this life, because that making
great account of that to come, I have before my age endeavored to live well, and
in my age to die well, and to die well is no other then to die willingly. Take
such order that what so ever thou must (...) do, y^ do it not by constraint,
for constraint and necessity belongs to such as do resist, and not to them
that do things of their own accord: for he is not necessarily constrained
that does things willigly, wherefore I say he that willingly obeys laws and
comma^ dements, has already escaped the sharpest part of bondage, which is to
do the thing be would not. It is no misery to do the thing commanded, but to
do it whether a man will or no. Let us therefore so frame our courage, that we
be willing to what soever the case requires, and abooue all without heaviness
to think on our end: for we must first prepare for death and the^ (...) life.
Life is sufficiently furnished of itself, and yet are we ever gree^ of
provision for the same. Still we thinkt (...) we want somewhat. It is neither
years nor days that causes us to have lived long in^ugh, but our hearts and
mind. I, friend Lucilius have lived long enough, and satisfied with this life
do wait for death.

Epistle. 71.
THe day will come that we must ariue at this sweet Haven and should never shun
the same. If any man landeth there in his youth, yet ought he not to complain
otherwise, then as one who has soon ended his Navigations, for as y^ know,
the winds do toss and stay some upon the Seas and sometime with the slownes
of a calm werieth them, others it brings home quickly filling their sails
full and rudely. Think the^ that it is so with us. Life brings some in haste
to the places whereto they might as well have come by leisure. Others it stays
long time, scorching them by the way, and yet must we not still draw back. For
to live is not absolutely good, but to live well: wherefore the wise man lives
so long as he should, but not as he could. None of us considreth that one day
we must depart from this house. We do as the old tenauntes, who through
custom^ and continuance do still keep their possession, though not without
infinite wro^ges and iniuryes. But will thou, whether thy body will or no, be
free? Inhabit it as ^f thou were ready to change lodging, propound to it that
shortly thou must pass out of this ^abernacle, so shall thou be the more
courageous against thy necessary dep^ture. But ^ow can he think upon his and
who is continually covetous and desi^us of worldly wealth? Ordinary and usual
meditation is most necessary in all things.

Epistle. 78.
NO man is ^o ignorant but he know eth that one day he must dye, and yet
draming near the point, he turns back, quaketh, and lamenteth. I pray you if
any should weep because he has not lived a thousand years, would you not
think him the foolishest man alive? even as foolish is he that lame^teth that
he shall not live a thousand years hence. These are like cases. Thou shall not
be, nor thou have not been. These two times do belong to others. Well, thou art
brought to the extremity, admit thou do lengthen it, how long think
thou to lengthen it? why weepest thou? why wishest thou: thou loosest thy
labor. Think not through thy importunacie to alter Gods determination. H^ is
firm and steadfast and guided by wu^derful and^ everlasting necessity. Thou
shall follow all other things. What is it that is news to thee? Thou art borne
hereunto. The like has happened to thy father, to thy mother, thy predcessors,
and unto all that have gone before thee, and the like shall chance to all yt
are to come after thee. It is an invincible chain and unchangeable order,
which binds and draws all things. There is no way but has his issue. Oh
wretch that thou art to make thy self slave to men, to goods, and to thy life,
For where there is no virtue or courage to dye, life is but bondage. What have
thou I pray thee why thou should stay? Thou ha^ wasted all the delights that
might ^acken and withholde thee. There is none which is news to thee, no there
is none but that thou should loathe, so greatly have thou been cloyed with
them, and yet those be they from whom thou art so loathe to depart. For what
diddes^ ^hou ever worthy life? confess ye truth, It is neither because of the
desire of Pallaice or of the Court: neither for grief to forsake the nature
of things, that thou art so slow to dye. Thou art loathe to go from the market
wherein thou have left nothing. Life is as a mask: we care not how long it
lasts, so it be well handled. End it where thou will, it is all one: end where
thou will so y^ thou concludest with a good sentence.

Epistle. 94.
THus do we daily reprove de^eny. Why does not death take away such a one?
wherefore does it cut of this man in ye mid way? why does such a one live so
sorrowful an age both for him self and others? I pray thee whether is more meet
that thou obey nature, or nature obey thee. What carest you when thou must
depart seeing there is no remedy? Thou should not take thought to live long,
but how thou live long. "To live long depends upon Gods will, to live enough
(through his permission) is in thy hand, Life is long and life is full. It is
full and accomplished when thy will is contented, when thy mind has yielded up
all his goods and is restored to ye power of it self. Contrariwise, an other
who dyed in his flourishing youth, has nevertheless fulfilled the office of a
good Citizen, a good friend, and a good child. He has omitted no part of his
duty. Notwith standing his age was imperfect, yet was his life perfect, I pray
thee therefore friend Lucilius, let our li^e be to us as most precious thing.
Let us measure it, not after the time but after the behaui^urs: not according
to the continuance, but to the eff^cts.

Let us commend and accounte him happy, who has well bestowed ye short time of
his life. Age is an external thing and out of our power. My being here
depends of an other: but my being a honest man, of my self. Require of me
that I pass not my age unknown as in darcknesse, and that I may lead a true
life which time may not out run. Ask thou which is the longest life, that
is to live until wisdom, and who that has attained thereto, although he has
not reached the farthest end, yet has he gotten the principal. Death go eth
every where. He that has killed follows him that is ^ain: There is nothing
for the which we take such care. What is it to thee how long thou escapest
that which in the end thou can not escape: or that y^ shrinkest from that
that finally thou can not avoid?

Epistle. 100.
COnsider me the brevity of time, mark the shortness of this carrier wherein
we run so hastily. Se the follow ing on of all mankind, tending into one place.
They which see me far of, are often nearer then the rest, he whom thou
think perished, is but gone before, so that there is nothing more
unreasonable then (seeing thy self must go the same way) to be wail him yt is
gone before thee. He that complains of the death of any man complains
because he was a man. All the world is at one stay, ^e that is yet unborn
must nevertheless die. We are divided by spaces, and yet have all alike issue.
Some go before, some follow, all go one way. All things are tossed, and all
things (...) pass to their contrary through the will of nature. In all this
turmoile of human affairs there is nothing so certain as death, and yet
every man complains of the thing wherein was yet never any man deceived. Well
dyed be a Child, I will not yet say that it was so much the better for him
that he was delivered out of this life. But let us come to the ancient man and
ask him what this Child has gained? Let him cast in his mind this profound
distance of time comprehending it all together, then let him therwithall
compare the ordinary age of man, so shall be see what a trifle we do desire
and how short a way we can reach. Let us therefore in this age first consider
what part thereof the weeping, the thoughts, the wishings for death before it
comes, the sickness, the fear, and to be breef, these yung and vnpro^table
years do take a way, besides that we sleep away half the same, whereunto let
us add the labors, sorrows and dangers thereof: and so shall you see that even
in a long life, the part that we do live is the least of all. Life is neither
good nor evil, but the place of both. Who so dies in youth is in y^ he was as
like to appaire as to amend, like to him which at dice loses ye one of the^,
when with he was as like to lose as to win. Finally in case you compare the
brevity of age with the infinitnes of time, then are we all alike yung and
old: for even the longest age of man is but one jot.

Epistle. 102.
Each day and hour do teach us that we are nothing and by some fresh argument
calls those back to the remembrance of their frailty which would forget
the same, compelling the^ to have an eye to death when they would but once
think upon eternity.

Oh says one, we will now graft pear trees, we will at such a time pla^t whole
rancks of Uines. Alas what folly is it to seek to dispose of age and life, we
have not so much power as over ye day of to morrow. What follye does then
possess the hope of those which do begin long and tedious woorks?

I will build, I will bye, I will take interest, I will exact, I will obtain
honors, and all with the time. But when I am old, and that my age is weary and
cloyed with all this, the^ will I take mine ease. Well believe me, all things, even
ye happiest are doutfull. No man can promise him self ought in time to come:
for even that that man is in possession of, does many times escape through his
fingers, and at the very instant that we lay sure hold on them, some
inconvenience comes between us and home. Time passes on according to an
assured and vnchaunge able law which is hidden from us.

Why what have I to do, if it be mant fest and known to nature, though to me
it be secret and unknown? We un dertake long voyages, from the which we shall
not of a great while return home until we have straied and costed ma ny
unknown Contries and shores.

We take upon us war, and the siack rewards of our warlike (...). To be breef
we acc^pt commissions, (...) and (...) from one office to an other. During all
this time death costeth us: but we never think on it un til some examples of
the death of other men do set it before our faces from time to time, which
also we do no longer thinck upon, then whiles the wunder thereof is fresh in
mind, and yet what ^eater folly can there be then to wun der, that the thing
does sometime happen which is in danger daily to come to pass? Our bounds are
limited in place where y^ inexorable destiny has planted them, and yet can
no man tell how nere they are. Let us therefore frame our minds as if we were
at the end of them, let us not defer the time. For he who daily se ^th the last
hand to his life has noth^ to do with time. Wherefore friend Lucilius hasten
thee to live and think that how many days so many be thy lives. The time
nearest hand does always escape from him that lives in hope, and he is so
covetous of life that with ye fear of death he bec^meth miserable, and though
the dout thereof lameth him of one hand and of one leg, of one thigh, makes him
crooked, and loseneth all his teeth, yet so long as life continues it makes
no matter, all is well, such a miserable thing does death seem unto him. He
wishes his pains more extreme, and that which is hard to be abidden he
desires to prolong and maintain a great while: and for what reward or wages?
eue^ to obtain longer life. But what is this long life? as long a death. Is
there any who would la^guish in torments and perish member after member, that
had not rather cast away his life by little and little, then to cast it away
all at once? Deny me then, that the necessity of death is not a great be^ of
nature: for many are ready even to make wurse bargains as to betray their
friends, whereby to live long: to become bauds to their children, to ye end to
see the next day witness of so many mischeefes? we must therefore shake of this
desire of life, and say y^ it skilleth not when we suffer, for as well one day
we must suffer, It skilleth not how long thou live so thou live well: and
unto good life many times long life is hurtful.

Epistle. 103.
ANother original and estate of all things tarieth us, fear not therefore to
tarry the appointed hour, which will take thee from hence. What soever thou
see about thee account it as moouables and baggage of hostryes and that thou
must go forward. Nature abaseth men at their departure, as at their coming
in. We carry away no more then we bring with us. All that is lapped about thee
shall he taken away, thy skin shall be thy last cover. Yea this skin, this flesh,
this blood which is dispersed in all parts, these bones and these Sinews that
do sustain y^ more feeble parts shall be taken and plucked from thee. This day
which thou fear as the last, is the beginning of an everlasting day, thon
weepest and houlest so does the newborn child^. Why art thou heavy? These
thigs are usual. Thus do the couers of those that be borne ^e rish, wherefore
love y^ these things as if they were thine? they be things where with thou art
but covered. But ye day will come that will uncover thee, and take thee out of
the house of thy filthy and stinking body Here after begin to meditate upon
some more higher and mystical matters. One day thou shall know the secrets of
nature. These clouds shall depart and light shall appeer on all sides. Imagine
with thy self what a light it will be when so many stars have joined their
lights together. No more shadow shall derken the bright element: all ye parts
thereof shall shine alike: the day and night which keep their course are but
accide^ts in this lower air. Thou will say y^ here thou have lived in darkness
when y^ shall at full behold all this light which now y^ see but through the
narrow windows of thy eyes and yet do wunder at the^ a far of. What wilt
y^ think of the heavenly light when thou shall see it in his place?

This conte^plation leueth no thing impotent in this vile, low and cruel mind.
^ith God to be witness of all things. It commands us to seek that he would
allow of us, to prepare hereafter unto him ward, and so propounde to our
selves this eternity, the which who soever has comprehended in his
understanding, fears no anoy, is not ^ooued at the sound of tru^pets, neither
douteth any kind of threatenings. For what can he fear that hops to dye?
Thinck how much good examples do profit us, and thou shall know that the
remembrance of mighty men is no less commodious then even their presence.

Epistle. 108.
TO live is no delicate matter, thou have begun a long race. thou shall fall
and rise again, yea even fall down and wax weary, here shall thou leave one
of thy companions, there shall thou bring an other to his grave, in another
place thy self shall be afeard. Through many such by paths shall thou pass
this rough way. Must thou dye? prepare thy mind against all things. Let thy
heart know that it is comen into a good place where weepings and care have
taken their lodging, and where pale diseases and sorrowful age have chosen their
habitation. In this company must thou needs pass over thy life: well may
thou despise and make none account of these things, but avoid them thou can
not.

Thou shall not regard them if thou think often and reckenest as of things
which must needs happen. All men do approach more valia^tly to the thing long
before premeditated, and do resist ye same courageously: and contrariwise be
suppressed and taken on a sudden all astonished at small matters: seeing then
that all thigs (were it but for their nouelty) do seem grievous: in
continually thinking heerupon you shall not be as aprentise to seek what thou
have to do against such evils. Let us not therefore wu^der at any thing
whereunto we are borne. Of the^ no man can complain because they are alike unto
all men. I say in this case alike, because he that has escaped the^ was
nevertheless subject unto the^. For the law is not called indifferent because
every man uses it, but because it was indifferently ordained unto all men. Let
us frame our minds to equi tie and without lame^ting our mortal nature pay
our tribute willingly. Is win ter cold? cold is necessary, does su^mer bring
heat? we must not be without beat. Does the distempered air hinder our health?
we must be sick. Sometimes we shall meet with a wild beast, yea often times
with men more dangerous then wild beasts. Fire will consume some, and water
other some. We can not alter ye nature of things. The best then is to pay that
which we cannot be quit of, and without murmuring to immitate and follow the
will of God y^ author of all things. It is the part of an evil soldier to
follow his captain with howlings. Destiny leads him that goes of his own
accord, and draws him that comes against his will. Thus should we live,
thus should we speak. Let death find us ready disposed and nothing slack. It
is truly a valiant and noble ^rt which so (...) it self: but he that ^ueth
here against is of a faint, cowardly and slowish mind which thi^keth amiss of
the order of the world, and had rather correct God then it self.

Epistle. 121.
MAn is never more heavenly then when he considers his mortal nature, and
knows that he is borne a man, to die, assurig him self that this body is not
his own house but an Inn, and such an Inn as he must shortly part from. It
is a great token of an hautie mind to account these places where he is
conuersa^t, ^ce, and straight, and not to fear to depart from them. For in yt
he knows and (...) from whence he comes, he knows also whither he must
re^urn. Se we not how many discommodities we ouerpasse, and how unfit this body
is for us? Sometime we complain of our bellyes, of our (...), or of our throat.
Othertimes our sine was or our feet do (...) us. Other whiles some flix or
(...) molesteth us. Other whiles we have to much blood and otherwhiles to
little. We are tempted and ^ed from place to place. Thus are they ordinarily
used which dwell in other men's houses, and yet being furnished of such vilanous
bodies we do here propound to our selves eternal matters and as far as man's
age can exte^d, we do through hope promise our selves all things. We are not
content with any wealth or authority. Is there any thing more shameless and
foolish?

We are made to dye, and yet at our death nothing seems sufficient for us.
For daily we draw nearer the last point, and every hour drives us to the
place from which we cannot escape: behold then the blindenes of man's
understanding. If therefore a hie mind which finally knows a better nature
then this Earthly, does take order to live honestly and painfully in that
vocation whereto it is called, it accounts none of those things which be about
it proper to it self, but as a Pilgrim and trauailer, uses the same as things
convenient.

Out of his first book of the tranquillity of life.
LIfe is but a bondage, wherefore we must use our selves to the conditions
thereof complaining against it so little as may be, and embrace whatsoever
disco^moditie is in it. There is nothing so sharp wherein a mild mind finds
not some comfort. Evil does he live who knows not how to dye well. He that
fears death will never do deed of a living man. But who so knows that this
even from his birth has been signified unto him, will with like courage take
order that what soever happens, nothing shall come suddenly as unlooked for.

Sickness, imprisonment, destruction, burnings, none of all this comes
suddenly upon him. For the wise man will say, I knew in how troublesome an
house nature had placed me.

Many an Alarm has been given at my neighbors house, many an untimely funer
all has passed by my dooers, many a crack of ruynouse houses has sounded in
mine ears. The night has carried away many of those whom the Pallaice, the
Court, and familiarity had joined unto me, cutting away in manner th^ire
hande^ from between mine.

I marvel how so many dangers coming on all sides of me, could escape my
self. But many other men when they take their Shipping, think not on the
tempest. No man think^th that what so ever happens to another can happen unto
himself. For who so had printed these things in his mind, and had considered
what free acc^ the e^ils of others have to him self, he would put on and
prepare his a^mour long before he were assailed. After danger it is to late to
exhort his mind to take perils patie^tly. But will he say, I thought not that
this would have hapened, I would never have believed that such a thing could
have come to pass. And why not? Where be the riches which poverty, fam sne,
and beggary ^oo not follow, even at the heels? Where be the dignityes and
Magistrates robes, which the rags do not accompany, either by a banishment, a
blot, a reproach, or an extreme slander? Where is the Realm whose destructi on
is not nigh and whose accuser and formentor is not at hand? etc.

Out of his book of the shortness of life.
MOst part of mortal men (oh Pauline) do co^plain of the frowardnes of nature.
That we be engendered for a short time, and that the spaces of time that be
granted us do run and flee so wiftly away, that most men do leave their
lives before they can almost prepare them selves to li^e. Our time appointed
is not short, but we lose much of it. There has been given us life enough and
that not nigardly to accomplish great matters, if it had been all well bes^owed:
but when it ^des away in pleasures and idle^es, when we bestow it not upon any
good matter, in the end being pressed by extreme necessity we find our life
wasted, and yet cannot tell how. This it is, we have not received any short
life, but we have s^ortned it. We do not make spare, but are over prodigal of
our li^es. As the innumerable treasures falling in the hands of an evil
husband, are sudainly dispearced, and contrariwise the mean quantity falling
in a wise man's hand, does through use increase the more, so likewise is our
age very ample to him that can well order the same. Wherefore do we then
complain of nature? she has behaved her self (...) toward us. Our life is long
enough if we knew how to use it. One is holden with insatiable covetousness, an
other uses painful diligence in (...) labors. One is moystned in wine, an
other ling^eth in loyt^ing; an other is toyled and withered with ambition,
depending upon the judgment and voice of others. An other for hope of gains
through an hedlong covetousness of trafick co^passeth all lands and seas^ Others
are vexed with desire of war, always laboring either in their ^wn dangers or
in bringing other men into danger. Others there are who can delight in following
nokinde of course, but even languishing and yawning for sorrow death takes
bold of the^, whe^by I ^ut nothing of the truth of y^ whi^ the cheifest poets
have pronounced after manner of Oracles. Of all our life, that part that we
live is the least, and all the other space is not properly ^ife, but a time.
Every man deuideth his life in to diverse things. Some are hard and ^igardly in
keeping their patrimony, others are as prodigal in losing the time I say the
time, ye covetousness whereof is honest and not lamentable. I will therefore take
one among the number o^ old men. Come on, we see that thou have attained to
ye end of man's nature; as far as man's age can reach. Thou art about thy
hundredth year, (...) therefore to me some part of thine age. Tell me how much
of thy time has thy creditor taken away from thee, how much thy friend, how
much thy commonwealth, then how much (...) with thy wife, the (...) of thy
servants, and thy journeys (...) the town for thy friends sake. (...) ^ut the
deseases which (...) procured, and then ad to it how much thou have left to
spare. Thou shall find that thou have fewer years then; thou ^ast reckned.
Call to thy mind when thou were resolved in any determinati on how many days
passe^ ^uer according to thy fprca^, how many have pro fited thee when thy
countenance was in good estate, and thy mind de^oid of fear, what business thou
have sustained ained in all this so long age, afterward how many men have
ra^ished and wasted thy life; while thou have not felt the loss, how much a
vain sorrow, a foolish joy, a sharp desire, and a flattering con^ersation have
taken away ^ro^ thee. And after all this; how much thou haste le^ of (...) y^
was thine. So shall thou see that yet thou dyest before thou be ripe, or thy
time come. And who is cause hee^eof?

Thou lyuest as if thou should always live. Thou never think upon thy
good husbandry. Thou never markest how much time is gone. Theu spendest and
losest as if thou had (...). Thou fear as a mortal man, and couetest
all, as immortal.

We shall hear thee say, fifty years (...) I will take mine ease: three score
years he^ I will give ^uer mine Office. And I pray thee where haste thou gotten
any longer life? whose letters pa^ te^tes (...) promised thee y^ thou shall
live longer? Who will permit things to fall out as thou (...) appointed? Art
thou not ashamed to reserve the remnaunts of thy life for thy wisdom, and
appoint the time which y^ art not (...) to bestow upon any thing? Oh how (...)
is it to begin to live, when thou must leave this life? (...) not this a foolish
forgetfulness of out mortal (...), to delay a good and sound advice, unto our
fifteth year, and to seek to begin our life at that place whereunto few can
attain? You shall (...) the most mighty, (...) ant, and lofty persons so^time
let (...) words tending to desire of quietness, praising and preferring the
^ame before all their wealth. They would ((...) they might safely) come down
from the top where they stand.

The mighty Emperor Augustus endued with more graces then any, ceased (...) to
wish for quietness, and to seek for varations whereby he might be exempt from
dealing in public affairs. All his communication tended to that effect. This
quiet seemed to him so great a matter, that not being able to comprehend it in
effect, he apprehended it in thought. He tha^ saw all things depend upon him
self, that gave to all nations such fortune as him (...) li^ed, esteemed y^ day
happy where in he might depose his authority: he had tried how much sweat the
goods which glistred upon earth did procure, and how many secret thoughts they
did conc^ale.

It ^re but superfluous to rehearse many who to others seemed happy, and yet
them selves bare other witness against them selves, when they discoursed upon
the actions of their years, and yet with all these complaints could never
change, neither other men, neither them selves, for although such words
escaped them, yet did their affections still return to their former ward.
Truly although our life should last a thousand years, yet would it still seem
but short, the worlds would devour it quite. All that time which though
nature does cover yet reason might set free through good husbandry, must
nevertheless flee from us in a mo meant. For we take no bold of it, we stay it
not, neither do slack the pace of it through our diligence in any thing, but
we let it go as superfluous and which cannot be recovered. All our life time we
must learn to live: yea, which is more strange, all our life time must we
learn to dye. Such mighty men as have forsaken all lets, and renounced all
their goods, offices, and pleasures, have gone about none other thing, e^ to
the end of their age, but to learn to live, and yet most part have dyed,
confessing that yet they knew not the way.

Every man hasteneth his life, laboring with desire of time to come, and
werynesse of time present. But he that has no time but that y^ he bestow eth
to his own use, and that orders each day as a life, neither wishes nor
^eareth to morrow. What will happen? How ever thou be occupied thy life
departs, thy death does approach and will be with thee by and by, wherefore
will thou, or nil thou, thou must be at leisure.

They frame their life at the Cost of their life, and do discourse thereof a
^ar of. The gre^test loss that is in life, proceeds of delay. Delay takes
away thy first days, it catches away things present, while it promises thee
things to come. The stay which depends upon to morrow and loses this day,
is a great let unto life. Thou appointest of that that is in the hand of
Fortune, and let slip that which thy self haste hold of. Where look
thou? What tendest thou? All things to come are uncertain.

To be brief, thou shall understand that aged me^ do live but a short space.
Mark then how old men which do even dote do seek longer life. They do
through vows and wishes entreat for the increase of a few years. They do
persuade them selves to be younger then in deed they be. They do flatter them
selves with fainings, and (...) deceive them selves as willingly as if they
deceived both death and destiny together. If through any faintnes they be
admonished of their (...), oh how ^ully they die? It seems y^ they do rather
pluck them selves up by the roots, then quietly depart this life. Then they
say that they have been fools, and through their folly have not lived their
whole time: but if they might escape this sick nesse, they would live quietly
and give over all affairs. Then begin they to consider that they have in vain
prepared those things which the^ selves shall not enjoy, and that all their
labor has been in vain and is come to no effect. Those only are wise and do
live, which tend to the learning of wisdom, for they do not only well
preserve their age, but do also ad thereunto all their time past. All the
years gone before have they gotten, and so have we likewise unless we be
unthankful.

The famous authors of these goodly and sacred oppinions are borne for us. They
have prepared life for us. We through the labor of other men are guyded unto
goodly matters, and (...) dug up and drawn out of darcknes and so brought
to light. If we delight through valiant minds so get out of the strait bonds
of humain wekenes, we have time enough to walk on ou^ way. We are parmitted
with Socrates to dispute, Carneades to dout, with some to rest (...), and with
other some to overcome and surmount humain nature.

Seeing then that nature admits us to the company of all woorldspassed, why
do we not abandon this little and frail passage of time, and with all our hearts
give our selves unto high and eternal matters, which we may participate with
the best? Of men which run from office to office, which be importunate both
to them selves and other men, when they have well run from street to street,
where they have trotted from door to door, when they have left no door open
wherein they have not thrust in their nose, when they have walked salutations
for hire from house to house, how many, be there in a great town let with
diverse pleasures, that they cannot see, and yet can well tell how to rid their
hands of them and send them away, to the end to sleep quietly, or pass over
their time in ryotousnesse, or else are discourteous and hard to be spoken
withal. We therefore do stay upon better offices.

Each man that lists may have (...) access and private conversation daily
with Zeno, Pythagoras, Democritus, Aristotle, Theophrastus, and other such
principal Authors of g^d Arts. He shall find none of them let, but all at
leisure to common with him. Each one will send him away more happy, content and
desirous of their amity, none of them will suffer him to depart empty.

Out of his book of consolation.
IT is a great comfort to a man to thinck that that which all men before him
have suffered, and all that are to come shall suffer, either is or must happen
to him self: and in mine opinion nature has made common to all men the thing
which to them all was most greeuons, to the end that such equality might
comfort the rigor and cruelty of death. Come on then (...) hold every way
all mortal men, on all sides thou shall see great and continual cause of
lamention.

Ambition which is never in rest tor menteth one, poverty calls an other
daily to woork: an other fears the riches that he has wished for, and is in
con tinuall pain through his own desire. One is vexed with care, another with
labor, an other with preace of people which continually do beseedge the
thresholde of his doors. This man is sorry he has Children, that man that his
are gone: sooner shall we want tears then caus^s to weep. See thou not what
life nature has permitted to us, which has ordained that all men at their
birth should weep. With this beginning do we enter into the world heerunto
does the rest of our years agree, and thus do we pass our life.

All those goods which through pleasure do delight us, which have but the
outward she we and within is full of deceit. I speak of money, dignities,
power, authority and such like, which astonisheth ye blind covetousness of man
kind, do we possess with pain and envy of other men, and even among those
that have them they use more threats then authority. They be slippery and
uncertain, man is never in any assurance of them, we are still in danger lest
they should escape us. Yea although a man fear nothing that might happen, yet
the custody of a great felicity is full of cares: If thou will believe them
that more narrowly do search the truth, all this life is but pain. We are
thrown into this deep and unconstant sea, which continually ebbeth and
flows, hoisteth us up with her rising, and then casts us down with greater
barme, and still tormenteth us either with rising or falling.

We misetable wretches (I say) ^aue never any firm or assured dwelling place.
We remain still in dout, always swimming, hitting one against an other, and
many times making S^wrack. In this surging Sea being abandoned to all tempest
we live in con tinuall fear. All they that sail therein have n^e other Haven
then death.

After what manner many evils do chance to honest men, out of his book of
Gods providence.
THou have asked me, Lucilius, in case the world be guided by Gods providence,
how it chances that so many evils do happen to honest men. I will in this my
work wherein I do pretend to prove that Gods providence is above all things
and that God him self hau^teth among us, show thee a good reason. Between
honest men and God there is a kind of amity, procured and contracted through
virtue, and not an amity only but a most strait alliance and likeness. For
time only is a difference between the honest man and God: Man is the follower,
disciple and assured o^pring of God, and therefore his triumphaunt father
which requires earnestly of him to be virtuous, nurisheth him hardly after
the manner of severe a Father. When (therefore) thou see honest men, who^e God
likes of, labor, sweat, and have still stony paths to walk in, and
contrariwise the wicked men pass over their time in folly, and wallowe in
dilights that do turmoil our children, and let run at random the children of
our slaves that through a sorrowful and laboursome discipline, we do withholde
our own children in their duties, and let go the raines unto y^ others. Be y^
therefore certain of y^ like at Gods hand: He dallieth not with an honest man,
but tries him, hardneth him, and prepares him for his seruise.

Of the means to bear adversity, out of the same book.
Wherefore do many evils happen to honest men? no evil can hurt the ho nest
man. Contrary things cannot be mixed together, he accou^teth all adversities as
exercises. For what honorable ^an is not desirous of a true and ready labor,
even with hazard to utter some good duty, Virtue languisheth and with reth
away when she has none enemy: but having one it appears who she is, how
much she is worth, and what she can do, when through patience she shewher
power.

Honest men therefore must take in good part and thinck well of what so
happens to them. It skilleth not what thou suffer, but how thou suffer
it. Do thou not see that Fathers and mothers do entreat their Children
(...). The Fathers command their Children to exercise them selves, to study
apace, not suffering them to be idle even on the (...) days, and often times
bring forth the sweat out of their brows, and tears from their eyes. The
Mothers contrariwise do dandle them on their lappes, in the Chimney corner, or
in the shadow, not suffering them to weep, to vex them selves, to take any
care, or to labor.

So God toward honest men bears a Fatherly heart and a manly love. He
troubles and molesteth them with labor, sorrow, and losses, whereby they may
gather and obtain true force. But those bodies which are fatted up, do not
only fail in labor, but also languish away through sluggishnesse, fainting
and falling down under their own labor and weight. The felicity which was
never hurt, cannot indnre any great stripe. Among many stout words of our
friend Demetrius, this being still fresh and sounding in mine ears does best
please me. I find (says he) nothing more un happy then him that never
sustained damage or adversity. The more that a man is tormented, the greater
is his honor.

Of Prosperity. Out of the same book.
PRosperous things do still light in the hands of the mean people of vile and
base minds: but the property of a valiant man is to subdue calamities and
what soever else that astonisheth mortal men. I do account thee miserable,
because thou vaste felt no misery, and vnhapy in that thou have no mischau^ces.
Thou have lived without any enemies. No man, no not thy self can tell what thou
can do.

It is necessary for the better knowledge of thy self, first to try thy
ability, for who is perfect in any thing which be has not proved? Virtue
desires danger, viewing how far it stretches, and where it ends, and not
what she must endure before she come at it. For what so she has to endure is
part of (...) glory. The Pilate is not known before the tempest, neither the
soldier until the battle be begun. How shall I know how thou can bear
poverty: so long as thou swimmest in wealth? Where shall I learn thy co^stan
^ie against ignominy, infamy, and batred of the people, so long as thou con
tinuest amongst the reioycings of all men, or if a certain inclination of
men's minds toward thee does still fol low thee? Thy calamitieis a cause of
virtue.

Those then whom God looueth he proves, hardens, vieweth, visits. and
does exercise. And contrariwise those whom he seems to flatter and spare
does he reserve to leave them the more delicate and faintharted in the evils
to come. Why does GOD afflict the best with sickness, sorrows, and
discommodities? Or wherefore in any Army, are the greatest and most
dangerous enterprises committed to the most courageous and va leant persons:
or wherefore does the Captain send his chosen Soldiers to scirmish with the
enemy, to view a way, to win a passage and to drive those away which do
keep the same.

None of them says, my Captain has done me wrong, but rather, he ac
counts well of him. So likewise should all those say, who through Gods
permission do endure those evils of the which Cowards and effeminate persons
be weary. God did account us worthy to be tried how much man's nature can suffer
and endure.

Flee therefore these delights, eschew this faint and effeminate felicity
which distempereth and molifieth the heart, lulling it asleep in a perpetual
drunkenness except there ha^peneth some chance which from time to time
puts him in mind of man's estate. Alas were it not far better to sustain
such perpetual felicity as conducteth thee to virtue, then to quail under an
infinite wait of wealth.

Therefore God toward the good men does as Schoolemaisters toward their
Scholars, in giving the painfullest lessons to those in whom^ is most
likelihood.

Think thou (I pray thee) that the Lacedaemonians hated their Children, when
in proouing their natures they did even whip them openly, yea, their own
Fathers exhorted them valeauntly to bear the stripes, and all torn and half
swou^ded, desired them to heap wound upon wound.

What marvel is it therefore though GOD have hardly entreated and tried the
valeaunt minds. To be in continual danger causes us not to care for
danger. And so do Maryners strengthen their bodies to the air of the Sea:
Laborers harden their hands to work: Soldiers pra^ their arms to the
casting of the Dart: and Runners make their (...) nimble to pass the Carrier.

To be, brief, that part of man is moste^ (...) that is oftennest exercised.
No ^ree is so steadfast and strong as that whereon the wind does daily beat,
for through torments it gathers it self closer and takes surer root.

I do also remember this courageous voice of Demetrius. Of one thing, oh
immortal Gods (says he) do I co^plain of you, and that is, that you did no
sooner show me your wills. For of my self I would have come, where now being
sent for I do appear. Will you take my children? I offer them un to you. Will
you have part of my body? take it. I promise no great thing, for as well I shall
shortly leave it all. Will you have my spirit? why not? the fault shall not be
in me, I will not let, but that you may take whatsoever you have given me.
Willingly shall you carry away what so ever you ask me. What is there else? I
had rather have offered it to you my self, then to leave it to you. What need
you take it from me? you may take it, but you shall not take it from me, 'for
nothing can be taken away, but from him that does resist. But I am not con^d,
I suffer it not against my will, and so serve not God, but do consent to his
will.

Fire tries Gold, and (...) the ^rt of man. But wherefore then does God
suffer any evil to be done to good men? Nay contrariwise, he suffers it not,
for he has put from them all evils, mischeefs, naughty thoughts, theeuish
counsels, blind whordomes, and couetounesse which continually lies in wait
for other me^, and he him self keeps them. But seeing he withholdeth them,
would not some men also desire him to keep their goods and baggage? No for
they do ease God of that pain, in that they make none account of outward
things.

Demetrius threw away his riches esteeming them as a burden unto the good
mind. Imagine thou therefore that God says: what have you to complain of unto
me, you that have delighted in righteousness. I have compassed the rest with
false goods, and have settled their vain minds in a long and false dream. I
have painted them out with Gold, Silver, and Iuorie, but within is nothing any
thing worth.

They whom at the first you take to be blessed, if you look well upon them,
not on that side that you see when they meet with you, but on the other side
which is hidden, you shall find them miserable, ^lthye, and ahominable, and
there is nothing but their walls ^ecked and painted out on the outside. This
therefore is not the firm and perfect felicity. This is but a crust and yet
that a thin and very fine one. Where fore so long as they can stand upright, and
show but what part they list, they do glister and deceive the people.

But if peradventure by chance they fall and be discovered, then may you
plainly perceive how filthy and deep vilanie is hidden under a borrowed
brightness. But the contrary is in you. I have given you assured goods which
will continue. The oftener they be turned, and the narowlyer that they be tooked
upon, so much the better and excellent will they appear, which are these. To
make none account of that that we fear, and to disdain that that ordinarily
we do desire. You show not (...) wardly all those goods which are with in you.
Thus does this Monark disdain the outward paries, and is content with the
conte^plation of him self. He has set up all his goods within. Your felicity
is not to have to do with felicity.

FINIS.

