A LAMENTATION IN WHICH IS SHEVVED what Ruin and destruction comes of
seditious rebellyon.

ANNO. M.D.XXXVI.

A LAMENTATION.
IF STVDY HAD GOTTEN me as much eloquence, as true and unfeigned love of my
country gives me cause to lament: the^ durst I boldly say, that there is
none so wicked, none so unnatural, none so far under all the senses of
humanity, but I could fully persuade him, nothing so much to be eschewed, as
sedition, none so worthy all punyshement, as they which traitorously make of
one nation two, of them that even now were friends, suddenly to be utter
ennemies. But seeing min eloquence, which I must needs grant to be very
small, can not so serve me, as I desire in so weighty a mattier, I will see
what love, sorrow, and pity can do, which if they could as ernestly work,
as they be greatte in me, I would trust to make all honest stomachs to
deteste and abhor sedicious traitors. Take away the commandments of god,
destroy all the laws of nature and of man, may not either the high
commodyties, that come of mutual concord between all the kings subjects,
and the kings grace, or the exceeding damages, that ensue open sedition, keep
any honest heart, in maynteynynge the one, and fleinge the other? But in so
shameful an act, why do I speak of honest hearts? For who is he, that can
think him self to have any vein of an honest man, that fears not god,
that loves not his country, that obeys not his prince, that finally does
as much as he can to pulle away nature, honesty, and al good laws? What is he
that can say, he is an english man, and that he cares not, though the wealth
of England be trodden under the foot? A beast he is, a man he can never be
judged, that passes but on his own wealth and pleasure. Alas how unworthy is he
to be shaped after the form of a man, how unmeet to dwell among men,
which sees what follows sedition, and yet woll endeavor him self to stir
the quiette and obedient hearts of the people to sedition? He that with him
self ernestly ymagineth, how much blood must needs be shed, what a
number must needs be slain, how many good towns shall be robbed and
spoiled, how many fermours, and honest howseholders shall be utterly undone,
how many gentle men for lack of their rentes shall be fayn to lay their lands
to morgage, or utterly to selle them away, how many honest women shall be
defiled, how many virgins ravished: He that sets the blody feld before his
eyes, here legs, there heedes, these deadly wounded, those utterly deed, is
it possible, that any man can so cast of humanity, so hate men, that he had
leauer have so many deed, as needs must die in such cruel division, than to
have them alive and his friends? If our most gracious prince, god save his
life, and theyrs that so wyshe, had given you some great occasiou, to have gone
from him: yet to go against him and his true subjects, good cause you can
have none. How can ye say, you fight in a good cause, which in one act
offend so many of goddis commandementes? Who is he that very nature has not
taught, to be obeysaunt to his soueraygne lord the king? Peter, Paul,
Christ, finally all say, that say well, Obey thy prince. I am sorry, that
Turks hethen creatures, men cast away, if Truth say truth, I am sorry that
they should so far excelle us, in a thing that only perteyneth unto us,
and little or nothing to them, Obedience is the badge of a true christen man.
And be not we ashamed, that the Turk shall send for the greattest man's heed in
his countreye, and bid him leave the body at home, and find them here in this
so unreasonable a request obediente: and are we not ashamed, that we being
demanded a little money, to come with clubbes, bylles, and bows, to oppress
him, in whose defense we ought all to shede our best blood. Look how Dauyd,
which was chosen of god to succeed Saul king of Israel, trembles, how sorry
he is, that he had cut a piece of Saul's garment, which now full of iniquity
sought all the ways that he could, to kill David. Look upon the circumstances,
David's heart was innocent, pure, and clean, which did cut his vesture for
none other intent, but to show his fidelity unto him: and to declare, that
he had opportunity, and might have slain Saul, if he had lysted so to do.
There was no den so derke, no rock so vnclymable, no mountain so high, but
king Saul would up to it, and seek the death of David. An other time Saul was a
sleep in his tente, Dauyd comes in, he might have killed him: what does he?
nothing but take away a spear that was at his heed, and a vessel of water,
which stood beside him. This is the text. David cut the typpe of the skirte
of Saul's cloak, and by and by he repented him, that he had cut the kings
vesture, and began to cry, Our lord be merciful unto me, that I do no such
thing to my soueraygne lord: Our lord keep me, that I never lay hands on
him, because god has anointed him. What is he that can extend his hand
toward a king, and be innocent? Read farther. Thou shall se, that he which
said he killed Saul, and brought the crown unto David, was slain by David's
commandment. Yet here is more to be marked. Saul fell on his own sword,
and would in any case be deed. After this came the son of Amalachites, and
feyned, that he had help the king to dye, layinge for his excuse the king
was half dead and more before, and desired him to ryd him out of his pain.
Not withstandyng David thought him worthy to dye, which laid no violent hands
upon he king, but help a king to dye. And when David hard that Saul was
dead, what lamentation makes he? how renteth he is vestures? how fasteth he,
and causes al his to fast from morning to night? And do we think them
not worthy most cruelle death, that thus haynouslye rob and spoil the
kings true subjects, and farther most bloodely bent against his hyghnes,
comme with a huge and a riottous army against his capitaynes, to the
destruction of his laws and commonwealth? Alas what unkindness may so kind and
so loving a prince reckon in these traitors, for whose sakes and sauegarde of
lives, I dare well say, his grace would have shed his bloudde? what unnatural
hearts? That they should for none or small cause run into such outrageous
malice ageynste his grace, and foolyshely pretend to hate them only, which
his highness best loves? and needs must best love, as long as such their
virtues, qualities, fidelity so compels his grace to do. Who can justly
blame him for making them great, that in deed have al those things, which at
the beginning of nobility only made them noble? But what marvel if such
vile and abominable traitors, highly hate all those, in whom virtue shyneth,
which in deed can promote none but such as honesty gives reputation unto?
It far passes Cobblers craft to discuss, what lords, what bishops, what
counsaylours, what acts statutes and laws are most mete for a common
welthe, and whose judgment should be best or worst, concerning matters of
relygion? Good lord, is it possible that such a nombre of men, should cast
them self away, there where a Cobbler shall be counted a captain? If England
could speak, might it not say thus? I am one, why do you make me twain? Ye
are all mine, how can any of you, where none ought so to do, seek the
destruction of me, my most noble and prudente prince king HENRY the, VIII.
and his true subjects? It is a shrewde hand that scratcheth out the eyes, a
shreude foot, that for his fault putttih the neck in ieoperdy. Lyncolneshire
thou art a member of mine, I thought if need had been, if mine ennemies had
infested me, to have found help and succor at thy hand: and thou thus
traitorously set upon me? when meat, which should keep the body lusty,
sleeth, what marvel if hungre kylle many a one? If thy weapon, which should
defend the, fight against the, what wonder to see an other ma^s dagger busy
with thy bosom? If Lyncolneshyre seek to distroye England, what wonder is
hit, if France and Scotland sometime have sought to offend me? Alas who
can blame me, if I be woo, which find none (I thank the prudence of my
prince and his counsayllours) that seeks my sorrow, but such as I have to
long nourysshed and pampered up. Lyncolnshire I took the for my friend, so did
the king also, and I trust he woll do again, if thou pourged of these
traitors, hereafter do as thou shall wyshe thou had now done. Thus
England might say, and much more, which I will say for her. If the fear of
god, the love of the commonwealth, and loyal obeisance to our most gracious
prince, had moved the rest of his subjects no more thanne they did you, might
not we have feared, least it should have chanced unto us, as it did to them that
came of the serpents tethe? The fable is not long, another feyned without good
cause. Cadmus by the consent of the poetis, killed a great serpent, whose teth
he was commanded to sow in the ground, of the which sodeynely arose harneist
men, a row on the one side, an another on the other, which straight fell to
gether by the ears, in so much that they were almooste deed, er they were
fullye borne. The poets would declare, that where as is dissension, both the
parties go to wrack. But what needs me to use a fable, when I may confirm
this thing with so many histories? First what brought down the greeks? or to
begin somewhat farther, what was the cause that some time the Lacedemoniens
were under the Atheniens, sometime contrary? Look the histories, you shall
evermore for the most part find, that never great realm or commonwealth has been distroyed without sedition at home. Dissension dissension, has been the
ruin, the venom, the poison of all great estates. In so much that the
discord of capitaynes only, often times put the greeks to much calamity. How
often was Athens vexed by reason of the private hatrede betwyxte Aristides and
Themistocles, Cimon and Pericles, Nicias and Alcibiades their capitaynes?
Surely the division of Greece, that is to say, the Lacedemonyens ageynste the
Atheniens, the Corinthians and Thebans indifferent, friend to nere another, made
the Romans lords of Greece. Now what brought down the Romans, which were
conquerours of all the hole world well nygh? Does not Silla, Marius, Cinna,
Pompeius, and Caesar seditious citisins make almost the end of the reign of
the Romans You se in other lands sedition has been evermore the bringer in
of al sorrow and mischief. Has sedition done no hurt in England? have we
had no experience before now? I would we had not, how be it I trust the
kings grace will so prudently and graciously order this, that here after
England shall have little fear of insurrections. Is there any in England,
that has not hard of Palm sunday filde, Black hethe field, and many other,
which because they are almost forgoten, I would no body should at any time
speak of them? I am of Platos mind, I would have no histories to make mention
of them, that have fought ayenste their country. I would no sedition should
be written of, no nor spoken of, I would have men believe, that there was never
none so unnatural, as to rise against his prince and country. But saying it is
to far past, and the hurt to great, to be so soon forgotten, let us take in
all things some fruit. For what is so yuell, but sum good comes of it?
These two feldes, how many wydowes made they, how many fatherles chylderne,
what blood they cost us, few be but they know. I let pass how all that
ever came into England, to infeste us, never did hurt, except we were
divided. Julius Caesar, the best captain that ever the Romans had, and
peradventure that ever was, at his first setting upon us, did no man hurt
but him self. I pray you see what opinion he had of us. Read Paulus
Orosius. where at the first he came but with.lxxx. ships, at his retourninge
he came with no less than six hundred ships, furnished with piked
soldiers. And as Caesar him self writes, Mandubratius, son of the king of
London, called Imanuentius, stale out of England and followed him, being than
at variance with Casseuelaunus king of Kent: And so Caesar came in helped by
this sedition. O cruel sedition, O venomus hatred, O unlucky debate, O
pernicious dissension, O spiteful rancour, O blind and ever hurtful envy, O
seldom well endyng malice, why do thou in one hour often times mar more, than
in an hundred years can be restored again? What folly, what madness is this, to
make an hole in the ship that thou saylest in? what wylful frowardnes is
this, to lose both thyn eyes, that thyn ennemie may lose one? I pray god the
Cobbler be chief captain. I pray god there be no polshorne pedlers, I had
almost called them by their name, that put the Cobbler out of his room. Who
will think, but it was great pity to put out such good religious me^, yt now
have turned their coules in to iackes, their portessis and beadis into bills,
bows, and twenty other praty things, and comme now harneist into the feld,
against god, their king, and both their laws? Is it not very like, that they
lived virtuously in their cloisters, where they might do al mischief, and no
man see them, which now in the face of the world are not ashamed to be the
ryngleaders of these traiterous rebels? Is it not pity that these should
lack, An halter.
which will sooner undo (as far as they may) an hole country, tha^ not have
for their harlottes as they have had in time past? Their pope, their puppet,
their idol, their romayn god will not out of their hartis. They can not abide
scripture to com in place, and bear the rule of religion, as it was wont, and
ever ought to do. But god shall fight for the king in this behalf: unto whom
for the setting out of his most holy word, I dare boldly say, god is more
bound, if god may be bound to man, than he is to all the priests, monks,
friars, cardinals, and popes that have been this five hundred years. It was no
less than a learned kings act, to send the popes bulls into their own
pastures. To make of a pope a bishop, which is in deed as well both as one,
well sought, nouther of both: It was a princis deed to drive out him, ayenste
whose abusions no man could open his mouth, peyn of loss of goods, life, and
honest fame, thank be to their tyrannous decrees, and abomynable laws,
which I might call lustis, but that I am understand well enough. He is
gone, but to many of his lyuerey tarieth still. I dare say, if it be proved
this sedition to come of them, they will not tarry ever. I speak never ayenste
the good, because I know not where they dwell. This I know well, the kings
grace for a few good, has suffered an abhomynable sort of the yuelle raygne
to long. But I will return to my purpose. If the king should ask you, as
sometime the Romayne ambassadors asked theirs, why they had left the
Senators, and were so seditiousely departed?

Have you any more to say, than they had? Nay, you have much less. For they
lacked no matter to have laid for them, but they lacked a man to utter it. I
pray you, what can you say, if the kings grace lay but unkindness to you,
where the law condempneth you of treson? I am sure in so great a crime, there
must needs be some greatte occasion. Lyncolneshire bring forth your Cobbler,
what can you lay for your excuse? How can you say, it is lawful, nay that it
is not most abominable, thus traitorously to invade, rob, spoil, and kyl
the true subiectis of your most gracious and loving prince? Will you lay the
putting down of abbeys for you? First why may not the kings grace by the
counsel of the lords spiritual and temporal, and the commons assembled to
gither in parliament (of the which many are among your rout) do that, that all
these, and the better part of you, than thought best to be done? And what
cruel and blind malice is this, to lay in one or two men's necks, as yuell
done, that, which was thought by the hole counsel and consent of the three
estates of England, to be most to the honor of god, dyscharge of the king,
and weal of this his realm and subjects of the same? What an inconstancy
reygneth in fools? How long have you cried, monks, priests have to much?
How long have we al prayed, god send the king such counsel, that one day
he may see goods that were yuell spente, turned into a better use? How can
he turn them into better use, except he first take them away from these,
that you your own self by act of parlyament publyshed, to have been misvsed
and spent in the mayntenaunce of vices and oppressynge of virtues. First you
would in any case, that the abbeys should down, that the spirituality should
have less. So in deed these spiritual traitors, that are in harneys ayenste
their country, call them self, which have none other spirit, than their
father the dyuelle has inspired into them. If these be spiritual, put a coule
on Catilms back, is not he than a religious monk, and a good spiritual man?
If these be religious and spiritual men, which do all that they can to
distroy both the laws of god and of man, to bring this realm in desolation,
why may not Jack Cade, Jack Straw, Will Wawe, Wat Tyler, Jack Shepeherde,
Tomme Myllar, and Hob Carter, a harbor sent for, be shorn into religion? If
they be spiritual, that consume the day either in ydelnes, or in an other
thing worse then that, sowynge sede in other men's forowes, whom shall we call
carnal? It were not honest to utter all that the vysitours in their
inquysitions bring home, that these holy hooded religious have them self
confessed, and confirmed with the subscription of their own hands. What
things can they be ashamed of, that confess such crimes, as no honest man
can well rehearse, nor good man abide to here? They shall pardone my
shamefastnes, I am content that I lack boldness to write that which they are
not ashamed to do. They have fautes inowe, though I lay not this to their
charge. They need none to accuse them, except they change their apparayle. The
world has spyed them: I would scarce believe, that men could teache nature a
new way, except it had been proved to their teethe, and uttered by their
own selfs. They that be learned, know what I mean, and what they are. Paul
laid the same faut to the Romans. Romans ^.
They that be unlearned will much marvel, except they have been brought up
with monks and friars, how young nouyces may stand instead of young wives. I
have said enough. It stynketh to sore, to de sturred to much. Is it possible,
that men should marvel, such to be put out of their houses, and not sooner
wonder, that they be not raked in the coals? I wol not agrauate things. I am
glad that they have greatter cause to say, that the kings grace shows mercy,
out of his place, tha^ to think them self hardely delte withal, which lose
but their dwelling places, where they ought to lose their lives. The civil
law puttethe such not out of their house, but with the swerd puts them to
death. And how strayte the act of the parlyament is, they should have found,
if it had been put in execution. If the kings grace had done as the law would,
and not as his most gracious nature provoke him, could any man have said,
such detestable vices to deserve less punishment. The kings grace follows
such process as god does use lightly for the most part. God does not
punysshe all, that are sinners, another the king has punished all monks, all
be not put down, that both the law, and the judgment of good men, think
unworthy to stand, but such, which had neither preyse of good life, nor of
hospitality before they were suppreste. Wherefore I can not think, that the
puttinge down of abbeyes, that is to say, the puttinge away of maynteyned
lechery, buggery, and hypocrisy, should be the cause of this rebellious
insurrection. There was some other wild worm, that would not suffer mad
brains to be at rest. You would feign, and have sought to find some honest
color to shadow your execrable and most cruel intended robbery, spoylynges,
rauyshementes, burnynges, exilyng of all honest and quiet persons, and
setting up of thieves, murderers, and manquellers. Think you that wise men,
which have seen by all histories, the end of such seditious traitors, do
not well epsy, what all your intent was? What should other shyres look to find
at their hands, that have first undone and distroyed their own?

Whom would they have spared to rob, spoil, or kylle, if they had brought
their purpose to pass, that now rob and slay, when they are assured that
they can no while continue, neither could have contynewed so long, but that
the kings goodness gave them this space both to aknowlege their high and
detestable fault, and to declare unto all his subjects, how loath he is to
shede the blood of them, that ought to love his grace best, next unto god. I
am glad and sorry, that you have no better excuse, than either you have made, or
any other for you. Glad that all men, which have judgment, shall think
you to have done, as people is wont to do, that is, wonderful fondly, and
without any ground. Sorry that you should be so mad, none occasion given
you, to put your self to such rebuke, shame, and confusion. It is to folyshe,
that ye lay for you, that for the payement of a shyllyng in the pound, you
would set all England by the ears. How can he be less worthy to dye,
then they that most deserve it, which had leauer see all England distroyed,
than part from.x. or.xx. s. that was before freely and beneuolently given and
granted of your selves?

We could find in our hearts at the request of a sedicious pope, Look in
Froissar^ the first part of his Cronycle the 428. chapyter.
called Urban, to part from.xxv. hundred thousand frankes at one time, which
amounts above.xii. hundred thousand crowns of the son, to aid and
strength him against an other Romayne bishop, called Clement, that challenged
the Papacy, and never grudged at the matter: And now for the urgent
busynesses, and most needful affairs, as to the suppressynge of the rebels
and other ennemies, that rose up in the kings land of Irelande, which
business, as it was than thought by all the wise men of this realm, and as
in deed we now have proved, could not be redressed and well fynysshed,
without exceeding charges, beside the great expenses, that his grace is at,
upon many things, that we know, which know but little, as upon the haven
at Dover, the bulwarks fortresses and buyldynges made for the munition and
defense of his town of Calyce, of Berwyke, and of other fronters that are so
hyghelye beneficial for the common weal of this his realm, not only in his
gracis time, but many years after. Now I say, for all these high and weyghtye
causes, and many other that I reken not, which his grace is at only for our
profit, quiet, rest, and peace, we wyllnot depart from so small a sum,
that was (Isay again) so freely granted unto him. Every man was not charged
hereunto, but such as all the wise men of the realm thought, might easily
bear it. He that says his substance is less worth than.xx.li. pays never
a penny. Alas what a detestable mind is this, to will sooner.x. or.xx.
thousand to be slain, than to depart from.x. or xx.s? Is there any honest
man's arm, but it would fight alone, if it were cut of, against such
pestilent and traiterous mankyllers? Is there any man so naked, but he shall
think him self twice armed, that comes to fight in such a cause, and against
such rebels? Is there any that thinks he can better bestow his best
blood, than upon such murderers? you say, we have been ruled to much. There
is a pretty fable, which Plutarche does recite. There was a serpent, whose
tail began to strive with the heed. The taylle said, Heed, so it is, I have
followed a great while, me seems reason, that thou should follow an another
while. The foolyshe heed granted the tail to be obedient, and followed him. To
be short, the tail made captain and ruler of the heed, now busteleth forth,
often times knocking him self against stones, prickynge him self with thorns,
and also brynging the heed evermore in peril and danger to be spylte. Should
it not be much worse, if the kings grace should here suitors, that comme in
harneys, and being heed, apply to their requestis, that seek nothing but
dissension, shedyng of blood, and ruin of the hole realm? The kings grace
woll, as his true subjects trust, so order this matter, that here after the
tail shall be content to do as the heed shall command. The king and this
his realm, should be to fortunate, if these rude countries knew, as well as
the noble and faythefull city of London, and other cyuyle placis of England
do, how much they be bound to love and trewely serve king HENRY the.VIII.
For what act sens Christ's departure was more to be commended, than this
exaumple, that our most gracious prince has given unto all foreyn princis,
that is, nothing to apperteyne more to a kings office, then to redress
things of religyon, to put down hypocrisye, and to restore honesty to her
place again? What could he imagen more godly, than the appositions, which are
now in hand, for to know who be shepeherdes, and who be wolves, Who be able
to teache, and who be yet to learn? What commendacyon can be so great, but it
shall seem far to small, given to a prince, that takes such care, to see
relygyon restored, his people now well taught, which so long has been
deluded? Sorry I must needs be, to se monks, friars, and priests, which so
long stood doubting, whether they might aknowlege our soueraygne lord the
king to be their heed, so without any staggerynge, to have made a Cobbler
their heed. Sorry I am to se, that such sedicious traitors should cumber so
honest a purpose, so godly an intent. How be it I trust, their cumbrynge of
it, shall set it much moore forth, than though they had endeavored them
self, with all redynesse, to set it forward. Thus god when him lusts,
can make his enemies fight for him, when they think most to fight ayenste
him. I doubt not, but they shall much encreace the kings honor, which have
done and yet do, all that their might may, to have dishonored him. What
greatter prouffe could his grace have had of his nobles, true and loyal people,
than in such occasyon to have showed them self so faithful, so trusty, so
willing, and so obeysaunte? What would they do, if strangers camme, which
ayenste their own were so ready? I say more, the king is much bound to
these traitors, that have so assured his grace of his subjects benevolence
toward him. Wherefore most noble dukes, earls, lords, with all the nobility,
doubt you nothing, but you have done service to a prince, that both does
consider your hearts, and will hyghely recompense your faithful peynes. How
be it what greatter reward can there be of fidelity, than the joy, that an
honest heart receives of his faythefulle doing? All be it these traitors
have done much hurt, yet surely they have done the nobles of England high
service. You may also be joyful, you I say, whom the kings grace ever has
taken for his true subjects, and now in very deed has so found you. Let
them be sorry that have deserved sorrow: Let us be sorye for nothing, but that
these traitors shall cause the king to strive with his nature, and there to
do justice, where he gladdelye would have showed him self merciful. Let
not this the pernycious example of these rebels, any thing alyenate our
minds from the fear of god, the love of our prince. Let us recognyse our
duitie unto both, and when both their commandments agree, study to
accomplish both. Let us now in the furious rage of these seditious
traitors, declare our selfs both true christen people to god, and faythefull
subiectis to the kings grace, not only ready to resist and pacify, but also
utterly to extirpe and distroy these and all other such beasts, which by any
color shall go about to stop goddis word, to sow sedition between our
most christen and godly king and his true and obedient seruanntes. Keep the
commandments of one, and thanne you shall keep both. Luc. 20.
For he that said, Keep my commandementes, said also, Give your prince such
things, as perteyne unto him: if thou do not, here what he says. Thou shalt
be cursed in the city, Deu. 28.
and cursed in the field: Cursed by thy berne, cursed be thy store, cursed be
the fruytes of thy bealye, and the fruits of thy land: The herdes of thy
bullockes, and the flock of thy sheep. Cursed shall thou be, when thou gooest
in, and when thou come out. The lord shall send the hunger and thyrst and
cursing in all that thou take in hand, til he have destroyed the. All these
maledyctions lyghteth on them, that set light goddis commaundementis: And for
as much as they be al made for succor and aid sooner of men, than that god
has any need of our good doings, which of all the commaundementis is more
necessary for us, than this, Obey ye your king? Doing all the other, and
breaking but this, how can we live one by an other? How can we lack any
myschefe, any sorrow, if sedition enter among us? God thretned before, now he
falls to desiring and says, He that will keep my commandementis, I will
love him, bless him, and cause all his things to increase. I will bless his
chyldern, and his chyldrens childerne, his corn, his pastures, his cattelle,
all his shall multiply. Who can hate him that god loves? Or what makes
matter, if traitors hate him, that god promyseth to defend? If god be on our
side, the Cobbler has clouted euylle, he has put to much hemp in his
lyngell. God is with the right part, and can not leave it. All traitors god
wylling, shall learn by Lyncolneshire, nothing to be more odious to god and man,
than treason.

God save the King.

