THE True knowledge of a man's own self.

Written in French by Monsieur du Plessis, Lord of Plessie Marly.

And truly translated into English by A. M.



AT LONDON, Printed by I. R. for William Leake, at the sign of the Greyhound
in Paul's Churchyard. 1602.

Aduenturez et marchez auant.
coat of arms or blazon

TO THE RIGHT Worshipful, Master John Swynnerton, Esquire: And to the most
virtuous Gentlewoman his Wife: All happiness to them and theyrs in this life,
and in the life to come heartily wished.
THis excellent Treatise, (right Worshipful) being written in the French
tongue, by that honorable and learned Gentleman, Monsieur du Plessis, appears
by his own words, to be done for the reformation of a mighty Atheist, who
stood stiffly against the knowledge of God, and very deep disgrace of Religion
by him daily committed. In regard whereof, albeit he had commended to him his
learned labor of the truth of Christian religion, (able enough to stop the
impious mouth of any blasphemer whatsoever:) yet he was the rather induced this
way to deal with him, because by laying open the knowledge of a man's own
self, and the several admirable testimonies he carries about with him, Gods
omnipotent glory might the more plainly be approved, the immortality of the
soul no way be able to be denied, nor the truth of Gods religion and his
providence be at any time doubted of.

If we look upon any curious picture drawn to the life: we immediately
conceive, that the same was the work of some rare and artificial Painter. If
we gaze upon the goodly Monuments and stately erected Palaces, full of art,
industry, and many exquisite perfections: we presently apprehend, that some
ingenious Master was the contriuer thereof, and that it proceeded from a
skillful workman. If discretion, in censuring of these and such like things,
does so sway our oppinions: what can we then say, when beholding the world,
and attayning to the knowledge of wonderful things therein contained, but that
perforce we must confess and acknowledge, an higher cause and especial
Creator of them all?

Let us come then to Microcosmus, to the little world man, and enter awhile but
into this kind of consideration. We cannot be so absurd and blockish, but
that we will grant he had a beginning, a cause from whence he came, that it
was not possible for him to make himself, but must needs come into the world
by the help and means of some other.

This very consideration, guides us to acknowledge a Father and Mother, from
whose loins we proceeded, and that from them we had the benefit of life.
Arising thence by further gradations, we attain to intelligence of our
predicessors, and judge by them as of our selves: that they had an original as
we had, and were not the first men in the world, but ascending up still from
Father to Father, we shall find in the end one Father of us all, and that
from him we had our first beginning.

Concerning that first Father of us all, he must also descend of one, or el^e
be eternal, or come of some matter like to God, or at the least be GOD
himself. Which because he could not be, he must needs have some beginning,
and be borne after some other sort, then they that did descend of him: wherein
what can we otherwise say, but that the Creator of the whole world must needs
be his father? From this beginning we can climb no higher, but there of
necessity must stay and conclude: that this first Creator of Nature was without
beginning, and because we shall else have no place to rest at, confess him to
be infinite and eternal. Thus the creature leads us to find out the Creator,
and proceeding from one essence to another, attaines at last to the first
essence, endless and everlasting, as the spring and original of all in
general, to wit, the almighty and omnipotent great God.

Having thus attained to the knowledge of God by the creature, let us now
proceed to learn to know what the creature is: which being the whole scope
and argument of the Treatise following, I will leave the whole case to be
resolved thereby, as being therein handled at full and very learnedly.

Now my humble suit unto your Worship is, that in regard of some breach of
promise, concerning my Paradox Apology, which long since you should have had,
but that the troubles of the time, and misinterpretation of the work by some
in authority, was the only cause why it went not forward: that you would
please to accept of this excellent labor, not as in discharge of that former
debt, because it being again restored me, shall shortly come to answer for it
self, but rather to look with the more favorable regard on this, first for
the honorable Frenchmans sake, whose works do carry no mean commendation
through the world: And next, for the unfeigned affection I bear you, deuoting
my best abilities of study to your kind patronage, so please you but to grace
them with favorable acceptance.

The Treatise against Atheism, written by the same Author, to the same person,
and annexed to this learned labor of his, being likewise so lately come to my
hands, I will (by Gods assistance) finish with what expedition I may, and
entitle it to the kind entertayner of this former, as being a book most
needful for these times, wherein never enough can be said or written of that
argument, so mighty is the multitude of blasphemous Atheists, and so dangerous
their proceedings to Gods high dishonor.

I am loath to be troublesome by tediousnes to your Worship, because to the wise
and iuditiall, I know a word is sufficient: the work, my self, and what I can
beside, I prostrate to your gentle interpretation, wishing to you, the virtuous
Gentlewoman your wife, and hopeful issue, all those hapepie blessings that
this world can or may afford, and after the finishing of this
frail-terrestriall pilgrimage, a full measure of eternal tranquillity in the
Land of the living.

Your Worships in all trunesse of affection, An: Mundy.

To the Reader.
BY the judgment of the best and learned Philosophers, as also by some
apparent proof in our own selves, we find, that our affection or desire
after any thing, is a quality proper and peculier to the soul: for from it
only are our affections derived, and thereby are we led to the prosecution of
whatsoever we can most covet. Now, all our longings and desirous appetites, are
not evermore for the best, albeit in our frail judgments it may carry a well
seeming likelyhoode: but too often we find it by woeful experience* that we
have no greater enemies then our own affections, nor fall into heavier
dangers, then those we are led to by our own wilful follies.

To run into particularities of our several appetencies, as some after
honor, others after riches, others after temporary glory or applause, and
others after vain and frivolous pleasures: would require a larger discourse
then this whereto I am limited, and I should but follow the old track of
custom, which almost is handled in every tractate. Yet we find the nice
natures of some to be so scrupulous, that when the liuer-veine of their
corrupted opinions is but touched a little, not launced or let blood for the
better safety of their health: they fall into such extraordinary fits, or
rather frenzies, that no men are more condemned, then they that can soonest
cure them, nor worse entreated, then such as best love them.

And what is the maine impediment in those teachie humorists, but only a mighty
assurance and ouer-weening of their own knowledge, and skillful reach in all
things whatsouer? whereas if their capacity of knowledge were brought to the
true touch indeed, it would evidently appear that they know nothing at all,
at least not what they ought to know, and would best of all become them to have
knowledge of. The ambitious man pretends to know what honor and height of
dignity is; yet finds his knowledge to be mere ignorance, when the miserable
downfall from his expectation, teaches him (too late) that a mean estate had
been much better.

The greedy scraping money-monger persuades himself, that his knowledge in
managing of worldly commodities, and battering for best advantage by
bargayning, is as much as is needful and necessary for him to be acquainted
withal, and that, that is the only real substance of knowledge indeed: but
when he finds by some cross and change of the world, as either loss at Sea
abroad, rapine of thieves at home, or some other casualtie (whereof there
wants no abundance) that this worldly knowledge is indeed but witless
folly, then he can cry out with the Philosopher, that he had much wit, but
no knowledge.

The like might be said of the proud, envious, wanton, Epicure, etc. all of
them coveting no other kind of knowledge, but what best fitteth and agrees
with their sensual appetites; to whom I answer with that learned Father Saint
Ambrose; That it had been much better for them not to have known at all,
except they had attained to true knowledge indeed.

Seneca tells us, that the looking Glass was first made and invented, for a
man to come to the easier knowledge of himself thereby. Now albeit we may
gather somewhat concerning our selves, when we view our faces, proportion and
the bodies liniaments therein: yet Socrates reached to a greater matter, and
applied this beholding of our selves in a Glass, to an evident enstruction of
life and good behavior. For, he would very often advise his Scholars and
followers, to make a continual use of looking themselves in a glass, to the
end, that he who perceived his shape to be comely and well beautified, might
thereby learn to shun all turpitude in manners, which would much deforme and
blemish so goodly an appearance. Moreover, he gave them this further
admonition, that when any one did discern by the glass, some want either of
apt form or comlines in himself, or any other impediment which he thought
to be defective: that his labor and care should be the more industriously
applied, to recompense the lack of his outward wants and imperfections, with
the minds inward virtues and more splendant graces. Contrariwise, if the
outward shape appeared Angell-like and goodly: to make the inward part thereto
as beautiful in resemblance, by avoiding all occasions that may deforme it.

Upon consideration (gentle Reader) of that which has been before alleged,
happening so well on this excellent Treatise, written in French by Monsieur
du Plessis, an honorable Gentleman of the Kings Counsel, and governor of his
Crown and Kingdom of Navarre, being entitled, The true knowledge of a man's
own self, and therefore may the more aptly be compared to a Glass, that
guides a man to the knowledge of himself: I was the more desirous to bestow
translation on it, that it might pass abroad to general benefit.

And so much the rather was I thereto induced, because this Glass has a
vvonderous difference from the other, which but deliver our outward shape and
semblance only; For this discouers the inward parts of the body, from the
very hour of conception, to the latest minute of life, with the manner of
nourishing, increasing and growing to perfection, and how the body naturally
lives by his power and organes, with every sense, nerve and faculty thereto
belonging; likewise how the soul has her being in the body, approouing the
dignity and immortality thereof.

My humble suit to thee, in requital of my labor, and the inestimable
benefitte thou may gain hereby: is, that thou would read it with
reverence and discretion, as a work not meet for every immodest judgment.
Let thy reverence be to God, who has so miraculously wrought for thee, and
bestowed so many blessings on thee in Nature. Let thy discretion guide thee
step by step, to a true and perfect knowledge of thy self, by shunning those
corruptions and vices that blemish and vvrong Nature, and embracing those
excellent prescriptions herein inserted, to preserve thee in a most tranquile
and happy condition.

Last of all, for him that first in French vvrote it, and my self that have
made it apt for thee in English: we will refer our selves together to thine
own construction, being loath to conceive so unkindly of thee, as for a
good turn to look for any other then kindness at the least, which if thou
can afford us, it is all we desire, and in truth no less then we have
well deserved.

Thine, A. M.

Errata.
FOr dogs, read drugs. page, 1. line 6. For Genues, read Gennes. pa. 34. li.
11. For intestiues* read intestines. pa. 52. li. 2. For he, read the. page 53.
line. 20. For cerkitude, read certitude. page. 96.
The true knowledge of a man's own self.
IF great and excellent spirits, took delight to know and understand the
nature of all kinds of Beasts, trees, herbs, dogs, and other things,
which God by his power created, by his wisdom gouernes and maintains, and
in his liberal bounty has ordained to our use: surely, with far greater
reason, we ought to take some pains to have knowledge of our own selves.

The knowledge of a man's own self, The benefit of the knowledge of a man's
own self.
avails, not only for preservation of the bodies health, but likewise to
moderate the veheme^cie of inordinate affections, which hinder and impeach the
health of judgment. And, although it be a matter indeed very hard to
express, in regard of the excellency and inexplicable majesty therein
consisting, agreeing with him that said, Excellent actions are of great
difficulty: Yet, for the profit and pleasure which may be gathered thereby, my
good will shall stretch forth her uttermost ability. Our nearest way then to
attain this intelligence, is in speaking first of our chief and principal
part, namely the soul.

The soul is a substance simple, What the Soul is.
having continual agitation in the natural body, possessed of parts capable
to the actions thereof, and albeit (of herself) she have powers and
perfections: yet it is so, that while she abides within the body, she has
no use without her organes, and those parts of the body that do agree with
her actions.

The virtues of the soul.
It remains therefore to know what virtues are in the Soul; in what parts of
the body she performs her actions; by what means; and how her virtues are
extended; with the full effects of her strength.

The Philosopher numbers five several powers in the soul, The powers in the
soul.
which are discerned by offices, organs and objects, that is to say, those
things whereon she grounds her action.

The first of these powers or perfections, is called vegetative, which by the
means of such things as do preserve her, (namely, air, eating and drinking,
sleeping and watching, rest and motion, euacuation of superfluities, and the
affections of the heart nourishing the body,) do give increase, and power to
beget.

Nourishment is made by the virtue of natural heat, Of nourishment.
which conuerts the meat and drink into the substance of him that takes it.
The organes and instruments which have use of this power in operation, are
those parts of the body appointed to receive, change, and transport our food:
as are the mouth, the pipe or passage of the throat, the ventricle, the liver,
and the veins, which do convey the blood.

Howbeit, all the bodies parts do serve to make nourishment, and convert the
several aliments or sustenaunce into their substance: whereupon one well
says, that each part has his peculiar power, to receive, retain, alter, and
expel.

The manner of the bodies nourishment.
The manner how the body is nourished, is necessary to be known* as well in
regard of health, as also behavior, which makes me the more willing to
describe it, for all men's easier apprehension.

When the stomach or ventricle has received the food, it locks it up
afterward to heat and convert it into a kind of white matter, which being so
changed (according to his qualities) discends by degrees into the guts and
bowels, certain veins whereof do suck and draw the very purest and best
substance, and so do carry it to the Liver.

When it is gross and superfluous, it discends into the nether guts, but
when it is elaborate and refined by the Liver, then does it make some ample
distribution.

Choler.
For, the chollerick humor, in the greatest part is with-drawne, and received
into a little pursse, commonly called the purse of the gaul.

Melancholy
Mellancholie, which is the very grossest and most earthy blood, is sent into
the Spleen.

The part cold and dry, commonly called fleame, Phlegm.
is dispersed by diverse proportions into the veins, according to the oppinion
of many, the very best whereof the kidneies do draw to them for their
nourishment, and the rest is carried by vessels attending on the bladder,
whereof urine is made in that part.

What else remains of this mass or substance, is transported to the heart,
where the right ventricle thereof receives and purifies it, to the end it may
be conuenable and fit for nourishment.

Moreover, Of the blood.
one part of the blood so received into the right ventricle of the heart, is
derived unto the left ventricle, and converted into the spirits vital: So
called, because by them the life and natural heat of the body is preserved,
and so are the animal spirits of the brain made, which are the instruments of
moving and understanding, and of those noble actions that conduct our life.

Again, from this right ventricle of the heart, is the blood distilled into the
veins, and from them an apposition and commutation of them, is conuayed into
our substance.

There are three several digestions made, Three kinds of digestion to perfect
nourishment,
only to perfect this nourishment: the first is in the ventricle, which
vulgarly is called the stomach, when the food is converted into matter dry and
white: the second is in the Liver, where the said matter is altered, and takes
a kind of red color: the third is in the veins, where this matter (already
converted red, and made blood) is purified, thinned, and heated, by the virtue
and warmth of those spirits which are in the arteries, and (as the nature of
sweat) do pass over the heads of those arteries, and subtly is mingled with
the blood of the veins.

Herein truly nature gave us the law and example of communicating our graces,
Natures instruction concerning our gifts and graces.
gyfts, and perfections, from one to another, for the arteries, which are the
pypes appointed for carriage of the spirits, where the finest and perfectest
blood (regularlie placed under the veins, by poares and little holes almost
imperceptible) do make co^munitie of their spirits with the veins, to the end
that the blood of those veins most corsiue and cold, might be heated,
altered, and subtiled by the means of those spirits: in recompense of which
benefit, the veins do impart their blood to the arteries, to moisten and
temper their spyrites, which (without this help) would be very dry, burning,
and too hot.

The like argument derived from nature, uses S. Paul, 1, Cor. 12. 1. Cor, 12.
co^ferring the offices of the bodies members, the utility, dignity and
communication of them, with the spiritual graces, which god has distributed
to every one perticulerly, to make a co^plete body, and an entire church (as
it were,) the place is well worth the noting.

The inconvenience of the first digestion, not helped by the other.
We commonly say, that the hurt or defect of the first digestion, cannot be
corrected and repaired by the other: even so, when the ventricle does not
justly perform his duty, the matter which remains ouer-rawe or cruded, can
never engender good blood.

Therefore, such as give not due leisure to their stomach to make digestion,
do fill their bodies with hurtful humors, abating and weakening the virtue of
their stomach, and likewise of their liver: whence grows Palsies, trembling
or shaking of the members, age hastened sooner the^ should be, with blisters
and bleanes, which deforme and much misshape the body.

Yet is not this all the inconvenience and hurt that ensues hereby, for if the
blood be impure, the spirits made thereof, cannot be clear or noble, of which
spirits, are vapors and fumes subtly extracted and drawn from the blood, of
which spirits are begotten and heated the left ventricle of the heart, and made
like industrious and lively sparkles, to give heat and virtue to the parts of
nature, as both proffer and produce their actions.

These sparkles have been (by reason of their dignity and excellence) in so
great admiration, The oppinion of some concerning the soul.
that diverse entered rashly into this error, that those spirits were the
substance of the soul: then the impure blood, badly digested, gross and
disorderly concocted can never be made spirits, nor by ouergrosse and impure
spirits, can be done any noble actions, neither can the soul be freely
exercised in her offices, only through their most harmefull hindrances.

For we see those men that are given to intemperancie, The hurt of
intemperancie.
be commonly sleepie, dull, of slender capacity, not able any long while to
contemplate, retain, well confer, or understand the order, discourse, causes
and effects of things, neither what conuenaunce or difference is among them:
nor can they promptly or expeditiously apprehend and judge the benefit or
harm, which ensues on any thing taken in hand, so great is the intemperance
of the mouth.

Herac. Ephe.
Heraclitus the Ephesian, by impuritie of his feeding, became full of the
Dropsy. Solomon.
Solomon says, that more perish by the intemperance of the mouth, then by the
sword.

Hipocrates numbers six things, Six things not naturally in us.
which he calls not natural in us, because they are no parts at all or
members of the body, yet necessary notwithstanding to maintain life: which are
air, eating and drinking, sleep and watchfulnes, motion and rest, euacuation
of superfluities, and the affections of the heart. He gives a rule whereby to
know those things profitable for the body, as also the manner and order how
to use them. First (says he) labor and moderate exercise of the body, meat,
drink and sleep, all these things are to be used in a mean.

The benefit of the first, is, The benefit of labor.
that by moderate labor, natural heat is excited and moved, superfluities are
consumed and expelled, which is a profitable thing before new viands be
received. For even as hot water by the fires side becomes cool, when cold
water is mingled therewith: so is digestion hindered, when the stomach is
charged with fresh receite of food, not staying till the former have taken
his due course. This ought we especially to avoid, according to the rule
which says: that the more we nourish an impure body, the more we do offend
and dangerously hurt it.

Those labors and exercises, which do cause great agitation of the arms and
stomach, are most agreeable for health: but care must be had of over great
stirring, as well of the body as of the mind, immediately after refection is
received, for then we should rest, or keep ourselves from immoderate moving,
The hurt of immoderate exercise.
because (in that case) the stomach being too much stirred, it cannot
entirely and fully make his digestion: For the little door beneath in the
stomach, by this ouer-hastie stirring, is opened, and therethrogh escapes
some matter undigested, which fault (as already we have said) cannot
afterward again repair it self.

The qualities, measure or quantities, the kinds or sorts of food, the time,
and the place for taking them, the co^plexions both of them, and those that
receive them: ought also to be diligently considered and weighed, but them we
do refer to the Physicians, who have therein prescribed very learned rules.

The benefit of sleep.
Sleep is necessary for the preservation of health, and then it best agrees
with the body, when the vapors and fumes (both sweet and profitable) of
nourishment, being in the stomach, do raise up themselves to the brain,
slyding sweetly through the ventricles of the brain, thickning and mingling
themselves with the brains natural coldness: for, in discending, they would
hinder the course of the motive and sensitive spirits, and stop the conduits of
understanding, and those nerves usually serving for motion. Nor do I without
just cause term these vapors to be sweet: for if they be at any time too
clammie, sharp, dull, or slow, they do then wound the brain, and engender
Apoplexies.

How sleep profits the powers of the Soul.
This rest serves to recreate the powers of the soul, it moystens the brain to
beget new spirits, and labors for perfecting the offices of the ventricle and
liver: all which things at full it performs, because the heart (thereby)
reuocates and draws his heat to him. For those members which are far off
from the heart, do wexe cold by sleeping, as we may note in the hands, head and
feet: wherefore it behooves to cover those parts better in the time of rest
and sleeping, then when we are awake, busied, and laboring.

This reuocation of heat and blood for the heart, works it self thus, How
heat and blood work for the heart.
the vapors being made cold by the brain, in discending, do meet warm fumes
coming from the heart, whereupon those vapors are chased to the exterior
parts, and so the heat of the heart more amply is augmented: whereof, the heart,
by the arteries, like to a King, (willing to assist and furnish thoroughly the
indigences and wants of the liver, and the stomach) makes his provision and
store of blood and heat, to help the^ with supply in perfecting their
concoctions, and offices of nature. And assuredly, herein we have a lively
example, of the well guiding, governing, and managing of a commonwealth: An
excellent comparison.
for the heart (as Prince and King) enricheth and furnishes him self in the
time of peace and rest, (commonly called sleep) to the end he may in needful
time likewise, distribute to the liver and stomach, such spirits as are
sufficient for their working, which spirits do help, further and fortefie the
natural heat.

Truly, Three duties needful in a Prince or Ruler.
the first and chiefest office of a Prince or Governor of any Country, is, or
ought to be, that his Subjects may live in quiet, without vexation or trouble
of incursions, and thefts of enemies.

The second office, is, that he take order they have victuals and provision,
for their nourishment and maintenance. And the third, is, that they should be
instructed in Religion, honest actions, and other necessary Arts, for
maintenance of human society.

Conclusion concerning sleep.
Sleep then is most necessary, and serves for every one of these virtues in
the soul, as in the office vegetative or nourishing, because it perfects
digestion: and there is nothing more certain, then that incurable crudities
do come through lack of rest and sleep. For not only by ouer-long watching,
the food received cannot perfectly concoct it self, but likewise the virtue of
the ventricle is feebled and utterly ouer-throwne: as well through the charge
and weight of the food, as also that the nerves are made weak by the
feeblenes of the brain, whence they proceed, and this debilitie is only
caused by want of rest. It serves also in the power appetente: The power
appetente.
for the heart attracts his heat, and engenders great abundance of spirits,
which are always the cleerer, the more the blood is neat and purified.

It profits likewise the power principal, which is the virtue Intellectiue, The
power Intellectiue.
for he orders his actions by means of the spirits in the brain, which touch
and move the nerves, as well sensitive as motive.

Add we heereto, that in sleep, the substance of the brain is refreshed and
moistened, which brain, (by too great drynes,) loses his complexion, and the
substance of the nerves cannot then well perform their offices: justly
agreeing with the strings of a musical instrument, An apt comparison.
which if they be too dry, or too moist, too slack, or too much exte^ded, they
can yield no sound of good accordance.

This place admonishes us to speak of dreams and fantasies, Concerning
dreams in sleep.
which happen in the time of sleep, and are nothing else but mere
imaginations, that present themselves, when the spirits (which are the
instruments of our cogitations) leave their orderly course, and confusedly and
irregulerly move themselves in the brain.

There are diverse sorts of dreams, Diverse kinds of dreams.
some being called common and vulgar, because that the causes are evident: as
when in our sleep, the images and shapes of things, which the day before have
exercised and frequented our cogitations, do make a tender and offer of
themselves: Example of dreams, the causes being evident.
as Judges do often reuolue on their law-cases: Scholastical Divines, on their
relations and urgent examinations: Carters call on their horses: Sheepheards on
their sheep, and so of others.

When the cause of dreams is in us.
Sometimes the cause of dreams is within us, as those dreams which agree with
the humors abounding and working in us, and these humors do induce
imaginations: as sometimes, by the great abundance of phlegm being in the
stomach, a man dreams that he is swimming in a water: or by the weight and
thicknes of humor in the stomach or brain, a man thinks he is crowded, or
down-pressed in his sleep.

There be other sorts of dreams, Dreams foretelling things to ensue.
which are many times predictions or forerunners, of such things as are to
ensue: but these dreams are not always certain, and they happen to persons,
by reason of some special complexion or temprature remaining in them, or else
by gift of divine perfection: as naturally some one is more inclined to poesy
or music, then another.

Examples concerning dreams.
Many especial examples have been noted, as namely the Physician of Augustus,
who dreamed that the Tent belonging to the said Prince, should be spoiled:
whereof he advertised the Emperor, who immediately did withdraw from thence, and
soon after it happened, that the enemy came and set upon it, spoiling and
destroying all that was in it.

And Cicero, who dreamed of Octauius before he knew him, that he should be
the Prince of that commonwealth. And a soldier at Genues, who dreamed that he
should be devoured by a Serpent, and therefore, on the day he should have bin
shipped away thence amongst others, he hid himself in his house: where, by the
inconvenience of a tumult, which happened that day in the City, he was slain
by a bullet, which came from a piece named a Serpentine.

Divine dreams or inspirations.
There are other manner of dreams, which divinely are sent to me^ by
inspirations, or announciations of Angels: such as were the dreams of Jacob,
Joseph, Daniell, and such like. Such do never happen upon light affairs or
occasions, but in cases of importance: as for the government of GODS church in
Kingdoms and commonweals, for order and observation therein to be kept: Which
kind of dreams are always certain. There be others deuilish, Deuillish
dreams.
as the dream of Cassius, whereof Valerius writes.

We have then spoken sufficiently (for this time) of the manner how we are
nourished, which behooves the more to be understood, The hurt of intemperance.
for our better preservation from intemperance: for when we give no leisure to
Nature, to make her concoctions and transmutations, the receptacles of the
body do fill themselves with hurtful humors, which rotting within us, do
engender very dangerous diseases: considering that the free and liberal course
of the animal spirits, which are the chiefest and very nearest instruments,
or organes of our understanding, are hindered by the cold fumes of the
stomach, which the^ do mount up into the brain.

Increase of nourishment.
The augmentation of nourishment differs only, according to the time and
quantity of the creature, for there is a power, which in a certain time
causes in the creature a just quantity, according to his kind: to wit, when
it increases through all his dime^sions, as length, largenes, and thicknes in all parts, which works it self about five and twenty or thirty years. When
Nature receaueth most substance to her self.
In this time nature receives most substance by what she takes, which she
loses not by emptying her fumes and excrements, for then is the heat
natural in greatest force.

Galen says, that after this just quantity is confirmed in the creature, the
action of nature grows to weaken, because the pipes and vessels of the body,
wexe to be more dry then before: but we say that it is the ordenaunce of God,
who has constituted and limited to every creature a term and date, until
which time he should increase.

Even as we behold the flame of a lamp, Example how the body is increased.
to be nourished and maintained by some clammie drines which is in it: in like
manner the body of any creature, having life and understanding, has some
especial good humiditie, fat and ayrie, which comes of the seed and
essential beginning of the body, and disperseth it self through all the parts,
wherein is carried this viuifying and celestial heat, holding together, and
still nourishing this heat, which humiditie once consumed, immediately that
heat is quenched.

This humidity is (by little and little) used and perfected by this heat, When
natural heat decays in us.
and as the measure and proportion of this humiditie is diminished in us, the
natural heat grows to be the more weakened.

And albeit that this best and primitive humiditie, be so maintained and
nourished, by that which we take in eating and drinking day by day, yet
whatsoever exceeds, or goes beyond that just substance, is held to be most
impure. Like unto wine, which while his first force and nature is entire, he
will very well bear some small quantity of water: but if often, and hour by
hour it shall be so commixed, he will in the end loose all his strength.

Example conceruing our life.
Upon the like terms stands our life, for that which we take and receive
daily in substance, does not so naturally nourish this viuifying heat, as the
first and original humidity. For note hereby how natural death comes,
Death natural according to Aristotle.
which Aristotle says to be, when the heat natural is extinct: that is to
say, when the primitive and original humiditie (pure and entire) is consumed.

Death not natural, Death unnatural, occasioned by many causes in our selves.
has many other causes, to weaken and impouerish this primitive humiditie,
which is sweet, pure and temperate of it self: As by drunkenness,
gourmandizing, immoderate lubricities, and other excesses of all sorts.

Great pity then is it, that in respect our life is but short, and that day by
day it attracts and gathers some diminishing; that yet through our own
barbarousnesse and inhumanities, (worthily termed worse the^ those of the
Cyclops) we should accellerate and hasten our end, only by intemperance, and
diverse extraordinary kinds of excesses. The augmentation is then made by the
same organes, and by the same natural heat that our nourishment is.

Concerning generation.
Generation has his parts properly ordained by nature, and may be thus defined.
The power of engendering, is that whereby the creature is (as it were) remolded,
and renewed for preservation of his kind: that is to say, of the common
essential form, being in many distinct and singular parts.

The manner how the fruit is formed in the matrixe of a woman, How the fruit
is formed at the first.
is thus. When the matrix has received the seed of man and woman together,
first of all the matrix, like to a little Oven, (moderately made warm) does
dry and sweetly harden outwardly the two seeds together: and makes a thin skin
about it, such as we see about the hard shell of an Egg, which skin or
membrane, is made to keep and continue the said seed, softly and sweetly
boiling within it, only by abundance of fine and subtle spirits, which
naturally are in the same seed.

This me^brane, wherein the seed is kept and enclosed, The offices of the
membrane.
is principally made of the Woman's seed, which is more soft, and less thick
or massy, because it is extended with more facility then the other.

And not only is this membrane made to co^taine the seed, but it is also for
other uses beside: Of ye veins and arteries of the membrane.
for thereon are placed and imposed infinite veins and arteries, to the end
that by them the menstruall blood might be carried, for the nouriture and
increasing of the fruit, which veins and arteries have their original, not
only of the spermaticke vessels, that is to say, those which draw, prepare and
carry this seed, but likewise of a great truncke or vein, planted and rooted
on the liver.

This skin is (as it were) folded and wrapped about the matrix, to the end the
said matrixe might give warmth to the fruit round about.

There is in this wrapper or membrane, many small threads of veins or arteries,
which spreading and extending themselves one among another, do constitute and
make two veins and two arteries, and in the midst of them a conduit. These
veins and arteries, like roots of fruit, How the nauill is made, and in
what time.
being planted in the seed, do make the nauil: where, by the first six
days, nature cloatheth these stringes and threads of veins and arteries, and
the seed softly boyleth in his folder. Then about the seventh day, when the
nauill is formed, and these veins and arteries joined, through them is drawn
the blood and spirits, and carried and mingled with the said seed, for forming
of the principal members. For in this enuellopper there are diverse entries,
like the entering into some little vault or seller, in which entries or
concauities, they are conjoined together, and (through those vaultes) the little
roots do attract blood and spirit. And while the seed thus heats and
boileth, The places for the liver, heart, and brain.
it is made like three little bladders or purses, which are the places for the
liver, the heart, and brain.

There is then drawn along by a vein proceeding from the nauil, some thick
blood, as nourishment, which thickens and shuts it self into the seed.

The foresaid vein is forked, and along one of those branches passes this
blood, How the liver is formed, and what it is.
and settles it self to a thick substance: behold then how the liver is
formed.

We see by experience, that the Liver is nothing else but thickened blood,
grown hard together, and this liver has many small threads, which serve to
attract, retain, change and expel, according as we have before declared.

Along the other branch of this vein, is formed a gutte or passage, which
soon after, How the bowels are fastened to the back.
carries, contriueth and fasteneth the bowels or inwards, to the back of the
creature, and it is a vessel wherewith to sustain the veins, wherein
prospers the very purest part of blood, in the smallest intestines or
inwards, and so conueies it to the liver. In like manner, along the same
bra^ch, the stomach, the spleen, and the bowels are formed. So when the liver
is perfected, he makes an assembly of the smallest veins, as of little roots,
and by their assembling is made a great vein on the upper part of the Liver,
which vain produces some high braunching forth, whereof is formed
Diaphragma: How Diaphragma is formed.
to wit, a strange round muscle, lying overthwart the lower part of the
breast, seperating the heart and lites from the stomach, with the Liver and the
Spleen. And so is made a part of the bones belonging to the back, Of the back
bones.
and there be branches which shoot out somewhat lower, whereof is also formed
the rest of the said back bones.

The arteries dispersed from the nauill amongst the seed, do tend toward the
ridge of the back, The forming of the heart.
and by little and little have a place designed, for forming and engendring of
h^e heart. These arteries do draw the hotest and most subtle blood, whereof
in the little purse (therefore appointed) is the heart engendered and formed:
which heart is a solid flesh, hard and thick, as is most conuenable for so
very hott a member.

The great plant or vein, extends and goes just to the right ventricle of the
heart, only to carry and administer blood for his nourishment: The hearts
nourishment.
and beneath this vein, arises or springs up another vein, which carries the
purified blood to the lites, made subtle and hot, only to nourish and keep
it warm.

At the left ventricle of the heart arises a great artery, which carries the
spirits vital, formed of blood by the heat of the heart, A comparison worth the
noting.
through all the body. And even as by the branches of this great trunck of
veins, the blood is conveyed through all the bodies parts for nourishment
thereof: So by the boughs or arms of this artery, are the spyrits likewise
carried through all the body, to furnish it with vital heat. And doubtless,
The heart is the beginner of heat vital.
the heart is the beginner of vital heat, without which, the other members can
not produce their actions, neither can their nourishment be duly made.

Under this artery of the foresaid left ventricle, springs up another artery,
which serves to carry the sweet air from the lungs and lites to the heart, to
refresh it: and likewise to recarry the air, being first made warm by the
heart. So then, when of these two ventricles of the heart, are those veins
brought forth which do intend to the lites: of the subtle blood (which is
transported by this vein of the right ventricle of the heart, How the lungs
and lites are formed, and consequently the height of the body.
) is the lungs and lites formed and made, and so successively all the height of
the body, is made by these arteries and veins, which are conueyers to the
spirits and blood, whereby nature fully makes up all her building.

Soon after, the brain, The forming of the brain.
which is the place and seat for the very noblest functions and offices of
nature, is formed in this manner. A great part of the seed with-drawes it
self, and is received into the third little purse before specified, hereof is
the brain composed, whereto is joined a couerture, hard and dry by force of
natural heat, like unto a tile in a furnace, The skul of the head.
and that is the skul of the head. So the brain is only made of the seed,
to receive, conserve and change the spirits, which are the instruments and
causes of voluntary moving, and of understanding: it behooves then that it
should not be made of vile or simple matter, but of the abundance of seed,
fullest of spirits.

Now, even as the veins are bredde in the liver, and the arteries in the
heart: The nerves are bred in the brain, as the veins in the liver.
So are the nerves in the brain, which are of the nature of the brain,
viscuous, clammie and hard. Nor are they holow, like the veins and arteries,
but solid and massy: except those two that are called Opticke, which do
co^uey the spirits of the brain into the sight of the eye.

From the brain discends the marrowe in the chine of the back, and there is
great difference, between the marow of the other bones, and this here spoken
of: for the marrowe in the other bones is a superfluity of nourishment,
engendered of blood, ordained to norish and moisten the bones, The marrow in the
chine bone of the back.
but the marrow in the chine bone of the back, is engendered and made of the
seed, appointed for producing of the nerves sensitive and motive.

We may (by that which has been said) in some sort know the beginning and
fashion of our human body. While the fruit is in the womb, How the fruit
is nourished in the womb.
it is nourished by blood, attracted at the nauil, because the fluxes ordinary
to women, do cease when they become great, and the infant draws abou^dance of
blood for his nourishment. The superfluous blood is divided into three parts:
of the very best and purest part, The division of the blood into three parts,
and to what uses.
is the infant nourished in his mothers belly: the other part less pure, is
carried to the breasts, and converted into milk: the third and last part, like
slime in the bottom of a marish, is discharged in the birth of the child.

The times of the infants being in the womb, are discerned in this sort: and
the bodies of male children, Male children more perfect then female.
are ever more perfect then the female, for the seed whereof the male is made,
is hotter then the other.

An admirable secret, and worthy (with great reverence) to be regarded.
The first six days after conception, the seed boileth, resolves, and
becomes as an egg, making three little bladders or purses, as before we
have declared.

Nine days following, is the attractions of blood, whereof are made the liver
and the heart: and twelve days after the aforesaid six and nine days, is the
liver, the heart, and the brain to be seen and discerned. Then eyghteene
days after, are the other members formed: these days nu^bred together, are
forty and five, and then when the members are formed and discerned, the fruit
begins to have life, for it has some feeling: where upon it is said, that about
the five and fortieth day, the soul is infused into the body.

Hipocrates gives a very good rule, speaking in this manner. Hipocrates rule
from the time of co^ception, to deliverance.
The days from the conception, to the perfection and entire forming of the
members, being doubled, do declare the time of the child's stirring: and those
days trebled, do show the day for his deliverance.

So then, if the infant have his members and parts perfect the five and
fortieth day, he will stir at ninety days, and shall be borne the ninth
month. This rule is ordinary in male Children, but the female tarry longer.

Of the power Vegetative, and how it nourishes and increases the body, as
also maintains kind
It is as easy likewise to judge, how much the power vegetative is necessary,
which preserues and maintains (by his offices) as well the whole frame, as
the singular parts there-to belonging: that is to say, by nourishing and
augmenting, it maintains the several parts, and by generation preserues and
supplies the state of kind. Every one ought to know this, and reverence these
gifts of God in nature, using them lawfully, and to the benefit of human
society: For it is no light offense, to be excessive and dissolute in these
things, wherein likewise if we keep not a mean and measure, there does ensue
horrible pains, not only temporal, but also eternal. Indeed Nature
admonishes us to be continent, How nature admonishes us to be continent.
and if she would not be deformed in the beginning, she would have no other
power used in generation then is necessary: Our selves the greatest enemies to
nature.
but we destroy al, by vain lubricities, inconstant and inordinate means,
decaying Nature in her very self.

Over and beyond this, the diligence, art and care, which nature appoints
to engender, preserve and perfect the infant in the womb of his mother:
advises us to preserve and be respective of kind. It is then great
inhumanitie, rage and fury, if one part do grow offensive to another: for we
see by the archetecture of nature, the fashion, the seat, the order and use of
every several part, that there was an infinite power in the Creator of this
frame and piece of workmanshippe, The infinite goodness of God in our bodies
framing.
by so great wisdom or dayned and compassed, by inexpressible goodness
liberally furnished, and provided of all things for norishing and maintaining
the same.

Doubtless, whosoever sees not and understands these things, has lost the
light of true sense, and is more degenerate to human nature, the^
Nabuchadnezzer when he became a brute beast.

And in truth, the order of these powers is worthy consideration: How the
order of the several powers is to be considered in their offices.
for (as has been said) the power to nourish, maintains the distinct and
singular parts: the power of augmentation, gives them a just quantity, that is
to say, greatness, largenes and thicknes: the power to engender, preserues and
supplies kind. I say (in repeating it again) that this order clearly shows
us, that there is an eternal GOD, An absolute proof of God against any
Atheist whatsoever.
who by his infinite power created these natures, and by his inco^prehensible
wisdoms assigned the^ their offices, and separated their effects, as we may
behold that every one begets a thing like to himself. For these kinds are
guarded in their cerkitude, and by a certain law and manner are these living
creatures produced: and not confusedly (without counsel) mingled and
confounded in their kinds.

We should consider and acknowledge God in nature reverently, A note concerning
christian duty in us toward God, in regard of al his divine gifts bestowed on
us in nature.
we should esteem the actions of nourishing, giving increase, and supplying by
generation, as divine gifts and graces, the abuse whereof is punished by most
horrible pains. We see drunkenness, licorish feeding, and gross gurmandizing,
to be the causes of murders, circumuentions in judgment, trades, traffiques
and merchandises, of beggeries, and miserable ruin of goods and lands, of
wretched diseases and sicknesses, as well corporal as spiritual. As for
lubricities and immoderate thefts, we see the evils and inconveniences ensuing
thereby, to be great, and in greater persons then one would wish to see it:
whereat those of better understanding receive no mean coffeehouse.

The second power of the soul, Of the power Sensitive, being the second power
of the soul.
is called sensitive, it is that whereby we discern our several actions, and
it is an excellent and necessary benefit to man: not only to search and seek
after his living, and a certain place wherein to confine himself; but likewise
for many other offices requisite in humane society. This power is divided into
senses exterior and interior.

Of the exterior senses, being five in number.
The senses exterior are five, namely Sight, Hearing, Tasting, Sent or
Smelling, and Touching, and these five senses are discerned by their offices,
seats or organes.

1. Sight, and how the same is wrought in us.
Sight is the sense whereby we behold colors and the light, which things are
propper objects to the said power: and this perception is wrought by the means
of certain spirits, coming from the brain by the optic nerves, into the
apple of the eye, wherein there is a christaline humor, which receives (as by
a glass or mirror) the kinds and lusters of colors, and likewise of the
light.

We gather also hereby, the greatness, figure, number, motion and position of
bodies, yet not singulerly and properly so, but likewise these things are known
with and by help of the other senses.

Aristotle being demanded, considering we have two eyes, wherefore all things
which we behold, do not seem double to us? the answer he made thereto was
thus. Aristotle's answer concerning our two eyes.
That because the nerves of the eye, are seated between the place of their
original, and the eye, where they meet together like the forke of a tree,
therefore the spirits united there together, do make the object seem but one
thing only.

Of the inward organs of the sight, and what use they serve us to.
The interior organs then of this power, are the spirits assigned to that
office, and they are transported by the Opticke nerves into the eye, whereof
the exterior is the eye. This power serves us to know the heavens, and they
move us to understand, the power and wisdom of so great a GOD: to know also
the elements, and them severally in their natures, to the end we might make
election of the fairest, and leave the deformed. Small difference between life
and death, but by the benefit of sight
In sooth, there would appear, no great difference between life and death, if
we should have perpetual darkness: what a wonderful blessedness then is it,
and more then our frail thoughts can stretch unto, that GOD has given us this
gift, namely, the light?

Plato says, that our eyes are given us, Platos oppinio^, to what end our eyes
are given us.
to instruct us in the knowledge of God, when we behold the cleerenes of
heaven, with his reguler and ordinary motions: for this admonishes us
(whether we will or no) of the builder and maker of the world, of his great
power, wisdom, and counsel, and of the admirable and eternal light, whereof
we shall have joy after this mortal life. This power has his seat in the
humor christaline, shut under the bal of the eye, which humor shines of his
own nature: Where the sight has his seat and abiding.
and the nerves thereto deputed, do carry the spyrits, which attain to the
boule of the cirkle, that shows it self in the eyes to be of diverse colors.

These spirits the^ give life to the eye, and are as a little flame, Of the
spirits that give life to the eye.
resembling the Celestial bright beam, and gives strength and power to see.
The names, the matter, the qualities, and the seat of the balls and humors of
this member, we leave unto the Physical Anatomists: but properly and
peculierly, by this sense we apprehend the light and colors, for, as
Aristotle says, Aristotle's judgment of the eye.
the eye can see nothing, but only by his color, which color is the quality
of a commixed body, participating of the light.

A question concerning the sight of the eye.
One demands, how those things offered and apprehended by the eye, or whether
so ever it addresseth it self, are thereby perceived? the common answer is,
The answer worth the noting.
the light being in the color of the thing seen, spreads and extends his
beams through the air, and this light forms an image in the eye, as in a
mirror, because that the beam when it finds the eye, redoubles if self and
gathers together, and so the image is made: as we shall see the Sun beam, An
excellent comparison.
entering by a creuise or crannie into an obscure place, when it settles it
self upon any hard thing* as on a wall, it engrosseth and redoubles it self,
as is very easy to be noted.

If the light be over violent, it may hurt and offend the eye, How easily
the eye may be offended
as we may see by the flash of lightning: and any color that is too
excellent, cannot suddenly and perfectly be discerned, but it raises some
debilitie in the sight, as we may see likewise by snow: but questionless, the
whole nature of the light is full of meruailes, and can neither be perfectly
explicated, nor sufficiently understood.

The manner how colors are truly discerned.
The kinds or images of whatsoever colors, are not perceived at all, but only
by the means of the air, or the water, as we may note, when one offers a thing
too near unto the eye, then the beholder does not plainly see it, for
assuredly, the light which is in the color, is very feeble, and a man cannot
see or discern it, without some distance, yea, and very ample means of it
self. The true capacity of the eye in sight.
And it is also to be understood, that the eye never sees any thing, but
according to a direct line, and that the shapes or images which come into the
eye, do carry the figure or likeness of a Piramides, which figure is seated in
the thing seen, and so in a direct sharpness renders it to the eye.

The commodities of this sense are evident, The benefits which the sense of
sight yields.
as well for the knowledge of God, our search for safety and assurance, our
willing prevention of perrils and inconveniences: as also for our choice and
election, of those things which are beautiful and fair, and leaving them,
which in themselves appear to be ill shapte and counterfeit, and God knows
what confusion would happen in our life, if we had not this happy and gracious
power of sight.

2. Of Hearing, and the organs thereto appertayning.
Hearing is a Sense whereby we apprehend sounds, which sense is garnished
outwardly with an organe ample enough for entrance, but crooked and full of
windinges in descending, to the end that by little and little, the sound might
gather it self together in the organe: for otherwise, if the sound entered
violently, and altogether, it would greatly hurt the power sensuiue.

Sound is a quality, What sound or noise is, and how it makes it self.
only coming from the fraction of the air, which is made when two bodies
large and hard do beat against one another. This fraction is made in the air,
as we may easily see, when we throw a little light stone upon the water, it
makes an appearance like little circles, in turning and entering into the water:
and even as in small and narrovve Fountains, those circles beat often against
the walls, and so redouble themselves: even so in places which are cauernie,
vaulty, or in forests that are well furnished with Trees, the air coming
from such hollow breakings, does very audibly and perfectly redouble the sounds.

The means whereby any such sound or noise is apprehended, Of the means whereby
either sound or noise is apprehended.
is the air, for thereby is the sound carried to the hole or buckole of the
ear, and is there entertained by another interior air, tempered by diverse
sweet spirits, only thereunto naturally ordained, which (against a little thin
skin spredde over the hole,) renders back again the sound; as we see the
skin does upon a drum or tabour.

This sound made against the said thin skin, How all sounds are conveyed
to the sense common.
by the spirits tempered of the sweet natural air, is conuayed by the nerves
(for that service deputed) to the sense common, where only is made the
dijudication and discretion, of the qualities of all kinds of soundes: to wit,
which are obtuse or piercing, which are sweet, rude, wandering or delightful,
and so of al other differences and varieties in the sounds.

The manner how our voice or speech is formed.
To this purpose may we speak of our human voice or speech, which is formed
and made on high at the rude, rough, and sharp artery, for so some call the
co^duit or wezand, where the tongue (at the entrance of the throat) smites
and cleaues the air, as we may very apparently behold in our Flutes, so is
the voice made in the wezand, and so is guided right alo^gst the throat.
Therefore Fishes do form no voice at all, An excellent note concerning our
voice or speech.
for they have no such conduit, neither lungs or lytes, by the motion whereof,
air might mount up into their throat: these things are evident, but the means
and causes are hidden, being an especial benefit granted by God in nature.
Nor can the said causes be plainly understood, by the weakness and obscurity
of the light of our capacities: Notwithstanding, we ought reverently to give
glory to the Creator, for having so wisely created and ordained the causes,
motions and effects of this sense, which is so profitable and auayling, not
only for our health, but likewise for directing the affairs of this life:
For, by this sense we have faith, By this sense we have faith.
says S. Paul: thereby we also make our contractions, and in our conuentions,
it is necessary to understand one another.

3 Of Smelling, and by what organs it is apprehended.
The sense of Smelling, is that whereby we distinguish sents and odours; The
organe of this sense is two little spungie teates, and full of spirits, which
are seated beneath the forehead, above the co^duit of the nostrils, whence the
substance of the brain, conuerts to a little neruie skin, but yet exceeding
soft and very tender: by the closing and pressure whereof, all sents and
smells are apprehended.

Nor are the two nostrills the proper sense, but only do serve to convey the
odor into this organe: as is very easy to be noated; for, we perceive not at
al any odours or smells, but only attract the air by the said nosthrils, to
the organe seated near the brain, to the end, such gracious smells might
recreate and cherrish the brain.

Odor or sent, What odor, sent or smell is.
is a certain quality in a subtle and invisible fume, issuing from commixed
bodies, wherewith the ayrie humiditie is mingled in an earthly nature,
abounding either more or less, and is like a thing burnt, or much dried* as
we may gather by the wood of Juniper* Rosemarie and others: whereon it is said,
that the humor or moisture, gouernes in the savor, and the dryness, in the
odor.

Things burnt, Apt comparisons of sents in their moist and dry kinds.
that are moist in a mediocritie, do savor well, but such as are altogether
dry, have no odor at all: because in them both cold and dryness, are the
reasons that they have no sent.

And albeit that some cold things are odoriferous, as be Roses and Violets:
Nevertheless, by their odor they do heat and vvarme sweetly.

This is the reason, why in the East parts, things of strong savor do most
increase, The sweetest things have least savor.
because the country is hot, and likewise things exceedingly sweet, have the
less savor, by reason they are fullest of humiditie.

Contrariwise, those things which be less strong, and yet burning, are of
the better savor, as Rosemary is good in odoure, but very bitter in the taste.

The differences between good sents and hurtful.
The general differences of odours, are those that be good odours, which comes
from the sweetest parts, and best digested, having an ayrie nature, and is a
pleasing recreation to the brain. And likewise bad odours, which are those
that be called stinking, being a quality coming from the corrupt and
putrified parts, which is a poison and hurt to the brain.

There be other differences of sent, taken of savors, as is a burning and
strong odor, such as the sent of Garlic or Onions: and the sower savor,
drawn from sharpness, as the sent of vinegar. The means how we judge of
smells.
The mean whereby we discern and judge of these odours, is the air: for
Fishes do savor a smell or odor in the water: as we behold them to be sooner
taken, by the sent of some one bait, then of another.

Sent is very necessary to our life.
It is a thing very necessary to life, as well for recreating and delighting the
brain, by the receiving and perception of kindliest and best pleasing sauour^*
as also for freeing and ridding (by the nosthrils) the superfluities of the
brain.

4 Of the sense of Tasting* and his organe.
The sense of Tasting, is that whereby we discern and relish savors: the
organe of this sense, is a neruous skin, spread over the flesh of the tongue,
which flesh is full of pores, slack, slow and spungy. How the tongue
receives his taste.
The self same skin is extended to the palate, and has his original of
those nerves which discende by the palate, to the root of the tongue, and
gives the tongue his power to taste, and to discern the four chiefest
qualities: Now because the said flesh is full of spirit and humor, the more
easily is therein impressed the savor of things.

The means of this powers use in his actions, is the said loose or slack
flesh, The means of the tastes use in his actions.
and the spettle or moisture which is above it: and therefore we see, that such
as have an Ague, find al things bitter, for their spettle is bilious or hot, as
much to say, as mingled with the chollerick humor.

The object of this sense, Savor, the only object of taste.
is savor, which is a certain quality in the thing, having more humiditie
then drines, which is digested by the heat natural. Many sorts of savors.
There be many sorts of sauors, which make very much for our further knowledge:
because they show and teach the diverse temperature and complexion of things,
and for whom they are meetest, which is a matter well worth the regarding and
understanding, as well for our civil regiment in diet, as for the remedy of
diseases: for, as Galen says, it is necessary that our nouriture should be
sweet, or prepared, and mingled with things that are pleasing and sweet.

The savor that is sweet, as of honnie, Of the sweet savor.
or of sweet wine, does delight the tongue, because such a savor is ayrie, and
agreeing with our flesh and blood, proper also to nourishment, temperate both
in heat and drought: for, (as is already said) it is needful that the
nourishment be sweet, or at least tempered with sweetness, because sweet viands
and drinks, do mollify and fill the parts which are dry and vacant.

Of the savor over sweet.
But notwithstanding, such things as are exceeding sweet, as Sugar and honey,
do abound in their ayrie heat, and very easily inflame and convert into
choler: therefore such as use Sugar and honey too often, or abundantly, it
ingenders in the^ strong choler, and putrifactions also, only by the abounding
of humors. Of the fat and marrowie savor.
The savor which is nearest to this before named, is the fat and marrovvie,
which is not so hott as the former: such is the savor of butter, oil, and
flesh.

A mean in usage of the^ is good, for things which are over fattie, do hurt
much: because they will floate upon the stomach, offend and hinder digestion,
and also do engender oppilations.

What savors best agree with nature, and most please the taste.
These two sauors are most agreeable to nature, and delight the taste of a
healthful person. For, even as the hand glads it self, at the entrance into
lukewarm water, being made temperate in his heat: so the taste delights it
self in things sweet and fatty, because they are indeed temperately hot,
like unto the blood and flesh, and also do procure delectation, in that they
agree in temperature with nature.

Of the bitter savor.
The savor which we call bitter, is properly contrary to the sweet, and is a
savor that frets, makes hoarse and bites the tongue, and is of an earthy
nature or complexion, which being thick also, has naturally in it an excess
of heat in drines: as is the taste of wormwood and Aloes, and therefore things
over bitter, do never nourish.

The savor strong and ardent, Of the strong and hot savor.
differs from the bitter, for not only does it wring, byte, and tear the
tongue: but also it burns and chaps it, which penetrates and enters by heating
and drying extremely: This savor exceeds the bitter in hotnes, and such is
the taste of Pepper, Ginger, Sneesing-woorte, Garlic and Onions.

There is a savor called sower, drawing on sharpnes, Of the sower savor.
which in returning back becomes cold, whereby it flagges and weakens the
tongue much: which savor is both cold and dry, nevertheless it exceeds
most in coldness, and such is the savor of Sorrel.

The savor of vinegar is not altogether so, for, as it retains some obscure
and weak heat, so is it also some-vvhat strong, and yet therein is coldness
most; For, when the ayrie parts thereof are cast forth, it remains earthie
in some chillie humor.

Hence is it naturally received, The sharpest savors do most urge appetite.
that sharpest things do give most appetite: because they deiect the
superfluous humors, gathered before together at the entrance of the ventricle,
only by biting, without any burning. So does Sorrel seem good for such as have
a Fever, not only because it casts out and discharges the ayrie
superfluities, but likewise, by reason it moderates the heat chollerick.

The savor called green, Of ye green savor, that edgeth the teeth.
which setts the teeth an edge, shuts up and draws back the tongue: Wherefore
it has the power to collect, thicken, and bind fast, being of an earthy
nature, crude, cold, and dry, therefore it differs from the precedent savor,
because the former is of a subtle nature, and this other is thickning: of such
taste are Medlars and other green fruits, before they are come to their
maturitie, for when they are ripe, they have a commixed savor, as mingled both
with sweetness and greenenes. Of the rude and sharp savor.
There are other sauors besides these, as that which is termed rude, and sharp
too, that softly dries and hardens the tongue, yet neither wrests nor binds it,
like the precedent taste: in nature it is earthy, massiue, cold and dry,
nevertheless, more hot and moist then the other.

Galen says, that this relish is good in wine, for wines of this taste, do
naturally shut up and dry the ventricle, casting fumes of small heat up to
the brain.

The salt savor makes not any retyring of the tongue, Of the salt savor.
but it whets it by washing and drying it, for salt guardeth from
putrifactions, because it thinneth and dries the parts severally, perfecting
all the humidities; wherefore salt hardneth soft flesh, and softneth hard: for,
as in the soft it consumes all superfluity of humor, so in the hard it
attenuates and softens the parts, making the more mild and dainty, being of
an earthy nature, thick, hot, and dry.

Some things are said to be without savor, Of things without savor.
because in the^ are not to be found any of these natures before expressed.

The sense of Touching, 5. Of the sense of Touching and his organe.
is that whereby we discern the four chiefest qualities, to wit, heat, cold,
drought and moistnes. The organe of this, is not in any sole or alone part of
the body, but is like a thin skin or neruie caul, which is spredde over the
whole body, under the uppermost skin, taking his original from the brain,
and from the mouth of the chine bone in the back. The most subtle nerves, do
make the most sensible parts, as are those nerves that descend into the purse
of the heart, and to the ventricle. Of the benefit of this sense.
The benefit of this sense is apparent, for a man delights when he is hot,
to touch cool things, and the coldest parts of the body, take pleasure in
touching things that are warm.

The interior sense is a power working by organes, Of the inward sense, and
where it is seated.
seated within the brows or forehead, appointed for knowledge and
understanding, excelling all the exterior senses. For if we should apprehend
only the things, which offer and present them selves before us, without
discerning or making any judgment of them, it would profit us but very
little: For, what auailes it to look on black and white, and not to discern
or severally distinguish them? Therefore the sense interior is very behouefull,
The necessity of the inward sense
to make discretion and dijudication of things, by their several causes and
effects: as the horse, accustomed to pass by the way where he has once
fallen, grows afraid of falling there again, this has the^ some power above
the outward senses, whereof we shall come to speak hereafter.

The sense common, and memory, according to Aristotle.
Aristotle numbers the senses interior, to be two: to wit, the Sense common,
and Memory.

Galens addition of cogitation.
Galen puts another to these two, called Cogitation, so he accounts the^ to be
three.

Five inward senses.
There be others that name five inward Senses, to wit, the Sense common, 1.
Sense common.
which receives the images and apparitions of things presented to the outward
sense.

Secondly, 2. Sense imaginatiue.
the sense Imaginatiue, which discernes the actions of each one of the
exterior senses.

Thirdly, 3. Sense estimatiue.
the sense Estimatiue, which by one thing judges another: as a horse, when one
strokes or clapps him, conceiues that he takes pleasure in him.

The fourth sense is called Deliberation or Cogitation, 4. Sense deliberatiue.
which gathers (from furthest off) the causes of things: these do confer
and make judgment, after knowledge is received, what difference and agreement
has been between them, which virtues and effects only they have.

The wonderful providence of God for his creatures.
Our eternal GOD, has by his (providence) enstamped in his creatures, a
moving marvelous, to search and seek after things necessary for
conservation of their lives, and remedies likewise for their diseases: as
Serpents that seek after Fennel, for clearing of their eyes, or young Asses
that search for the herb Ceterach, to allay their melancholy.

The Serpent or Snake, A strange example of the Snake and the Lamprey.
being willing to meet or company with the Fish called a Lamprey, begins to
hiss or whistle, to procure her coming, and perceiving that she comes, to
meet and be sociable with him, he casts his venim on the gravel, as fearing
to engender (of her) by venim or corruption: but when he has ended, he
returns again to seek his venim, which if he find not, he dies with
grief, for having lost his arms or weapons.

Now, albeit that they do these things naturally, yet we may notwithstanding
judge, A kind of deliberation in dumb creatures, confirmed by examples.
that they have herein some kind of deliberation: as we may note for example
in a dog, that knows his own master amongst a huge croude of people.

A Fox, a Cat, a Lion, and other beasts, which have been seen to do
admirable acts: and as for Swallows and Bees, although they perform very
marvelous works, yet for all that, they have much less cogitation then they
aforementioned.

5. Sense is memory.
The fifth interior sense, is Memory. The organe of the sense common, The organe
of the sense common, and his place.
is two ventricles at the door or entrance of the brain: as much to say, as
when the nerves of the sense exterior, do carry their spirits in their
concauities or ventricles, then afterward do these spirits imprint or stamp
the shapes and images of things in the brain: and thus the sense interior
works his actions.

It is certain that there be many powers in the inward senses: for, Many powers
in the inward senses.
a man may loose memory, without any detriment to estimation: moreover, when
estimation is wounded, the^ medicine or remedy is applied to the forepart of
the head, but when memory is weakened, then help is given to the head behind.

Cogitation has his organe in the midst of these two ventricles or
concauities, The organe of cogitation, and his seat.
which are before in the head, and this power is more excellent to some, then
others, according to the better composing of their heads: as we see some more
sudden and quick in inuenting any thing, then others are. Some also will divine
and judge more certainly of a proposed case, Example of this senses power.
then others: as Solomon so readily perceived that the woman lied, who would
have the infant divided in twain, and distributed to her and the adverse
party by halfes, for he conferred the affection of the mother indeed, with
the other parties, which was nothing at all unto the child.

The organe of Memory is behind in the brain, The organe of memory and his
place.
which part has less humiditie the^ before, and is more apt to conserve the
images and shapes of things.

Of the brain in his kinds, of diversity.
A brain too moist, does easily apprehend things, but suddenly forgets them
again: whereas, the brain that is harder, apprehends more difficultly, but
retains longer.

Cold and dryness of the brain, is a very pernicious thing for memory:
wherefore it is said, that lubricitie is a plague, which spends all humor
natural in a man or woman, and most certain is it, that age then comes, when
natural heat and native humiditie do most decline.

The power appetente, is that whereby we pursue or fly those things which
present themselves before us: This power is called sensitive appetite, whereby
all our affections, do pursue what we have apprehended by the exterior sense.

There is one kind of appetence or desiring, Two kinds of appetence in the
senses
which begets it self by touching, and is one while termed grief, another
while delectation: the other is made without touching: and so ensues
cogitation, or moving of the heart, whereby we follow what is offered, and
which cogitation (be it true or false) shows what is most convenient for
nature, or makes us shun the things that are not conuenable: so that naturally
we may perceive it cannot be otherwise, but that the thing presented to the
eye, must be from it a sufficient distaunce, or else it is not seen, neither
can the Nerves do their delighting functions, but in touching those things
agreeing with nature, whereas contrariwise, those things which are
disagreeable, breaking and hurting the parts, must needs be yrkesome to them,
and very painful.

True it is, Of the power Motive.
that the motive power may be restrained by the will, for, if we please, we
may shut our eyes, and the^ we can behold nothing at all: but while the eye
is open, and at liberty, distant from his object by a sufficient space, it
cannot but receive the image thereof; therefore such as have said, that
griefs are oppinions, Of greefes.
which come and go according to imagination, have spoken against manifest and
universal experience.

Four principal affections.

1. Joy. 2. Fear. 3. Hope. 4. Hate.
The opposites four.

1. Love. 2. Grief. 3. Envy. 4. Iealosie.

There be four principal affections, to wit, joy, fear, hope, and hate,
whereunto are reduced love, grief, envy, iealosie and others. And surely it
is a marvelous thing, that so soon as a man has knowledge of a thing
pleasing or offensive: the heart moves it self, and likewise the spirits and
humors of the body.

Of anger, and the hurt it does the brain.
As in anger, the heart (as rising to reuendge himself) labors and beats, and
then the spirits being chafed, do heat the blood, and the actions of the
members are troubled, by the sudden moving of the spirits and confusion of
the blood: but especially in rage or anger, the brain is hurt by the blood,
and the spirits inflamed or ouer-heated, do mount thither, by fiering the
nerves and substance of the brain* which causes a shaking or trembling in
the head, by vehement and sudden moving, as also a present fiering of the
eyes, and all the face becomes as burning: therefore, by over vehement anger,
are frenzies ingendered, and oftentimes Apoplexies.

Homers oppinion concerning anger.
Homer says, that anger is sweeter the^ milk, as meaning, that a man takes
great pleasure, when he may reuendge himself, as he that loves ardently, is
buried (as it were) in joy, when he has the iouissaunce of the thing by him
beloved. Of fear, and how it hurts the heart.
Fear is a moving of the heart or affection, whereby the heart shuttes up it
self, as flying and shunning evil to happen, and this affection agrees with
grief: for albeit the harm or evil is not yet present, nevertheless it is
wounded thereby, as if it were instant. In like manner, The hurt of grief and
sadness.
in grief or sadness, the heart (as being pressed down and close shut) is
weakened, by drying and languishing, for not having the liberty of the
spirits: wherefore, if it continue long in this estate, it prepares the death
of the body, because the spirits, by their long pining and consumption, can
give no further help or succor to it: behold what great hurt ensues by
grief and sadness.

Love is a moving of the heart, Of love, and how it helps the heart.
whereby we desire some thing, be it truly good, or but in appearance only. In
this moving, the heart does (as it were) leap and fly, striving to attract that
thing unto it, only to enjoy it: Hope does best of all agree with this
affection, but yet she is more vehement.

Of hate and his hurt.
Hate is a kind of constant and permanent anger: and anger and hate are contrary
to love.

Of Shame.
Shame is a motion, whereby a man despises and grows agreeued at himself, for
some fault or turpitude by him committed.

Of mercy.
Mercy is a grief which a man takes for the pains, miseries or adversities of
another.

Envy is a sorrow of one man, at the good, Of Envy.
commodity, or advancement of another.

Iealosie is a moving, Of Iealosie.
mingled with love and anger, to wit, when a man loves some thing* and grows
displeased against such, as do harm, dishonor, or ill to the thing he loves:
as the prophet Helias, loving the honor proper to God, grew offended at the
misbelieuers. How a king ought to be jealous.
So should a king or governor of a country, be inflamed with the love of
justice, the profit, honor and advantage of honest people: contrariwise, he
ought to despise the wicked, ungracious, seditious, and disturbers of peace,
loyalty, and public truth.

An affection more hurtful then the rest.
There is another affection, which has no name neither in Latin nor French,
and it is contrary to iealosie: that is, when one desires the loss and
overthrow of the good, and the exaltation of hypocrites, liars, and seditious
persons, such as were Nero, Tymon, and (it may be) others of like quality now
in these times.

Joy is a moving, Of joy, and how it delights the heart.
whereby the heart dilates it self, and sweetly takes pleasure at present good:
it disposes it self in hope, to receive a future good.

Some of these affections are good and agreeable to GOD: Of affections pleasing
to God.
as are honest love of thy neighbor, of thy children, thy wife and thy
country: iealosie of the honor and glory of God: desire for the advancement
of virtuous people: fear of the anger and judgments of God: hatred of
Tyrants, seditious and dissolute disturbers of public peace: hope and
confidence in God in all afflictions whatsoever, being assured that he sees
us, and that he will still have compassion on us.

What the contrary are.
The other are vicious, as envy, hate, and those beside, which trouble the
peace of human communication, and are the pains or penalties of the first
fault, dispersed over all mankind: the mean or moderation of them is very
necessary, for the co^seruation of human society, being the only butte and
aim of moral phylosophie, and of all civil laws in general.

And certainly, The hurt of humane society.
neither can this society or religion be maintained, except we refrain from
avarice, hate, and other such like vicious affections, which horribly do
deforme nature in this part, it remains then to support this part with all
diligence and respect.

The organe or seat of this power, is the heart, The organe of the power
appete^te.
and not any part of the brain at all, for oftentimes a man shall desire what
he knows to be ill: as Ovid said of Medea: I see and approve the good, but I
do the evil. And S. Paul: I see another law in my members: that is to say,
the heart, repugnant to the law of my understanding, and it holds me in
captivity, under the law of sin and death: and many other things (to like
effect) in his Epistle to the Romanies. In brief, very often is judgment
reproved by affection, whereby then it is most clear and evident, that our
affections are not in the brain, where indeed is the certain knowledge of
things.

In this sort disputes Galen, Galen, concerning our affections.
and by the same reason it is apparent, that affections are not oppinio^s, as
the Stoics held and esteemed the^ to be.

That the affections are not of the liver nor the other parts, Affections are
not of the liver nor the other parts.
where the natural appetentions are, of eating and drinking, it is manifest:
for, the affections can easily appease themselus, or use some kind of
moderation, apprehending the same by reason, and demonstrations: but the
natural appetites, as to eat or drink, will not be guided by any reason:
for, as Homer says, there is nothing more impressing or continually urging,
Homers saying of the belly.
then the belly, especially when it is hungry: for it compells us to be
mindful thereof, although we had no care thereof at all, and albeit we had
never so many other things to do.

Seeing then that our affections have their seat, neither in the brain, nor
in those parts where the organe is of the power vegetative: we must conclude
the^, that they are in the heart, for the heart is iocond and merry in joy,
mirth, love, and hope, but in grief, anger, fear, hate, and such like, it is
weary, and much troubled.

The holy Scripture says, Concerning our love to GOD.
that a man ought to love God with all his heart, as much to say, as by the
affection to receive the fruition: to pursue this love in cheerfulness of
heart, desiring to please him, and in truth (without feigning) to embrace,
franckly entertain, and fulfill his Laws, trusting in him, and expecting
health only from him: heereto are reduced the commandments of the first
Table. The degrees of the commau^deme^ts, in the first Table.
Now because those works and labors which God commaundes us, ought to be done
of us in cleannes of heart, not hipocritically, or with dissembling: we will
speak a little thereof here in this place.

The first commandment does strictly charge us, Of the first commandment.
to stand in awe and fear of God: whereby we may assure our selves without any
doubting, that he is a God, to whom we owe obedience, and that he punishes
the faults, offenses, excesses and malices of men.

The second expresses, Of the second commandment.
how jealous he is of his honor, that he will have no partner or competitour
in his honor, much less any attribute at all to be given to stocks or
stones, images, or inventions of men's idle brains: the penalties of such
offenses are therein described, and to what generations it in justice extends,
we ought then to be most careful of his honor and glory.

The third, Of the third commandment.
charge us to do all honor and reverence to the Name of God, and it is the
exterior honor which is contained in this commandment, whereby we are
enjoined: that with great heed, wisdom and fear, we should take care of an
oath, for affirmation of any thing, because it is most certain, that God has
an eye on all our doings, and that he will severely punish our iniquities.

So then we should affirm truth in an oths taking, and desire him to punish
us justly, if we swear not truly, or if we do beguile and deceive any one:
hereby also we are taught, to detest and hold as horrid, all blasphemies and
speeches, which are contrary to Christian religion, and so it is commanded in
the invocation on God.

The fourth commandment, Of the 4. commandment.
consists in the observation of ceremonies and duties, thereto belonging, as
also in their diligent regarding: according to our entrance into the knowledge
of God, of which knowledge they are visible signs, exciting us to obseruaunce
of true religion. Then the true performing of the commandments in the first
Table, is true fear of God, The sum of the first Table, well worthy to be
regarded.
certain trust in his mercy, obedience to all his commandments, explication
and publication of his doctrine, invocation for his aid and propitiation,
giving of thanks, praise of his Name and glory, for the creation,
conservation, and manutention of nature, being his own work, created,
conserved, furnished, provided and maintained by him: behold here the laws of
the first table.

Of the second table.
In the second Table, is contained necessary precepts for our own pollitique
society: for, first of all, such a state cannot be rightly maintained, except
there be a kind of degree and order observed among men.

It is that whereof Aristotle speaks in his Pollitiques, Aristotle in his
Pollitiques, concerning the difference amongst me^.
there are some naturally free, and others as servant: as much to say, as
that some have (by the gift of GOD bestowed on nature) more light of
understanding, and more purity of affections, the^ others can reach unto, to
the end, that they may guide and guarde by edicts, laws and statutes, the
affairs and negotiations of this life. Such were the ancient lawmakers,
Pretors, and Iurisconsults, who left unto us so many provident laws, gathered
by certain demonstrations, of the cleerenesse and light, which God had infused
and placed in their understanding, as also their sincere love and iealosie, for
the tranquillity of public peace: S. Paul's affirmation of laws and obedience.
Which Laws, (says S. Paul) being written in our hearts and consciences,
would give us testimony of them. What men are to be honored.


Such personages the^ ought to be honored, as, holding the bridle of
authority, do tame rude servant, that is to say, such as cannot cleerelie
judge of things: or (through their inordinate affections) do perpetrate
crimes, and commit offense to the civil body, or to the honors or goods of
others.

There are two manner of governments, Two manner of governments, the first
co^pulsiue.
one is, to force and compel the rebellious contemners of honesty: like unto
a master, who constraines his servant (willing or unwilling) to do his duty,
without any refusal or contradiction.

The second, civil and obedient.
The other manner of government, is pollitique and civil, as when without
compulsion, a man freely does the acts of honesty, holding in horror and
abomination, all wickedness and turpitude: namely, when a man in reason is
persuaded, that it ought to be so: as Pericles, Pericles ruling of the
Athenians.
who by honest reason and speeches guided the Athenian Commonwealth: or as a
holy and wise Preacher governs his congregation and church. Several
affections in the multitude.
In this multitude, every one have their several affections, some, sudden
inordinate mouings, and directly repugnant to virtue: but then by persuasion,
which a man perceiues to be used, of the hurt and inconvenience that may
thereon ensue, as well publicly as privately; they are made more moderate,
and faults remitted.

God has stamped in us, Reason and judgment given us of God.
the image and form of either of these manners of government. Reason and
judgment well and truly conceiving things, fore-sees the commodities and
disprofit of al enterprises whatsoever, exciting or restraining, and
accordingly moderates the affections of the heart: and this manner will hold out
very well, if daily our affections be managed by sound judgment.

The first offense, natures maine impediment.
But because (in this case) nature being disrancked and made unruly, by the
first offense cast generally on all, the affections are not moderated by
judgment, deliberation, The will, co^maunder of the affections.
or honest council: the will, as mistress of the affections, forbids the
motive power, that she transport not the members, to perpetrate unreasonable
or pernicious things. As a man having a Fever, affects to drink inordinately:
but yet the will checks the hand, that it shall not approach to the cup or
glass.

Thus see we two direct forms of government, The application of the two
governments in nature.
the one (to hold back the rebellious insulters) in their office: and the
other, by sweet exhortations and reasons, drawn from the rule of
understanding, to guide the obedient, and sway their actions to public profit
and honor.

Concerning the offices we owe by duty to our parents, Of the duty we owe to
our Parents, exampled.
we have a most clear example in nature: as we may easily see in the young
Storkes, who when they attain to strength and age, do nourish and assist
their fathers and mothers.

The following commandments, forbid to do injury or harm to the bodies of
one an other. Of the other commaundeme^ts following.
Man is created to be sociable and communicatiue, as is shewe^ us by our
procreation, careful nourishment* and dilligent regard of our propagation: but
the principal end of this society, is for our joint instruction, and
erudition together in the law of God, and al laudible actions whatsoever.

And because improuident and ill advised men, The reason why laws and
penalties were instituted.
have need of directours, therefore, to the end our co^munitie might continue
sound and entire: the obstinate and stifnecked are to be exempted, and for that
cause were pains and corrections by laws instituted.

Again, Why the division of possessions was thought behouefull.
in this unbridled communication and nature, the avarice and greedines of the
wicked, negligent and slothful is so great, as they will not permit any one to
live in equality or proportion: and therefore the division of possessions was
thought necessary for, if all should be common, then the idle, negligent and
careless wretches, would in short while devour all the riches of the
industrious and dilligent: Concerning theft.
for this cause therefore was committing of theft forbidden.

Notwithstanding, because that men should have dealings one with another, it
behooued that the communication of their goods and labors, should be made by
certain measure and reasons: for, an unequal communication, that is to say,
when the price or recompense shall be ouer-exceeding, or else of too light or
little value; such intercourse among men, The reason of justice in our
contractions.
cannot be long maintained: hereupon ensued justice, which renders to every
one his rightful proportion, in dealing and contracting thus one with another.

More-ouer, our accords, contracts, transactions, co^federations, and
appointments made by voluntary agreements, Without truth, no society can be
observed.
are to be kept: for, without truth, fidelity and loyalty of promise in our
contracts, human conversation can never be continued. Mark then how nature
desires conservation of her self.

Natures co^seruation of herself: and our injury to her and our selves.
In eating and drinking, temperance must be observed: for, inte^peraunce
corrupts nature, and inordinate lubricitie spoils the sanctified combination
of marriage, troubles titles of succession, wardshippes, cases of dowry, and
al pollitique order, all which are indeed most pernicious wounds to
pollitique and discreet society.

Thus see we the law to agree with nature, The law agreeing with nature, and in
what manner.
which first of all established Religion, afterward constituted Magistrates,
the^ they devised to ordain laws, for defense of such as were oppressed
either in goods or body: commanding honor to be given to men of worth and
desert, and they to be committed to al politic functions, by certain* forms
and laws. So grew establishing of marriages, and perfect discerning of
possessions, as also just orders and degrees of correction for all loose
wantons, ouer-daring resisters, and wilful co^temners of the laws.

Assuredly, the principal and chiefest causes of these laws, The laws them
selves the voice of nature, by their causes.
are even themselves the voice and sentence of nature restored, and reformed,
that is to say: the actions of the light of understanding, ordered by the very
purest: and sincerest brains, illumined and renewed by the grace of God; do
declare in what estate this life is guided and governed, and the prescriptions
in the Decalogue appointed, which express to the very life, the form of living
according to the integrity of nature.

Now to return to the point of the hearts moving, Two kinds of moving in the
heart, first by the pulse.
there are two sorts of moving: one is called the pulse, when the spirits
engendered at the heart, move the same, by means of the organes thereto deputed
by nature, and likewise when by dilatation or co^traction of his ventricles,
the arteries driven forward by the subtle spirits within them, do convey and
administer heat through all the body.

Now, albeit these things are very admirable, yet notwithstanding, the
affections, which are the mouers of the heart, (as we have heretofore said,)
are worthy of far greater and much more admiration.

The heart moves likewise by contrariety of humors, severally by each one of
them.
The heart dilated or shut up, moves also by diversity of humors: as in
anger, it is moved by the chollerick humor: in joy it is moved by the very
sweetest blood, and sends the same (as witness) to the exterior parts. In
fear, it calls it self backward, and in grief it is trobled with the humor
of mellanchollie.

Doubtless, in these motions of diverse humors, are fumes and risings up of
diverse co^plexions: nor is it any easy matter to comprehend the causes of
these moouings, or the counsel of God in these their natural functions. Of the
efficient causes (inwardly and outwardly) of the hearts moving.
The efficient causes of these affections, are in us interiourly the heart, and
exteriourly the things which offer themselves unto us, either pleasing or
offensive: but it is necessary that knowledge should preceede affection, for,
as one says: no man ever desired, what he had not first knowledge of.

Ye have the very like combination between the powers of nature, Of the powers
of nature answerable to the hearts affections, and their difference.
and that the motions of the heart, do justly answer to the knowledge which a
man has of any thing: but there is a difference in the complections or
temperatures of the heart, and the spirits, and the bloods present being, for,
the heart being hot and dry, is the sooner kindled, whereon we see some more
suddenly to be enflamed with anger, then others are, and the moouings of the
heart and the spirits, moves the blood (not euer-more) after one kind, but
diversely, and according to the diversity of the affections.

Therefore in grief or sadness, Of the heart in grief and sadness, and the
bloods office in service then.
the heart being shruncke up and crowded together, the blood runs to him, as
willing to help him: and this is the reason, why men or women (being sad,
agreeued, or fearful) are pale, meager, and ill complexioned or colloured.

In joy or anger, the heart dilates it self, Of the heart, in joy and anger, and
how the blood works then.
and sends his blood to the parts exterior: therefore because in anger the
heart is enflamed, it moves redd choler, which spreading it self
ouerprodigally abroad, infecteth all the rest of the blood.

And if it continue long in that heat, it becomes black, and seething
strongly, dries up and burns, whereby oftentimes it happens that some become
frantique, mad and desperate.

Those men that abound in mellancholy, Of mellanchollie and chollericke men,
and their conditions.
mingled with red choler: are envious, full of ill will, and of very strange
and hard conditions.

Sanguine men are joyous, Of sanguine men.
delightful and pleasant, by the abundance and cleerenes of their blood, for
the spirits in them are pure and full of rich splendor.

The phlegmatic are dull, remiss, Of phlegmatic me^.
sleepie and heavy: because their blood is thin, and their spirits scant warm.

The mellancholick, are properly sad and fearful, because their blood is
troubled, thick and cold, their spirits likewise impure, gross, and (as it
were) full of darkness.

Of ye souls society with the body, answerable to the humors.
The very same society is there of the body with the soul, and her effects do
answer to these humors.

In grief or sadness, the heart shuts it self, and drawing backward (as it
were) attracts the humor of mellanchollie to the spleen, which spreading it
self sometimes on either side the body, engenders diseases in the sides, as
plurisies, and other very dangerous obstructions: which we see to happen to
such as are long time in sadness, meditating on nothing but matter of grief
and offense: I have heereto-fore experimented this hurtful humor in my own
self, and therefore can the better speak it.

The proper causes the^ of these affections, Of the proper causes of our
affections, and whence they receive their original.
are the things whereto a man finds himself and his cogitation most applied:
and the heart being suddenly moved, joining and following the knowledge of
those things, does in like manner apprehend the^. It is very clear concerning
anger and grief, that they have their cause inwardly in the heart, and the
exterior is the knowledge of some outward offensive thine.

So of love in like manner, for all such as are of right judgment, love virtue
and honesty: as Scipio loved honor grounded on virtue, and the beauty
thereof in others, moved him to attempt deeds of high prowess, and
(oftentimes) very difficult enterprises Even so, people excelling in virtue,
do dearly love together, for the conuenaunce and natural similitude that is
between them: Aristotle's oppinion of good people and good affections.
For every one (says Aristotle) loves his like; and truly good affections
(says he) are causes of great profit and commodity, and are as pricks and
spurs enciting to virtue.

Plato says, Platos judgment of anger.
that anger is as the nerve of the soul, by loosing or withdrawing whereof,
virtue is exercised.

Seeing the^ that there is in nature, certain organes and parts proper to her
actions, and certain humors which serve necessarily to the^, it behooves,
that some of the^ should be void of vice or offense: for even as the light in
the eye, is the gift of God to nature, Our good affections are divinely
inspired.
even so are good affections divinely inspired, which provoke and incite us to
what-soeuer is good and honest: as to love our children, hate sin, disorder,
tirannie, force, violence and all turpitude.

Aristotle's saying of anger in a virtuous man.
The saying of Aristotle is very good, when he says, that a virtuous man uses
anger, as a Captain does a soldier: for it is most evident, that our actions
would be cold and remiss, if love of honesty, and hate of vice did not
severally incite and move us. In all respects like unto a ship, which having no
wind, goes slowly and softly: even so were we, if we had no good affections,
for the^ our actions would be lame, slow, and of slender effect. The
corruption of nature in us, the cause of evil motions.
If nature were not corrupted in us, we should have very good and excellent
moouings, and no vices at all remaining in us: but the order and harmony of
nature being troubled, makes bad affections to arise in us, and such as are
repugnant to honesty, which boldly do surmount, and ouer-goe those that are
good, abastardizing, and quite ouer-throwing them.

Nevertheless, in all times, and in all countries, in changes of commonweals, there has euer-more been reserved some heroyick natures, exceeding
those of common course, having motions far purer, and of much greater
excellence then the vulgar.

Of the divine affections in our Savior.
The repairer of nature, our Lord Jesus Christ, had in him most true and pure
affections: as when he threw the Merchants out of the Temple, His zeal of his
Fathers glory.
only for iealosie he had of the place, as also the honor and worship of God,
contemning the misbeleeuers, who had polluted the place of veneration,
invocation and holy sacrifice. His heaviness for Lazarus.
In the resurrection of Lazarus, he showed great heaviness, when he wept, as
being greatly moved in spirit: In love, whereby he commanded, His love to
little children.
that they should permit little children to come unto him: In compassion,
which he had of the people, that had followed him in the desert and unfruitful
places: His compassion of them in the desert.
And how many times is the word of mercy used, repeated and inculqued in the
Scripture?

There is great difference between the good affections of Christians, The
contrariety of affections in Christians and Infidells.
and those in Infidels: for Christians acknowledge this purity of motion, to
be repaired in the^, only by the grace of God, and cheerfully (for love of
him, and dread of his displeasure) do ordain in their gouernme^ts, good and
honest laws, referring their actions to the glory of GOD: as did the Prophets
Esaias and Jeremy, who knew that God would have Commonweals to be governed by
holy laws, and all wicked confederatio^s to be cast out. The other, The wisdom
of the Heathen.
(as Cicero) acknowledge not at al, that Magistrates are ordained of God, but
do build upon their own wisdom and power, not attributing any honor to
God, but only to themselves: wherefore these motions may be thought good,
yet are (by accident) evil to unbelievers, because they are not ordered, nor
ruled by the knowledge and love of God.

In this place, after our passed speech of the affections, which are actions
and moouings of the heart, according to the knowledges coming to it by the
senses: me thinks it should not differ much from our purpose, to speak
somewhat of concupiscence remaining in us, Concerning concupiscence abiding in
us.
whereby we may understand many disputations of Saint Paul, the estate of our
own nature, and the great damage or detriment that comes to us by original
transgression.

The word Concupiscence, Of the word Concupiscence, and how it may be
understood.
according as it seems to me (yet yielding still to better judgment)
signifies, not only a moving of the heart, whereby a man desires earnestly and
beyond measure, some thing that may be pretended for profit or pleasure, as to
eat, drink, or commit folly: but likewise it is a privation and defect of
light in the understanding, whereof ensues ignorance of God and his will,
untruths, boldness to encounter with any of his inhibitions, failing in faith
and love toward him, as also diffidence in his gracious promises.

Concupiscence an error in the will.
Likewise, the same word imports an error in the will, as disobedience and
contempt of the commandments of God.

The wills boldness in his own pride.
In these obscurities, our understanding loves and conceiueth great admiration
of him self, and of his own wisdom, wexing bold to feign oppinions of God,
and to apprehend the^ after his own pleasure, whereby afterward it falls into
some narrow distress, where it is girded up with fear and terror, insulting
oftentimes beyond all obedience.

Of these evils complained S. Paul, when he said: Romans 7, 24*
Miserable wretch that J am, who shall deliver me from this body, so subject
to darkness and death? Afterward he aunswers, Romans 7, 25,
The grace of GOD by Jesus Christ.

The word then signifies not only an action sensual, but likewise a vice and
defect in the understanding and will, by which insueth infinite multitudes of
mishaps. So does the Scripture call the hearts endeavors, The hearts moouings
joined with the will.
because the moving and agitation of the heart, is co^ioyned with the will.

Assuredly, if nature had continued in her purity, (...) of nature.
the knowledge of GOD would have been clear in our understanding* whereto the
will had franckly obeyed, but now is hindered only through her obscurity.

Of the contrary moouings of the heart and will.
The heart and will have moouings distort, and contrary to God: for the will
(without the fear of God and trust in him) loves himself, seeks safety in
himself, trusts in his own diligence, delights in his own wisdom: for a
man would be honored and esteemed, and fears more the reproaches or blames of
the world, then of GOD his Creator.

The very like agitations do sway the heart, the sensual motions draw the will
unto the^, as much to say, as when the heart loves the voluptuous pleasures of
the senses, which are prohibited, or when a man hates his neighbor, flatly
against the law of God.

To this effect spoke our Savior; Mark, 7, 21,
That out of the heart proceeded evil cogitations, thefts, blasphemies,
murders, adulteries, lies, and such like other crimes.

In this then it appears most certainly, The heart signifies the will and
understanding.
that by the heart is signified the understanding and will: as when the heart
takes pleasure in false oppinions, and such imaginations as are contrary to the
honor and glory of God.

How to come to the knowledge of our selves
The consideration of these things, should check the pride and presumption
reigning in us, and induce us to obedience, by often and fervent prayer to God,
that he would renew in us the clear, pure and sincere light of our
understanding: that he would likewise make clean our hearts, and plant
therein none but good affections.

As David desired of God, A clean heart, and a right spirit. And Saint Paul,
who said: That Jesus Christ only reformes the cleerenesse of our
understanding, and conformes the body to his brightness.

The Motive power, Of the motive power, carrying the body from place to place,
and what are his organes.
is that whereby the body and his parts, are transported from one place to
another: the organes, are the nerves, the muscles, and the cords of the members.

The soul, the cause of the bodies moving.
Alexander Aphrodisianus says, that the soul is the cause of the bodies
moving, as weight is the cause why a stone falls downward.

Two kinds of moving, natural and voluntary, and the power of either.
This moving is divided into two kinds, natural, and voluntary.

The natural, neither begins or ceasseth, according to our imagination and
pleasure, nor can it be otherwise, but as when an object is presented, the^ it
is afterward pursued: as the ventricle, which draws the received food to it,
and the heart attracts the spirits, either suddenly, or softly.

The voluntary moving, both begins and ends at our own pleasure, and that is
the property of this power: as is the several mouings of our parts, going,
running, swimming, and such like.

There is another co^mixed moving, Of a commixed moving partly natural, partly
voluntary.
being partly natural, and partly voluntary: as is the moving of the breast
or stomach. The benefit of this power is easily discerned: For thereby we seek
what is necessary for our co^seruation, and shun what we imagine thereto
contrary.

It remains to speak of the intellectual power, Of the power intellectual,
according to S. Augustines oppinion.
whereof S. Augustine makes an accommodation to the Trinity.

The memory, (says he) forming the intellection, represents the Father: the
intellection represents the Son: and the will, the holy Ghost. For the
Father, considering and knowing himself, begot the Son; and the holy Ghost
is the agitation proceeding of the Father, and of the Son.

This is the power whereby we know, How action becoms appropriate to
intellection.
receive, judge and discern, having in it the beginning of Arts: heereto
likewise is action riciprocall for thereby our actions are seen and judged.

This power differs from the sensitive: How it differs from the sensitive power.
for the sensitive takes knowledge but of things peculiare and singulerly, but
this other co^ceiues, and apprehends both singular and universally.

Of the object of intellection.
The object of this power, is God, and the whole universality of things, as
well celestial as elementarie.

The offices of this power, The offices of intellection.
are to understand and form in him self, the images and representations of
things, to retain, and confer them together: the^ afterward, to see, what
agreement and what difference is between the^.

The organes of this power, The organs of intellection.
are the interior senses, whereof we have discoursed already. Plato says, that
as the seal imprinteth on the wax, so (by means of the spirits) are the
shapes of things imprinted in the brain. But this is the matter most
marvelous of all, that we should retain so great a multitude, and several
diversities of things, and likewise for so long a time: but the reason thereof
can never be well or sufficiently expressed.

Wherefore, Our life is guided by our actions.
seeing by our actions our life is guided, we should pray unto GOD, that he
would take pity upon our weak nature: and that he would renew his image in
us, to the end we may more perfectly know his works in us, and show our
selves more reverent and obedient to him.

Aristotle's division between the two understandings, active and passive.
Aristotle makes a division, between the understanding active, and that which is
termed passive: mary he calls the active understanding nothing else, but that
which inuenteth any thing, as the understanding of Archimedes, did invent the
Compass.

The passive understanding, is that which inuenteth not of it self, but makes
approbation of an others invention: as he that approved the invention of
Gunpowder, or that of the Compass, or the Astralabe. The knowledges of the
understanding, are divided into actions and habitude. The knowledge which is
called action, Actions and habitude, ye knowledges of the understanding.
is that part of the understanding, which apprehends something, by forming the
image thereof.

Habitude, is as a constant and resident light in the understanding, whereof
we make use whenever we please.

The understanding sometimes busies it self, and considers those things,
whereof it can but hardly reach to the knowledge: as the changes of the air,
Of speculatiue and practiue knowledge.
the reuolutions ordinary of the heavens, and those are termed speculatiue.
Sometimes it meditates on things that it can easily exercise, and then it is
called practiue.

Of reason, and the wills conjunction therewith.
The word reason, is that which comprehends, and then the understanding
co^ceiuing things, conferreth and makes judgment of them, where-upon the will
makes his conjunction. The definition of the will.
Then may the will be thus very well defined, it is a part or power of the
understanding, which is called reason: working freely, after that the
understanding has tried, and judged the thing to be good or bad.

If nature had continued in her first integrity, The hurt of natures lack of
her first condition.
we should never have willed, but what of it self had been good and honest: but
the order of nature being perturbed, makes such an alteration, that there is a
discord among the powers, and that the understanding is sometimes deceued in
judging of things. And albeit it can easily discern the hurtfulnes of things,
yet many impediments do happen to cross it: The impediments or hindrances of
our understanding.
as self conceit, or ouer-great weening in our own selves, envy, and other
such like harms, which draws us to commit enormous crimes, and to trouble
(sometimes) the quiet estate of the public weal.

How Gods image becomes misshapen in us.
Thus becomes the image of GGD deformed in us, and keeps not the true Idea of
his first excellence. Wherefore it behooves us, What we ought to desire of God,
in reparation of our wants and defects.
earnestly to desire (with S. Paul) that GOD would make perfect his image in
us, and that by understanding and knowing aright the cause and author of all
things, we may attain to more noble and purer actions, as well in our
understanding, as in our will. Likewise, that our memory may evermore retain
good and holy cogitatio^s of god, and of commendable actions, whereby religion
is preserved and increased: that he would purify our affections, and in sted
of such as are evil and corrupt, excite (by his holy spirit working in his
Word) honest and virtuous motions in our hearts. Moreover, to work so
graciously in us, that the inferior powers may be obedient to the superior,
being evermore guided, by the sacred direction in his word contained: to the
end, that by this accord and consonance of virtues in our soul, the honor of
God may be exalted and reverenced in us, and public tranquillity kept and
maintained, until it shall please him to receive us, and give us eternal rest
in his high and happy dwellings.

Of the immortality of the soul.
NOW, as concerning the immortality of the soul, some do dispute in this
sort, by arguments taken and derived from nature. Natural arguments,
concerning the souls immortality.
It is impossible (say they) that all the honest and well disposed people,
which are borne and brought up in this world, should evermore be vexed or
troubled with miseries. Yet is it evident, 1. Of the afflictions of good people
in this life.
that the greater part of good people, are most of all, and oftnest afflicted
grievously, yea, many times slain by the wicked, seditious and Tyrants. It is
then necessary to think and say, that GOD has reserved some port or haven of
safety for them, where (after all troubles) they may arrive to perpetual rest.

2. Of pains reserved for the wicked, notwithstanding their felicity in this
life.
Some likewise dispute on the contrary part, of the pains reserved for the
wicked, for, naturally we judge and say, that evil deeds do justly deserve
punishment. Yet oftentimes we see, that they which are oppressors of others,
both in body and goods, are nevertheless happy in their worldly enterprises:
why then it is most certain, that a place is also afterward reserved for them,
and pains likewise, wherewith they are to be punished.

First, Platos reason concerning the soul.
Plato gives this reason: those things that be not of elementary nature, are
not subject at all to coruption nor death: The soul consists no way of the
elements, it is then clear, that she is not mortal, nor any way corruptible.

That the soul is no way consisting or made of any part of the elements, The
soul no way consists of the elements.
is apparent and manifest by this reason. It is impossible, that nature being
corruptible, should comprehend and conceive things universal and
incorruptible: as to conceive and apprehend God, with the universality of
things: the numbers, the differences of things honest and dishonest: What
nature can, notwithstanding her corruption.
yet naturally, and even without teaching, men do apprehend these things.

It is then to be judged, that the seats of these apprehe^sions, are not
natures elementaries, but much more excellent the^ corruptible things, and
likewise that they are perpetual: see here what natural reasons are yielded,
for the immortality of the soul.

But we, Of Gods great love and kindness to us, far beyond others.
whom God has so much looued, and endued with so especial a favor, as to
make the beams of the glory of his Gospel shine upon our understanding, taking
and receiving the testimonies of true examples, and sayings of the Prophets,
which we know to be divinely bestowed on them, and confirmed by the words and
works of our Lord Jesus Christ: assuredly, me thinks it is very marvelous,
seeing that this epithet of immortality is so apparent, and confirmed in us
by many sayings and examples, Men's careless regard of the souls immortality.
why men do not better prepare themselves, to understand this judgment
aright, and that they have no greater fear or horror of the pains eternal.

It remains therefore, that men of good and virtuous disposition, ought to
rest assured, by the examples of Enoch, Elias, and our Savior Jesus Christ,
living already in life perpetual.

And if we will take notice from the very first age of the world, Gods
instruction of the souls immortality, from the original of the world.
we shall find, that God declared, how he would one day hold his judgment, to
punish the wicked, and reward the good, according to their several works, as
when he said to Caine: If thou have well done, Gene. 4.7.
thou shall find it, and receive like recompense: but if thou have done
evil, thy sin shall be hidden, until such time as it shall be declared and
discovered. The reason of wicked men's neglect of the souls immortality.
This deferring and dilatation of punishment, makes the wicked more bold and
forward in their sinning, and begets likewise contempt of God: but albeit
we see not such transgressio^s punished in this world, let us not therefore
think, that they shall so escape without correction.

Gods delay of punishment agrauates the chastiseme^t.
For, as the wise man of Greece said: GOD deferreth his chastisement, but he
recompenceth that delaying with greater measure of pains. And let us likewise
remember his own holy words, to wit, that sin shall be discovered, Gene, 4, 7,
which let us not think to be spoken in vain, or that the words are of no
effect: for, although we behold not here the pitiful end of tyrants, or
others that depart this life unpunished, let us yet remain assured, that the
measure of their scourging will be the greater afterward.

Enoch, who in his living body was rapt up, An especial proof of the life
eternal.
and translated from this world, gives us thereby to understand, that after
this life, there remains a better: then is it not to be doubted, but that
Enoch, Elias, and those other holy persons, taught and instructed others in
the happiness of this life perpetual, and that it also remained after this
present estate.

Likewise in the Epistle of the Apostle S. Jude, there is a part of the sermon
of Enoch, which speaks in this manner: Jude. 1, 14.
Behold, the Lord shall come with infinite company of Saints, only to do
justice, to rebuke and punish all those that have done evil and ungodly
deeds.

And Helie and Eliseus, who did raise up, and make to live again some that
were dead: and Elias, who was taken up in the presence of his friends, and
carried to heaven in his entire body, both in a whirlwind and a flame of
fire.

Many other examples, Infinite examples to confirm the immortality of the
soul.
and namely the most evident example of our Savior, who rose again, and to
him excited the company of the prophets and holy Fathers, to live with him
perpetually, and to enjoy the fruitio^ of the company of God.

By divine Scripture then it is most clear, That our souls are spirits, not
to be overcome by death.
that our souls are spirits, which are not to be extinct in death like the
body: but do remain separated afterward, and live perpetually.

God said, that we need not to fear such as kill the body, Math, 10.28
and afterward can do nothing else. He said likewise to the converted thief:
Luke. 23, 43
This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

If the soul could be extinct and dissipated like smoke in death, That the
soul is to live with Christ after death.
it would not then follow, that she should co^uerse and live afterward with
Jesus Christ: it is then a spirit, which continues after death, and in regard
it is a spirit, it cannot be idle.

As concerning the word Paradise, Of Paradise, and what it signifies.
it signifies the place of happy and eternal life: there where joy, wisdom
and justice are in all abundance.

It is necessary to note the sermon of the good thief, The good theefes sermon
on the Cross.
which he made hanging aloft on the Cross, even when he was at the instant of
death, and when all the Apostles were astonnied, and had left off their office
of preaching, and did forget the mercies of God.

Undoubtedly, this spectacle was not without great signification, for, there
was to be seen two thieves hanging with the blessed Son of God, which
signified, that the world was condemned to death for most grievous offenses And
seeing it should be so, that the Son of God, was to appease his Fathers
displeasure, One part of the world refused the benefit of Christ's death,
figured in the bad thief.
and by his death only: that yet one part of the world would still contemn
this benefit, and despise the kindness of this Savior, as may be discerned in
the bad thief, having no hope at all of salvation, and in whose person is
figured forth to us, the wicked, seditious, and tyrants, enemies against the
Gospel of GOD, who ought assuredly to know, that their condemnation is
already done, for their wilful contemning the mercies of God.

But the other part of the world, The conde^natio^ of the wicked, and
assurance of the elects salvation, in Jesus Christ.
which are such as (with reverence) acknowledge and receive this blessing of
God, knowing and confessing (with the good thief) that they have deserved
nothing but comdemnation and death: yet trusting only in God, do inuoke his
mercy and propitiation, acknowledging also, that they are delivered from sin
and death, only by the blessed and innocent death of their Redeemer.

The good thief, who desired his deliverance of God, acknowledged him therein,
and albeit he saw him there to die with him; yet he held it for most certain
and assured, that this was he who could give him eternal life: wherefore he
heard the sweet answer of GOD, who promised him, that that very day, he
should be with him in the place of rest, life, and joy perpetual. By this
voice he understood, that his sins were forgiven him, and that life eternal
was (in mercy) bestowed upon him.

Then, though he was hanged, broken, and half dead, yet (for all that) he
did honor and gave reverence to the Son of God: When the whole church was
silent, and the Apostles dumb, yet the good thief preached ye glory of God,
in his son Christ Jesus.
even then when the whole Church was silent, and when the Apostles were amazed
and dispersed, yet he confide^tly said* that he who was there hanged, and
ready to die, should (nevertheless) reign and give eternal life to men: he
called on him, as the only master and author of life: Nay more, he defended
the glory of GOD against the other evil speaker.

This spectacle then admonishes us of many things, and all good minds do
acknowledge, their transgressions to be fixed to his cross: for we are all
(by our sins) subject to death and calamities of all sorts, and can no way
be delivered but by the Son of God only. It remains then, that we call on
him*, that we declare to others these great blessings, How much we stand
bound to defend the glory of God, against all Atheists and misbeleeuers.
and that we maintain his honor and glory, against all miscreants and evil
speakers: whatsoever afflictions, torments or deaths we endure in the cause, to
the end, that he may give to every one of us, that which he did to the happy
converted thief, saying: This day thou shall be with me in Paradise.

Seeing then so great a matter is contained in this speech and conference, of
our Savior Christ with the good thief, let us confirm and fix in our hearts,
this saying and most powerful sentence: which manifestly declares, The soul
is a living spirit, after the bodies death, and consists no way of the bodies
temper.
that the soul is a seperable spirit, living after it has left the body,
according as Christ himself said, that the spirit of the converted thief,
should converse and be with him in Paradise.

Assuredly, it could not converse nor live after death, if it were only of
the bodies te^per, or if it were some smoke, neither could it likewise be in
Paradise, but would be dispersed abroad in the air.

In Saint Mathewe, Math, 17, 3.
Moises spoke and conferred with our Savior in the Mountain, although it be
plainly written in the Book of the repetition of the law, commonly called
Deuteronomie, that Moses was dead and buried: our Savior then spoke with the
separated soul of him. Saint Paul said, Philip, 1, 23,
that he desired to be delivered from his body, and to be with Jesus Christ.

And to the Corinthians he said: 2. Cor, 5, 6,
While we remain in this body, we are far off from our Lord. But we have this
confidence, that after we shall have finished this long voyage, we shall then
abide with him.

And S. Peter says, that the Spirit of our Lord, while his body was in the
Tomb, preached unto the spirits of them that were in prison: 1, Pet, 3, 19,
which then assures us, that our souls are separable spirits. In Saint Luke,
the history is recited of the wicked rich man that was in hell torments, and
the poor beggar, Luke. 16, 19
whose spirit was in Abraham's bosom.

In another place, GOD says, that he is the God of Abraham, Math, 22, 32
and the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob: and that he is not the God of the
dead, but of the living. Let us then end with this conclusion, that Abraham,
Isaac and Jacob are living.

FINIS.
(...) Socr. Tell me, which do thou judge to be works of Fortune, or of
reason and deliberation? as much to say, as those works that have no certain
end, neither are known wherefore they be made? and what think thou of such,
as manifestly do appear, that they are made for the benefit of men?


Aristo. Doubtless, those which are made for the profit of men, are
questionles works made by reason and deliberation.


Socr. Does it not the^ appear to thee, that he that from the beginning made
men, and gave the^ sense, whereby they should have knowledge of every thing,
did it not for their benefit? as eyes to behold things visible: ears to hear
soundes: and so likewise of things that are apprehended by sent, whereof no
profit would be had except we had nostrils: nor knew we how to perceive or
distinguish which taste is sweet, and which is sower or sharp, except we had
a tongue and palate to taste them? Moreover, does it not likewise seem to
thee, to be a work of Gods high providence, to enclose (within lidds) the
weak and feeble eyes, which when need requires to see, do open, and close
again when desire of sleep urges?

And to the end no angry winds may be offensive to them, he has placed the
brows over the eyes, as also to defend them from the sweat, desce^ding down
the head, yet kept thereby out of the eyes. As in like manner the ears, that
receive all sounds, and yet are never full: the teeth also in order made and
placed, that those before do cut the meat, and those behind chewe and prepare
it for the passage: so may we say of the mouth, whereby the food has conuoy to
the stomach, being seated under the eyes and nostrills: but the co^duit of
offensive superfluities, is placed behind, and far from the several seats of
the senses, least it should be any way hurtful unto them.

These things which thou discernest to be made by so great a providence,
whether do thou attribute them to Fortune, or to counsel and deliberation?


Aristo. Assuredly, these things seem to me, to be the workmanship of a
most wise Creator.


Socr. And the natural great desire we have to beget a continuation of
lineage, as also of mothers to nourish their young children, and when they
become great, a care for their living, and then the mighty fear they have of
their death.


Ari. In sooth, al these things are the works of him, who had a will, that by
counsel, reason, and deliberation, his creatures should be made living,
having both sense and moving.


Socra. Does it appear to thee that thou have any discretion, whereby thou
make apprehension or judgment of these things?

Thou have in thee a little portion of this earth, which thou see to be so
great, and a small quantity of humor, which is of so large abou^dance in the
world: now, considering either of these things to be so great, and yet thou
have of either some small portion, and altogether being so assembled in thy
body, as thou could have no understanding at all, except they were in this
sort ordered: These things (I say) being so great, and in multitude infinite,
how do thou imagine, but that they should be well ordained?


Arist. I can no way perceive their ordenation, as I behold the order of other
workme^s labors.


Socr. Why even so thou can no way behold thy soul, which directs and
gouerns (at her pleasure,) all thy whole body: yea, and in such sort, as thou
might else say, thou do all things without counsel; reason, or
deliberation, but that only raises regard of fear and trembling.


Arist. I vvoulde be loathe to neglect the Gods, but do hold and esteem them
so great, as we should have nothing else to do, but to be reverent only
toward them.


Socra. The greater then thou esteemest them to be, the more thou ought to
honor them.


Arist. If I wist that they had any care of men, I would adore them, and never
neglect them.


Socra. Why how can thou think, but that they have care and regard of us,
seeing man is made only (above and beyond al other creatures) to go upright?
to foresee many things intended to him, and to govern all other creatures
under him? having eyes, ears, and a mouth bestowed upon him?

And though to some he have given but feet, as to Serpents: yet to man he has
given hands, to guard himself from many outrages, wherein we are more happy
then other creatures.

And albeit other beasts have tongues, yet to man only it is given, to turn
his tongue from one side of his mouth to the other, thereby to form an
intelligible voice, to dispose and make known his thoughts to others.

Now not only is this care taken of our bodies, but much more of our inward
spirits. For where or when did any other creature ever think or consider, that
God was the Creator of the very best and greatest things? Or what kind else,
(only man excepted) did ever, or can give honor to God? or keep himself from
cold, heat, famine, thirst, and other inconveniences? Or shun diversity of
diseases? Or by exercise gather strength, ability, and learning? or retain
longer and more faithfully what-soeuer is to be understood?

Seems it not then to thee, that man only is (as a God) amongst all other
creatures? more excellent, and out-going them both in body and mind?

Undoubtedly, if man had had the body of an Ox, he could not have done what
soever he would* and such as have hands (without any other part of inward
spirit) have somewhat to be reckoned of much more, then they that have no hands
at all.

But thou that have hands and understanding, can thou think that God has
not care and respect of thee? Do thou not think, that the most ancient and
wisest Cities, are those that most dilligently and carefully do honor the
Gods?

Learn, learn my friend, that thy soul gouerns thy body: likewise, that the
good spirit which contains all things, directs all things at his good
pleasure.

Think thou that thine own eye can see many things far off, and that
Gods eye does not discern them altogether? Or that thy mind may conceit at
one instant, what is done in Athens, Scicilie, Egypt, or elsewhere, and the
Divine Spirit or mind, does not know all things directly together? Yes, hold
and believe it for most certain: that God sees, hears, regards, and has care
of thee, me, and all things else whatsoever together.


FINIS.
A Directorie, for the Readers more easy and speedy apprehension, of the
special matters handled in this Treatise.
WHat benefit a man gains by the knowledge of himself. page, 2. What the
Soul is. page 3, Of the virtues and powers in the soul. page 4, Of
nourishment, and the manner of the bodies nourishment. page 5, 6. Of Choler,
Mellancholie, and phlegm. page* 8, Of the blood, and how it is received, page
9, Of three kinds of digestion, to perfect nourishment. page, 11, That the
inconvenience of the first digestion, is not helped by the other. page 14, Some
men's oppinion concerning the Soul. 16 The hurt of intemperancie. page 17, Six
things not naturally in us. page 18, The benefit of labor to the body. page 19
The hurt of immoderat exercise to the body. 21 Of sleep, how it benefits the
body, and helps the powers of the soul. page, 22, 24, How heat and blood do
work for the heart. 24. Of dreams in sleep, their kinds, causes and examples.
page 31, 32, 33, 34, etc. Of the increase of nourishment, and when nature
receives most substance to her self. 38, 39 How natural heat grows or
decaieth in us, 41* Of death natural, and unnatural. page 43 Of generation,
and how the fruit is formed, 44, Of the offices, veins, and arteries of the
membrane. page 46, 47, How the nauill is made, and in what time. 48, Of the
places for the liver, heart and brain, 50 How the liver is formed, and what it
is. 50 How the bowels are fastened to the back, 51 How Diaphragma is formed.
page 52 Of the back bones, and forming of the heart, 53 Of the hearts
nourishment. page 54 That the heart is the beginner of vital heat, 55 How the
lungs and lites are formed, and consequently the bodies height. page 57 Of the
forming of the brain, and skull of the head. page 57, 58, Of the marrow in the
chine bone of the back, page 60 How the fruit is nourished in the womb, and
the bloods division into 3. parts. 60, 61, 62, How the power Vegetative
nourishes the body, and maintains kind. page 64 How the order of the
several powers supply their offices, page 68 Of the sensitive power, being
the souls second power. page, 71 Of the five exterior senses, and first how
sight is wrought in us. page, 72 Of the inward organes of sight, and what use
they serve us to. page 74 How sight has his seat, and what spirits give life
to the eye. page, 77 The manner how colors are truly discerned, 80, The true
capacity of the eye in sight, and benefits of that sense. page 81, Of hearing
and his organe, page 82 What sound or noise is, and of the means of
apprehending it, page 83, 84 How our speech or voice is formed. 86 Of smelling,
and by what organe it is apprehended. page 89 What odor, sent* or smell is,
90, Of tasting, and his organe, and how the tongue tastes with his means, use
and object. 94, 95 Of the several kinds of savor; what savors best please
the taste: what most urges appetite: and of things without savor. page 96,
97, 98, 99, etc Of Touching and his organe, and benefit. 107, 108 Of the
inward sense, his seat, and necessary use. page 108, 109 Of the five inward
senses, their organes what they are, and how they help each other, 110, etc Of
the brain in his diversity of kinds. 118 Of two kinds of appetence in the
senses. 119 Of the four principal affections, and their opposites: both
helping and hurting. 122. etc The organe of the appetente power, and what it
is. page 133 Of the commandments in both the Tables. page, 136, 137, 138, etc
Of the contrariety and difference amongst men. page 41, Of two kinds of
government: compulsion and obedience. page 143, 144, That the will is the
commander of the affections. page 146 The reason of laws, division of
possessions, and justice in our dealings. 149, 150, 151 How the law agrees
with nature, and in what manner. page 153, 154 Of two kinds of moving in the
heart: and the efficient causes thereof, 155, 156, 157 Of the powers of nature,
answerable to the hearts affections, and their difference. page 158, Of the
heart, with his helps and hurts. 159, 160. Of the souls society with the body,
aunswerable to the humors. page, 162, Of the proper causes of our affections,
and whence they take original. page 163 That natures corruption is the cause
of our evil affections. page, 167 Of the divine affections in our Savior,
page, 168, 169, 170, The contrariety of affections in Christians and Infidels.
page 170, 171 Of Concupiscence, and how it may be understood. page 173, 174,
175. Of the contrary mouings of the heart and will. 176. How to come to the true
knowledge of our selves. page 178. Of the motive power, carrying the body from
place to place. page, 180 That the soul is the cause of the bodies moving.
eodem Two kinds of moving, and the power of either of them. eodem Of a
commixed power, partly natural, and partly voluntary. page 181 Of the
intellectual power. page 182 How action becoms appropriate to intellection,
and differs from the power sensitive. 183 Of the object of intellection: his
offices and organes. page 184 Of the two understandings, active and passive.
page 186 The action and habitude, guide the understanding. page 187 Of the
speculatiue and practiue knowledge. 188 Of Reason, and the wills conjunction
therewith. page eodem, Of the wills definition. eodem. Of the hurt of natures
lack of her primative condition. page 189 Of the impediment and hindrances in
our understanding. 190. How Gods image becomes deformed in us, and what we
ought to desire of him in repayring of our wants and defects* 190, 191, 192, Of
the souls immortality, and natural reasons therefore alleged. page 193, 194
That the soul consists no way of the elements. page 195 What nature can do,
notwithstanding her corruption. page, 196 Of men's careless regard of their
souls immortality. page 198, How God instructed the souls immortality from
the worlds beginning. page 199 That our souls are spirits, not to be overcome
by death. page 203. That the soul is to live with Christ after death. page 204
Of Paradise, and what it signifies. page 205 Of the good Theefes sermon on the
Cross. page, eodem One part of the world refused the benefit of Christ's
death. page 206, The condemnation of the wicked, and assurance of the elects
salvation. page 207, That the good thief preached Gods glory, when the whole
Church was silent, and the Apostles stood dumb. 209 That the soul is a living
spirit after the bodies death, and no way consists of the bodies temper. page
212.
FINIS.

