THREE HOMILIES Upon these three sentences following.

PSALM. 55.22. Cast thy burden upon the LORD.

John 14.27. My peace I give unto you.

LVK. 10.42. One thing is necessary.

Composed by Philip Mornay, Lord of Plessis Marly.

LONDON Printed by I. D. for Nathanael Newbery, and are to be sold in
Pope's Head alley at the sign of the Star. 1626.

To the Worshipful and his very loving Sisters, Mris Dorothie Gerrard, Mris
Elizabeth Harvie, and Mris Anne Moulson; All increase of true happiness.
Dear and loving Sisters, seeing it has pleased God to unite us together by
most near and strict bands of amity, as namely, those of nature and grace, I
have often been proiecting with my self which way I might (before my
departure out of this world) leave with each of you some expressions of that
love, which in regard of both these bands, I find my self obliged unto you
in. Whereupon it being my hap during this late and great Visitation (never to
be forgotten) to light upon a subject, well suiting to these troublous times,
viz. these 3. Treatises ensuing, written by a Noble and Judicious personage, in
his own native Language: I resolved out of that little insight I had
thereinto; by reason of my travels in my younger years, to set upon the
translation thereof; time and leisure serving me so fitly thereunto. And the
rather, least with the unprofitable servant, I might justly be taxed in mine
own conscience, either of laying up in a Napkin, Luke 19.20 Mat. 25.25.
or burying in the earth, even this one talent committed unto my trust. Now
howsoever some may here not untruly object, that more Tracts in this kind have
already bin brought to light, then are either carefully read, or of the Readers
kindly respected, yet well weighing the worth of the points herein contained, it
seemed to me, that I could not without some wrong done to my self and others,
withhold them any longer from the public view. For what burdened soul, would
not gladly accept of case? What trembling heart would not rejoice to find
peace? And who is he or she, whose heart and head being distracted and cumbred
about many carking cares, would not willingly light upon that one thing, which
being obtained, would breed in them a world of contentment? So that upon the
point, these 3. Treatises carefully read, digested, and well practiced, may in
some cases prove more beneficial; then to be left by ye gift of friends,
thousands of gold and silver. Now as I am bold to publish them (my good
sisters) to ye world, under each of your names and patronage, so is it my
meaning also to bequeath ye same unto you, not as a worldly, but as a spiritual
legacy, the fruit whereof my hope is shall abide with you forever. Let me
entreat you all then, my dear sisters, with good Mary to choose the better
part, which as Christ says, shall never be taken from you, lest being overmuch
busied about the things of this life, you should seem to come short of the
heavenly: as it is to be feared too many have already done, do, and will do,
till they repent the same at leisure. For what will it profit us, to gain the
whole world, and to lose our own souls; or what can we give in exchange for
our souls? Mat. 16.26. But beloved Sisters, I am persuaded better things of
you, and such as accompany salvation, though I thus speak. Wherefore accept in
love, what is here presented unto you, from a loving heart: and cease not I
pray you, to pray for him, who desires from the heart, ever to rest,

Your very loving Brother, A. R.
January 5. 1625.
To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, thou have here by the good providence of God, and not
without the faithful endeavors of a very good friend, a fair opportunity
offered thee to read and read again, if thou be pleased, these three Homilies of
the thrice renowned Philip Mornay, Lord of Plessis: who in commenting upon the
holy Scriptures, Act. 8.
seems rather to resemble Philip the divine Evangelist, then a peer of that
Land where he did reside. His labors herein though short, yet shall thou find
them pious, pithy, learned, and sweet. For here 1. thou may learn on whom
to cast the burden of thy ordinary and extraordinary trials. 2. In all outward
and inward perturbations, where to find true peace. 3. In all thy worldly
encumbrances, how to pitch upon that one thing, which in truth is better then
all things whatsoever besides. So as had not my friend and my self by often
viewing and reviewing them over (in these late dolorous days) esteemed, that
thy gain inreading of them would plentifully have answered the pain, thou
had not I dare assure thee in so great plenty and variety of good Books at
this time, had so free an use of this; being penned as it was in another
Language. Accept it then Good Reader, as a pledge of our Loves to thee; as also
of our earnest wishes, that thou may daily profit in the knowledge of these
and the like sacred and divine truths, to the glory of God, and thine own
eternal good, Amen.

Thine in Christ, C. C.

A HOMELY Upon these words of DAVID;
Cast thy Burden upon the LORD, and he will nourish thee,

Psalm. 55.22.
DAVID much experie^ced in bearing Afflictions, powers out his soul in a most
bitter Complaint before God. sal. 55.
I grieve, says he, and am much perplexed, because of the voice of the enemy.
But what voice? They cast iniquity upon me; upon me poor Innocent, all
iniquity, all manner of Crimes; And for the furious hatred which they bear
me. And what Enemy was it? He with whom I was so familiar, that we
communicated our secrets tegether, we went together into the house of God. And
in this case what could be more said? When, from whence comfort should come,
thence arises grief: Neither dissembles he the depth of his anguish: My heart
is sore pained within me. And I said who shall give me the wings of a Dove
that I may fly away? As if he should say, now ready to leave all; This
affliction above any other, being beyond the patience and consolation of man.
But as soon as he was come again unto himself, nay rather going out of
himself, he redoubles his courage; I will cry unto God, and the Lord will
deliver me; if at the first he understand me not, nor answer me, I will not
recoyle. Psalm. 55.17.
Evening and morning, and at noone day will I cry aloud, and he will he are my
voice. I will knock, and that so often, and hard at his gate, that he will
open unto me. Such importunity is pleasing unto him. Then he gives us a
lesson; In like care; from whom can we better take it? or up on better proof?
Verse. 22. Cast thy burden, says he, upon the Lord, and he will nourish thee.
Art thou a Christian, and overwhelmed with adversity, or toyled under thy
Calling, power out thy heart unto the Lord; roll thy self even upon him, take
him for thy pledge, and doubt not, but as he is naturally good and faithful in
his promises; so he will take thy burden upon himself, and comfort thee; In
the same sense as he says else where. Psalm. 37. verse. 5. and 6. Stay thy self
upon the Lord, commit thy way unto him, and he shall bring it to pass; quiet
the disquiemes of thy soul; and commit thy self to his direction; the which
S. Peter also teaches us, together with him. 1 Pet. 5.6. and 7. verses. Humble
your selves under the mighty hand of God, that he may exalt you in due time,
casting all your care upon him, for he cares for you. And seeing it pleases
him to take the care upon him, who has all times in his hands, let us not
fear, that he will let the time slip. Should I cast my burden upon the Lord,
may some say; Is it not over much boldness, were it upon a brother? Shall the
servant presume to lay his burden upon his Lord, the Creature upon his
Creator? A creature? nay which is worse; burdened with unthankfulness, with
rebellion, and hateful sins, can this be done without presumption? or rather
without pride? And what does God more abhor? But I will help thee in this
doubt. It were pride indeed, if thou tookest this boldness from thy self; But
he has given it thee, he has ordained it for thee; Call upon me, and I will
hear thee. Call unto me, and I will run to help thee; He is thy shepherd,
and vouchsafes to call us his sheep, and the shepherd carries the bruised
upon his shoulders burthening himself with them; so far is he from casting
them off. Of a Judge, of a Lord, of a Creator, he is become thy Father, and
Brother; From whence, even David comforts himself. Psalm. 27. verse. 10. Though
my father and mother should forsake me, yet the Lord will gather me up; yea the
Lord himself says, Isa. 49.15.
Though a mother should forget her sucking child; the son of her womb, and
take no pity of it, yet will not I forget thee. That is to say, not my
Church, nor any member thereof; More tender therefore is he toward us, then any
parents toward their Children, or toward those that hang upon the breast of
the tenderest mothers, who in the mean time, run as it were undone at their
cry, opposing and exposing themselves against the cruellest beasts, to defend
them, they forget themselves, go out of themselves, to put themselves in their
place. What then shall we not expect from the bounty of the Lord toward his
children, from his Bowels ever yearning? From this Father, who spared not his
own son, his only son, one with himself, to give him for us* Romans 8. and
32. Of that Son who being in the form of God, equal unto God, emptied
himself; took the form of a servant, and humbled himself unto the death,
even the shameful and cursed death of the Cross; and all this, for servants;
nay rather for slaves, malefactors, and accursed sinners.

Well then, Cast thy burden upon the Lord. No other will take it upon him,
upon no other can thou lay it. But what burden? He says thy burden, not
every burden; but thy burden. Thine own burden; not that which thou
impofest upon thy self, at thine own will, or do rashly thrust thy self
into. Know therefore, if thou be a child of his family, that thou art in a
house of order; That is the burden which he has laid upon thee, who by his
Ordinance has made it thine; But take thou heed also, that it be from him;
that has a sovereign privilege. By him who does nothing, but by weight,
number, and measure; it cannot be but well proportioned and rightly added, if
according to the proportion of thy strength, of the strength which he has
given thee, that thou should bear it cheerfully, that thou should go on
still in thy Calling with all thy power: if above thy power, it is to make thee
feel thine own infirmity; and to call for his help: let thy weakness humble
thee before him, and strengthen thy self with his grace. For how ever it be,
thou can not lie long under the burden, for as much as his grace is made
perfect in thine infirmity; thy burden is made his; his strength consequently
abounds toward thee, even then when thine sayleth. Contrariwise, Impofest
thou upon thy self, any cross or affliction; thou art in danger least it be
said unto thee; who has required these things at thy hands? Also, if thou
undertake a charge according to thine own will, and afterward fallest
under it, take heed it be not objected unto thee, thou rannest and I sent thee
not. Ierem. 23. and 21. thou spakest, and I put not those words into thy
mouth. Whereas those, unto whom God has give^ their charge, he binds
himself to be their Guardian; Saying, I will be with thee, and where he is,
what can be wanting? He is faithful, says the Apostle, and will not suffer
his to be tempted above their strength; and gives an issue with the
temptation: with his calling, the efficacy. Only let us be assured, that we
bear the burden; that we perform our (or rather indeed his) charge, and let
us not be afraid to say with the same Apostle, Phil. 4. and 13. I am able to
do all things, through Christ, who strengthens me. Now this burden is
usually of two sorts; either a cross, or some tribulation laid upon us by God,
or else a Calling, wherein he has set us. And that properly is meant here, but
in the highest degree, and highest terms. For, The burden of trials and
temptations.
as for afflictions, it is certain, that there is nothing that lists up our
hearts more unto God, which draws them from the earth, they are the bellows,
that kindle prayer in us, raising it, as it were, out of the ashes, But whilst
they contain themselves within some measure, so as they seem fitted to our
strength, abiding within the terms of hope, namely, disgraces, loss of goods,
sicknesses, griefs, banishments, and such like. But when disgrace passes unto
persecutions without cause, the loss of goods, unto slander against our
honor, sickness into agony, grief into heartbreaking, banishment into
proscription, then the accents of our Complaints change their tune, the
complaints themselves are dried up; and so much the more, if these evils be
procured by those who should wish us well, yea, if when thou art most wronged,
whilst thou take most pains to do well; And so much the more, as it
concerns thy person, thy family, the house of God, his Church, (the apple of
his eye) Because certainly it seems unto us; that God has lost his rule,
that he remembers not any more what flesh and blood is; but rather has an eye
to the mind of man, winding it up unto the highest pitch; Because it seems,
he does not equally poyse the balance of his justice, nor to have left him any
thing but the string to hold them, when often the wicked prospers at the
costs of the godly; the slaves, at the peril of the children; the Philistime,
unto the shame of the Israelite, reprobate Saul, unto the confusion of
faithful David; He delivers them into their hands, he forsakes them. And
therefore we are not to think it strange, if the request of David passes from
a prayer unto a cry, from a cry unto a hideous noise, from a hideous noise unto
a tempest. Psalm. 55. and 2. And yet though he casts not off his burden: may he
not be said to shake it off? He shakes it off, who to deliver himself from
affliction, makes a Covenant with death, and hell; takes counsel of flesh and
blood, trades with the world, though it be with loss of the glory of God,
redeemes himself (he cares not how) from them who persecute him. David does
not so, for says he, death as a tyrant shall sease upon them. Psalm. 55.15. But
as for me, I will call upon the Lord, and he will save me, Verse. 16. Why so?
Verily because he knows that the Church is Gods building, that the faithful
are his true children, and are the only living stones thereof, that amongst
these stones some are hewn, some polished for the cornerstone, for the
maister-piece, for Corinth, etc. All that come under his hand, must endure the
mallet, the chislell; and so much the rather by how much they are destinated to
a higher place, to wit, to stand in the forefront of the building. See thou
any exempted from the hammer, then say boldly, they are not fit for his
building. Upon our corner stone, he lays no other, but chosen and precious.
1. Pet. 2.5. yea, himself, to be laid as the head stone of the Corner, by what
hammers, chislells, etc. has he not passed? Namely, calumnies, false witnesses
of Pharisees, of Priests, the cruelties of the Romans, of the Jews
themselves, his brethren according to the flesh? Upon this stone, think
thou, unskillful builder, that there may be set any ruff ones? And thou
untamed member, do thou think it strange, that to make thee capable thereof,
he make thee pass under the plain, makes thee smooth through hacking and
hewing? Therefore David who had passed through such trials, who knew what and
how many hewings are needful for the faithful, to make them fit for this
building, what were the uses, and benefits of affliction, which God sends us,
is not ashamed to say. Psalm. 119. verse. 67. that before he was afflicted he
went astray, but now it had brought him back to his Law; He casts not off his
burden through despair, but cries unto the Lord, and waits for his answer;
because he assures himself, that that spirit which cries in him Abba Father,
the same eternal spirit doubtless will give him this answer; behold I am with
thee, nearer unto thee then thy self; He knows that the Lord does willingly
draw near unto the broken hearted and contrite spirits. Psalm. 34. and 18. He
delights rather to be in the prison of sorrow, then in the wedding chamber; in
a soul withered with bitterness, then spread out in deliciousness. And in
deed seldom you see such a one power out his soul before God, but presently
she gathers up again her self in faith and confidence, and her cry is
turned into thanksgiving, this swounding into a sacrifice of praise. Has David
said. Psalm. the 6. verse. 3.4.5. and 9. My bones are vexed, and my soul is
astonished? By and by also follows, Depart from me ye workers of iniquity,
the Lord has heard the voice of my weeping. And upon the calumnies of Cusse
the Beniamite, prays he. Psalm. the 7. verse. 1.2.11.13 15. and 17. Lord I draw
near unto thee, defend me, that he tear me not in pieces like a Lion; He
resolves with himself, verses 10.11.12. The Lord is my Buckler, if he turn
not, he will whet his sword. There he finds both his weapons offensive and
defensive, he shall travayle to bring forth wickedness, but shall bring forth
a lie, his travayle shall fall upon his own head. I said, says he elsewhere,
when I began to slide, when I began to be swallowed up with fear, I am cut off
in thy sight. Psalm. 31. verse. 22.23.24. But thou have heard the voice of my
supplication, when I did cry unto thee: glorying thereupon by way of triumph,
saying, Love the Lord all ye his Saints, for he keeps his faithful ones; be
of good courage, and he will strengthen your heart. And so in this place,
having felt himself discharged of the burden of his griefs, he encourages
others; saying, Cast thy burden upon the Lord, etc. Psalm. 55. Is he hid in the
Desert of Ziph, flying from the fury of Saul his King, being ready to be
delivered up into his hands by those of that place? He has no sooner said,
Psalm. 54.13.
O cruel people; a people that have not set God before their eyes, do even
seek my life; But he presently resolves, God is my help: Verse. 4.
He even burns with zeal to offer him sacrifice; I will, says he, Verse. 6.
sacrifice unto thee with a free heart, for thou have delivered me. Even thou
have delivered me; He holds his deliverance for accomplished he sees it with
his faith, with the eyes of his soul; though a far off, yet most certain.
For the holy History tells us, that as Saul and his people went pursuing him, a
messenger met Saul, saying. 1 Samuel 23.27.
Make have for the Philistimes are come into thy Dominions; Saul presently
breaks off his Chase, and behold David in an instant beyond all expectation
delivered, by means of the Philistimes. And hereunto belongs that of the Psalm.
57.4. 1 Samuel 24. ver. 1. at what time he hid himself in the cave of Hengedi.
When Saul also sent to kill him in his house, we see him troubled. 1 Samuel
19.9.11. He observes their practices, their plottes, their watches; he opposes
his integrity and his innocence; but with what peace unto his soul? Psalm. 59.
ver. 9.12.16. Lord God, thou will laugh at them, and yet Lord slay them not,
least my people forget it; He is now more careful of their life then of his
own. Lord I will sing of thy mercy in the morning; I will not loose one hour
of my ordinary exercises. The like examples we have also in the Psalms
64.69.140. and many the like, against those who eyed him, watched him in his
ways, in his words, and (if they could) even to his very thoughts; But even in
the greatest peril, he concludes all in certain hope of Deliverance; saying,
The just shall rejoice in the Lord, and shall draw near unto him, and all that
are true of heart shall be glad and rejoice; as touching his Justice, which he
will manifest to the one, and will do to the other; The floods are risen up
even unto my soul, I am afflicted and in grief, but thy deliverance shall
lift me up on high, so high, that no waters, no, not a deluge shall attain
thereto; I know that the Lord will execute Justice for the afflicted, and
howsoever it be, the upright shall dwell before his face. But some profane
person may here say, is David thus confident, the burden notwithstanding lies
still upon his neeke, he is slandered, abused, watched, pursued by Saul, by his
most familiar friends, yea by his own son; but he is lightened of this his
burden, comforted in soul, because of his lively faith, which represented
unto him the help of his God, both certain and present, because his love by
his holy Spirit was powered into his soul, because a divine light shining upon
it, scattered the darkness thereof. And thou Christian, whosoever thou art, if
ever thou have called upon the Lord in the like anguish, how often before thy
burden (the cause of thine anguish, of thy grief) was eased; have thou
notwithstanding felt thy spirit eased by thy prayer? God without doubt holding
his hand invisibly and insensibly under thy burden, as it were hidden from
thee. The burden continuing, and yet the pain diminished; because we have now
two to bear it, because it pleases God to bear one part of the burden, and
that the greatest part also, suffering us to redouble our strength, that he
might lend us his own.

For example, Joseph being cast into the pit by his brethren. Genesis 37. ver. 27.
it was some relief to be sold unto the Madianites, and then unto Potipher,
Captain of the Guard Genesis 39.1. his burden increases, when the slander of
his mistress caused him to be cast into the dungeon; but Moses adds presently,
that the Lord was with Joseph. ver. 20. he showed his mercy upon him; in
giving him favor in the sight of the Master of the Prison. Such favor as
made him way to Pharaoh, even to the supplying of the necessities of Jacob his
Father, and all his house; yea even to be ruler over Egypt. Who now in the
mean while would have believed that GOD was with him in prison? In like manner
he says to Jacob; that is, to his Church, and to all the members thereof. Esa.
43.2. When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee, they shall not
drown thee, and when thou go through the fire, it shall not burn thee;
because I will be with thee. Even I, who commandes the elements, who rules over
the waters of the Flood. Psalm. 29.10. who makes my Ministers a flame of fire.
Psalm. 104.4. I am with thee, because I have redeemed thee. Esa. 43.1. I have
called thee by name, thou art mine, and by consequent I have Interesse in thy
ruin, in thy loss. Is God with us in the fire, and in the water. Isa. 43.2.
if he said it not himself, who durst believe it? And indeed we see it in the
waters of the red Sea, which gave place unto the Children of Israel, Exodus 14.
when in the mean while they overwhelmed Pharaoh and his host. Also in the
three Children in the Furnace, Dan. 3.
being heated more then ordinary, it consumed them, who cast them in. Dan.
3.27. but of those that were cast in, it singed not a hair; an Angel joining
himself unto them, in the midst of the fire, who kept them; One (says the
Prophet) like to the Son of God. These things you see being performed, both
really and visiblie in them: whence we may learn, that God who was with his
in the midst of dangers, out of the which there appeared no issue, is
invisibly, and no less really with all those, who call upon him in true faith,
he compasses them about with his mercy, and assisteth them with the presence
of his Angels, yea, of his own presence also. Whence it is that David, hiding
himself from the wrath of Saul in the Cave, makes his prayer unto God. Psalm.
57.4. saying, My soul is amongst Lions, I lie amongst these that are set on
fire, amongst men whose teeth are spears and arrows; he assures himself
notwithstanding, that God will send from heaven, and deliver him; yea out of
this danger; and in this faith he wakens his tongue, and all his musical
instruments, to give him praise. This deliverance being unto him no less
real, nor less miraculous, Dan. 6.22.
then that of Daniell in the den of Lions, in which den the Angel of the
Lord did shut their mouths; but what if not so visibly; because such miracles,
are wrought visiblie but once, or very rarely; to try our weakness, as also to
show that God can do it, ceasing not in the mean while invisibly to continue
according to his word and promise, which assures us that he will do it. And
herein the faithful consider, that so often as they find themselves, amongst
such Lions, thirsting for their blood, and hungering for their life, yet can
they do them no hurt? And in such appetite and such fury, seeing themselves a
prey, can they doubt of him who restraines them, who mussels them thus
invisiblie? Therefore tell me not here, that we now see no more miracles. We
see them not indeed, because we want eyes; for what do we see in effect but
miracles? Thou Christian, if the creation of the world, if the universal
change of the course of the world, by the power of Christ, if the death of so
many Martyrs believing the Resurrection of a God crucified, so many ages past;
tell me if so sweet a harmony of all and every particular thereof, be not a
sufficient miracle? In vain will it be for thee, to see the lame to go, the
dumb to speak, the dead to rise; Thou shall always find in thy discourse
matter of doubt; they will be unto thee illusio^s, slights and tricks of
Satan; well then, let us cast our burden upon the Lord, and let us the rather
consider of his grace and of his help in us and toward us. And after we have
seriously called upon him, feeling our selves in effect either discharged of
this burden, of this cross, which crushed us, or encouraged to bear it more
joyfully, let us then boldly say; The Lord has here put to his hand; for from
no other but him, could come ease of pain, or increase of strength. Therefore
let us freely acknowledge, in the healing of our stroke; and of this issue of
blood, that virtue is gone out from Christ, yea, albeit we have but touched the
hemme of his garment; this touching, this hemme, which is as it were but to
give a body unto their invisible and spiritual virtue, thereby to make it unto
us (flesh and blood as we are) not more efficacious, but more sensible.

Well then, if the Lord as in some temptations seems to thee that himself
takes part against thee, and by consequent thou think, that he himself is
become the burden, so far off is it, that thou can hope, he should bear
thy burden; unto whom then should thou have recourse? And here lies the
highest point of the trial. Take an example in Abraham, when God commanded him
to offer up his son, whom he had long time waited for, his Isaac, his only
son; by that so express a commandment, upon so solemn a promise. Genesis 22.
In Isaac shall thy seed be called. What was here to be done? Certainly both
these two, being equally objects of our faith, and of our obedience; the one
and the other, being the word of God, but we will hold us to the commandment
which binds us, Note.
leaving unto him the fit time to fulfill his promise; And let us say with
faithful Abraham; The Lord will provide, who holds the issues of death in his
power. Psalm. 68.20. Who can raise me children even out of stones, and can
restore me this son again, if need be, even the same and none other out of
the grave; And yet on this child depended the promised Christ, the blessed
seed, the salvation of the church? So ought the Christian to be resolved to
follow the voice of God, with his eyes shut, against all imaginations,
equivocations, and human glosses; whereof in all perplexities, the chiefest
wisdom is to be silent, Note.
both in God, and to God. Psalm. 62.1. How ever it be says the Psalmist, my
soul is silent in God: an higher praise we cannot give unto him; To be silent,
that is to say, he murmures not in himself, replies not again, but yields to
his will, and waits with patience the issue thereof, and submits his whole
wisdom to his providence; This being certainly the highest point of faith,
to which it is not always given us to attain unto. But if it happen unto us,
as it did unto Jacob upon his wading through the foord Iabok, upon the point of
his meeting with Esau, to wrestle with God, with our weakness, against his
promises, let us not trust so much upon that, that he suffers himself to be
overcome by us, vouchsafing to condescend unto our weaknesses, as to the
perpetual mark he left unto Jacob in his thigh, when he leaves unto us the
mark, as of his power, so of our infirmity. Of this power (says the Apostle)
which is perfected in our infirmity. A healthful infirmity, which God
delights to leave in those that are his, to keep them in duty. As in Jacob,
Note.
though he blessed him, yet he humbled him, that he should not be proud of that
blessed wrestling; In like manner in S. Paul, notwithstanding his prayer many
times reitterated; least the excellency of things revealed unto him, should
lift him up above measure. 2 Cor. 12. That we should always be forced under
the heavy burden of our adversities, and in our weakness, to call to him for
strength.

Strength, which shall never fail, seeing it is he that promises it, offers
it unto us, so as he even takes pleasure to be called our strength, although
somedmes he lets us suffer, and groan, being ready to sink; but he knows at
what instant to help us; Note.
at the half blow, as of Isaac upon the block; the more to manifest his
deliverance; if also he lets us alone in danger, in necessity; it is always
one and the same providence, from the same art of the Physician proceeds the
incision of the Patient, and his diet; both the one and the other, being in his
choice, and not in that of the patient. 1 King. 17. That the Prophet Elias
should be fed by the Ravens, which day by day brought him bread and flesh,
evening and morning, his daily bread; it was the more to make him feel God his
fatherly care, and the rather to bring him to commit himself unto his bounty,
then if he should have set before him a full store house of victuals. Unto the
widow of Sarepta also, to draw our of her barrel of meal, and her cruse of
oil, to multiply it from day to day, even to abundance; it made her the more
to feel her want, and in her necessity, the power and bounty of God, and by
the one and the other, to keep her devout, to augment her faith, to heat her
zeal; then if at the instant, he had given it her in a full barn, and
wineceller. Because the blessings we receive of God in the whole heap, Note.
and on a sudden, vanish away into some light thankesgiving; they are at the
first but coldly acknowledged to God; and a little while after, they are
attributed unto a friend, and to our good fortune, and to our own industry;
but when they come flowly, and by degrees, so as we are constrained to wait
for them, then they give us time to desire them, to sigh for them, to taste
them, to relish them, to fill our senses, our imagination and memory; And to
say with David. Psalm. 63. I seek thee at the dawning of the day, my soul
thirsts for thee, my flesh lusts after thee, in a barren and dry Land,
where no water is. Grant, that he rain Quails down upon us, the flesh being
yet between our teeth, we will be ready to murmr. And therefore the better
to fly, to fly I say unto God, we have need to be kept low; to return unto
him, to know his luer, and not to feed us to our fill, least otherwise we take
the wing, and follow after vanity, with the first wind that blows.

God then being called upon by us, when we are under crosses and afflictions,
which he lays upon us, he strengthens us with his grace, according as he sees
it needful for our salvation. Lo the very end of these crosses, even of the
crosses, which in the doubtful ways of this world, better then any other
guide, or mark, do correct and reform us. The burden of bearing the Cross
of Christ.
But under the cross principally of his Christ, under the true cross when it
is laid upon our shoulders, then we feel the help of his strength; when we
are called to suffer for his Name, for his Truth and for his Word; and indeed
diverse are the natures of these crosses, every manner of way. By these he has
ordained to humble us, to bear witness unto the true faith, wherein
consequently, God interposeth himself, yea he even participates with us, he
suffers, and suffers with us himself. And therefore in this cross, the
faithful seek for comfort from God by their prayer; in this affliction, their
prayer begins with giving of thanks, he praises God for doing him the honor
to suffer for his Name; to choose him as it were for a Champion of his
quarrel, he rejoices, he glories, he boasts in his sufferings, and in his
disgraces. Romans 5.3. The Apostles of our Savior even rejoiced after they were
scourged by the Magistrates. Act. 5.41. S. Paul so far boasted, as to triumph
in his tribulations; Because these afflictions were not so much his, as
Christ's. Because he fulfilled the rest of the afflictions of Christ in his
flesh, for his body sake, that is, the Church. Col. 1.24. Because the Christian
is assured in suffering for Christ, that Christ suffers with him, takes part of
his sorrows, burdens himself, and disburthens him. And from hence did the
glorious Martyrs, triumph in their Martyrdom. When thou see them then half
burned, their bowels issuing forth, and yet lifted up their eyes to Christ by
prayer, nay rather by singing, brake through the noise of the flames. Therefore
O flesh and blood tell me here; if Christ were not there, if he assisted them
not effectually, or clothed them not really with his power against the violence
of that Element, and against the cruelty of those who sharpens it against
them; think thou that there could be any one found, that could stand? And
from whence then came so many millions? Yea where could there have been found
any one, that should resolve with himself, to die for one dead, to suffer
himself to be tortured, for one Crucified; and from whence then could this
come, if it were not in that Christ lives in them; and in them, and with them,
is crucified? Verily in them who cast their burden upon the Lord; the Son
coeternall with the Father, not to shake off their burden, but the more
courageously to bear it, being encouraged by his presence, strengthened by his
hand. And therefore in other crosses, the wonder consists herein, that the
Lord being called upon in faith, does graciously deliver thee; But lo here the
miracle is, in that the faithful, against sense, reason, and nature, offer
themselves up in sacrifice unto God; their flesh and blood, their human
reason, altogether flesh and blood, renouncing themselves, to confess Christ.
And seeing it is impossible of themselves, whence is it then, for the honor of
God, but by God.

The burden of our Calling.
And so much for the burden of the Cross and affliction, when it overchargeth
us. Now follows that cross, which concerns our calling, and function, unto
which God calls us. A true burden also, for there is none so small in regard
of the weakness of our nature, under the which our shoulders do not bow, yet
be it never so great, in his power, who calls us thereunto; we need not fear
to pass; provided always, it be a true calling, by which he makes it his
own. And therefore the Apostle exhorts every one, Ephesians. 4.1. to walk worthy
his calling, according to that grace which is given us, according to the
measure of the gift of Christ. To walk, is not simply to go, but to hold a
certain way, and to aim at the true end thereof; and besides, in a man's
Calling, to look he have it from God; who is a God of order, who ordaines, and
who imployes all his Creatures; every one to some certain thing; every stone
to have a certain place in his building. He that walks in his Calling, sets
all his paths unto profit, walks always well, though he halt in it; he that
strayeth from thence, what speed soever he makes, goes the further out of his
way, and for the most part goes backward. Well then, every calling has his
labor, or rather his cross, yet not without some inward comforts, and help
from above, even from him who has created all things. He I say, with the same
power, bounty, and wisdom, preserves them, and directs all things. For let
us not think, that he has less care, or takes more pleasure to comfort an
Artificer in his shopp, then he does a Prince in his Throne: a family, as well
as a Common wealth; for every where where his name is called upon, he hearkens,
he hears, he puts to his helping hand without exception, without acception of
persons; unto him who has equally made them, the brass is as dear as the
gold, the hemp as the flax, the course cloth as the scarlet* But in the
callings of those, whom he calls to the conducting of his people, of his
Church, this bountiful providence does more appear; because she is set as it
were upon a hill, because they are, or ought to be, the light of the world, as
also because the Lord in his holy Scriptures has left them for our examples.

Art thou then in a public Calling, 1. In the Magistracy.
be it either polliticke, or ecclesiasticke; and do thou meet with a
stiffenecked people, being ready every hour to murmr; with giants, advancing
their heads against heaven, against whom thou art every hour to pronounce, and
lay open Gods judgments? A hard Commission, troublesome, rough, and hard to
undergo, if thou only look into thy self, but look unto God, who has
imposed this Calling upon thee; do not thou therefore shake off thy burden,
as another Jonas. Who fled unto Tarsis, from the presence of the Lord, and
shipped himself at Ioppa, who meets with him amongst the waves; Whether shall I
go from thy spirit, says the Prophet. Psalm. 39.7. or whether shall I fly
from thy presence. Therefore rather humble thy self before his face,
acknowledge thy imbecillitie, seek thy strength from him, take thy warrant from
his Commission. What, oh Lord, is dust and ashes, that thou should expect
such strength, such service, if thou put not to thy helping hand, if thou work
not in it? There needs no greater matter then lyce to confound the wise; the
ruin of the pride of Egypt. Well then, Lord, work thou; Who am I Lord (says
David, 2 Samuel 7.18 19.22.23.24.) and what is my house, that thou have brought
me hitherto? is this the manner of men, is there any thing here whereof man can
presume, or promise ought unto himself? But he takes him at his word, wherein
his glory is interressed. And says, for thy promise sake, and according to thy
heart, thou have done all this greatness, etc. to get thee a name, and a
people for evermore. And where his calling meets, there his promise secretly
comes between. Who am I also says his Son Solomon. 1 Kings 3. to judge this
so great a people, etc. Alas, I am but a child, who knows not how to go in
and out before them. And further, the Lord, from whom every good gift comes,
gives him, to him I say (who acknowledging his own incapacitie; seeks the
supply thereof in his grace) a wise and an understanding heart, a habit very
necessary for a King; he gives him more then he requires, riches and honor,
things very seemly. Also, who am I, says Moses, Exodus 3.11. that I should go
unto Pharaoh, and that I should bring the Children of Israel out of Egypt, etc.
Exodus 4.10.
Alas Lord, says he, neither yesterday nor before yesterday, am I a man of
cloquent speech, but on the contrary, of a slow mouth and tongre. Now the
business was to speak unto a great Prince, to persuade him of strange
offensive things; but I, says the Lord, will be with thee; and behold the
signs: Who made the mouth of man, who made the dumb, etc. Exodus 4.12. I will
be with thy mouth, and will teach thee what thou shall say, or rather by thy
hand I will do that which thou shall have to say; that we might know the great
privilege those have, whom God sets on work in respect of all others. Those
whom the Princes of the earth employ in their services, if they be not adorned
with exquisite qualities, shall but shame both themselves and their Masters:
but on the contrary, those who are assured of their calling; nay of his
calling, who works all in all, and in all things, it cannot be but they should
be able to discharge it. But yet in humility feeling their own imbecility,
and for the most part, above that they imagined they could have done. Because
they work by him, and he in them, by whose power the qualities of things work
the contrary effect to their nature, as namely, heat to refresh, fury to
cherrish, weakness to cause it self to be feared, the sta^mering tongue, to be
able to persuade, a child to pronounce judgment, yea bondage it self, to
rule.

Now this is also in respect of this confidence, which they believe they have a
right unto, and so they have indeed, to cast themselves upon the Lord, when
evil oppresses them. Iehosaphat being affrighted with the Moabites; he
proclaims a fast, craves help from God. But how? they come, says he, 2 Chronicles. 20.12. to dispossess us of thine inheritance, which thou gave us to
possess. O our God, wilt not thou judge them, and the rather because the case
goes thus ill with us, there being us strength in us, to stand before so great
a multitude: But says he, our eyes are toward thee; even toward the Lord,
who forthwith puts his hand to the burden, and answers him by his Prophet;
fear not, you shall not need to fight, but God; behold he comes to their
reseue, and he alone will do all for you; stand still, says he, and see the
salvation of the Lord; take you no other care but to praise me. So important
and behoouefull it is unto every servant of God in such occasions, to engage
the Lord in his cause, and to have no interest therein but his justice, his
sanctuary, his glory.

Rabshakeh comes unto King Ezekias. 2 Kings 18. and 19. Let not thy God, says
he, in whom thou trustest deceive thee; thou see what the King of the
Assyrians has done unto all other Countries; have their Gods delivered them,
that thou should hope better of thine? But what does Ezekias in this
anguish, Lord, says he, thou art the only, or alone God of Kingdoms, belongs
it not then properly unto thee; and this argument which he makes; comparing the
Idols of the Nations with thee, shall he be left unpunished of thee; of thee,
I say, the Creator of heaven and earth? Incline thine ear then Lord, and
hearken unto the words of this Champion, whom Senacherib has sent to blaspheme
the living God; Deliver us therefore, O Lord, out of his hand, that all people
may know, that thou Lord art the only God. Then comes the Prophet Esaias unto
him, and allures him in the name of the Lord, that his prayer was heard, and
that the Lord took knowledge thereof, making the cause his own; who in the
same night smot Senacherib and his Army, by the hand of his Angel. And Moses
speaks to this purpose in more express terms; and for the ground of this
Confidence, this holy boldness to cast his burden upon the Lord, he takes his
measure from faith, faith grounded on knowledge. For is it not said, that God
spoke unto him face to face? The people of Israel being nourished and fed by
miracles so many years in the desert, being enemy to their own good, would
not go into the land of Canaan, but murmured thereupon, against God, and
rebelled so far against Moses. Numb. 14. that they were ready to stone him.
The Lord being wrath at this their infidelity, he tells Moses, that he is
weary of them, and that he will destroy them. O but Lord, says Moses, what
then will the Nations say; for the Cananites cannot be ignorant, that thou Lord
art seen of this people face to face; that thy Cloud, thy protection stands
over them, and that thou have expressly undertaken the safe conduct of this
people; and now they will say, that thou have killed them, because thou wast
not able to bring them into the Land, which thou had sworn unto their
Fathers to give them: urging God upon the point of his own honor, jealous in
regard of man; no less jealous in respect of God, who gives himself the
title of jealous; thereby inducing him (as a means) to restrain his anger,
and pardon his people. As I live, says the Lord unto him, the whole earth
shall be filled with my glory; with my glory in a double respect; first,
because these murmurers shall not see the promised Land; yet notwithstanding,
those who continued faithful, shall possess the Land for inheritance; thereby
being equally magnified, both in my mercy, and in my justice. Let all this be
granted, may some one reply, but this was in the time of miracles. True; but
miracles were heretofore done from time to time, to none other end, but to make
it appear to thee, as a glimpse of that infinite power, which works, and
disposes, all these miracles of the whole world, which being perpetual, are
to thee no longer miracles. The Prophet says, Isa. 59.1.
The Lords hand is not shortened, that it cannot help, nor his ear heavy that
he cannot hear. Whereas the globe of the earth, since so many ages past,
continues hanging in the air, holding by nothing, but by the only powerful
will of the Creator; is it not myraculous even at this day? It may be, more
myraculous then the first day that he framed it; whereas the Church also
continues, being but a point as it were in the midst of this Chaos of
unbelief, yet swimmes aloft, always showing the head above water, amiddest so
many waves, is also no less a miracle, yea and it may be also more, in the
midst of so many disordered Nations, and of so many floods; then when she
floated in the Arc, or passed through the red Sea. The works therefore of the
Lord, though less visible to our eyes, are not therefore less real in
themselves, nor less considerable in the minds of the faithful. The Prophet
says Isa. 59.2. that our iniquities have made a separation between us and
him, causes him to hide his face from us. But let us only turn our eyes
toward him, and he will return again wholly toward us. In like proportion
toward an estate, nation, City, family, or particular person, which shall
call upon him; where his Church, where his service, where his fear, has taken
up their dwelling. My soul which art often perplexed in thy self, in anguish
for his Church, amongst so many waves which tosseth her, and thee in her,
tempted to cast off thy burden, have thou cast it upon the Lord, and has he
eased thee? How often dispayring of all human helps, have thou said unto him;
how long; and did the Lord ever fail to answer thee; yea to answer thee by
visible effects, more intelligible then his words?

2. In the Ministry.
The like may be said of them who are called of God unto an ecclesiastical
function; As heretofore of the Prophets denouncing the judgments of God
against Kings, and against Nations; after them the Apostles sent to Preach the
only word of salvation unto the ends of the world, to the ruin of false gods,
and of their Idols, the pretended protectors of States and of Commonweals.
Those Prophets and Apostles being consequently bound to defend their cause
against the persecution of those who disgraced them. And so in like manner
those, who in the Church, as they are dispensers of the Gospel, hold their
place at this day. For with what confidence, and with what wisdom, did Elias
and Elizeus with their cloakes stand against Kings, Princes, and the Priests of
Israel; John Baptist with his garment of Cammels hair, withstood King Herod.
The Apostles being poorefishermen, and unlearned, undertook the ruin of
Satan's kingdom, the Conquest of the world, under the Cross of Christ?
Therefore let those who succeed them in this office, accept of this Commission
in all humility, and say, Lord, who am I, that thou have called me thereunto;
And what man is he, though never so great, that is sufficient for it? But yet
as incapable as I am, even the least in my self; yet being assisted by thee,
who art the greatest, what am I not able to do? For so Esaias says; Isa. 6.
Woe is me for I am undone, because I am a man of polluted lips; no sooner had
God touched his lips with a live coal from the Altar, but he changes his
speech; Who shall I send, says the Lord, he answers chearefully, behold I am
here, send me. But with what Commission? Say unto this people, in hearing you
shall hear, and not understand etc. Make fat the heart of this people, etc.
Let a man have ten times as many natural gifts, as Esaias had; could he without
this assistance from the Lord, have undergone this Charge? In like manner, the
Prophet Jeremy; I have set thee this day, says the Lord, over Nations, and
over Kingdoms, that thou should pluck up, and pull down, that thou
should build and plant. A pooresilly Priest of Anothoth. Iere. 1.1.
Therefore he that will wonder, let him yet wonder at it? Ah Lord God, behold I
cannot speak, says he, for I am but a child. And behold! he had no sooner
touched his mouth, but presently he girdeth up his reins, and is resolved,
that whereas bebefore he acknowledged himself to be but a child, now he
begins to be a man; and the terror of men. So likewise Christ tells the
Apostles, Math. 10.19. Ye shall be brought before Kings; and you shall bear
witness of me even to the ends of the earth; being but men of mean
condition, to stand astonished at the only look of a man of authority, the
boldest amongst them, at the word of a poor silly maid. But take no care,
says the Lord, I will put that into your mouth at the very instant, which you
shall say. Fear not, says he also unto S. Paul, hold not thy peace, Act.
18.10.
for I am with thee. And what he said to them, let us take as spoken unto all;
unto all who are Ministers of the same word, being never destitute of his
spirit, nor of his strength, to the pulling down, s yth the Apostle, of strong
holds, 2 Cor. 10.
casting down all counsels, and every high thing which exalts it self
against the knowledge of God* bringing every thought into captivity, to the
obedience of Christ having vengeance ready prepared against all d sobedience.
What can be said more? And be not dismayed at this that the live coal has not
touched thy lips, nor the breath of Christ, breathed upon thee; the signs of
his word and spirit; provided that thou have his Commission with thee, and his
word in thy mouth. Those signs had their place once for all; Timothy had not
received them, whom notwithstanding the Apostle summons before God, and before
the Lord Jesus, unto whom he shall give an account. 2 Timothy 4.1. and 2. Where he
says, Preach the word; But how, in season, and out of season, reprove, rebuke,
exhort, do the work of an Evangelist. It may be, thou shall be hated of those
which are without, and despised sometimes of those within; will thou have it
bteter cheap then the Mr of the Vineyard? Which of the Prophets, or which of
the Apostles, were not abused, stoned, and vexed? Say with David. Psalm. the 31.
I have been a reproach unto my adversaries, unto my neighbors much more, and
those of my acquaintance seeing me, fled from me. But Lord, I have said, thou
art my God, I trust in thee. Learn thou also with the same great Apostle. 2
Cor. 6.7.8. to go through honor and dishonor, through good report and evil
report, by the word of truth, by the power of God, by the armor of
righteousness, on the right hand and on the left. Be not discouraged also, if
thou fallest upon a barren ground, as it were sowed with salt; upon a brutish
and stiffenecked people. Who has believed, says Esaias, our report? And after
him, our Savior himself. Ioh. 12.36. And of six hundred thousand which went
ont of Egypt with Moses ready armed, how few of them entered into the Land of
promise? Of so many people whom our Lord had healed, had preached unto, even
the eternal word; how few of them did believe, and continued following him?
How many think thou were there of them, who helped to blaspheme him at his
death? And notwithstanding, did God therefore cease to devide Canaan by line
unto his people? The word of the Cross, did that cease to subdue the world,
yea to triumph in the world, and over the world? Hear our Savior Christ
himself in Esaias the 49.4. complaining, and in his consolation, receive thou
thine; I said I have labored in vain, and spent my strength for nothing,
notwithstanding my reward is with the Lord, and my work with my God. The Lord
who answers him afterward, I have heard thee (hold it as if it were already
done) in an acceptable time, in the day of salvation have I succored thee. It
must be a long time after, least thou should wax weary, yet in his time, in
an acceptable time, in a time by him eternally pre-ordained. And thus of this
word which thou publishest, to the clearing of his truth, to the convincing of
errors, to the advancement of the kingdom of his Christ, to the dissolution of
the tyranny of Antichrist, wait for the fruit, and expect the effect in his
time; but in the mean time, be not thou careless, but use all the means to
manure the ground, which he has committed unto thee. And say unto him, Lord,
this ground will be but Iron, if the heaven be of Brass. From thy only
blessing, I wait for the fruit of my labor; by thy Commandment I plant, and
in this hope I water. And thus behold, how in the difficulties of our
Callings, we are to comfort our selves in the Lord.

Is there no other burden which we are to cast upon the Lord? Yes verily, the
weightiest does yet remain, the burden of sin. Sin, The burden of sin.
as light as it seems unto us, which by no means can stand in the balance of
so just a God, must needs be very heavy, and most weighty, because it
provokes his anger, and presses us down to hell, by an offense against an
infinite Majesty, against an infinite anger. Sin which lies upon the
conscience, being the liueliest, the most sensible, and tenderest part of the
soul, does vex and disquiet it. Whereas the grief of afflictions, lies
properly upon the senses: perplexities in our Callings, lies upon our spirits.
But sin was the cause, that made our first father after the commission
thereof, to hide himself from the Lord; and to tremble at the very shaking of
the leaves. As also that Caine having perceived his offense, was smitten with a
dejected and pale countenance; and the sentence being pronounced, was as a
burden and punishment unto himself; My iniquity, says he, is greater then I
am able to bear, Genesis 4. though he had all the world at command, yet he finds
himself in a straight in his soul. Even so the best men, though more tender
in Conscience, courageous and patient in all sorts of afflictions, yet are here
impatient, and stooping under this burden, lie distressed in, and by
themselves. David who so often repeateth in the Psalm 56. I trust in God, and
will not fear what the arm of flesh can do unto me, yet finds himself
pressed down under the burden of his old man: My finne, O Lord, Psalm. 51.
says he, is continually before me; I see nothing else, I have sinned against
thee; O turn thy face from mine iniquities. Not content with this, as
elsewhere to say unto God, have pity on me; but here, he calls to his
succor, the greatness of his compassions, the full depth of his mercies; to
purge, wash, and wash again, to blot out his sins; to create in him a clean
heart, to renew in him a right spirit, feeling nothing in himself, which might
abide the light of his countenance, which turned not unto him in stead of a
pleasing light, a countenance justly inflamed with wrath. And thus that great
Apostle also, who was joyous and triumphing over all sorts of afflictions,
shrunk at this; those others being pledges of help from God, but this a
kindler of his wrath; those calling unto him as it were from heaven, and
causing him to hasten his pace toward us, as at the cry of his Children: But
this which turns away his eye, and sequesters his presence from us, makes him
forget, yea and to renounce his Creature. I repont that I have made man; Genesis 6.
my spirit shall not always strive with him; it makes him to consent, or
rather resolve to blot out his Image with a curse, and to determine in
himself, to destroy even all flesh from the earth with a Deluge. And therefore
let us not think it strange, that he changes here both tune and voice; that
he who said Phil. 4.12.13. I know and am instructed, how to be full, and how to
be hungry, as well to abound, as to want; I am able to do all things in Christ
who strengthens me. But now with a languishing speech, changing his tune;
says, Sin dwells in me; and in me there dwells no good thing; I have
not the power to perform that which is good; I find this Law in me, that when
I would do good, evil is present with me. How far off was he here from doing
all things? But on the contrary adds; Romans 7.
There is a law in my members which leads me captive to the Law of sin,
delivers me bound hand and foot, my feet fettered with sin; and
consequently to death, and hell, the rewards of sin. What burden think we
then he felt, who before was so valiant under all other burdens, when he cries
out in the end, Verse. 24.
wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Well
then, seeing sin in it self is so heavy, in regard of God who is purity
and justice it self; yea to hideous and so odious; who shall be so bold then
as to cast this burden upon the Lord? Shall we say unto him as Adam did after
his fall. Genesis 3.12. The woman whom thou gave me, gave me of the tree to
eat? Or as the profane ones mentioned by the Apostle, Romans 9 19. Why have
thou not made us better? Whereof complainest thou? for who can resist thy will?
Thus covering their sin with blasphemy; a sort of creatures, who Contest
against the Creator, whose judgment sleeps not. What then, is there no
remedy to ease this burden? Is it exempted from the lesson which here the Prophet
gives us? And if we must lie down under this burden, what will it profit us
to be relieved under any other burden? yea rather here principally has it
place, here it is wherein God means properly to show that his mercy is above
all his works; to power out his mercy, and to open his bowels of compassion,
that by executing justice, he may make his chief work to appear. To us
(says the Prophet) a child is borne: Isai. 9.5.
to us a son is given, and his government is laid upon his shoulder; His
government, that is, his power, to save his people from their sins; upon his
shoulder, for as much as he has laid the Cross upon himself, and unto the
Cross has nailed our sins. And therefore the same Prophet says, Esaias
53.5.6.7. He has borne our griefs, and taken on him our sorrows, he was
bruised for our iniquities. The Lord has made to come upon him the iniquities
of us all, the chastisement of our peace was upon him. Upon him, even upon his
shoulder; therefore is it also added, that his name shall be cased Wonderful,
Counselor, the mighty and strong God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of
peace. No other but he, could be capable of such a burden, our Emanuell, God
with us. The Lamb of God, Ioh. 1.29.
says S. John Baptist, that takes away the sin of the world; has borne
them, says S. Peter. 1 Pet. 2.24. in his body upon the tree; being made
sin, says S. Paul, 2 Cor. 5.21. that we might be made the righteousness of
God in him; and made a curse for us, upon the cross. Gal. 3.13. that the
blessing of Abraham might come upon us by him. But think not here that thou
who delightest thy self in thy sins, and flatterest thy self therein, who
make triumphs, who art jolly and merry under this burden, that thou have any
part in these benefits, or that Christ should burden himself with thy sins,
wherewith thou feel not thy self burdened, thou must first feel them. Unto
whom shall I have respect, says the Lord, Esaias 66.2. unto him that is
afflicted, and has a bruised spirit, and trembles at my word; to such a one
is it said, Romans 5.20
that where sin abounds, grace does more abound. On the contrary he says,
away from me, ye workers of iniquity, who make a trade thereof, who make you
pillowes thereof to sleep upon. Should we sin, Rom 6.1.15
says the Apostle, that grace might abound? God forbid. Know ye not that unto
whom soever ye yield your selves servants to obey, his servants ye are unto
whom ye obey, be it of sin unto death, or of obedience unto righteousness.
Ye then, that are servants of sin, who suffer it to reign quietly in you,
what can you expect but death, even eternal death.

But would thou have part in this promise, to be eased of this burden of
sin? Then confess thy sin freely unto the Lord with sighs and tears. So
long as I held my peace, says David, my bones waxed old, thy hand was heavy
upon me, my strength was changed into the drought of Summer. Psalm. 32.3.4.5.
See him here as it were overwhelmed under his burden; I acknowledge my sin
unto thee: I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the Lord, and thou
forgavest the punishment of my sin. See how he is eased both of his sin and
punishment. Say unto him then with the Prophet Daniell; I have sinned, Dan. 9.
I have done wickedly; unto thee belongs righteousness, but unto me
confusion of face; but Lord do thou forgive: And doubt not but Christ will say
unto thy soul, if thy soul speak truly; Thy sins are forgiven thee, go
in peace; thy peace is made with GOD, be at peace in thy Conscience, for he
also it is, in whom this promise is yea, and Amen; In him who calls us, Math.
the 11.28. saying; Come unto me all ye that travayle, and are heavy laden,
if with afflictions, I will refresh you. Heb. 2.18.
For as I have suffered and was tempted, so am I of power to succor those who
are tempted. If with perplexities; alas! are not your Callings properly my
yoke? My yoke is easy, and my burden is light, seeing I have laid it upon you;
yea, if of sin; 1 Ioh. 3.8.
am I not come to destroy the works of the Devil, to unloose sin, and to
save sinners? Come then, and you shall find rest unto you souls. To him
therefore with the Father and the holy Spirit, for the riches of his grace, be
given from our souls, all honor and glory for ever and ever, AMEN.

AN HOMILY UPON THESE WORDS;
My peace I leave with you, my peace I give unto you; not as the world gives
it,

etc. Ioh. 14.27.
OUR LORD JESUS approaching near unto his Passion, making as it were his last
will and testament among his Apostles, he leaves and gives unto them his peace,
it behooveth us to know wherein this Legacy and gift consists; seeing it
extends it self unto all who have need thereof, Ioh. 17.
who by their Word have believed in his Name; and so much the more, because
that in the words of our Savior there is always a mystery, a heavenly
treasure hidden under the earthly sound of his words, which we must search and
look into by examining of them, proportioning the sense according to the worth
and excellency of his person who utters them. For example, When he speaks
of washing us, of nourishing us, and of healing us, we must understand
himself to be our washing, our nourishment, our healing, we being taught
thereby to raise the signification of these words unto the pitch of his meaning
who speaks; and thereby to apprehend both the effects of his holy spirit in
us, but chiefly in our souls, being naturally spiritual. If thou did
content thy self with a less gift, Alexander would answer thee, that if it
suffice thy base mind, yet it is not worthy of his magnanimity. And our
Savior Christ would answer thee, who would content thy self with
temporal blessings, that he came not into the world, nor suffered so many
things to pamper thy belly, or thee, to give to thy body all co^tentments. And
therefore the question is here of a blessing and comfort truly spiritual. For
his spirit whom he ordains the true Executor of this his Testament, will
sufficiently witness unto us the nature of this Legacy; The Comforter, says
he, who is the holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in my name. A spiritual
Executor, as well both of a spiritual disposition, as of a spiritual
donation; of the donation which he has granted unto us, even of all that
which he has gotten, and purchased for us by his life, and the price of his
life; I say, of his life, from the very first entrance whereinto even the
heavenly Hosts have sung; Luke 2.14
Glory be to God on high, and peace on earth, good will toward men. Even his
Passion, whereof in so many preceding ages, the Prophets did foretell unto us,
Esa. 53.5. The chastisement of our peace was upon him. Both procuring peace
between heaven and earth; the only reconciliation of the world.

I leave unto you, says he, my peace. But what peace? Truly under this word
peace, many blessings are comprehended, and likewise many evils excluded. And
the strictest way we take it, it stretches it self very far, namely, unto
the good of civil society; The which cannot be better comprehended then by
the representation of the contrary. For example, domestical quarrels being the
ruin of families; public war, the combustion of States; an abridgement of
all calamities, that either the malice of men, or the mischief of ages can
bring forth. Here then he leaves unto us a peace, which preserves us therein,
such a peace as a Father may leave unto his Children by his Will and Testament,
setting bounds touching their portions, curbing in their strifes and
co^tentions. Or like to those of a good Prince, who in good policy, passes
them over to his Subjects after his death; under which peace, every one sits
quietly under his own vine and fig tree. Well then, shall this peace be
worthy to be uttered by the mouth of our Savior, of him who is King of Kings,
the Father of Spirits; of the Prince of peace, even of peace it self, of our
Savior, God and man; God borne amongst us, God who dyed for us? Let us look
for no greater nor more excellent thing. Let it be granted that he leave unto
us the peace which Augustus himself had; what will it profit thee if the fire
consume thy harvest? If the worm gnaw thy conscience? If thy conscience
torment thee? Let us grant, that thy fields bring forth plentifully, that thy
trade prospers, that thy family flourishes, that thy person triumphs, What
will all that benefit thee, if thy taste be gone, thy spirit feverish, thy
soul upon the rack, eternal death in thy bosom, a hell in thy Conscience,
even then when thou think most of all to have made a covenant with death, an
agreement with hell, to have confirmed thy peace with every Creature; and yet
art thou odious even unto thy Creator? Often times there is an external peace,
which causes civil wars; a bodily well fare, which kindles in us spiritual
discases, temporal good things which prejudice the eternal? Nay, let us yet
go further; even he who tells us plainly, that he came not to set peace in
the world, but war; who forewarneth his Apostles, that for his sake,
households shall be divided, Kingdoms troubled, his Disciples persecuted from
place to place; That even then, they should esteem themselves happy, when
they shall be persecuted for his name. He has not promised us a deceitful and
fraudulent peace, which flatters many times the body, to the hurt of the
soul, and makes us forsake our inheritance, for a pease, and for very husks;
and therefore he adds further; I give unto you my peace, not the worlds peace,
but contrariwise make your account to have the world for your enemy. What else
do we see in all the lives of the Apostles, for the space of so many ages? in
the death of so many Martyrs? Not the peace of this world; how long shall we be
children, and how long under the tutorship of the Law, only to taste and
desire milk and honey? Not peace with men; seeing for this cause it behooved
that God should become man, and that heaven should come down upon earth? Could
not some Solomon have given us that peace? But my peace, peace with God, peace
in our selves, with our selves, which the only Prince of peace, the father of
eternity, can give unto us. Even he as the Prophet tells us, Mich. 5.3.5.
whose goings forth have been from everlasting, of whom it is written, this man
shall be the peace; being able both to accomplish it, and to give it, and is
that very peace himself. The governor of Israel, of whose coming, Haggai the
Prophet says, Hag. 2.6.
I will set peace in this place, to wit, in my Temple, in my Church, says the
Lord of Hosts. A peace, notwithstanding far different from that which carnal
people, which flesh and blood comprehends; Seeing that the government of this
Prince of peace, is upon his shoulder. A proof, that he should have much to
suffer himself; even this governor, whole kingdom is wholly disdained,
thrown down, and crushed, and yet therein properly cosisteth the peace which
he brings us, that in his wounding, we might and healing; for what temporal
peace can we expect from him, and by him, whose life in this world was a
continual warrefare? He will say unto us, Shall the servant think to be
better entreated, then the Son, then the heir, then the Father of the
Family?

Well then, says he, I give you my peace; mine; such a peace, as no other but
I could make; I.
peace with God, whom no other but Man God could undertake. Your iniquities had
made a separation between you, Isai. 59.2.
and your God, and has made him to hide his face from you, nor would he
vouchsafe to look upon you, neither could he, but in his anger, and to your
ruin, and eternal damnation. And therefore behold now, how that by my
mediation you have peace with him; and that in my blood which I am ready to
shed for you, is made the propitiation for your sins; a mystery heretofore
hidden from other ages, but now a miracle; which will fill all the world with
astonishment, and confound all humane wisdom in their discourses; whence it is
that the Prophet long ago being ravished in himself, cries out and says,
Esa. 52.7. Oh how beautiful are the feet of him upon the mountains, who
brings glad tidings, who proclaim peace and salvation unto Israel. And you
have this privilege to be of them, not only to partake of this salvation, but
also to be the heralds and dispensers thereof, to proclaim the benefit of my
death, and the forgiveness of sins unto the world, to manifest unto Sion this
good tidings. Thy God reigns, Isa. 52.7. and yet not with an iron rod; for
who then could bear it? But with meekness and with mercy, Zech. 9.9.
Whereof you enjoy the privileges of his kingdom, that is, righteousness,
peace, and joy in the holy Ghost. Ro^. 14.17. And therefore we read so often
in the Writings of the Apostles; Grace be with you and peace from Jesus Christ.
Peace through grace, for without the grace of God, there is no peace. And
therefore so often it is said, Mercy and peace are met together, Gal. 6.16.
one proceeding from the other. Jude the 2. verse, and both of them in Christ
alone. Thence it is, that the Lord himself tells us. Esaias. 48.22. and 57.21.
that there is no peace for the wicked, because there can be no peace where
there is no grace; What soever peace they seem to have in outward appearance,
yet always (says the Prophet) they are like a troubled Sea. And there can be
no grace but only in Christ. In Christ, in whose name God sends to proclaim
peace every where. Act. 10.36.
In Christ, Ephe. 2.14. Romans 1.5.
who himself is our peace; In whom being justified by faith, we have peace
with God, peace with all men. Truly that peace, which we seek, and which we
find in him. But here it is time now to examine what is the efficacy thereof.

Certainly it is such, that in this peace alone we find whatsoever is in all
others; and yet in all others put together, we find nothing of that which is
found in this peace perfect in it self, and makes a supply to all others. Now
three kinds of peace are usually reco^mended unto us. And first, peace with
all men; as the Apostle says Romans 12.18. if it be possible as much as lies in
you, have peace with all men. But has a man it, when he will; or did even the
Apostle himself obtain it? And seeing such manner of speeches are doubtful,
is it not rather to be desired, then hoped? True Christians especially being
the objects of the hatred and fury of the world; secondly, peace amongst our
selves. As when our Savior says unto his Disciples, Mark. 9.51. have salt in
your selves, and be at peace one with another. But amongst such variety of
human passions, and so many civil broils, what salt, what wisdom will
suffice to season it, if the bond of the spirit and true Christianity come not
between? for even amongst the Apostles themselves at the evening of the
Passion, and in the presence of their master, yea even of such a master, who
saw the very depth of their souls, what disputes had they? And now last of
all, peace amongst our selves. To which purpose the Apostle exhorts us. 1 Thessalonians. 5.13. Be at peace among your selves, (...)
that is to say, possess your souls in patience. But again, how can this be,
where the outward man striveth against the inward, the flesh lusts against
the spirit, the spirit of flesh, against the spirit of God, the law of our
members, against the law of our mind, tameth it, leads it captive, is sold
under sin? But in that peace which we have with God by Christ alone, we
recover all this, even peace with all men, will they, nill they. Because he who
has peace with the Creator, has it with the Creature, with the whole order of
nature, with his armies celestial and terrestiall, seeing all depend upon his
pay, takes the watch word from him, who guides their blows, and directs
them, as it pleases him, even those which would seem unto thee mortal, to be
for thy health, and for thy salvation. Peace with the Elements; for he bridleth
the Sea, moderateth the fire, so as he who lodges under the shadow of the
Almighty, Psalm. 91.1.
needs not fear any thing which terrifieth by night, or flies in the day,
which destroys at noone tide. Peace with the beasts of the field; for he
muzzells the mouth of the hungry Lion; Out of the eater he gives meat, and
out of the strong he brings forth sweetness. Judge. 14.14. Peace with men,
though worse one to another then Lions, for says the Prophet. Ps. 56. God is
on my side, what then can man or flesh do unto me? Peace with death. Psalm.
the 3. so that although thousands should set themselves in battle array
against me, I should not sleep a whit the worse, because he is on my side.
Peace with the grave, and with hell; for is it not he, that brings to the
grave, and rayseth us up again? and what can death bring unto me but life?
Death which is but for a moment; life eternal. 1 Cor. 15. the 54.55. Death is
swallowed up into victory. Our Lord Jesus, has not he triumphed for us? O
death, where is thy victory? Henceforth where are thy triu^phs? Hell, where is
thy sting? The power of sin being now abolished by grace? And therefore we
have peace with all, seeing al their might and weapons turn to our peace, all
their curses into blessings, all their gashes, how terrible soever they may be,
are turned into balm, their tempests into safe havens. All these things I say,
and all others whatsoever, work together, as says the Apostle, unto our good,
and that because of the love of God, which is purchased for us by Jesus Christ;
for in stead of a judge, he is now become a father, and of a just revenger, a
gracious protector, disposing all against the hair to our victory, to our
peace, to our glory and salvation.

Peace also amongst our selves; with our brethren, though some be hardly and
not easily to be reconciled, yet when we come to consider, what and how many
offenses God has forgiven us, and does also daily forgive us; even that God,
who is judge and sovereign Lord of all the world, not sparing his own Son,
for the ransom of our sins; what offense then ought there to be so grievous
unto us, that should make us to bear malice in our hearts against our brother?
or what pardon should seem hard or difficult unto us, be it to require, be it
to grant, to keep back, or recover friendship with them? But there is yet
more, for will they, nill they, thou have peace with them, though it be wanting
on their part whilst thou give not place to wrath, whilst thou renouncest
revenge, in doing good for evil. Romans 12.20. When thou hold thy self for
revenged, by doing them good. A glorious revenge, and of a high strain, far
more glorious then any other; for there by though they make not use of it, thou
heapest coals of fire upon their heads. And such was that peace which David;
that valourous Prince had, who overcame a Lion with his strength, a Goliath by
his prowess, who had both given, and also won so many battayles, who fasted
and put on sackcloth for his enemies, who in the midst of the ruin which
they plotted against him, begged of God their life, and having them in his full
power, was contented with the skirt of his garment. Lord, says he, if I have
not kept him who wrongfully oppressed me, let the Enemy pursue me, and take
me, let him tread my life upon the ground, and lay my honor in the dust. Psalm.
7. A true figure of him, who here leaves unto us his peace, and yet more lively
in his own example, who prayed for those that crucified him, and was crucified
for them that offended him. This Philosophy, nay rather Chivalry, how far
remote is it from that of the world? Moreover, he tells us hereafter, that he
leaves it not unto us, as the world does.

Now peace in our selves; behold the principal peace; for in vain will it be
for us, to have peace without us, if we have war within us, health in the
City, if the Plague be in our bosom, if our conscience accuse us, if our
sins war against us? But is it possible to smoother sin in our selves? Let
us if we can. But who can do it, and who is it that does not every hour
kiddle it? Yea rather give fire as it were unto it? We would feign still the
sting of Conscience? Alas! the remedy is worse then the disease; What will it
be but a gangrene in stead of an ulcer? Let us then embrace that grace, which
God offers unto us in Jesus Christ by a lively faith. Let us awaken our
Conscience to find out her sins, to search her wounds to the bottom, being
assured, that in confessing them, it shall besayd unto us, go in peace, and in
laying them open, it shall become our healing; And which is more, we shall be
strengthened in spirit to wrestle against flesh and blood, against all
spiritual powers and wickednesses; so that the flesh striving within us
against the spirit, we may notwithstanding say with the Apostle. Gal. 2.20. In
that I live now in the flesh, I live yet by the faith of the Son of God, who
has loved me, and given himself for me. Though I fight, and the Combat be
sharp, yet the quarrel is just, and the issue certain. I have kept the
faith, says S. Paul, therefore the Crown of righteousness is laid up for me.
2 Timothy 4.8. These things have I said unto you, says our Lord unto his
Apostles, that you might have peace in me, in the world you shall have
affliction; yea he foretold them of all sorts of afflictions. Whence then is
this peace? He adds, but be of good courage, I have overcome the world; and
am now about to give it the last deadly blow; for you principally; as for my
self, it is already overcome; the victory is yours, which obtaines for you
perfect peace, that is, your reconciliation with God, and the consequent
thereof, a freedom from all perils and fear; For if whilst we were enemies
(there being nothing in us, nor ought that could proceed from us, which did
not provoke his anger) we were reconciled to God by the death of his Son;
Romans 5.10.
being now reconciled, his good favor being restored again unto us, shall we
not then much more be saved by his life? He living in us, reigning for us, who
vouchsafed to dye for us? Is not the Kingdom of God within us? to wit,
righteousness, as the Apostle says, peace and joy. Romans 14.17.

Hence it is that the Apostle amongst the fruits of the spirit of Christ
dwelling in us, sets down first. Gal. the 5.21. Joy, peace, meckenesse. Being
now prisoner at Rome; where they are wont to be impatient; or where commonly
they find neither joy, nor peace; yet he tells us that his bonds in Christ, did
confirm his brethren Phil. 1.14. that he rejoices to be offered upon the
service of the faith of the Philippians; and prays them to rejoice with him;
But how? even by the virtue of this peace of God, Phil. 4.7. which passes all
undo standing, and keeps our beaies and minds in Christ Jesus, which
consequently ought to hold the chief place in our hearts, to subdue all other
affections, with all other passions. Collo. 3.15. Such peace as proceeds from
the love of God, shed abroad in our souls, such a love which has his root in
that reconciliation, made only by the death and Passion of Christ; wherein
being guilty, we are absolved; of sinners, made righteous; of enemies,
familiar friends; of servants, children, redeemed by the death of that well
beloved Son, by whose spirit we cry, Abba Father. And here o Christian
remember, each one in his Calling, how many Combats, how many perplexities thou
meetest with? Public, private, without, within, corporal, and spiritual;
and in the midst of the strongest of them, yet holding tranquillity;
possessing the peace of thy soul. From whence had thou this, but from this
only peace of God, which alone can pacific the torments of the soul? On the
contrary, O thou profane wretch, how many times even in the height of thy
prosperities, and in thy safest and surest haven, have thou found rest to thy
soul? And why? only because the Lord says by his Prophet Esaias 57.19.20. that
unto them which mourn, I give consolations, peace, yea, even peace unto him
that is near, and to him that is far off. I willingly draw near unto them,
though they seem never so far off. But the wicked, says he, are like unto a
troubled Sea, which cannot be appeased, her waves cast up mire and dirt. The
Sea, which when all winds be still, yet is moved by his own proper motion. So
the wicked has his own heart vexing him, and in the height of his
prosperity, susters him not to be quiet.

Also, he by and by adds, I give not unto you my peace as the world gives it;
The world gives that which is outward, but I my self, that which is inward;
The world gives it you, in your fields, in your vineyards, and in your
gardens; but I give it you in your souls. Now that peace which the world
gives, it gives it by withholding; now to give, and yet to keep back, is
usually of no esteem. But I give it you without sorrow, without grudging
absolutely; absolute, even for ever and ever. But peace commonly amongst men is
only held by some reciprocal interest, or under a mutual fear; where
somewhat is wanting on either side; and therefore soon disquicted. But that
peace which I give you, is not subject to such accidents; ye have it
altogether from me, altogether freely; what can all of you give unto me? poor
silly Creatures; Am not I the living God, what can I look for from you? Where
of should I be afraid? This then is the peace, which our Lord Jesus leaves
here unto his Apostles, unto his Disciples; and unto all those which have
believed their word. Peace with God; peace in their Consciences; for as much as
the good pleasure of the father was to reconcile us unto himself, and to make
this peace by the blood of the Cross of his Son. Truly his good pleasure,
Coloss. 1.10. for, whence else could it be expected? Peace, which discharges
us of our sins, in as much as he bears them, and clotheth us with his
righteousness. 2 Cor. 5.21. for as much as we are made the righteousness of
God in him. Peace, which delivers us from the evil of the fault, in as much as
it is forgiven us; from the evil of punishment, because they turn to our
good; pacifying our Consciences against his anger; In as much as of enemies we
are received into his favor, our souls partakers of his glory, in as much as
we are incorporated not only into his alliance, but also into his family; In
him, I say, who of God, is made unto us, wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. To whom with the Father and the holy Spirit, be
glory for ever and ever.

AMEN.
AN HOMILY UPON THESE WORDS;
One thing is needful.

Luke. 10.41.
TWo Sisters receive our LORD into their house; to wit, Martha and Mary; And
Martha makes her Complaint unto him, that whilst she was busy to give him
good entertainment, Mary her sister sits down at his feet to hear his
Preaching, not caring to put to her helping hand: whereunto our Lord answers,
Martha, Martha, (which name twice repeated, advertiseth her to take the greater
heed to that he had to say unto her) thou art troubled about many things, but
one thing is necessary; not reproving her for the offices of love she went
about, being such as were both seemly and commendable, and where I pray you
could they be better bestowed, then upon our Lord? But our Savior recalleth
her unto a more principal, necessary, and only necessary work; being a thing
usual with the son of God (who descended from heaven, to lift us up thither)
always to weane us from too much minding our belly; our work; and to draw us
from this earthly life, unto the heavenly; from these inferior and humane
offices, unto those benefits, which bring us unto the everlasting Mansions.

One thing then says he, even one thing is necessary; To the meaner sort, how
many things seem necessary? To those of higher rank, many things are wanting;
unto the wise, many things pass from pleasant, unto things profitable, from
profitable to things necessary, and even amongst these necessary things, how
many of them are chosen, or refused? and yet Lord thou say, that one thing
only is necessary; thou who being man, conversest amongst men, could not be
ignorant, that in a house, where there are a number of employments, if but one
thing be wanting, we think we are half, if not wholly maimed; In like manner,
in a storehouse, after we have imagined, whatsoever can be devised, yet many
things are still wanting. Thou, O God and man in one person; who did give
thine assistance at the Creation of things; thou have made an infinite number
of things, as the Elements, Mineralls, Plants, living Creatures, Planets,
Stars, and all for the use and necessities of men; nay rather of one man. And
yet thou here tellest us, That One thing is necessary; what then? are all other
things therefore superfluous! Has nature made ought in vain? or thou LORD so
many things in vain? As though thou were less then thy Creature. What then
would become of that manifold wisdom; (...).
that wisdom of thine, who tookest pleasure to create variety of things?
Variety then, not vanity, seeing it came from, and also depends on thy
wisdom. And therefore let us weigh this saying of our Lord, who contradicts
not himself, either in words, or actions, and let us seek with reverence
among so many things, what then may be this One thing necessary. The which
certainly ought to glad us, and to give worth to all other things, though
otherwise superfluous.

One thing then says he, is necessary; necessary for thee Martha, and unto
every believer: Now we properly account that necessary, with which we can, and
without the which we cannot live, much less live well; we I say, who are
composed of body and soul, one part mortal, the other immortal. It should
then follow, that this one thing must have reference unto both, otherwise, one
thing would not suffice both, but one of them rather then the other, rather the
soul then the body, according to the usual manner of Christ's words, which
always respect the soul more then the body, not as having an eye unto the
body; but for the good of the soul.

Therefore let us stand no longer Cheapening about riches, favors, greatness,
health, or knowledge; things which are not here to be sought for, nor in this
one thing to be found; things which all men have not; for if all were rich,
mighty, learned, then there should be no difference at all. Men being
respected more or less, according as they want these things, or as they have
them in greater abundance then others. Our Lord then, to give it us in one
word, says, that Mary has chosen the better part, which shall not be taken
from her; For, for the most part, those things formerly mentioned, are subject
to perish, and totally to be lost. Therefore this one thing must needs be
Godliness, that is, man's duty toward God, and his well-being with God,
subsisting in it self, without the aid or help of any other, having the
promises both of things present and to come, which only gives the form unto
all those other things: Without this, being but a confused lump, whether
mixed therewith, or else being absent, making them either good or evil, as the
salt to season them, which otherwise would putrefie and corrupt: or as the
soul; giving them their life, feeling, and motion, which otherwise would turn
and pass into rottenness, into worms, and into serpents; which being
ingendered therein, eat out the bowels. And therefore Solomon concludes with
us, who had tasted of them, even to distaste, and possessed them to his fill;
Vanity, says he, Eccl. the 1. and all is vanity. Fear God, then says he,
and keep his Comandements; for this is the whole duty of man. Eccl. 12. This
our Lord (a greater then Solomon) tells us, is that One (...) necessary. For
do we not see that our first Father in his integrity, the Monarch of all the
world, not keeping himself unto this one thing, but suffering himself to be
deprived of his favor, which preserved him, and made him better then all
things; thereby lost the government, and almost the use and knowledge of them;
so as notwithstanding the whole world was created for him, yet he revolting,
all became accursed and damnable unto him, from the greatest of the creatures
even to the least. The elements turned into corruption, the beasts of the earth
into rebellion, the creeping things unto persecution, the herbs into poison,
the corn into thorns. A curse which cannot be repaired, but by returning unto
this only piety, which by the persuasion of Satan, he lost for all his
posterity, but is now found again for those who cleave unto God, in our
second Adam, to wit, in our Lord Jesus Christ, God and man, who sets us again
in our way toward God, making peace between him and us; And therefore he
prayseth Mary, who keeps near unto him, sitting at his feet, who setting
aside all other business in the house, lets not go her hold, because in him
she finds all things, or rather forgets all other things, who indeed sucked
the doctrine of life from that mouth, and from that sacred spring; and on the
contrary, he reformeth Martha, and calls her away, from her household affairs,
and civil complements to a duty of an higher nature, wherein are to be found
and recovered all other things, that is unto the study of piety, and unto
this only necessary thing, Jacobs portion, Mary's lot, even that pearl for
the attaining whereof, all must be sold, Mat. 13.45. which thing being once
got, can never be taken away.

O Christian, art thou rich, glory not therein; but be thou poor, and be thou
humble in spirit, think that these riches are given unto thee, to make trial
of thy liberality toward the Saints, and of thy charity toward thy
neighbors; and so they turn as a blessing unto thee, which otherwise are to
thee a snare, the cause of a heavy reckoning, reserving to him a great
remaynder to be paid down presently, or else to prison, or rather to the rack.
But art thou poor, and wast thou so borne; think thou then, that God in his
justice, has need of sergeants and officers, to Cite and Summon the rich. Or
art thou decayed by thieves, fire, or by some banckrupt; think then, that
thereby God has discharged thee of this great account, and therewithal has
lightened thine expenses from superfluities, unto which these riches might
seem to bind thee; and so to bring thee to that estate, he has ordained for
thee. But is it grievous unto thee, to have lost that which once thou had,
yea more grievous, then if thou had never had it; think that in stead of
being able to relieve others, God calls thee to faith; think also, Note.
that GOD has his Champions, his Actors, and so will have thee to be one of
them, and that he vnclothes when and whom it pleases him, to set them (as it
were) upon the stage naked as my nail, even to the wast; having neither
raiment nor weapons to desend themselves withal against the injury of the
weather, nor against the gripes of the world, but only his Alluding to that
oil with wrastlers used to anoint themselves with, being naked from the girdle
upward.
Oil. But if they were clothed like others, be it as rich as might be, yet
were they not acknowledged for Champions, but if they come upon the stage
naked; the beholders are attentive; they look, they admire their arms, their
sinews, their ligaments, their musckles, the steadfastness of their standing,
the force of their gripes: their faith, their constancy, their virtue, or
rather the strength of this holy oil of the spirit of God, which is in them.
And being ready to depart thence, they are proclaimed by the Herald, they
carry away the prize, the crown which withers not. See thou not then, how
piety seasoneth the evil of thy poverty, or would thou now rather have had
the fairest garment of the rich?

Art thou in credit or reputation? think it is but a smoke of the Court; and
beware least it turn to oppression. Art thou as a Joseph in Egypt, pray for
thy Lord and Master; Be a Father unto his people, forget not thy thy kindred,
nor family; whether within or without; in the Church, or in the Commonweal,
but according to thy power, as a feeling member thereof, make them sensible of
thy fidelity. But art thou none of these, but one of the common sort, it may
be, not because thou deservest not better, then think with thy self; that he
who disposes all things with weight, number, and measure, who discerns
within thee, that thou see not thy self; knows best what is fittest for
thee; handles thee according to thy disposition, he takes that wine from thee,
which heated thy liver, and therefore brought thee to this diet. And therefore
bridle thine appetite, and look upon his favors bestowed upon others, without
repining, live without envy. But have thou been in credit and reputation,
and art thou rejected, be it by alteration of thine estate, or by the Prince,
not of thy self, be not discouraged, thy fall is not great, and seeing thou
can be no more reverenced upon thy Chariot as a Joseph; let them reverence
thee as a Job, although upon a dunghill, even by those holy consolations, which
thou have learned hereby thy self, and which thou shall also leave unto
others. Believe me, that all those applaudings, those flatteries, those
adorations which were given unto Joseph, are now vanished in the air, who
nourished so many bodies, and saved them from famine; whereas on the contrary,
the holy speeches of Job, are consecrated unto all eternity for instruction,
and are so many perpetual consolations, reviveth and comfort the souls of
the Saints unto this day; and then, this danghill being ordered by piety,
would thou change it for the smokes of a Court, or for all the glory and
treasures of Egypt?

Art thou a Magistrate, A Magistrate.
think then with thy self, that he who judges here below, shall be thy ludge
from above, and remember also that thou executest Gods judgment, and not
thine. And therefore execute judgment and justice; justice in helping the
poor out of oppression, judgment in chastizing the oppressor, without
exception, without acception of person. And hold godliness always as thy
sword in thy right hand, poyse thy balance straight, not to make a false
draught, but to carry it even.

But art thou a private person, A private person
think then how much GOD has spared thee, who have not to give account of the
goods of another, nor of the blood of thy brethren. Arm thy self to suffer
injuries, and ponder in thy mind, in thine own conscience, the difference
between such an high estate, and thy mean condition, whether in suffering or
doing.

Have thou been a public person, Of a public person beco^ming a private.
and art thou now deprived; deprived, not having deserved it, deprived
peradventure having deserved better, and more then deserved it also; disrobed
notwithstanding of scarlet, and brought to wear freese; then think with thy
self, how often thou have willingly unclothed thee, to go to bed, and did
thou sleep the worse, to take thine ease? think then with thy self, that
this costly attire, is such where the Mothe most breeds, the Mothe of the
Court; as jealousy, slander, envy. But rather remember how many Kings and
Emperors, being weary of wearing their Crowns, impatient of sustaining and
undergoing the same, have cast them off, detested them, to find rest unto
their mind, and that by laying them aside. Many also to seek the health of
their souls, which they thought could not stand therewith, namely, true pie
tie, this One thing necessary; and yet piety, which abhorres neither Scepters
nor Crowns, but on the contrary, makes them flourish, when they believe it.
But to a very few has the Lord usually given, especially, to these great
powers, a capacity to hold them upon such dependences. And from thence comes
so many miseries in the world.

But besides, be it thou be disrobed, and further vexed in thy estate; they
grate thee, they hew thee; know how that God has his dimonds amongst men; and
we are beautiful, if we be such. Rough as they be, he puties them under the
Wheel of steel; he polisheth them, he smoothes them, he cuts them in Taples,
in pomted ones, etc. Otherwise, it could not be done; and then they show their
hardness, their water, their fire; their faith; their sincerity, their zeal.
And therefore fear not that he who is so good a leweller, should mar thee;
for in cutting away some of thy rubbish, Note.
he gives thee thy form; by diminishing of thy weight, he augments thy price.
Pretty teaches it thee, it tells thee, that all things (nothing excepted)
work together for good, Rom 8.28
helping forward the salvation of them that love it; but to speak it more
warily, to those that it loves.

Of an health full constitution of body.
Art thou healthful, art thou strong, it is a gift of God; give him thanks for
it, but abuse it not unto disorder, and violence, possess these, as things
that are but frail.

Of a sickly constitution.
But art thou sickly, and afflicted with infirmities, and has Satan touched
thy flesh? afflict not thy self above measure; think that these grieses, are
as so many summons, and goads, to urge thee to pray unto God, to call for his
grace; nay rather, praise him. Note.
How often are the sicknesses of the body sent, for the health of the soul,
and have kept us from sins and other follies? For sicknesses, and
adversities; have their songs of praise, no less then prosperities, yea even
as well as the greatest joys; in their diverse accents, and tunes of
sweetness, most harmonious, we have an example in David, who sung more in
affliction, then when he was jocund; yea even in adversity, he seems to
redouble his melody; because our nature being little or nothing sensible of
the graces of God, is not touched unto the quick; has quickly enough, or
lightly passes it over, and according as his hand is light or heavy, it
leapeth, it cries, and will have no nay, until she be heard. Note.
But know be sides, O Christian, that forrow has her part to pl y, as well as
joys; that as fullness has emptiness succeeding it in order, so sorrow has
her sweet relish, which stirs thee up to call upon thy Creator in thy
misery, and hear him answering thee by his holy spirit in his mercy, who
feel him in thy soul from his sweet hand, bringing a slumber upon thy
sorrows; binding up thy soars; who teaching thee, causes thee to see that
they are but incissions of the surgeon, and not the wounds of an enemy, being
guided by the judgment of love, and not by a fury of hatred. Whence the
Apostle wills us. Phil. 4.4. To rejoice always in the Lord, and again to
rejoice, being in a season, when the Apostle was full of combatts of
persecutions, and of Bonds, himself being bound for the Gospel; But observe,
that he says, in the Lord; for as much as piety makes us receive it all from
God, and as from a father, makes us to take sicknesses, afflictions of the body
as a purgation for the health of the soul; for as much as but one dram of
the love of God manifested unto us by his spirit, is of power to dissolve a sea
of griefs; there needing but one spark of the spirit of God, to consume all.

Of such as are learned.
In a word, art thou learned, I will further instruct thee, for know thou, that
whatsoever thou know, is not the thousand part, of that whereof thou
artignorant; for he who was most expert in the knowledge of the matters of this
life, acknowledged, that all his knowledge was but vanity; yea vanity more apt
to puff up, then to fill; to make thee proud, rather then truly glorious.

A learned ignorance.
There is also a certain learned ignorance, that one who is truly learned,
would prefer before all thy learning; And therefore in praising God for his
graces, referring them to their right end, namely, unto piety, to the service
of God, without the which they are nothing: be not then I pray thee, too wise
in thy self. But art thou ignorant, Of such as are ignorant.
or esteemest thou thy self to be so; who dare not speak before others, and
art ashamed of thy self. Be not therefore troubled; I am about to teach thee
how to be both better learned, and wise; if thou will believe me, nay, if thou will but believe even that great learned Apostle, who 1 Cor. 2.2. determined
among his Corinthians, to know nothing, but Jesus Christ, and him Crucified,
was notwithstanding rapt up into the third heaven, into Paradise, where he both
heard and saw, things not to be uttered, and yet of all that, he makes no
reckoning, in respect of this only knowledge, the knowledge of this one thing,
which is only necessary, on which they are all either grounded, or confounded.

Let us see then how piety suffers not riches to make us proud; nor to turn
favor into oppression, greatness into violence, health into disorder,
knowledge into vanity, but extracting these from it, as it were poison from
Vipers; to make thereof good Treacle, turning it into the medicine of human
society, being without this, both dangerous and deadly to meddle withal. It
supplies also all our wants, poverties, infirmities, afflictions, and
necessities, as only necessary, like unto that herb Tobacco, so much
extolled in the New-found-Landes, which alone is sufficient for meat and
drink, for Clothes, and for Physic. We say, like to that Manna, in the
Wilderness (according to the Jewish Rabbines) which fitted every man's taste,
whatsoever he desired, else were there never so little of this drugge, it would
convert to it self, and into it self, every other thing.

See another Example in Saint Paul. Phil. 4. ver. 11. I have learned, says he,
to be content with that I have, I know how to want, and how to abound, every
where, and in all things, I am taught, as well to be satisfied, as to hunger,
as well to abound, as to want. But hear how? I am able to perform all things
in Christ, who gives me strength, Phil. 4.13.
in and by this his only grace. This only grace of Christ does furnish all,
being apt only of it self, both to pare away our excesses, and to supply our
wantes, to make us find contentment in poverty, and glory in shame. And
therefore says he elsewhere; God forbid that I should glory in any thing, but
in the Cross of Jesus Christ. A poor glory, will thou say, in one Crucified;
He is dead indeed, but is risen again, ascended into heaven, and reigns
there. Of which glory, of which kingdom, he that is a member of Christ,
feels himself already partaker of. Who thinks it strange, that the head
being in heaven, the feet should not have a feeling therewith, should not
glory therewith, though creeping here below on the earth. And from this glory
it comes, that the Apostle styles himself, putting it in the front of one of
his Epistles. Philem. 1. Paul a prisoner of Jesus Christ, in bonds for his
Name. Might he not rather (will thou say) have styled himself with a more
honorable title, namely, Rapt up into Paradise, as if he had been equal to
the Angels. Note.
But his piety, this faith in Christ, honors him, and sanctifies his bonds;
so that to suffer in Earth for Christ, is more unto him, then to be taken up
into heaven, this ravishment being of short continuance, but his sufferings
which assure him of his promise, to have there an everlasting being, and to
reign there for ever with him.

What is meant by this one thing.
But here O Christian, it may be thou desire to know, wherein this one
thing, properly consistes, which has so many virtues, and only can do all
things, but think, and fear, that this knowledge is too laborious, who
see so many books of so long studies written, so many degrees to pass
through, to attain to so high a knowledge. And verily, the mystery of
godliness is great, as Saint Paul tells us. 1 Timothy 3.16. That God was
manifested in the flesh, justified in spirit, seen of Angels, preached unto
the Gentiles, believed on in the world, and received up into glory. For of
every one of these Articles, there might Volumes be made. The Angels
themselves, says Saint Peter, desire to pry thereinto. 1 Pet. 1.12. But for
all this be not dismayed. For God the Creator of man in his mercies, would that
this mystery should of right belong as well unto the ignorant, as unto the
learned; by very Idiottes he has converted Orators; in the netts of poor
Fishermen, he has taken Philosophers; In one and the same Sea, both great and
small fish live and swim; depths for the one, and shallowness for the other;
thou have thy part in this mystery, or rather thy privilege, though thou
could not read. Under the Law it was said, do this, fulfill the
Commandments of God, and thou shall live; A lesson proportioned according to
that integrity, wherein our first parents were created. After so great a fall,
which displaced, which bruised all his faculties, and ours in him; as
over-matched. For where is the man that ever did, or could perform it? But
Christ our Lord by his perfect obedience, not content only to satisfy for us,
but therewithal gives us a lesson, both shorter and easier, that is, this
mystery of faith; If thou confess, says the Apostle, the Lord Jesus with thy
mouth, and beleevest in thy heart, that GOD has raised him from the dead, thou
shall be saved. Romans 10.9. Will thou have it in other words; These things are
written, says S. John; these Gospels. Ioh. the 20. and last verse, that thou
might believe, that Jesus is the Christ, the son of God, and that in
believing, you might have life in his Name. And will thou make it thine, and
appropriate it unto thy self, say then, with S. Paul, 1 Timothy 1.15. It is a
true saying, and worthy of all acceptance, therefore waver not, neither
dispute, but with him confess, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, of whom say thou, I am chief. Here thou have thy part, take it home
unto thee, it is Mary's part, which cannot be taken from her. Cleave therefore
unto Christ, and cast down at his feet (by her example) the pride of thy
flesh, the opinion of thy own righteousness, make thee a seat at his feet,
by humility, in seeking his favor, which is thy reconciliation with the
Father; And then say thou, but not as David, thy Law O Lord; Psa. 119.98
but rather thy Gospel, which is the end of the Law; Faith in thy Christ, Rom
10.4.
has made me more learned and wiser, then all the learned men in the world.

Faith, if of the right stamp, is operative.
But learn also, that this faith is not an empty, imaginary, or idle opinion,
but an inward and found persuasion, which has a substance, which manifests it
self by works, makes a deep Impression in thy soul, engraues Christ in thy
heart, in thy spirit; begetting in thine understanding, a feeling of the love
of God toward thee, in thy will a holy fire of love toward God, nourished by
the same his love, which quenches in thee all other loves, Note.
that depends not thereon; but above all, the love of thy self. And
therefore even as when thou have grafted a grift upon a wild stock, and a
while after come to see, if it has taken; find the bark green, some
budds; and a little after, both leaves and fruit, thou reioycest and hold it
as y^^nne; so in like manner will thou see, if the says of Christ be rooted in
thee; and that unto salvation, review thy self from time to time, if it has
imprinted in thee a hunger after the knowledge of God, an ardent desire to
please him, a fear to offend him, to order thy senses, thy moovings, thy
actions, thy passions, to govern the faculties both of body and soul, as
instruments of purity, of integrity, of charity, of justice, to renew thee
from day to day, in thy inward and outward man, casting forth a good savor in
thy life, and conversation, then say boldly, that faith has taken root in
thee, and the gift is past the worst: but above all, if she renounce her first
sape, to receive it from Christ; this grafting being of another nature then
ours are, because these turn the wild sape into them, contrarily, this
conveyeth us to Christ, converts us into Christ, whence we may then say with
S. Paul, Galat. 2. and 20. I live, yet not I, but Christ lives in me, and
whilst I live now in the flesh, I live in the faith of the Son of God, who
has loved me, and given himself for me. Being ready to cast away
whatsoever is in us, and of us, whatsoever seems to be most precious in our
eye; to keep, and to preserve this only; even this one only necessary thing,
which is worth them all; being then every way fit to say unto Christ, with all
confidence and boldness; I have sinned, but I know that thou art my JESUS, the
Son of God my redeemer, this only word suffices; let us therefore keep it
pure, and without mixture, with this Word let us pass the night of this world,
let us pass over his Barricadoes, and Watches; if we meet with some rubbes,
though it be with some danger, yet let us go forward till break of day, even
of our day, of our rest, there we shall see our JESUS reigning in heaven, to
live with him, where we shall reign gloriously, glorifying him for ever; to
whom with the Father, and the holy Spirit be glory for ever, AMEN.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
PAge 112. line 21. and 113. l. 2. for amongst, read in. P. 136. l. 5. for
conversest, read conversedst.


