AN APOLOGY FOR SCHOOLMASTERS,

Tending to the advancement of Learning, and to the virtuous education of
Children.

By THOMAS MORRIS, Master of Arts.

LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop, for Richard Flemming, and are to be sold at
his Shop at the Sign of the three Flower-de Luces in Saint Paul's Alley near
Saint Gregory's Church. 1619.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable the Lord Rosse, Son and Heir apparent of the Right
Honorable Earl of Rutland.
MY especial good Lord, I presume to preset to your Honor this title treatise
concerning learned Knowledge, and the Teacher thereof: Seeing that as God has
blessed you now in your Childhood with a virtuous and most Noble disposition, a
loving and kind nature, quick apprehension, pregnant wit, ready vttrance, and
firm memory: so if it pleases his Divine Majesty (which I heartily desire)
to grant you prosperous health, I hope by the careful education of your right
Honorable Parents, you will in process of time attain to excellent
knowledge. Your virtuous, and right Honorable sister the Lady Katherine, may
obtain the perfect understanding of the Latin tongue in very short time, such
is the excellency of her wit and memory, if she continue as she began in the
study thereof. Good endeauouers, even the best enterprises, by sinister
suggestions whispered, or scandalous aspersions scattered, are sometimes
hindered. I trust your Honor will accept of this slender token, offered with
as good a will to your Lordship, as the widow did her small mite to the
Treasury; or the poor man his handful of clear and clean water to the
Persian King Artaxerses. For albeiit my body, against my will, is absent from
you, notwithstanding my mind is with you, my memory of you, my love toward
you, and my prayers to Almighty God are for your health, long life, and
perpetual happiness. So I rest

Your Honors ever devoted. Thomas Morris.

To the courteous Reader.
SEeing that (gentle Reader) all men are naturally desirous of knowledge: and
that many have bin advanced thereby, to Nobility, Principality, Regal and
Imperial authority. And considering that this knowledge, whether it be
Reminiscentia, as the Platonistes, or de nouo, as the Peripatetikes do more
truly maintain: is instilled, and derived unto us originally, and ordinarily
by Schoolmasters, which are the isntrumental causes thereof, ordained by
Almighty God to that intent and purpose.

I thought it not amiss, in this short treatise, to incite and stir up some,
which in this age are exorbitant herein, to a due consideration, to a more
religious respect, to a more requisite usage, and to a more grateful
remembrance of Schoolemasters. Albeit there be faults in all professions, and
in all fortes of people; yet some imperfections we ought rather with Sem and
Iaphet to cover, then with cursed Cham to scoff at. The sweetest rose has a
prickle; and the finest cloth a bracke. I request thee to be advertised, that I
treat here of learned and honest Schoolemasters, not of unlearned and
dishonest intruders into that function.

Abel will offer sacrifice, Cain will sacrifice too: Jacob will have a
blessing, Esau would have a blessing: too: Simon Petter will work miracles,
Simon Magus would do so too: Constantine the great will be a Warrior, Thraso
will be one to: Quintilian will be a Schoolmaster, Rombus will be one too. The
impes of Satan, sometimes will be the apes of the Children of God. I do not
defend irregular, unlearned, or unfit persons, which intrude themselves, and
usurp the office of teaching: but approved, learned, and discreet
Schoolemasters: which for the benefit of publique-weales are not a little to be
regarded. Thus wishing thee increase of virtuous knowledge, I rest ever thy
Well-willer.

T.M.

The Contents of the Treatise following.
1. The dignity of Learning and the degrees thereof maintained. 2. The
election of a Schoolmaster, and the education of Noble and generous Children
briefly declared. 3. The Office of a Schoolemamaster, and his place, being
entertained into a Noblemans house, discussed. 4. The errors of them which
abandon, or at least debase learning and the Professors thereof, displayed and
confuted. 5. The confutation of them which hold, that a Schoolmaster is a
servant to any subject, who in consideration of learning gives him allowance.
6. A demonstration how necessary Schoolemasters are for the good of public
Weals, and how they ought to be regarded. 7. A Frenchman is not so fit to
teach children in England, to read, understand, speak and write English,
Latin, and Greek, as an Englishman. 8. The absurd opinion of them which
prefer the French tongue before the Latin, or do parallel it with the
Latin tongue, impugned. 9. The use and benefit of travel, after the
knowledge tongue is attained unto.
AN APOLOGY for Schoolmasters, tending to the advancement of Learning, and
to the virtuous education of Children.
I Am determined (GOD assisting me) to make an Apology against proud and blind
ignorance; the only adversary to noble and learned knowledge: for, Scientia non
habet inimicum praeter ignorantem; Knowledge has no enemy but the ignorant
person, who reputeth the Schoolmaster, and teacher of the Liberal Sciences:
albeit he be a Doctor, or Master of Arts, to be a servant to any subject in
Christendom. I say, to any subject: for I confess, that he is a servant to
God, and to his King. Wherein I purpose to prove, that by the Divine Law, by the
Law of Nature, and Nations, by the Constitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical: by
the Statute Law of our Realm, by the judgment of the Heathen men, illuminated
by natural reason, that a Schoolmaster, as a Schoolmaster, and teacher of
the Liberal Sciences, is not a servant to any subject, much less an inferior
servant. He does acknowledge in all humility his Lord, of whom he receives
his allowance, to be his especial good Lord, his very Honorable benefactor,
his Noble Mecenas or Patron, to whom he belongs, of whom he depends, and
to whom in all liberal duty he is obliged.

Schoolemasters, who have taken degrees of School in the Universities of this
Land, lest they do otherwise, let them remember their Oath: for they have
sworn to defend and maintain their degrees. They must not make the Profession
of the Liberal Sciences servile, being Masters of Arts, by reason of the
teaching thereof, they ought not to be inferior servants. All learned men,
ancient and modern, might justly be thought improvident, and unwise, for
bestowing so long time, so much pains, so great charges to attain to
Learning, and the degrees thereof, if by teaching of it to other subjects, they
themselves should become inferior servants.

The most Noble Earls of this Kingdom do take the degree of Master of Arts
willingly, as an Ornament to their Nobility, which they would not do, if they
held the degree servile, or the persons servants, in respect of their
Profession of the Arts. I request not to be mistaken, for I acknowledge and
confess, that Masters of Arts may very well, and not without cause, be
Noble-mens servants, in offices, and places appertaining to servants; but not
as their Chapleines, or their Schoolemasters; for herein they exercise their
Professions of Divinity, and of Arts, which are not servile, and this they
must defend, as they are bound by Oath, and I hope they will not make shipwreck
of their consciences. Every one is to be regarded, and esteemed according to
his vocation and degree, and the subject or object thereof about the which he
is conversant: The Divine for his Theology. The Lawyer for administration and
execution of Justice. The Phisician for the preservation of the health of the
body. The Schoolmaster for the good education of children. The Steward for the
ouerseeing and well ordering of servants, who are inferior to the children.

Furthermore, seeing that Honor is the reward of virtuous Learning, and
Learning the promotor, or aduauncer, the maintayner, and principal Ornament of
Nobility, it seems to be great want of discretion, to make a Schoolmaster
an inferior servant: for how will the noble and ingenious children be animated
to learning, whereby they may become worthy Governors of their Country, when
they shall perceive the teacher thereof to be reputed an inferior servant, and
his learning servile. This will be distasteful, and a discouragement to their
Honorable natures and dispositions, and a whetstone to pride and disobedience,
the very bane of youth. For Noblemen, and Gentlemen's children are to be
brought up in humility, the root of all virtues. Otherwise, by sinister
minds, and means, not only the Liberal Sciences, and the Professors thereof
are disgraced; but also the children are by their own Parents dishonored, and
debased, by making an imputed servant their Master, to the exceeding hurt and
hinderance of their good education and profit in knowledge, the aduauncer and
preserver of true Nobility, whereby, in process of time, they may become wise
Councillors, fit and discreet Governors; For how will the Noble and generous
children stand in obedience, due awe, and regard to a servant? or love and
delight in learning so vilifyed? This preposterous course, by all probability,
will breed in them contempt of the one, and dislike of the other.

There is an objection propounded by the proud ignorant to be confuted; who
ever (say they) receives meat, drink, and money, for the execution of bis
Office, or function, is a servant unto him, of whom he receives it.

I answer, that this assertion in the general is manifestly false and
erroneous. Offices and functions are not to be huddled up, and confounded, but
to be iudicially distinguished. There are some Offices servile, they who
execute these, are servants. There are other Offices liberal, they who
undertake these, are not servants, but only to GOD, and their King; albeit
they receive allowance, stipend, see, or salary, as their deserts require. Such
are the Professors of Divinity, Law, Physic, and the Liberal Sciences.
He who holds these Sciences to be servile, may be yoked with Anaxagoras,
who held the Snow to be black. His opinion is erronius: And if he persist
stiff-necked therein, heretical, and worse then Heathenish: for the Heathen
men were not so deprived of understanding. A man gives meat, drink and money
to a Lawyer for the devising of lands, by making conueyances or assurances
thereof to his sons: Is the Lawyer therefore his servant? Or in like manner,
gives to a Physician for ministering Physic to his children: Is the Physician
therefore his servant? One gives yearly certain quarters of wheat, and
malte, which are equivalent to meat, and drink, and money, to an other,
because he bestows upon his son, for term of life a Tenement: Is he
therefore who bestows the Tenement the others servant? Likewise one gives
meat, drink and money to a Schoolmaster, because he conferreth upon his
son Learning, which by the judgment of the Wise is betttet then a Tenement
Is the Schoolmaster therefore his servant? They who persuade themselves these
Consequences to be true, are infected with an error which is scandalous and
prejudicial to all Universities, Innes of the Court, and degrees of Learning,
which worthily have advanced, do still, and will advance many descended of
mean parentage, to true Gentry, true Nobility, and to high dignities in
Christendom.

After a Noble man his son is six years of age, diligent industry is to be
used, and especial care is to be taken, to have a fit and sufficient
Schoolmasters for him. By the judgment of the wise he is deemed to be fit,
and sufficient, who is adorned with these qualities, viz: Who is a man of a
found belieefe, honest life, and civil conversation, an ancient man, rather
then a young: For a young is commonly more proner to lewd lust, more apt to
give badde example to his Scholar, more inconsiderate, of less discretion and
experience, then an ancient man. A man tried for methodicall teaching, and
trayning up of children, and well allowed for the same: A man known to be
learned, of ready utterance, and perfect pronuntiation of speech, and of
reputation, having taken the degrees of learning. It may be demanded, why so
learned a Master is to be provided for a child of such tender years: I
answer, that it is very requisite, and needful for diverse considerations A
vessel being well seasoned at the first, retayneth the taste, and preserves
the liquor, that shall be powered thereinto. A sure and firm foundation is
first to be laid of pure and perfect English, to be delivered with decent
action and gesture, with a right accent, and distinct pronuntiation: that when
he comes to ripe years, being in eminent places, he may communicate his
learned knowledge iudicially, and eloquently in his Native tongue, to the
benefit of his own Country. In like manner, he is to be taught pure and
perfect Latin, and if it be not too tedious for him, the Greek may very well
be joined thereunto, that he may not only read with understanding for
increase of knowledge, most learned books in the said languages, and hear with
judgment exercises and disputations, accomplished by the learned of famous
Universities; but also impart his intellectual conceits in eloquent Latin to
foreign nations, most honorably in any important imploiment for the weal
public. An other consideration isl, that a well learned Schoolmaster is
expedient, or rather necessary, because he is to stay with his Scholars; for
change of Masters makes seldom good Scholars: many me^, many minds, many
masters, many manners and methods of teaching, which hurt and hinder knowledge.
The rolling stone gathers little moss. This noble child is to be kept in awe
and obedience, and with ge^tlenes to be alured to virtue and knowledge: To be
co^me^ded for his good endeavors, and praised for his well doing, that he may
love learning, take delight in understanding and pleasure in pithy and witty
discourses, delivered unto him in pure speech with perfect pronuntiation.

His discreet Schoolmaster is to consider his Nature, and disposition, and to
frame his instructions and precepts thereunto, according to the child his
capacity: not to daunt his Spirit, or dull his wit: for in the recreation
of his mind and memory, Music and honest sports are to be used: And for the
health of his body, moderate exercises are to be practiced.

Honest, civil and careful men are to attend upon him, who will give him no
bad example, but encourage him to proceed in virtue and learning. Wicked
flatterers in any case are to be debarred from him; who to dehort him from
humility, and the pathe of virtue, and learning, will tell him that his
Schoolmasters is his servant, that he is descended of high Nobility, and shall
have living and lands in plentiful abundance. Why should he lone the book,
why should he listen to, or be ruled by an inferior servant? he is to
command: why should he be governed, or in any sort debarred of his will: It
is fit for him to take his pleasure, and to do what he list. Thus a
Parasite, or a Gnato by sugared words, will attempt to corrupt him, having
Jacobs voice, and Fsaus hands, smooth words, and rough works. Of all tame
Creatures, a flatterer is the worst. Likewise other evil disposed persons are
not to entrude themselves into his company: such as commonly will use swearing,
cursing, slaundering, lying, evil speaking, or bad actions in his presence, or
hearing: They also are not to be admitted, to converse with him, who will teach
him foul and foolish songs, dishonest actions, or to mock and deride any one:
or to do harm to others.

These are to be taken heed of, and sharply to be rebuked: for children by
nature are more prone to vice then virtue: and are not so much or soon
furthered by things well done or spoken, as they be hindered, and corrupted by
deeds, lewdly committed, or words wickedly uttered.

In a Noble man his house, the Schoolmasters his place is next to the
Chapleines. The office of the Chapleine is to celebrate divine Service, to
preach and to teach the true worship of of God. The office of the
Schoolmaster is by gentle means to instill into his Scholars, by little and
little, as their capacities are able to bear, the excellent knowledge of
divine and humane things: to instruct them in the Liberal Sciences, that they
may daily increase and fructify therein; with the perfect understanding,
ready and distinct speaking of die learned Tongues: I mean Latin and Greek.
These Offices are liberal, not servile, appertaining to the soul.

Of Offices belonging to servants, the Stewards is chief; he wears the
Livery and Cognizance of his Lord and Master. If the Chapleine and
Schoolmaster were servants, they also should wear the Livery and Cognizance,
as the Steward, and other servants usually do. I could never yet be
advertised, what law could be produced, or what reasons could be rendered, why
the Steward, Gentleman of the Horse, or the Receiver of the Rents, servants to
any Noble man, being a subject, should persuade themselves, their offices and
places to be above the Schoolemasters. They are conversant about Servants,
Horses, Rents, as the proper objects of their Offices. The Schoolmaster about
the Noble Children, as the proper object of his Office, Are servants, horses,
rents, more to be respected then Noble Children? Or, do they think, the
ouer-seeing of certain servants, the managing of horses, the receiving of some
rents, to be preferred before the governance and teaching of honorable
Children the excellent knowledge of divine and humane things? Herein, as it
seems, they offer indignity, not only to the Noble Children, but also to
the Professors of Learning, and the degrees thereof, which worthily have
advanced, and continually do, many from mean estate to true Gentilitie,
Nobility, and to the chiefest Dignities. Where order is not, there is
confusion: the Sexton there will be above the Clerk.

Certain Reasons demonstrating the prioritie of Place of the Schoolmaster,
before the Steward to any subject.
1. FIrst, because of the Vocation: For the Schoolmaster is not a servant. The
Steward is properly a semant. For proof thereof, I refer them who are
opposite posite in opoinion, to the Co^stitutions and Canons Ecclesiastical,
and to the Statute law of our Realm; where they may evidently see
Schoolmasters distinguished from servants by several titles, and sundry
Statutes concerning them.

2. Secondly, Because of office; for the one is to instruct, and furnish with
the knowledge of divine and humane things: the other to manage matters
appertaining to servants.

3. Thirdly, Because of the object of the office: for the one is to govern and
teach the children: the other to ouer-see and order the servants, which are
inferior to the children.

4. Fourthly, Because of the love of parents, descending naturally to their
children, which induces them as it were by the law of nature, if they do not
unnaturally abandon natural love and learning, to prefer him, who has the
education and instruction of their children, before a servant.

5. Fifthly, Because of discretion and wisdom that is or ought to be in
Parents, being very lawful and forcible motives to cause them more to grace
and countenance the Master of their children then a servant: for that
redoundeth to the profit, worth, and honor of their children.

6. Sixthly, Because of the good of the children, that they may better stand in
due regard, awe, and obedience to their Master, may more esteem and honor
learning, wherewith being adorned, they themselves may be more esteemed and
honored: and consequently continue with augmentation the name and fame of
their house.

7. Seventhly: Because of custom, which is a law unwritten, and shows, that
the Steward wears the Livery and Cognizance of his Lord and Master: the
Chapleine and Schoolmasters do not; for they are not servants. The Steward
has a table assigned to him: but it is in the Hall, termed, The Stewards
Table. The Chapleine and Schoolmaster usually sit either at their Lords Table,
or at a side table, anciently called, The Chapleines table.

8. Eighthly: Because of the dignity of Learning, and the degrees thereof: For
it were extreme folly, or rather madness in Parents, to bring up their
children so chargeably in learning, and semblably in their sons, to bestow so
many years, even the prime of their time, to disburse so great expenses, to
be so vigilant, and to take such pains for the attayning to learning, and the
degrees thereunto belonging; if Promotion, Preferment, Worship, Honor, Grace,
were not the due rewards thereof. Honos alit Arts.

The divine Plato being demanded what difference there was between ignorant
man, and a learned, answered; As much as between a sick man and a sound: For
blind and proud ignorance is the sickness, and virtuous learning the health of
the soul. We usually say, At your service. Your servant. Rememember my
scruice, to such, and to such a one. Those are mere verbal complements: when
indeed we are not their servants: and we know, and take our places, according
to our offices and degrees.

A Schoolmaster, who has received the degree of Master of Arts in the
Universities of our Land, must not make his office of teaching servile: for a
public oath has been tendered and ministered to him, according to this form
and tenor; (viz.) Tu tueberis gradum tuum, etc. Thou shall defend and
maintain thy degree of Arts, etc.

These Arts always, and most truly, have been called Liberal: Why should
any person be so lewdly disposed, as to attempt to make the Profession of them
servile? In what great estimation Phoenix was, when he was Schoolmaster to
Achillis, Homer declares. And in what honorable credit Epaminondas was, when
he was Tutor to Philip, who was after King of Macedonia, Plutarch shows.
Alexander the great was accustomed to say openly, that he was as much beholding
to Aristotle his Master, as he was to King Philip his Father: for of his Father
he took the occasion to live; of his Master he received the reason and way to
live well. Dionysius King of Cicily, being banished by his subjects, taught
publicly, and kept a Grammar School in Italy: He affirmed openly, that
although he were exiled unjustly by his subjects, notwithstanding, in despite
of them, he did, and would still reign: intimating thereby the authority
which he had, being a Schoolmaster over his scholars. The Cicilians
understanding his heroical resolution, repented themselves, and established
him in the Kingdom again. They who will read, and advisedly consider the
lives of these most Noble Emperors, Alexander the Great, Iualius Caesar,
Seuerus, Tacitus, Probus, Aurelius, Traian, Adrian, Antonine Constantine the
great, Theodosius, Charles the great, surnamed Charlemayne, shall easily
perceive: these being trained up in their youth by skillful Schoolemaisters,
more to have flourished, and to have been more reuowmed then other Emperors,
by reason they were more excellent then the other in learning: whereby the
saying of Plato is verified, That those public weals are happy, and blessed,
wherein either Philosophers reign, or Kings are in Philosophy studious.

Of what reputation Schoolemasters in all former ages have been, and how
necessary for the benefit of public weals, experience proves, and
Hystoriographers relate, and testify

Socrates, Plato, Pythagoras, Aristotle, Isocrates, Plutarch, Seneca,
Quintilian, and very many more, which might be nominated, were all
Sehoolemasters: All of them were reverenced, and well regarded in their places
of teaching, and at this day are renowned for learning. Their published Books
eternize their names and fame.

Our Savior CHRIST graceth the office of teaching. He himself taught: the
twelve Apostles were his Scholars. They also according to his commandment,
taught. Saint Mark was Saint Peter's scholar, Saint Luke was saint Paul's
scholar.

Sir Thomas Elyot that right worthy Knight, in his book entitled, The
Governor, dedicated to King Henry the Eight, declares three principal
causes, why Noble men, and Gentlemen were not so excellent in Learning then, as
their ancestors were, who thereby much advanced themselves, augmented their
estates, profited, and protected their Country. Contrary-wise, some of their
posterity decay their houses, being not fit to be politic Statesmen, or
wise Councillors, or discreet Governors, nor sufficiently furnished to
execute the Laws, or to administer Justice, tempered with equity, because
they want learned knowledge. The first cause that he alleges is the pride of
many Parents, who do not esteem learning as they ought to do, nor respect
the Teacher thereof, as they should do. He notes not any subject in his days
to be so seduced or blinded with ignorance, or to be so puffed up with pride,
as to account a Schoolmaster an inferior servant. Even in his time Hadrian,
the sixth of that name, was made Pope, and Wolsey was created a Cardinal, both
of them were Schoolemasters.

The second cause he affirms to be the Avarice or diverse Parents, who being
desirous to pinch and spare their purses, are loath to give sufficient
allowance, or bountiful salary to a well learned Schoolmaster. They will not
buy learned knowledge for their children, unless they may have it cheap, and
at a very low rate, regarding more, like Aesops Cock, a grain of Barley, then
a precious Jewel.

The third cause he avouched to be the negligence of Parents, who do not
bring up their children as God commands them, as nature binds, and birth
requires, and as the hopeful expectance of their Country craves at their
hands. There are some Parents in our time (I am sorry to speak it) who besore
they receive into their service a Cook, a Falconer, or an Horse-rider, they
have an especial care to have them skillful and cunning in their qualities,
and to have the best and most expert they can get: But when they entertain a
Schoolmaster, to teach their children, being the props and continuing stays of
their houses, the monuments of their names and fame, they are desirous to have
a young man, who will take small allowance, which they term Wages, will be an
inferior servant, will wait, and serve at table, will use verbal and
iesticular complements. Such a one, according to their sinister surmizes, is
fit to teach. They do not much care whether he be well learned, or has
taken any degree of School, or is lawfully allowed to teach, or has any good
method in teaching, or has had experience and approbation in the trayning up
of children, and does understand and speak perfectly pure English, Latin and
Greek, with the right accent and true pronunciation thereof. These things,
which are most material and necessary, they least regard, using more exact
diligence, in making choice of servants for their sports and pleasures, then of
Schoolemasters, for the virtuous education of their children: wherein they
swerue and degenerate from their wise Auncesters, transgress the laws which
distinguish Schoolemasters from servants. Debase their children, by making a
servant their Master, disgrace as much as in them lies, the Office of
Schoolemasters; and that which is woorst of all, abuse learned knowledge, being
a singular blessing and principal benefit which Almighty God bestows upon
man, by making little reckoning thereof, and accounting it as it were a servile
matter. I pray God they do not therefore incur his heavy displeasure and just
indignation, he threatens by the mouth of his holy Prophet, saying: Because
thou have rejected knowledge, I will reject thee. I have diligently observed,
and perceive, that their children very seldom prove learned; and such Parents,
for the most part, do not prosper. Their estates by little and little do
decay. Julian the Apostata published an Edict, forbidding the Professors of
learning to teach the Christians children. Christian Parents are desirous to
have their children taught, yet some of them (I would that some were lesser)
repute their childrens Teacher, and Master to be an inferior servant,
exhibiting allowance unto him not competent. The wicked Apostata persecuted
Christians and their children: albeit these do not so, yet (with their favor
be it spoken) they debase Learning, and the Christian Professors thereof.
Aristotle (by general opinion the chiefest Philosopher) says, That to God, to
our Parents, and Schoolemasters, we can never give enough, or that which is
equal to their deserts. Although the Philosopher out of his wisdom tells
us, that we can never give enough; notwithstanding in this age it is thought by
(some that to Schoolemasters there can never be given too little. Such scandalous
aspersions are cast upon the^ by the proud ignorant. A wise man hearing an
unlearned Gallant speak absurdly, and nothing to the purpose, said; En ex
aurea vagina plumbeum educit gladium: Behold this brave Gallant, out of his
golden sheathe draws a leaden sword. Diogenes seeing an ignorant fellow
sitting upon a stone, affirmed, That one stone there did sit upon another. The
more a man is with virtuous knowledge beautifyed, the more he approaches to
God; and the more he is with ignorance blemished, the more near he resembles
a Beast. The heathen men induced thereunto by the law of nature, highly regarded
their Professors of learning. The Indians, their Gynnosophists: The
Egyptians, their Semnothei: The Persians, their Magi: The Gauls, now called
the French, their Druydes: The Grecians, their Philosophers. Philip, King of
the Macedonians, intending to conquer and subdue the Athenians, not long after
he had proclaimed and made war against them, sent Ambassadors with an
offerture of peace, upon condition they would put from them Demosthenes and
other learned men. Demosthenes, a most famous Orator, smelling the stratageme,
in an eloquent Oration, wherein he dissuaded the people from embracing such a
Peace, told them this tale: On a time there was great war between the Wolves
and the Sheep; at length the Wolves, politikely and fraudulently, promised the
Shepherds and the Sheep to join in firm friendship with them, so that
they would put their Dogs from them. The credulous Shepherds and simple
sheep yielded thereunto. As soon as the Dogs were gone, which protected
them, the Wolves assaulted the sheep, and devoured them. Even so, said the
Orator, (my dear Athenians) the Macedonians, if you condescend unto them,
will make havoc of you presently after the departure of the Learned men,
which instruct and direct you.

Our life, as sacred Scripture shows, is here a warfarre; we wage war
against the World, the Flesh, and the Devil. These three mortal enemies tempt
and solicit the unlearned, pretending to link themselves in league and love
with them: so that they would disgrace, put or pull down their Schoolemasters,
which are indeed the first isntrumental causes and ordinary means ordained by
God to furnish and fortify them with divine and humane knowledge. If these
subtle adversaries could compass effectually their plotte and project
herein, they would, no doubt, deal with the unlearned, having none of
reputation or account to teach them, as the ravenous Wolves did with the silly
sheep, having none to defend them.

Gerson, a famous Doctor, relinquished and gave over the office of the
Chauncellourship of Paris, being a place of high credit, and for the good of
the weak public, became an instructor or teacher of children. Theodosius, that
right noble, wise, and Christian Emperor, when his son Arcadius was six
years of age, aduauncing him to the Empire, and taking an especial care, to
have him furnished with virtue and leaming, requisite for imperial rule and
dignity, used most exact diligence in the searching out, and providing of
Arsenius, a grave, honest, and well learned Schoolmasters for him. At the time
he delivered his son to be taught, and did commit the charge of him to
Arsenius, he spoke in this manner: Postbac tu magis pater eius quam ego,
hereafter you are (being his Schoolmasters) rather a father unto him, then I.
This wise and discreet Emperor, not long after coming into the school and
finding Areadius his son sitting, and Arsenius standing and reading unto him,
blamed them both, telling the one, that he did not perform the office of a
Master, and the other that he did not show the duty of a Scholar, and
caused Arsenius to sit down and read, and Arcadius to stand up bare-headed to
give attentive ear to his lecture: Adding these words, that then his son
would be fit for the Empire, when by humility and obedience, he had
attained unto sufficient knowledge.

Nicholas Frigantius in his description of the Provinces, Kingdoms, and
manners of the people subject to that puissant Monarch the King of China, among
other discourses declared), what reverend, dutiful, and grateful respect, the
inahbitants of those countries bear to their Schoolmasters. For albeit (says
he) they have been their scholars but for a short space, notwithstanding, per
vitam deinceps vniuersam eos magistros appellant, and pro magistris colunt. In
all their life time after they call them masters, and do reverence them as
their masters. There is a contagious disease wherewith horses are infected,
called the Fashions: I fear lest the name thereof exte^deth to reasonable
creatures, insomuch that some of them also, may truly be said to be affected
to, or infected with the fashio^s. There is a fashion lately start up, to have
a Frenchman to teach: If he speak broken, and not pure and perfect English,
with the right accent distinctly pronounced, and truly write it, there is
danger lest he hurt the Childrens english, being far more necessary for
them, then the French and so pull down with one hand, more then he can build
with the other. I have had conference with diverse French men, whom I like, and
love; I have not heard any one of them to speak, and pronounce english, as
perfectly as an English-ma^ does.

They in whom intellectual reason ouerswa^eth sensual appetite, do well
discern and perceive, that a Frenchman is not able so much to profit, nor is
so fit to teach children in England, to read, vnvnderstand, speak, and
write perfect english, latin, and greek, as an Englishman is, albeit he be
as skillful in the latin, and the greek, as the Englishman: and the reason
is, because he is to make the children to understand the learned tongues, by a
language which they themselves understand already: as in the exposition of the
latin, if he keep due method, he is to give to every latin word, the true
proper and significant English thereof; to declare the variety of words and
sentences, which are proper, which are figurative: To deliver the peculiar
phrases of every Dialect: To cause them to observe Orthography: to translate
English into Latin; Latin into Greek; and again, Greek into Latin; Latin
into English. The Frenchman therefore being not so perfect in the English as
the Englishman, fails in that Language, which directs the children to the
knowledge of the other: and consequently, is neither so fit to teach, nor so
well able to profit them.

Now it remains that I briefly refute an error of some of our Countrymen,
who stiffely hold, that the French tongue is better then the Latin: That
Noblemen, Gentlemen, and Ladies, ought rather to learn it then the Latin.

This is a most absurd Paradox, seeing that the Latin, being the Carholike, or
universal Language of Christians, who are learned, is commonly taught, both
privately in houses, and publicly in Schools and Universities, throughout all
Nations in Christendom. A good thing, the more general it is, the better it
is. There are but three learned Tongues, the Latin, Greek, and Hebrew. The
French was never reckoned to be any. It is peculiar to that particular
Country, as English is to England, Irish to Ireland; so French to France. The
French themselves, especially the Nobility and Gentry, disburse large expenses
for the trayning up of their children in the study of the Latin. Who has the
knowledge thereof, may travel therewith throughout all Christian Kingdoms. In
this tongue all learned Books, for the most part, are written, wherein the
conferences, disputes, and exercises of the Learned are performed, which
promoteth to the degrees of School, whereby Worshipful, Honorable, and
gracious preferments are obtained: and is of that sacred estimate by the laws
of our Land, that the very reading thereof saves many Malefactors from
untimely death. I do not discommend the French, but for the causes before
mentioned, I prefer the Latin before it by many degrees.

There has been an ancient and laudable custom still observed by the wiser
and better sort, that after their sons can understand the Latin perfectly,
and speak it readily, to send them to travel into France, Germany, Italy, and
Spain, to the intent that they may there learn their Languages, which they
shall sooner, with more facility and judgment accomplish and attain unto,
having the Latin Tongue before: because the Italian French, and Spanish,
borrow very many words of the said Latin, albeit they do clippe, choppe, and
change diverse letters and sillables therein. Where they travel, they may see
the people, converse and confer with the better sort, perceive their natures,
dispositions, and manners, know their orders, laws, and customs, behold the
scituations of the Cities, the flourishing Academies, the courses of the
Rivers, the Castles, Fortresses, and Havens, the fruitfulness and barrenness
of the Soil: And so further, and furnish themselves, not only with the
Languages, but also with the Geographical knowledge of those countries. If the
gainsayers cannot produce any law, or allege sufficient authority to the
contrary of that which is here delivered, I hope they will yield, and not
shut their eyes against the cl^ere light of truth, as it evidently appears.
And I trust, they will not persevere obstinately in errors, remaining therein
not illuminated by God, to tally eclipsed, and silenced.

FINIS.

