Up and be doing, and the Lord will be with thee.

1. Chron. 22.16. THE PERFECTION OF HORSE-MANSHIP, drawn from Nature; Art,
and Practice.

By Nicholas Morgan of Crolane, in the Countye of Kent, Gent.

Data fata sequatus. (...)

Nil tam facile, quam otiosum et dormientem de illorum labor, et vigilijs
disputare. Hier. (...) Imprinted at London for Edward White, and are to be
sold at his shop at the Sign of the Gun, near the little north door of Saint
Paul's, 1609.

TO THE MOST HIGH, Puissant and Renowned King, JAMES by the grace of God King
of great BRITAIN, FRANCE, and IRELAND, Defender of the Faith. etc.
AMongst all Creatures which the high and mighty Creator of the World has
formed on Earth (most gracious and sacred Sovereign) those ever have been
justly (by all virtuous and temperate Spirits) crowned with the Garland of
Pre-eminence, by whom the knowledge and glory of the Creator, has been best
known and advanced: of which, only Man, by heavenly grace thereunto created,
and also by like grace, to the rule and dominion over all other Creatures, as
to his Birthright (purposely ordained) is above all others in superlatiue
esteem.

In like manner (amongst inferior Creatures) none may enter the Listes of
compare, with those whom the omnipote^t Creator has enriched with greatest
abylities for the use and glory of man. Nam in quibus est cadem Ratio,
similitudinis eorum debet idem ius existimari: For the Verdict of Reason must
pass according to the Evidence of Proportion. And what scrutiny can find a
Beast more behouefull to the greatness of persons of Estate, and necessary to
men of inferior condition then the Horse, which besides (his serviceable
obedience) is beautified with a chief Excellency of comely shape and
courageous boldness. So that the glory of Princes can be by none more highly
advanced, their Armies more inuincibly fenced, or their Enemies more speedily
subverted. Hence it is, that Antiquity, named them Iumenta, as the chief
Adiume^ta or helps of humane nature, that by the very name, the nobleness,
necessary use and profit of them might be known, and the division betwixt the
Noble and Worthy, Base and Unworthy, manifested in fit difference: Whereunto,
none, only the Learned and general practice of all former Ages, but more
particularly, the Statute-Lawes of this your Royal Kingdom of England do
subscribe: recording them to be the maintenance of the strength and
preservation of every Kingdom: Without them, the pride of the Enemy, wanting
no boldness to attempt, cannot but bring dishonor and detryment to Prince and
Country. So that man cannot be so much servant to his own conceit, or so
injurious to such serviceable Deserts, but that he must acknowledge, not only
the Excellency, but also the necessity of a Creature (by inseparable community)
so lincked unto him, that with it no Stratageme is impossible, and without it,
the least exployt hardly accomplished. Now, although this your Renowned and
flourishing kingdom be so fortunate in blessings, as never to have deaffed any
ears of foreign Countries, with supplication for assistance, yet forasmuch
as all good Races and breed of Horses are therein so decayed, that neither the
true shape of their primary creation, neither their perfect and right manner of
their breeding, and preservation in perfection, neither the knowledge of their
natural qualyties (without proof and practice) is by few or none discerned,
neither by writing or practice fore opened, (without which, that old Chiualry
of our English Nation cannot be continued) and thereby Error and Ignorance (two
inseparable Twins of this Age) through Custom (the Tyrant of all Ages,) more
predomynate, then was the palpable darkness of Egypt. Who is not afraid
least the idle delights and delicacies of this inuerted and infected Age, (the
first seeds of subuersions of all Kingdoms) make your Subjects degenerate
from their Ancestors happy care in this kind? seeing the Learned forbear to
practice, and the Practisers forbear to study: each man respecting his
bred-conceit and own private end, more then their Mother, the Commonweal:
the truth whereof al men's eyes depose. The feeling, consideration hereof, being
engrafted in the Temple of my memory, seeing the most excellent Horsemen,
thunderstrucken with the fear, by vewing what heretofore was ill done, was
drawn to the consideration of that was not done, and to acknowledge Paria esse
nihil fieri, et inepte aliquid fieri. Therefore, for the reviving of the dead
senses in the living minds of such as shall desire knowledge how to refel al
former Errors therein, I have perfected this work; being assured, that which is
once true, remains true for ever, neither can by art or strength be changed
into untruth no more then pure gold in deed, be no longer gold: My self for
the time of.xxxv. years past, (as to my fatal delight and period of desire)
given to the reading and practice of the most learned and best experimented in
this Subiet, was long imprisoned in the dark dungio^ of their divisions (yet
always gasped to suck the thinnest Air of true knowledge) at length
perceived, that the searching out of truth, was ingrafted in all men,
according to that saying of Isocrat^s to Euagoras: Arts and Sciences receive
their perfections, not by relying upon the sayings and opinions of men of
former ages (of how great Authority soever) but in finding out the truth, to
correct and change whatsoever is found untrue. This moved Aristotle for the
discovery of high secrets of Nature in his natural and supernatural
Philosophy, to confute the error of many excellent personages: and more when
occasion was offered, spared not his Master PLATO, adiudging (as himself
affirms in his first Book of Ethics) the honor of truth to be preferred
before all duties: Yet far more easy shall I wring from Hercules his Club,
then the deep apprehension of old error, suddenly lose the color died in the
thick brains of common people: for, Plaebis ignorantia periculi rationem sui
non hebet: The ignorance of common people has no apprehension of their own
danger. Who can be ignorant, that all or the most part of your subjects, at
the entry into this your kingdom, and ever sithence have acknowledged your
sacred gifts beyond the reach of all invention, thereby sounding forth their
joys, each man discovering his most hearty embracement of so gracious and
blessed a Sovereign? How should I, though the least and last of all others (if
no jealous IVNO hinder the flight,) possiblye fear, (if unworthiness did not
breed fear,) to leave this spark of my inward and loyal affection (to his
natural assention) to fly to the most High in highness, in whom the
fullness of knowledge and practice of this Subject does rest so far beyond
the rest, as Knowledge and Practice does or can add to Nature, to whom FAME
it self dares not call an Equal: whose shadow of perfection, by imputation
makes perfect the imperfection of this my perfection, as things below receive
Light or Darkness from above. This Treatise I have drawn from the springs of
Nature, Art and Practice, whereby shall evidently appear all perfection of
breed, shape and exquisite action: First, to have Commencement from Nature.
Then to be guided by general Precepts and universal grounds of Art.
Lastly, perfected and preserved by use and practice. And when these be truly
understood, then, and not before, shall this, now wthiered and dead Art of
Horsemanship blaze this MOTTO, Hijs radijs rediuiua viresco. Your Majesty's
performance herein cannot but tend to the immortal Fame of your Person, the
terror of your Enemies, the strength of your Kingdoms, and the general applaud
of your loving Subjects, whose eyes having seen the accomplishment,
whatsoever they have heretofore seen, shall be but as Stubble to lower grass.

Now, with Heart and Hands lifted up to the King of all Kings, I pray; That as
he has made you the greatest on Earth, so may your years be in this; and
after, your place in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Your Majesty's least and unworthiest subject: Nicholas Morgan.

TO THE MOST HIGH and mighty Prince, HENRY Prince of great BRITAIN apparent.
THe thrice worthy (and long decayed) Skill of Horsemanship (right Noble
Prince) whether it stand more obliged to your Royal inclination, by which it
is newly revived, or to your practical perfection, by which it is rarely
beautified, I had rather the establishment of good Races and perfect Riders,
then the rudenes of my Artelesse Pen should decide. And what fitter Herald can
there be to diuulge your love to our Nation, or your victorious resolution
against hostile invasions, then the maintenance of that whereby all your
Hereditary Kingdoms must be walled and enlarged, your Foes daunted, and your
victorious Name enthroniz'd. Hereunto if by these my elaborate Directions and
experienced Observations, your Highness may be happily incited, I make no
question, but this little Island, will furnish you with so fit places for
breeding, and so sufficient Riders for managing, that your men shall not
complain for want of excellent Horses, nor your Horses groan for want of
worthy Riders. This pleasing Harmony, your forward beginnings have given us
great cause to hope, and your answerable proceedings will (I doubt not) afford
us the happiness to see. By those was this naked Impe of mine first bred, and by
these it looks to be still fostered, as being his first Fruits: who with his
hearty prayers for your endless happiness, has wholly devoted his unworthy
self, to be

Your Highness most humble Servant, NICOLAS MORGAN.

To the most honorable Lord, EDWARD Earl of WORCESTER, Lord Herbert of
Ragland, Chopslow, and Gower: Master of his Maties. HORSE, and Knight of the
noble Order of the Garter.
IT may seem strange, Right Honorable, (if not within the degrees of
admyration that after many Editions of Horse-manship, published and practiced
in several Nations, as well before the coming of Christ, assythence, with a
general approbation of perfection, and thereby grown to so high esteem, that
it is thought the whole world can not discover another such, there should be
now (by one who has drawn the longest Line of his life within the Listes and
Lymits of an Inn of Court) a Volume of new Inventions: The Tuscanes do say,
that Wits of in^ention are Goatish, because they take pleasure and delight to
walk alone, and to approach near steep downfalles, and will not follow the
beaten path with a Guide before them: But it behooves that in humane Arts,
there be Goatish wits, who may discover understanding, through Secrets of
Nature, and deliver Contemplations not heard off. After this manner, Arts take
increase, and men daily know more and more: for, as Aristotle affirms, our
understanding is like a plain Table wherein nothing is portrayed: My self
seeing all former Writers and Practisers never to have published the knowledge
of Nature, Art and Practice of this Subeict, but successively to have trodden
and traced each other in one path, not daring adventure to ad any thing unto
that Table, wherein (through want of perfect sight) they thought APELLES Pensil
to have been, esteming all the actions of Superiors to be Rules of action to
Inferiors: et quod viros magnos sequi est pene sapere and that the paths of
the ancient Philosophers are so worn out, and ouer-growen with weeds that no
tract or touch remained to trace or follow them and their labyrinths, so
intricate, that no Ariadnes thread could wind him out that was once entered:
never believing, that Nature had dealt liberally with all the world besides,
thought it impossible for other to ascend to any higher Contemplation of
Nature: although the wise and learned will ever presume to race out that old
envied Sentence, Plura latent quam patent: being written in capital letters,
even by the hand of Nature in the forehead of every Creature. And knowing
(Right Honorable) the true end of all men's labors and Studies to be the
beginning of the public and common good of their Country wherein they breath
and have their being, without searing PLATO his Proverb: (...). NOTHERCVLES
himself against two: or (...). the revenging eye that is never shut, (the
necessity of the time enforcing thereunto) I have herein, not only
discovered, the hidden Secrets of Horsemanship, but also the manifest Errors
of the Art and Practice: And presuming upon your Honors accustomed favors
toward all lovers of this Art, having both the life of the true knowledge and
practice thereof, as also the Seat of perfect Judgment most worthyly living
in you, to inspire some life into these breathelesse Ghoastes of mine, wherein
if I have omitted any thing pertinent, or admitted ought that is superfluous, I
hope the eye of your favor will winck at my missing: as for the malicious,
seeing I cannot look for favorable acceptance, I weigh not their verdict,
only as the Poet says, Equitem mihi plaudere curo. In which hope of
acceptance of my tendered Duty, and pardon of your Honorable Lord ship for my
boldness, I thrice humbly take my leave, and evermore rest,

Your Honors, in all service: NICOLAS MORGAN.

The Author, to the Gentlemen of great BRITAIN.
IT appears by Varro and many learned Philosophers, that in the first Age,
as well men, as beasts did live of those things which the untilled earth
naturally brought forth: and that in the second Age, men began with feeding of
Cattle, and after to plow the ground, to take the fruits, to plant Trees, to
take wild Beasts to make them domestical: and that some Countries did
naturally exceed others in diversity thereof, as Phrygia for wild Sheep,
Samocrates for Goats, Italy for Hogs, Dardania, Media, and Thracia for
Bulls, and Kine: Fusia, and Cacinia for Asses, and Spain for Horses. And
after that they had made use of all Creatures, they affirmed that Inter cetera
Animal^a, Equus sensetur nobiltor, et magis ceteris necossarius, tamregibuset
alijs Principibus, tempore bellorum et pacis: Amongst other living creatures,
the horse is esteemed more noble, and more necessary then others, as well to
Kings and other Princes, in the time of war and peace: So that sythence their
first use, there is not any thing more probable then each man's necessary use,
and inestimable estimation of Horses with all humane society, necessarilye
comprehending, has bound all men, o^ only to endeavor truly to know
(according to their original nature) but also to increase and preserve them in
their greatest perfection: Yet such has been the forgetfulness of latter
Ages, that the true natural knowledge of every other creature increasing in
perfection, this only lies recorded in the Role of grieved memory: For if
you behold the excelling knowledge and preservation of the Ox, the Cow, the
Sheep, the Hog, the Dog, the Fish, the Foul, the Fruit, and all other
Creatures betfit^ing the use of man, how painfully sought forth, how lovingly
entertained, how diligently preserved, how carefully increased, how painfully
amongst all men nourished, and how prouidently bestowed: you must confess that
the general good knowledge and preservation of all is become common to all:
Again, if you consider the restitution of good Learning, the orname^t of all
Arts and Sciences, by the diligence of man's skyll recovered; Has not Grame^
Poetry, Rhethoricke, Logic Mathematical Sciences, Astrology, Cosmography,
philosophy, Physic, Ar^e of Chiualry, Buildings, Paintings, Music,
Eloquence, knowledge of Law, and Divinity, And all knowledge whatsoever,
attained greater and far more amendment and preservation, and only the true
knowledge of the Nature, Art and practice, with preservation of perfection of
this Subject lest in darkness, and the men of Skill (who should have
beautified the same,) utterly forbear the dealing, setting their soueraygne
felicity otherwise; so as the forbearing of the Learned to practice, and the
forbearing of the practisers to study the true knowledge and practice thereof,
being altogether imperfect without knowledge and practice, (most palpable
Error) is (by Matura calamitatum, molimentum consuetudinem in ^enit.
cancred and corrupt Custom) both Mother and Nurse of all practice. And yet if
you first consider the natural Valor of the Gentlemen of these Kingdoms, for
fitness and aptness of Horsemanship, to undertake without rashness, and
perform without fear: like sire enflaming their hearts to the execution of
difficult deeds: Secondly, their true wisdom in material and weighty points,
nor suffering their minds suspended in uncertainty, comprehendding nothing but
certain and undoubted knowledge:

Thirdly, their virtue of Temperance, to whom a Royal Scepter appertains,
keeping their appetites and unruly affections of nature, in awe and government,
like unto the fixed Stars, who the higher they be, the less they desire to
seem. Fourthly, their laborious practice, redily assisting the power of their
will and understanding, Excercieus labor proficit o^^^ consonosut.
not standing upon what they borrowed of their Aunesteors, but working out
their own honor. Fifthly, their comeliness of grace, in and to all and every
their actions, with their sweet affability, that can no more be severed from
them then life from the soul: and their studies such, as those that know
ignorance, can neither purchase Honor nor weild it, but that Knowledge must
both guide and grace them, the only fit and natural quallyties of good
Horsemen. You Would believe, the Excellency of their Nature (with knowledge and
practice) would make all men's hearts Idolles of their delights, and to be
honored with their oblations, whereby the beholders wouldt either wish them
not so excellent, or at least, tha^ they could think them not so excellent,
seeing Nature helping Nature, and Art so hidinge Art, as the forces of
delight would be without withstanding. Lastly, if you consider the aptnesle and
fruitfulness of the Soil of these Kingdoms, for the maintenance of these
beautiful Creatures, (whose praises the whole world does celebrate with
admyration, acknowledging their excellency, the renown of their Excellencies)
you would presently acknowledge that the not acknowledging of our ignorance of
Nature, and of our Errors in this Art, and the want of the practice, are the
only efficient causes of the infinite number of Iades, the utter decay of
perfect Races and deprivation of true Judgment; For until we shall
acknowledge our own Ignorance, we cannot possibly assure ourselves of the true
testimony of Judgment, because we can not understand, or pierce into the
Marrow or pyth of a thing, but that we must stick in the bone: For Quod Serbo
dictum est, Gerbo sit negatum
every human proposition has as much authority as another, if Reason make
not the difference; because there is not a thing so vn^^ersall in Nature, as
diversity, the which apeareth in that there is no one thing wholly like or
dislike to another. So as it is manifest, that the reason of man has many
visages: It is a two edged Sword, a Staff with two Pikes: Ogni medeglia, ha il
suo reuerso. There is no reason, but has a contrary reason, says the foundest
and surest Philosopher, And therefore, the want of the true reason and
knowledge, of Nature, Art and Practice of this Subject, does not only destroy
all the Races of good Horses, but also to them that are naturally good, bring
alcontrary vices, unless some God lay his helping hand thereunto: Wherefore,
you valorous Gentlemen, in whom all Heroycall parts are begotten, bred and
nourished, whose inward minds cannot be painted by any thing, but by your true
shape of virtue: For although the body of Nobility consist in blood, yet the
soul in the eminence of virtue: For as much then as God has given us a King,
such as the Subject neither wants Justice, nor he obedience, whom all
Nations find so hurtlesse strong, as they have thought better to rest in his
friendship, then make trial of his enmity, who excels in nothing so much as
in the zealous love of his people, whose knowledge and practice of this Subject
is such, as he takes away knoweledge and practice, but such as he gives back
by his shadow. Cast not a mist over your own glory, but so kindle your desires
and raise your affections, as the mean and base sort of people, may not by
their ignorance or error, make you do amiss, whom God has given hearts to do
well: neither let your eyes degenerate from their creation, but do you endeavor
the true knowledge of Nature, Art and practice herein; so as it may be said
of you, that, as it is the greatest thing the world can show, yet the least
thing may be praised in you. If there were a view of all the Races and breed of
Horses within his Majesty's Dominions, I make no doubt, but to find a hundred
Royles and Iades, before one of true and perfect shape. But if a view were made
of the general number of Horses that are kept within the same, it were much
easier to find 1000. Iades then one Horse perfectly, shaped, which were vnpo
stible if we did see our own (...). It is truly observed by the Learned, Nemo
sibi (...) erra, sed alijs erroris causa, et Author est, Error is not simply an
Error to him that possesses it, but it is the cause and Author of many other
errors: And besides, whosoever believes an error, thinks it a work of
charity, to persuade another to believe the ^^me, and that he may the better do
it, he fears not to add of his own invention, so much as he sees necessary
for his purpose, to supply that want and unwillingness which he thinks to be
in the co^cerpt of him to whom he tells the same And therefore, whereas other
Nations publish themselves the great Masters of this Subject, affirming that
whatsoever they say, should be believed and received without judging and
examining what they teach: Hold it for tyranicall Justice: Nam qut a semet ipso
loquitur mendax est. It is said, that in the Country of Pharsalia, from whence
came BVCEPHALE Alexander the great his Horse, that the Mare that was kept for
that Horse, brought forth Coltes always like the Sire: for which cause,
Aristotle reports, she was called IVSTE: I will not enquire how many of our
great Masters can express the natural and true reason thereof, (although I
doubt not the same, and many more greater expressed in this Tractat) and yet
the learned Philosophers and Physicians make great Dispute from whence the
likeness of issue to their Parents proceed, considering their diversity of
likeness: neither will I enquire of any man's particular Stable, where
peradventure (Asinus subfreno currere docetur) some concealed Cart-Horses are
finely clothed: Neither, at any time enquire where true practice of
Horsemanship (I only speak of riding) his Majesty's Court excepted, is used.
Who can make that clean that comes of unclean seed Can a Kite bring forth
a good flying Hawke? mals Coru^, malum ouum: of an evil Crow, comes an evil
egg. The long and pitiful apprehension hereof (standing at the gates of my
e^res) although in the winter of mine Age, has mere then enforced me to this
labor, and to present the same unto your view, as the most noble Air for such
labor to fly in, who by consideration what as amisle done may ^^o the Springs
of your wisdoms, as from the Beams of your virtues, be moved to the
consideration of that is not done and by your generous endeavors, in short
time, make both it and your selves in it, ^al samous parts and all his
Majesty's Kingdoms and Dominions above all the Kingdoms of the world in
greatest perfection, having at this day as famous Riders, as ever was Zenophon,
Geouan Barardiu^, Colo Pagano, Frederick Gryson, John Pietro Puglano, Claudio
Curto, or who soever. And therefore my principal labor herein, is principally
to inform and guide the understanding with assured knowledge, undoubtedly to
know from whence the perfection of shape and the natural goodness of every
horse proceeds: vt ipso unltu Ethiopem cognoscas: That by the only view of
them you may know their goodness, and how to keep and maintain your Races in
greatest perfection nearest their original and primary creation, and to set
forth the same by probable reason, thereby to refell and confute all former
Errors heretofore written or practiced, never by any heereto fore attempted,
but the contrary successively defended. My desire therefore is, that you would
be pleased diligently to read this my Tractat, wherein (I doubt not) you shall
find sufficient contentment against the oppositions of any former Writer
whatsoever, and to do your greatest endeavors to place within every Shyre a
sufficient understanding Rider according to the Rule of Themystocles, that will
Impetraremelius quam impetrare, prevail by persuasion not by constraint: By
whom all Horses fytte for service may be made fytte and apt for all services,
because without such Riders, there is not one Horse of a thousand
understandingly and truly broken or made perfect. Then shall your Horses be
defense of the poor, preservation of the rich, laughter at fear, invincible
power against force, honor of our most renowned King, and the life of the
Common weal: The want whereof has not only deprived all his Majesty's
Dominions of good Horses, but also has discouraged and dismayed many valorous
and noble Gentlemen from the delight and pleasure therein, although the whole
Art and every part thereof be without offense, scandal, Temperance the rule of
all pleasure.
damage, or prejudice of another: And without prejudice of the^ selves, their
honors their healthes, their leisure, their duty, or their function, if the
same be taken as men do take Honuy, with the tip of the finger, not with a full
hand, for the fullness of pleasure is the bayte of iniquity. Degener at a
robore ac^n^ute miles asiueiudine volupta tem. Tacit
And you my native Country men of North-hampton Shire, as also you Gentlemen
of Kent amongst whom I live: (A Country object to the eyes of all foreign
Nations,) because there is neither hearty desire nor true joy in that whereof
the mind is unskillful and ignorant: Malerum esca Goluptain.
Let the Coals of your affections be kindled with delight, and your actions to
the ears of all people blown to a wonder, against which, let no excuse be
sufficient Armor to set in a beautiful Sample, such Works of Horsemanship,
Honus ^ere, (...) nus est
that may beeas a Glass to the blind eyes of al foreign Nations to see
their imperfectio^s, and your actions in such perfection, at you thereby may
getthe first possession of the keits of al honorable and virtuous minds. But
if you object that the Io^ney of high Honor^ly eth not in plain way, and that
you cannot eat the sweet without the sower, Nam qui addit Scientia^^, addit et
labor^m, So may it be said on the contrary that laughter is mingled with
tears, Qui serutatur est maiestatis apprim^etur of gleria.
Et ipsa se^^cita^^se nisi temperat pramit: Yet I pray you be not dismayed,
invit virtuti, nulla est via: there is no way irresistable to virtue: Nulla est
praclusa o^^ thus patet: Neither is the way forestalled, but open to all,
neither is or can any thing be so hard or difficult, but pains and industry
will effect. Be not as the standing Pooles that gather only corruption: what
moved P^r^ander, to undertake the digging down of the high Mountain Ischmus?
Let it not be forgotten that the Learned have said, Dissacien^e auiuuant The
Divine power av^eth all vertu^us end^uours. Certainly, there are so many
Beauties and so many Gra^es in the face of G^odnesse, that no eye can possibly
see i^ without affection, without rauishment: otherwise, where had been the
Glory of all the famous verinous and worthy Acts of Alexander, Themistool^s,
Epiminodas, Hearcules, Persius. Thesius, Bell^o^^on, Hanntball, Seivio, Caesar,
and of infinite others, if great and difficult Labors had swallowed then
glorious encenours? Lober est materia vntutis et gler^ae, ^une qui reij^^^^
illas reijcis. The rewards of Labor are virtue, and glory, and he that
refuses Labor, refuses the reward. This moved that worthy King Agesilaus
upon his deathbed, to command, that no Image or picture of his resemblance
should be made: for if I have, said he, any famous thing nobly done, it will
bear witness enough for me: Talis post exilium fama est, qualis ante exilium
vita. Such as the life is, such is the Fame in death. Viui^ post funera Virtus:
when a man is Dust his Virtue dies not. And therefore I conclude, Q^i^u^it
Molam, fugit Fariuam: He that burns the Mill, has Ashes for his meal. Now,
although in my Dedicatory Epistle, I have set open the Prison Doors of my
desires, I confess beyond the degrees of mediocrity, and offered them as an
incense, upon that fire wherein my heart was sacrificed, yet so far did the
Sparks of unslain Duty prevail in me, that I have reserved a poor remnant
to live in the protection of your favors, The which, Sublime feriam Gerti^e
sydera.
with my self I consecrate to your service: wherein, (if such happiness I may
find,) I shall acknowledge my contentment higher then the highest Reward that
outward things can bring unto me.

Add manum, et cum Minerua manummoue:
By him that wishes all the degrees of Nature, Art and Practice to attend
your desires to the highest. N. M.

The Author in commendation of the worthy and renowned Rider, ROBERT ALEXANDER
Knight, deceassed.
GReat Alexander dearly loved his Horse,
The Horse loved him, and suffered none to ride
Upon his back, by flattery or by force,
But his dread Lord, that half the world did guide.
This knight did bear that Alexanders name,
Who brought the proudest Coursers to his beck,
And with his hand, spur, voice and wand, did tame
The stately Steedes that never brookt the check.
He father was to Alexanders three,
Which are for riding held in high respect:
As they are highly praisd, admired was he,
That taught them first those Coursers to correct:
Not only he in England was esteemd,
But eeke in foreign Countries for his Art,
And yet to me (that honored him) it seemed
His fames report was less then his desert.
This knight (the mirror of all knights for riding)
Had many men of worth and great renown
That were his scholars, by whose happy guiding
They in this art did put all others down:
Ye gentlemen, ye knights, and stately Pears,
That by his life reaped profit and delight,
Come join with me in shedding solemn tears,
And mourning for the death of this brave knight,
As Art united with Experience long,
Taught him those lofty Steedes in awe to hold,
So nature framed his bodyfaire and strong,
And heaven gave him a sptrit stout and bold:
To him was I beholding for his love,
My labors still were welcome to his sight,
This stirs up my heart, and does it move,
In what I may his friendship to requite.
In Fames sweet breath he lives, yet wants he breath,
And thus he lives, and yet is lise is done,
He rode apace, yet is out-rid by death,
And still he rides and yet his race is run:
He rides indeed, but how? on Angels wings,
And is new knighted by the King of Kings.
FJNIS.
An abstract of the principal matters that are handled in this Book.
THe cause wherefore the Art of Horsmanship was deu^sed: who are he to learn
the same, And who are fi^ to teach the same in perfection.

2. That there must be a true knowledge of the nature of the subject,
whereupon art and ^^actise does work.

3. That the nature of all Creatures desires restitution to their former
natural perfection, and an innated hatred to the contrary

4. That the desire of knowledge of horsmanship and the knowledge itself i^
naturally grafted in man.

5. That perfect horsemen, and perfect horses, are of such excellen^y, that a
great honor and strength of the state of a kingdom depends upon them.

6. That the ancient vvriters, and pract^tioners of ^orsemanshippe do set
forth the goodness of horses to proceed from the goodness of the Country, the
Ar^e the vviters, the ground, the Complexction, the Color, the marks and the
shape.

7. The demonstration of their errors there in and the confutation thereof,
drawn from nature, reason, and experience.

8 That the natural goodness of all horses is only taken at the time that they
are framed in the womb, and not otherwise, and therefore perpetual and not
changeable.

9. That the artificial goodness of horses, is only accidental, gained by
Art, and pre^^rued in vigor, by use and practice.

10 That the natural qualities of horses in their first and primary Creation,
were in all perfection, and what t^ose qualityes were, and the cause why the
same became vnperefct.

11. That those natural and primary qualityes are not utterly deprived
(notvvithstanding man's transgression) but only observed and therefore by man's
diligence may be restored to the full sufficiency of man's use.

12. That the natural goodn^s and quallityes of every horse, how young or old
so ever he be, may be know^e, and is herein perfectly let forth how to be
known, without proof or practice, only upon the view.

13. The true description of such Horses and Mares, as are to breed perfect
Colts, nearest to the first creation.

14. The age that such Horses and Mares are by nature fit to beget, and bring
forth colts in perfection.

15 The means how to prepare and keep them before they come to the action of
begetting, so as their Col^s may be in perfection of natural goodness, and that
without such observation they bring forth Iades.

16 The time when, how and where they are to do the action.

17 The manner how to keep the mare after conception, and how to preserve
the Colt in the womb in perfection of natural goodness, until it be so^led.

18 The manner how to use them when they are foaled, and still to continue and
preserve them in natural goodness.

19 The manner how to teach a Colt to amble without handling.

20 The description of a perfect stable.

21 The manner of perfect shooing.

22 The manner of taming Colts.

23 The art of stiding.

24 The true and perfect diet of Horses for preservation of health and
continuance.

25 The definition of sickness, the cause of all sickness and death, and the
causes of long life.

26 The means how to keep them from inward diseases, and outvvard Sorances.

27 The manner of curing of all diseases, the signs to know them, and the
causes thereof.

From the judicial reading and consideration of the whole discourse of this
work, there appears the knowledge of these causes. viz:
1. Wherefore one Horse is better then another in his action.

2 Wherefore two Colts begotten and brought forth by one Horse, and one mare
the one is better then the other.

3 Wherefore all Horses in their young, middle, declining, and decrepite age,
do differ in quality of action.

4 Wherefore some Horses are of imperfect shape, and some of perfect shape.

5 Wherefore some Horses are of long continuance for service, and some for a
short time.

6 Wherefore Horses of one and the same proportion and color, the one is good
and the other had.

7 Wherefore there are so many Iades and so fevv good Horses.

8 Wherefore there are so many differences of good and bad actions of horses.

9 Wherefore Horses do evermore decline to imperfection, notwithstanding
natures resistance and man's aid.

10 Wherefore horses cannot alvvaies live, though there were no sickness
allotted unto them.

FINIS.
Admonitions to the Reader.
FIrst read, but not with preindicate opinion, remembering that he which hastily
judges, speedily repents: Tamen si iudicare velis, sic iudica, quasi mox ab
alioiudicandus.

2. Secondly, read all from the first word to the last, and do it not cursorily
or speedily, but advisedly and with deliberation: for a cursory and tumultuary
reading, does ever make a confused memory, a troubled utterance, and an
incertaine judgment: and therefore he that will mount high, must ascend by
degrees.

3. Thirdly, read not with much intermission of time, neither at any time much,
least when ye read the last part, you have forgotten the first. Nam quo se plus
recepit animus, hoc se magis laxat: for the more the mind sudainly receives,
the more it loses and fre^eth it self.

4. Fourthly, read it often although you find Paruum in magno, when it should
have been magnum in paruo: because Ars long, vita breuis, a great task but a
short time: which don, make practice of your knowledge, for eueryman must first
study before he begin to dispute.

5. Fifthly, esteem not your self to know all when you know a little: for the
Synecodoche and figurative knowledge (taking part for the whole) is no other
then to have the tongue only tipped with the words of Art, but no judgment in
the Art, for it fares with men's fantasy, as it does with their eye sight in
an unequal distance from the object, which being far removed from their gross
and narrow capacity, it comes into their conceit as things of little moment;
which if their dim and weak sight were able in the visial line to behold in
the divine nature, they would confess the surpassing excellency, and exceeding
difficulty: but the not acknowledging their own ignorance, is the deprivation
of the true testimony of their i^dgement.

6. Sixthly, because this whole work takes his grounds from nature, how to
know the perfection of the primary creation, how to breed the^ acordingly, and
to preserve them in their perfection, and thereby refelleth the errors in the
whole Art and practice of Horsemanship, I have purposely omitted to ad any
marginal directious to stand as Mercuries statues in high ways of old
pointing the finger to consequents, or to make any Index or table thereof:
therefore raise thy hopes (thy only sweet and firm Companion) it is the last
thing that leaves thee and the highest things it promises thee: it makes
all labors supportable, and all difficulties conquerable, and will evermore
remain unto thee a sweet Nurse to suckle thy memory till it be strongin it
self to carry about it the beautiful burden of knowledge.

7 Seauenthly and lastly, it may seem that I have made too large a discourse
herein; the cause thereof is, for that no former writer has ever unfolded the
true secrets of Nature. The same being dark and enigmatical to common sense, I
was enforced to manifest the same by reasons, the which being manifested,
brings understanding, and then understanding setleth opinion, the which
opinion being able to definecertainty of truth, there follows true judgment,
without which al reading is unprofitable.

Pro capta lectoris habeat sua fata libellis.
THE Perfection of Horsemanship, drawn from Nature, Art and Practice.
CHAP. 1. Notwithstanding the excellency of man's Creation, yet must Art be
used to gain obedience of the creature.
ALlthough the Omnipotent Creator after he had made this visible world, made
man, placing him king and Emperor over the same, and of al things therein
contained, where, by contemplation of the excellency of the work, he might not
only admire and reverence the Creator, but also acknowledge his clemency
toward him his creature, and although in the creation by his instance of word,
he made al things in their perfection, and that in the Creation of man, he made
greater deliberation, for having created all other creatures with bodies and
faculties of life together, yet to make the excellency and dignity of the
creation of man greater, he fashioned the body of man only apart, to plant
therein the soul by inspiration, showing that the soul that he inspired in
the body of man is not taken of the earth, or of the elements, to die as the
body does, but in his creation he breathed in his face the breath of life,
Genesis 2.7.
whereby man was made a living soul: and although all other creatures were
subject to corruption, and man to a perpetuity of felicity to eternal life,
and that the excellency of the creation of other creatures, has ravished the
admiration of former ages, and that great imagination is to be made of man, for
that under his feet all are subjected, and for his only use and service
created and still preserned, and that although his habitation be on earth, yet
by his understanding the course of the firmament, the depth of the Sea, and the
incredible height of the Sky, he contemplateth as near unto him, Insita sunt
nobis omnium artia^ ac virtutum semina, magisterque ex oc ulto deus producit
ingenium.
neither does the darkness of the air confound his mind, the thickenes of the
earth-let his affection, nor the profoundnes of water hinder his desire, and
that the knowledge of all things remains in man, so that man cannot but
acknowledge man the finder out of the cause of all things, and his diligence
the consummation of al arts: yet nevertheless, man must consider that by his
disobedience, he has lost al obedience, which by original creation was subject
unto him, and that now the obedience of all creatures must be attained by Art,
and the same preserved in vigor by use and practice, Dissinition of Art.
Nam ars infaecunda est sine vsa and vsus temerarius sine art, and al Art is
no other then a habit, working by true reason, consisting of many things
gathered by experience, profitable to the use man, not inheritable to man being
obscured by the scourge of his own trangression, although the virtues thereof
are planted in his original Nature, so as he shall evermore desire the true
knowledge and practice thereof, because nature still desires restitution to
his prymary perfection.

CHAP. 2 Who are fit to learn Horsemanship.
IT shall be worthy consideration to understand that to attain to the
perfection of this Art requisite for the best use of the commonweal, Nisi in
us sit qui doceat in vanum doctoris lingua laborat. Gregory.
it is fit that he that shall exercise the same, bear a natural inclination
thereunto, which if Art and practice be reaued from the science is little worth,
but being united and conjoined, there shall recide the rarest Artists of the
world, and their works of greatest perfection, and so have all the ancient
Philosophers found by experience, that where nature does not dispose an Artist,
it has been a superfluous labor to toil in the rules of Art, Quia natura
nihil agit sine aeternis consiliis, because nature does not work but by the
Author of nature: and this advice Galen reports to have been given to his
father, when he first set him to the study of physic, and Plato when he was
to teach grave doctrine, always made choice of such Scholars, as by nature he
reputed most fi^ thereunto: for although there be many differences of wit in
mankind, yet Vnum semper advnum destinasse, (...) One instrument to one use
one wit is always fatal to one thing: Ei vna ars vn^ingenio satis est, and
one art is sufficient to one wit, and one only wit with pre-eminence can fall
but to one man's lot: for God being the Author of nature, has not given to each
man more then one difference of wit, being a miracle if he give more in an
eminent degree: Nusquam deueniet qui quot Giderit sequitur calls Varro:
for as that man that runs into every path he sees, shall never come to
his iourneys end: so he that strives to know all arts, shall never attain the
perfection of any one, wherefore this natural difference must be discerned, if
you will reduce Horsemanship to perfection, which otherwise will be as
impossible as for a Midwife to make a woman to be delivered that is not with
Child: for man's wit holds his proportion with knowledge, as the earth does
with seed, wherein is a natural disposition, because every earth cannot
without destruction produce every sort of seed: and nature is conditioned
like unto a Stepmother, which is only careful to bring up those children
herself breeds, which moved Cicero to say, what else is it (to resist
nature) but after the manner of Giants, to fight with the Gods, the which who
so labors to overcome, shall rest vanquished by her.

CHAP. 3. Who are fit to teach Horsemanship.
IT is to be considered, that the Master which teaches the Art, have both
manner and method in teaching, whose understanding must be sound and firm,
least it befall the Scholars as it did certain Physicians, whom Galen
convinced by many reasons and experiments, showing their practice false and
prejudicial to man's health, in whose presence their tears fell from their
eyes, curssing their hard hap in having so bad masters when they were
learners: so is it also requisite that the study of Art be in order,
beginning at the principles, and passing through the midst to the end, not to
have many lessons at one time of diverse matters, and to carry them fardled
together, whereby a mass of things being in the understanding, afterward
coming to practice, they have not a use of their precepts of art to assign
them a place convenient: for in the same manner every thing is learned, so is
it preserved in memory: which moved Galen to write a book to teach the
manner how to read his works, least the Physicians might be entangled in
confusion: and therefore it behooves every Artist not only to approve his
natural inclination, and the natural capacity of the Scholar, but also that
knowledge have his due digestion to take deep root: for as the body is not
maintained by the quantity it eats, but by that which the stomach
digesteth, even so the knowledge of this Art is not attained by much teaching
or much reading in a little time, but by that practice joined thereunto, which
by little and little it conceiueth and chueth upon: for the wit of man does
daily better, by process of time, and attaineth to that which formerly it
neither understood nor conceived.

CHAP. 4 That the nature of the horse that is to be taught be truly
understood.
LAstly it behooves that the nature of the Horse (being the subject where-upon
Art and practice does work) be sufficiently known, because the knowledge of
all things is such, Potentia a natu^a actu^ a ^o^untate.
that unless the nature of them be known, they cannot be truly and
perfectly known, being a sundry diversity of natures, as the things be
sundry whereof they be, because as that is only natural in them, as it is of
them, so does it declare the nature and natural quality of them, nam ex arena
nullum funiculum nectes, neque ex pumice oleum ant aquam vlla art exprimes,
For art cannot make ropes of sand, neither draw oil or water out of ^^ints, Et
nulla ars humana and licitapossit contra naturam essicere quicquam: and no
lawful and human Art can effect any thing against nature, neither can the
Offices and duties of Art be performed, because all Art works by true
reason, Difinition of reason.
and reason has his work and being, from nature, and is the perfection,
center, and the limits of all mediocritie, beyond which it is not lawful to
decline neither in too much nor too little: Nam quicquid moderamine caret, Quid
natura nisideus, et di^ina ratio tot^ mundo and ^ar tibus cius enserta.
id in pessimam degenerat speciem, whatsoever does want the mean does
degenerate into the worst kind. I then conclude that the natural inclination
of the Ryder, the sufficiency of the teacher, and the nature of the subject,
truly understood with the progress use and practice therein, the full perfection
of this Art will be approved.

CHAP. 5. An incytation to all men to love Horsemen and Horses, and thereby the
Art.
NOw for as much as the sinews of wisdom are not to beleene lightly, Qui (...)
est (...).
because wisdom comprehends nothing but certain and undoubted knowledge,
which proceeds from the beginning and cause to the knowledge and effect of
the thing, and from the effect and event into the knowledge of the cause; let
no man be persuaded that has true knowledge, that a thing is otherwise then
he knows it to be, the which being grosted in man, they rob and deprive
themselves of it, who without judgment allow, and approone the opinion of the
Elders, and do suffer themselves like sheep to be led by others directions,
who at the only hearing of Ancients and Elders, think it not posible for
them to know more, or for the other not to err: whereupon Ari^^t in his first
book of Pol^^t^ues says, As they have ^eft to pose itie that which they have
sound false, why should not those that have sound our the truth, leave their
better things to them that sha^^ come after? and seeing the omnipotent Creator
created man upright, directly tending to heaven, and all Plants opposite with
their heads, and roots within the earth, and horses, and all other beasts in
the middle betwixt man and Plant, going as it were athwart, so that man (the
universal king of these lower parts) walking with an upright countenance as a
master in his house, rulling all beasts with obedience and following will to
man their commander; springing from their natural affection to account the
mind being the efficient cause of their affection to action: (the mind being
the efficient cause of their affection) it is a consequent in reason, that man
by his knowledge and practice for the obteyning of the motion of their
affection, labor by art and practice to gain the mind and natural
disposition of the subject, to endure their being, which the god of nature has
given, whereunto every creature desires restitution. All which principally
consists in the true knowledge of nature: for who sees not that where nature
is bound, how it desires to be loosened, The works of nature
and wherein it is decayed how it labors to be restored, and how all
creatures in the world rejoice at their returning again to nature, and how the
ordinance of all things is to have joined the end to the beginning, and to
make the course of it stable? Not to change from his proper and origionall
kind, do we not see the tree, bird, sea, Sun, Stones, Fire, and every creature
preserve themselves in the natural course of their first and primarie creation,
and have an ynated hatred of all things that be enemies to the same? Therefore
whatsoever creature is to remain for durable, must now, by man's industry and
the help of his own nature (so far as lies in the power of man) be brought
to his former restitution, and for this cause has nature hid the knowledge and
truth of all things in the heart of man, which moved Plato to say, That
whatsoever men learned, they do but record them as things forgotte: Shall man
then (so divine a Creature) so much degenerate, to become so slymy and earthy,
not to awake his thoughts from the sleep of idleness, to embrace the true
knowledge of nature, Art and practice of Horsemanshippe, tending so much to the
honor of the King, and preservation of the whole body of the commonweal? can
any calling be more noble then a good Horseman? are they not tryumphers both
in Camps and Courts? does any earthly thing breed more wonder, and has not
the same from all beginning been hereditarie in the most noble persons? how
then, Fascientia nobilior quae Gersatur circa nobilius subiectu^:
shall not that action be accounted most best and honorable, that is
evermore performed by the best? wherefore let the pleasure in the exercise of
your minds be so cherished, that without persuasion of the excellencye of the
knowledge, your selves may be persuaded by knowing the fruits of knowledge,
Patente indisposito, frustra intitur vis agentis, None will be taught if he be
not moved with desire to be taught: and as Aristotle says, It is not (...)
but (...) must be the fruit, and how (...) can be without being moved to
practice, is not hard to consider, but no doubt that man which sees the virtue
cannot but be ravished with the love of her beauty: for as the Image of such
actions stirs and instructs the mind with desire to be worthy, so it
informs with knowledge and practice how to be worthy: have not Horsemen from
all beginning been accounted egregia et imidiate regni membra. The most
excellent and principal members of the kingdom, and such as the Majesty both
of King and kingdom depend upon? What else moved Seuerus the Emperor to call
them Senatoru^ seminarium, the nurserie of the state? and as men (especial
above others) evermore called to the great and solemn meetings of the
kingdom: Comitis apel^ la^^^g^n (...) and pr^ (...) Co^^^^ laluls (...)
^hitter.
is not a Dake called Dux a dncendo exercitu, of being the general leader of
the Army? and a Marquis called M^chio of this word M^cha, which signifies a
horse? for markg^ase signifies equitun. praefeclus, the general of the
Horsemen: and Marsteller the master of the Horse, on whom all the company of
horsemen called Equestres depended, who in former ages have twice in the year
celebrated their feasts, called Equiria, horsemens feasts, viz: On the
thir^^nth of March, and the eighteenth of April. And the Romens in their
government did ensrancheis Horsemen with many liberties and immunities: and as
an ensign of their fame, appointed to those horsemen called Equestres, the
wearing of gold Rings, naming them Equites aurati, the golden Knights, and
afterward for their more honor gave them ornawenta deaur^ta gilded ornaments:
If I should speak of ancient Histories, who are the witness of former times,
the light of truth, the life of remembrance, the mistress of life and messenger
of old season, how memorable is Salon on theme st^^enowned king, who kept
twelve thousand Horsen^en? Phrao, Corncl^^ Ta ^^us Oldendorpuis (...) de^tar.
so. 133
invincible Alexander, ^ulius C^^lar King ^ycus, Bellerophon Son of G^oucus
King of Eplera who ^lew two monsters, Solym^^ and Chymera who rid swift P^g^sus
into a mountain of Iabia, called Chimera, and of C^ius C^lar, in the time that
he sauoured M^rius against Silla: who to show the excellency of his
horsemanship, caused his hands to be bound behind him, and by the only keeping
of his knees close to the horse with the small motion thereof without bridle
and saddle perfectly to stay, stop, and turn: and of many other kings, the
memorable records of whose excellent actions would ravish the Reader with
admiration, how horsemen should become so wonderful among men, So may I not
forget the worthiness of the Horse, from whom the worthiness of man proceeds,
whose antiquity cannot be blotted out of memory, being originally created
with man for his only use and service. It is said in the 21. of Proverbs, that
the Horse was prepared for the day of battle: Bello armantur equs bella haec
^n minta ninantur.
and in the 1. of Kings the 4. and 2. Croni. 9. that Solomon kept 40. thousand
horses for war, and likewise many places of the Scriptures make mention of
the great provision of Horses for wars, and to illustrate their excellency,
appears in the 39. of Job. How the strength of the Horse comes from the
Lord, and with neying he covers his neck, and that his neying is fearful,
that he diggeth with his feet in the valley, and reioyseth in his strength:
he goes forth to meet the Harnest man, he meeketh at fear, and is not
affraide, and turns not his back from the Sword, though the Quiver rattle
against him, the glittering Spear and the Shield: he swalloweth the ground
with swiftness and rage, and believes not it is the voice of the Trumpet: he
says among the Trumpets ha, ha, he smells the battle a far off, and the
noise of the Captains, and the shouting, so that there cannot be any doubt of
their excellency, being from the testimony of eternal truth. Besides many
testimonies that record the greatness of their same and worthy actions, for
which they gained great solemnities of their burialls, and remembrances brances
of their worthiness.

As amongst the Persians, who after the death of their excellent Horses, buried
them and made Sepulchers and monuments over them, and as Pliny reports, the
Pyramides did the like. Also Plutarch says, that Simon of Athens, for the
great victory that he got by his Horses in the wars in Olimpio, after their
deaths made sepulchers and monuments over them. Likewise Alexander for the
renown of Bucephale his Horse, made him a Sepulcher and Monument, builded a
City, and walled it about, and named it after his horses name, as a memorial
of his fame: and as Pliny records, Caesar the Dictator caused the picture of
his Horse to be set up before the house of Venus. And likewise the horse of
Augustus Caesar, was buried with an honorable monument over him: And Dion
Cassius reports, that Adrian the Emperor, after the death of his horse
Borischemius, buried him and made a Princely Sepulcher, and a stately pillar
over him, with Epigrams about it, graven in stone.

And Julius Caesar (as Tranquillius affirms) erected a Monument over his
horse, with Ensigns, to signify their dominion over the whole world. Again,
some have so loved their horses for their excellencies, as they have caused
them to be buried in their own burials, as Lethurgus, the horse of Hypp immon:
so likewise Arsuitus the horse of Biornon his Son, was buried with his
Master: so likewise, as Caelius records in his 26. book, Cap. 8. Panthenia
and Eropha 2. famous Mares, were solemnly buried with their masters: and
likewise some horses for their great swiftnes in running, were buried, and
Epitaphes made over them, as Lampon, Pancates, Pelorus, Campasus, Lamus,
Sicoris, Ileridas Thereon, Rhebam, Aethon and others, whereof I recite some few.

Prestantia Celebrum.
Evolat ante omnes rapidoque per era cursu,
Caliacus Lampon fugit atque ingentia tranat,
Exultans sprciaet ventos post tergarelinquit,
Sed proximus ibat.
Astur, Pancates patrum frons alba tenebat
Insigne and patrio spes omnis concolor albo.
Again, some horses have been so loving, to weep at the death of their
Masters, Virg: lib. 11
and some with grief to dye, as Aethon, the horse of Palantis, the son of
Euander, who at his masters funeral powered out tears.

Post Bellator equus positis insignibus Aethon
Is lachrymans guttisque humectat grandibus or a. etc.
Nichodemus king of Bithinia, Plin: lib, 8 cap. 42
had a horse who for the grief of the death of his Master would never eat
till he died as Gellius records. And Antiochus had a horse, who when his
Master was dead, for the grief thereof cast himself to the ground, and
casting out his feet presently dyed: And Dionisius the Tyrant, had a horse,
who being forsaken by his ungrateful master, followed him by his footesteps to
sinde him out: and Dyon also reports, that the Emperor Caius Caligula, had a
horse named Vel^cissimus, which he so loved, that he had him very often to
dine and sup with him at his table, and caused him to be served with barley in
a great vessel of gold, and to drink white wine in a Caudrone of gold:
amongst which notable remembrances, I may not omit for the honor of this
kingdom, the monument of Arundel Castle, which Beauis the honorable Earl of
South-hampton builded for a monument of his horse called Arundell, for saving
him from many perils: but because some will report self-love better then any
guilding to make that glorious wherein himself is party, I will not as the
proverb says, aquam in Pelagus effundere, cast water into the occan: neither
in re non dubia vti ratione no^ necessaria having infinite worthy testimonies
of histories and holy writ (cuius spiritus nequeest me^dax nequemordax) besides
the daily assura^ces of every well minded mi^s practice wherefore seeing the
power, justice and providence of the creator, and the weakness of man in so
small consideration of so excellent a creature, as also the gentillitie and
nobleness of the beast so manifest, whose heart is so highly set, that for to
dye he will not leave his master in danger, but has such love with
fiercenes, and such fiercenes with love, which prodigal nature has given him,
by which we see him like a thunder, break the press of the men of war, murder
and kill those resisting his master, and letting him in his way, and finally
never to cease his violence, till either life be lost, or victory obtained. I
hope there is not any mind so base as to become a stepmother to Horse and
Horsemanship and whereas I have made show but of a spark of the excellency of
man and Horse in several division, If I should now join the excellency of
them both in one, and thereof only gather the Tithe, how excellent think you
were that conjunction, where such simpathy of obedience and reciprocal love is
each to the other in all motions: each accompaning the other in skill and ready
attendance to the skill, as your eye and sense shall not apprehend, but one
sense and one will by individual connection of two bodies in one, and with such
pleasant motions, as if you stedfastlye behold them, you would think them
chayned to your looks, and all their actions in such due time and measure, as
no Artist can observe better: the man evermore commanding the horse as his
own limbs, the voice, hand and wand, leg and spur, with such pleasing
grace, as when correction is done, it is so secret as eye cannot discern, nor
horse seem to complain, which would not only ravish the beholders senses,
but make all acknowledge man and horse, to sacrifice themselves to man's
pleasing delights: all which (though they may seem more then wonderful) yet
(because wonder is the daughter of ignorance) know that wonders are no wonders
in such wonderful creatures: but fearing I have run too long a cariere in
this matter (being unworthy to speak of their worthes) I think fit herein to
give my pen a full stop, hoping and heartily praying, that the famous Court of
our most renowned and gracious King may be as well replenished with horsemen, as
the court of King Diomsius was with Philosophers, of whom it is recorded, that
his whole Court through the greatness of their multitude, was replenished with
the dust of their feet.

And lastly, because I will (vno multa comprehendere,) entreat the Reader, that
for as much as the excellencye of perfect horse and perfect horsemen is so
excellent, ancient and universal, that no nation does despise it, nor
barbarous nation without it, since neither the description, nor end contains
any evil, the thing distributed cannot be evil, since the effects be so good,
as to teach goodness, and delight to the beholders and learners of it, since
the honor of the King, preservation of his kingdom, and the terror of the
enemies depends upon it, since the holy Scriptures wherein is no untruth
has recorded it most honorable to all posterity, to think as I think, and
I think I think truly, the laurel crown appointed for Tryumphant Captains
does most worthily honor the horsemans Triumph.

CHAP. 6. That the ancient writers and practicioners, do approve the goodness
of horses from the countries they are bred. viz. from Air, Water, Ground
Complexion Color, Mark and Shape: and first of the Countries, and so in order
to the rest.
1. Arabia. 2. Thessalia in Grecia 3. Naples. 4. Barbary. 5. Turkey 6. Spain
7. Sardinia and Corsica 8. Hungary 9. High Almaine. 10. Flaunders. 11.
Swethland. 12. Ireland 13 Friesland England Scotland and France, are not
mentioned but in this manner, viz: No Palfrey to England No Gelding to Scotland
No Hackney to Britain.


The demonstration of their errors, and the confutation thereof.
OF these Countries the proverb is veryfied: tot capita tot sensus, and
multac^pita sine sensu, so many men so many minds, and many without
understanding, for some hold only the Neapolitan, Arabian, and Grecian to be
best, some the Neapolitan, Barbary and Irish: some the Neapolitan Almaine,
Hungarian, Flanders, Spain, and Irish: some the Turk, and some name England,
Scotland and Britain, with a medley amongst others: it shall be therefore fit
to consider the causes of their conceits taken from the perfection of water,
perfection of Air, and perfection of Ground, whereunto they do only
appropriate the goodness of horses, and after to the rest. And for as much as
the ancient writers and practitioners do only approve those Countries,
these questions may be reasonably demanded: first whether all the horses that
are bredde within the same Countries are good horses, or whether in some
particular part of those countries, because they do advise breeders that will
have perfect races, to make choice of those Horses and Mares, from, and out of
those Countries: if then they mean that all those countries be excellent,
then it may be reasonably collected, that they would have us persuaded that
all Horses bred in those countries are good and excellent, which being
admtited, little will be the use of the knowledge, of Nature, Art, and practice,
but only to gain their obedience fit for the use of man, for where all is
good, there cannot be deceit in choosing, but if in some particular place of
every of those countries they are all excellent horses, then were it expedient
for them to show, and for us to understand where those particular places are,
and whether in those particular places there are not some Iades as well as good
horses, and also to set down by special direction how to know those horses
that are bred in such particular place of goodness, and the especial and
particular ruls that do approve their goodness, and the rather because most
men even of greatest place do approve the goodness of horses of other countries
much before their own, and so might al men be assured of the goodness of
their choice, otherwise the doubtfulnesse of the words makes question, sed cum
in verbis nullaest ambiguit as non debet admitti voluntatis question, But where
in the words there is no ambiguitie, there a voluntary question ought not to
be admitted: also it would be considered whether any one of those countries or
any one part of any of those countries, having most excellent Air, Water,
Ground, and so good as the wit of man is able to express, can altar a Race
of Iades to good Horses, or whether they be only good that are there begotten
and bredde, and no other, but because the only fame of those countries has
sounded it self over the world, and the opynion thereof rooted in most men's
hearts, being but fame and windy record, I will conclude with the Ciuilian,
fama per se parum momenti habet ad probandum, only fame is a small moment of
proof.

Again, it were fit that some cause might be expressed, wherefore England,
Scotland and France, having no doubt in account of reason, in some parts
thereof as perfect Air, water and ground, and yet not numbered amongst those
countries formerly mentioned, to have good horses, sed ex viciosa definitione
non procedit valida argumentatio, of an imperfect or untrue difinitition, a
true argument cannot be collected: and yet it is not to be denied, but almost
all the horsemen and breeders within this kingdom do much insist herein, so as
if a Neapolitan, Arabian, Barbary or such like be brought into England, how
inestimable he is valued, prised, and sold, and how all men desire him, who
can doubt? a verry strong implication to all ignorant men of an excellent
horse, as also that those countries have not any bad, such is our weakness
thorough want of knowledge and true judgment, that we do not only allow both
horses and horsemen of all other countries (though our own far more
excellent,) and thereby brand our own country and people with all
imperfection, being only carried with the Ayerie stroke of feuery censure, not
knowing the goodness or badnes of their natural quallities other then by the
name of the country. The cause herein cannot be had, Difficile est ^t bono
peragantur exitu, quae malosunt inchoata principio.
for ignoratis principijs nemo potest artem percipere, those that are ignorant
of the beginning shall never truly conceive the art, and therefore my desire
is, quae probat euentis perniciosa fieri ea debent reuecare, etiamsi initio
profuerunt, what things in success prove hurtful, let those be recalled,
although they were profitable in the beginning. If one should affirm that the
horses bredde in the north part of England (nay, but named so to be) are they
not more accounted, and better in estimation, and of all men so esteemed, and
more valuable then horses bred in any other part of the kingdom? and does any
man doubt that horses brought out of other countries, are not much more in
estimation and value, then the horses bred in the north part of this kingdom?
and can this supposed excellency be taken from any other cause then from Air,
Water and Ground? let us then consider and examine, whether this be an
argument from no cause to a cause: which if it be, then have all learned,
accoumpted the same absurd, for by distinguishing, inferring, framing of
reasons, and judging, we attain to understand the truth, and to discover
falsehood, and therefore it shall not be amiss to enter into the particular
examination of those so great and motive causes, where in the truth of the
controversy consists, and from whence the truth thereof proceeds
accordingly: for the true ways to come unto the knowledge of all things, are
from the causes and maximees to the knowledge of the effects, and by the
effects and consequents to the causes.

CHAP. 7. Of the Air.
FIrst of the Air, I deny that any horse can absolutely obtain or be
deprived of his original and natural quality, by the goodness or badnesse of
any Air whatsoever: although he alter his health, or obscure the quality for a
time, yet does it not deprive him of his natural quality, but such as he had
from his Syer and dam, such will he be unto his death, although by good or
evil usage, or education he may be either helped or hindered: for the best
physicians and Philosophers, do hold that all creatures receive their
conditions and qualities at the time of their framing and not at their birth,
for otherwise nature were not perpetual, so as the air where they are bred
cannot be any special inherent cause of natural goodness or badnesse, et res
quaelibet dominatur a suacausa, and every thing is governed of his own cause:
then if no cause of natural goodness, not any natural effect thereof can
follow: the which if it be not natural, then not perpetual but accidental,
whereof art takes no knowledge, so as the force thereof cannot deprive
general nature, for it is a general rule amongst all learned, quod accidens
in corpore nullum, pars est corporis naturalis, that an accident in the body is
no part of the natural body.

CHAP. 8. Of the Water.
SEcondly of the water, which all men know to be a heavy element, cold and
moist, and yet the water cannot aptly be said a mere Element of Water, being
mixed and vnpure, as our experience does teach us, with Brimstone, Allom, salt,
and such like, etc. no more then smoke can be said of it self to be a pure
clement, but this we know, that it is by nature cold and moist, and the power
and virtue thereof, does mollysie and yield nourishment more then the air to
the body, and therefore does te^perate and moderate the element of fire in the
body, but the same cannot any ways deprive original nature, without
deprivation of y^ subject, being co^pounded of the elements, whereof water is
one, (although not such as we see, except it do exceed the compass of natures
mixture in the creation of the creature, for if material water should alter
the nature of the Beast from the quality of his original creation, how
should he be fit for the use of man, when necessity shall enforce him to
drink of all waters? and thereby have several alterations in quality, and
therefore that being no principal cause there cannot be any effect of the
alteration of original nature from the creation.

CHAP. 9. Of the Ground.
THe third and the last is the ground which is a heavy Element, cold and
dry, and may well be said to be the mother of all bodies, the which
(according to the Mathematickes be divided into mountains, Hills, Valleys,
Fields, Meadows, and such like, the cause whereof the great Floods and Winds,
in the time of the general inundation of the whole world, have so erected as
some learned do maintain, and in the first creation to be otherwise: Now that
the dryness or wetnesse, the stony or shade, hills or dales, should make a new
alteration of nature, other then for perfection or imperfection of health, or
for other accidental matter, as the Fens and marshes do witness, I cannot
find reason to persuade, although I admit the goodness of the ground, a
means to many good purposes, for preservation of the temperature in the
composition of the creature, and then being no alteration of nature, other then
accidental, which has not perpetuity, I hold the same no such cause
whereupon any such effect follows, and consequently that the goodness of
horses is not appropriate more to one country then to another, neither is, or
can be any assurance of the natural goodness of any horse, for as ashes though
they be compounded of the 4. elements, yet no natural agent in the world can
corrupt them, or take from the^ their quality agreeable to their nature,
because nature left to her liberty, and to her own order without oppressing
her, and turns by little and little to recover the figur she had before,
which could not be, if the same were once deprived of his original quality,
which it took at the time of creation, for nature never passes from one
extreme to another but by the mean.

CHAP. 10. Of the color of horses.
NOw are we to proceed to the examination of the certainty of the knowledge
that may be taken from his color, which all men most embrace, whereof my
purpose is first to name those which they call the best. viz. Brown bay,
dapplegray, black full of silver hairs, black like a moore: the Roane bright
bay, dark bay, bright sorrel, flea-bitten, whitelyard, etc. The ancient
writers tell us that every horse is colored as he is complexioned, and
according to complexion he is good or evil conditioned, and as he does
participate of the Elements, so he is complexioned, and this is the Topica,
vel seeds argumenti, the place or seat of the argument: affirming, that if he
have most of the element of the fire, then he is choleric, and therefore
light, hot, and fiery, and of no great force as the bright sorrel: but if of
the element of water, then dull, slow, heavy, cold of nature, and therefore
most commonly milk white: but if of the element of the Air, then more full of
blood, sanguine, nimble, pleasant, and of color bay: but if of the earth,
then melancholy, faint-hearted, sad and heavy, and of color dark, dun,
russet, or black: and thereby seem to conclude, that colors are the
demonstrations of goodness of quality: so as by these and such like reasons,
by continuance of time, our selves being desirous evermore to maintain and
uphold that we first receive, as the new pot that retains the taste of the
first licour it was first seasoned with, not having judgment truly to
discern the same, being a fundamental point of their doctrine, In this Art is
to be examined from reasons of truth, and confutation of cavil, and therefore
from right institution.

I will begin with difinition, because a man may be well said to know, when
he understands what it is that he does handle: I define complexion thus:
Complexto est qualitas que ex action ad inuicem, and passione contrariarum
qualitatum in elementis inventarum resaltat, complexion is a quality or
condition which does rebound or move out of the joint action and passion of
contrariety of the qualities, moved in the elements: of which four
complexions, (whose fathers are the four Elements) there is a mixture of them
all, in all the parts of the body, yet diversely more inclyned some to one,
some to another complexion, according to their diversity of their uses, that
of these discords, a perfect harmony may be made up, for a perfect complexion:
but when any part of the body goes to be distempered, and leads to an
extreamitie beyond the compass of natures temperate mixture, then cures of
contarie qualities to the intemperate inclination of that part, may be both
necessary and helpful for the strengthening and assisting nature in the
expulsion of her enemies: and I do grant, as the learned do say, that there
are four complexions, and likewise four elements, but I deny that every
horse is colored as he is complexioned: for if the diversity of colors of
horse hair should be a true demonstration of complexions, there would be
many more complexions then there are elements: and although it be true that
horses have complexions, and also true, touching the compositions of the
elements, yet it does not follow, neither do I admit that the color of
their hair is a demonstration of their complexions, or that they be colored
according to the temperature of the four elements: for the diversities of
their colors, are to every man's eyes witnesses of more colors then there are
complexions: besides, The Moore is black. The Europian white. The American
tawny. The East Indi^n^ed. Distmouish those co^^lexions^y the have. The cause
of the color of have.
horses do almost yearly alter their colors from the colors they wre of at
the time of their foaling, wherein also should be alteration of complexion: for
we do see the color of man's hair does not truly manifest his complexion,
for that there are several men both of black, red, brown and white hair,
and yet every one of their complexions are perfect Sanguine: so as the
diversity of color of man's hair does not declare the diversity of man's
complexion: for the natural cause of the color of man's hair, is the gross
vapor which arises from disgestion, that the brain makes at the time of his
nourishment: and look what color is of the member, such is that of his
excrements, if the brain in composition partake much of fleame, the hair in
growth is white: if much choler, saffron colored, etc. And moreover
Hipocrates says, that the color of man's hair, may alter with the air of
the country: wherefore then should it be admitted in horses, to have their
color of hair according to their complexion or temperature? and if in horses,
why not in Kine, Sheep, Hogs, Dogs, and such like? and seeing that every man's
experience approves the contrary, why should I not say with Cicero,
Experientia magis quam discendo cognoui: I have known more by experience then
by learning. Furthermore, if that his hair should be colored according to his
complexion, the which I do not admit, but if it were admitted, yet how shall
it be proved, that according to his color he is well or evil conditioned?
For if by condition they mean his good or bad action, and the goodness of his
work and quality, then is their proposition also untrue: for every creature
works according to his nature, and all learning does deny, that complexion
and nature are in all parts one and the same: for the learned do know that the
temperature of the Elements is termed Nature, and that is the schoolemaister
that does teach the sensitive soul of the Horse what to do: Animi mores
corporis tempe ratur imsequu^tur^
and according to that temperature does one brute beast better perform the
works of his kind then another, but that shall never be found true, in
respect of the color or that the temperature of the Elements is manifested in
his color: again some Horses are of many colors, and then, acording to
their rule, of many complexions: and if complexion were admitted simply for
Nature, then by consequence of reason, of many natures, and so of many diverse
and several works, and quality of works: Notwithstanding, for further
examination of their infallible rules, wherewith the whole world is blinded, let
us come to the use practice and daily experience of colors: and let our great
love to colors, set spectacles upon them, to make their excellency appear
greater, clearer and more glorious then they are, and examine the most best
and generally admitted color, called Brown baye, which is termed the best at
al assayes: and which the Frenchmen do call Bayarie loyal: trusty Bayard, being
noted the general and chief Captain of all colors, and let me ask any
Horseman, in whom knowledge and practice does reside, whether all Horses of
that color without exception, are good, if al be not, then the rule for
color fails, and then by consequence, the color for hair proceeds not
from complexion, for if all baye color be principally good, then whosoever
has lived, and has his sight to know baye color, needs no further or more
knowledge to know a good Horse, and if that color be only the best, then
no Horses so good as those.

An other question I would demand, whether there are not as good Horses of
other colors, the which if it be admitted, then the color from complexion
fails.

Moreover if yet you rest not satisfied, I will set down the words of two
learned writers, that after long discourse thereof, say that de pilo diuersi
diuersa sentiunt of the colors of hair diverse do diversely think. And Ovid
and Virgill two famous learned men, are direct opposite each to the other in
opinion of color of horses: the one of them affirming the white color best,
and the other denying the same, being a color according to the rule of
complexion the most worst: and yet I could give excellent examples of the
goodness of white horses, but the more this cause is handled, the more the
error of color is manifest: but as I have said for this matter experientia
omnium rerum certissima moderatrix, experience is the best moderator of this
controversy. Now if you will yield your self to hear the original of these
former errors, understand that the best writers hereof have been much abused,
for Opianus says, that colors of horses were chosen and maintained for
hunting of wild beasts, because (says he) the color of some horses is
hateful to some beasts more then to others: and upon such like causes have
the learned writers allowed colors, leaving to posterity their opinions what
colors they thought best for such actions: since which, some writers seeming
(or at least making show to understand much, making great Books of diversity
of matter, have set down color a principal cause of a good horse, so as by
translating and taking notes out of other men's labors untruly, collecting and
adding their own conceits (not being able to understand the natural causes)
they have made al men almost be carried away with toies, and not with true
judgment, and thereof do notwithstanding wonderfully triumph, playing as he
that has gotten nothing, holds it fast, so as if the horse be a brown-bay,
with a white star, white foot, or such like, he is valued oftentimes more
then he is thrice worth. Thus has many ages taken that for a cause, which is
no cause: there is nothing more true, then that the goodness of the cause is
the goodness of the effect, for as Bernard well notes, si bona fuerit causa
pugnantis, pugnae exitus malus esse non potest, if the cause of a quarrel be
good, the effect and issue thereof cannot be evil: and as I have said, so I
say still, that all true knowledge seeks after the beginning and cause of
things to attain to the knowledge and effect of the thing, and from the
effects and events to find the knowledge of the cause: Thus you see that to
depend upon speech without probable reason, and without showing the cause of
such things as they publish to the world, does infect with error all those that
entertain the same, and will daily increase so long as they sectari riuulos
and non petere fontes, think the spring clearer then the fountain, Faelix qui
potuit rerum cognoscere causas.
it is scientia sciolorum quae est iusta ignorantia, it is the knowledge of the
pretended knower that is ignorant: but where true knowledge and practice
concur, there and not elsewhere truth shines.

CHAP. 11. Of horses marks.
ANother matter alleged by the writers, Non tam imperto nobi^ opus quam
exemplo.
to know a good horse is his marks, but for as much as I have stayed about the
displaying of the color, I purpose not to stay about a particular part of
color, whereof the Italian writers have drawn particular names, from whom (as
people apt to imitation) the common people willingly entertain the same, and
the horses so marked (for example presses more then law, and the eyes and
thoughts of the lesser, are always upon the great) and therefore when a horse
has a white foot or a white mark, they say he is excellent good, and him the
Italian calls Balzano, but say if the white extend high and large, that
betokens debilitie, because (say they) whitenes betokens weakness, dulnes,
and such like, and that they call Balzani, and so running in the path of their
own pride as a stray sheep that has been long time lost, is ever lost: go
forward and tell us of Calzati, Arseglio, Trauato, trustrauato, Rapicano,
Attuffu^ato, Guzzo, Zaino; etc. sure I am, that neither white foot, white
star, white list, struck, snip, phillet in the forehead, white rumpe, black
or red flee-bytings, Ostrich feather where it cannot be seen, meal nose,
meal flank, bearded under his chops like a Goat, black and long
fetter-lockes, long maine, long tail, black maine, black tail, black list
and such like, are no more assurance of a good horse, then the having a feather
in a man's hat, does prove him a good man or a bad, which by seeing and
practice, you will sooner believe, then my saying can persuade, for undoubtedly
you shall find good and bad of all colors, and without marks. But men having
been persuaded especially by strangers to those observations, al men are
possessed therewith by custom, and have sought to breed by such mares and
horses that have been so colored and marked as infallible tokens of their
goodness, whereby great multitudes of those colors and marks have been
generally bred, and thereby received and esteemed of great value, being
accounted true noates of good horses: how truly may it be said, consuetudo
piccandi tollit sensum peccati, the custom of doing evil makes men
senseless and without feeling of that is evil, which makes a monster in
nature, when as seeing their own experience, will not believe so true
experience. And therefore I conclude with Augustine, consuetudinem vincere dura
pugna, to overcome custom is a hard fight.

CHAP. 12. Now of his shape.
THe last thing the writers affirm to know a good horse, is his shape, which
originally as it issued from the hands of God, was no doubt most excellent, for
the works of God were all perfect, but the particular observations and
discriptions of perfect shape, Nihil est sine mensura ac partium
proportion-formosum. This rule is generally to be observed in the shape of a
horses description.
are in number about thirty, the which I will recite and give some short
answer to every particular, as they are by them recyted, only to move you
to careful consideration to understand what they accounted perfect shape:
which being divided into 4 parts, 3. parts thereof, are as well incident and
proper to Iades, as to good horses, and therein I wish you to observe their
incertaintie for your understanding, and I will begin with the hooue, and so
ascend til the whole body be described: First therefore they say that the hooue
should be black, smoothe, dry, large, round and hollow: and some write, that if
it be soft and tender, and the heel broad, it is a sign of lightness, and
that the Horse will from his foaling, tread light upon the ground, being
affraide to trust his hooues, being tender, and therefore streyneth his fore
legs-and back the more.

First, for brief answer herein, there appears contrariety in the
description, and yet both are herein commended: and yet the learned say,
contraria non solum substantia sunt seperata, sed etiam pugnant inu^^em,
contraries are not only separated in substance, but do each of them fight
against the other: for all contaries are either immediate or mediate, as if a
man would thus reason: aut dies aut nox est, either it is day or night: of
which if you allow one, the other is taken away: but to say that a man either
sits, or walks, is no contrariety, although no man can do both at one time,
for a man may do neither, as he that lies down: but here the dry hooue is
commended, therefore the moiste, and soft hooue is discommended, but as well a
good Horse as a bad Horse may have a dry hoof, and there is not any Horse can
be said to have a perfect hoof, that has a moist or soft hoof: and yet the
greater co^mendations is attributed to the soft hoof, because (say they) it
betokens lightness: but if a man might thus reason, a dry hoof is naught,
because it is brittle, and easily becomes hoofe-bound: and a soft hoof is
naught, because it is a flat or pumish hoof, which cannot be deep of hoof, so
as he cannot be a horse of continuance, no more can he be bold of his feet as
other Horses, and especially, if he be not very skilfully shod: neither dare he
use his feet boldly upon stony and hard grounds, and thereby becomes
fearful and yielding, and so not sure footed: but if it be said that good
shooing may altogether help that fault, I answer, good shooing may do some
good, but not to the perfction of the hoof, but only to succor the
vnperfection thereof: good Smithes are rare to be found, but how if he be evil
shod (as it is ten to one amongst common Smithes) is he not more then half
spoiled? besides it is imperfect, for it cannot be of continuance as a deep
hoof: and because it must be intended only of the forefoot it is the worse.
And all things must be considered and allowed, that are in perfection, which
is mediocritie, and not in their imperfection, which is evermore in extremes,
therefore to be rejected: besides, if the hoof should be hollow and dry, it
cannot be perfect, for then by the hollownes it would be the more dryer.

Again, to have it large and round is not perfect, for thereby it will be
fleshie and club-footed, which is propper to Iades: and as to the tenderness of
his foot, that it should be a sign of lightness, as it has no truth so it
has no reason to defend it, but a plain and manifest demonstration of
fearfulness, by reason of his tender hoofes: and how he should upon travel
strain his fore-legges, and his back and spare his hoofes, I cannot
understand, but sure I am that such horses cannot long continue or endure hard
travel for man's use, the end of his creation consisting altogether in action
and nor otherwise.

2. The second rule is, that his hoofes should be small and heavy: I answer,
that the former commendation of a large hoof, and now of a small hoof are
somewhat repugnant, yet I gather, and I think I gather truly, that their
meaning is that the Cronet of the hoof should be small and heavy: to which I
answer, if the smallness, howsoever it be taken, be not answerable to the
joint, it is naught, and that it should be hayry, I answer: if he have a
good Fetterlocke it is good, in that it answers his nature, and yet the joint
may be bare without hair, and yet a good horse, but being not part of his
shape I leave it.

3. That his pasternes should be short, neither to low nor too high, and
thereby strong beneath, and not apt to fownder: I answer that his pasternes
should be answerable in length and shortness to the natural and equal
proportion of the body, and the shortness of the pasterne is no more assurance
of strength, then to say, that every thing that is short is strong, or that
every short boned beast is strong, for the strength of the pasterne is the
uprightness thereof, and not the shortness: do you not often see a weak
Horse to have a short pasterne, and a great weak Horse to have a great and
short pasterne, bending and bowing in his pasterne, although it be short: And
as for aptness of foundring, is a rule without reason, for as a short pasterne
preserves not a horse from foundring: no more is a long pasterne the cause of
fowndring and when you understand the cause of fowndring: and whence it
proceeds, you will reject the rule.

4. That his joints ought to be great, with long fetter-lockes behind, and
that the same is a sign of force, I answer the greatness of his joints, are
words doubtful, because they may be great of bone, without much flesh, which
of it self is good: and yet may a great lean ioynted Horse be weak and a
Jade, but the greatness of joint must be answerable to the proportion of his
body, otherwise the great joint little avails: and as to his long fetter
locks, it may be a token of a moiste constitution, and not of strength, for
then the more hair the more strength, but his strength lies not in his hair
as Sampsons did, neither is it any part of his shape.

5. That his legs ought to be straight and broad, I answer, if you
consider only the streightnes and broadnesse of his fore legs it is good,
but if herein you consider his hinder legs, they may be broad and crooked
in the ham, and yet very good, I never condemn his shape therein, if his
action be good, and of continuance, whereof this gives no certainty.

6 That his knees should be great, lean and plain, I answer, that the same
are all good for shape, and yet we see Iades to be so shaped as well as the good
horses.

7 That his thighs should be full of sinews, the bones whereof to be short,
equal, just, and well proportioned: that when he stands with his legs
together, there should be more distant one from another toward the breast then
beneath: I answer, for the fullness of sinews, nature frames in quality and
number al a like, as many in one horse as in another, otherwise there should be
a defect in nature, which as it is universal, does not err: moreover, the
proposition is such as I know not how a man should attain to a certain
knowledge thereof upon the view of any horse, when the same is not to be
seen by the eye: and as to equality of proportion, it is perfection of shape
in all creatures, and therefore to be allowed: and as to the distance betwixt
his legs, is altogether from the fullness and breadth of the breast, which
causes the distance: for otherwise it were to be attributed to the fatnes or
leannes of the horse, which is accidental, and therefore uncertain.

8. That his shoulders should be long, large, and full of flesh: I answer,
that the length and largenes should be answerable in proportion to his body,
and being so it is very good, but as to the fullness of flesh it is more or
less by good or bad keeping, and no part of shape, and as well incident to
Iades as to good horses.

9. That his breast should be large and round, I answer it is very good, and
yet a Jade may be so.

10 That his neck should be rather long then short, great toward the breast,
bending in the midst, and slender toward the head. I answer, if it be not
set on as the neck of a Hog or Goat right forward it is good, and the longer
and higher reard, the better shape, and yet no assurance of a good horse.

11. That his ears should be small, sharp, and upright: I answer it is
comelines, and a good shape, and yet no assurance of goodness.

12. That his forehead should be lean and large: I answer, if that largenes
be intended both of breadth and length, according to natural proportion, it
is good, otherwise the largeness may be deformity of shape.

13. That his eyes should be great and black, I answer it is a very good
shape.

14. That the hollownes of his brows be well filled, and shooting outward, I
answer the filling up of the holownes of his brows is very good, but the
shooting out may breed deformity, if it be fleshye and do much ouerhang the
eye, especially if the eye be small: otherwise good shape.

15. That his Jaws should be slender and lean, I answer it is a perfect and
good shape.

16. That his nostrils should be open, and puffed up as you may see the red
within, apt for air: I answer, the nostrils may seem greater and redder upon
the violence or motion of the horse, but a wide nostril is part of a good
shape, but I reject altogether flitting of horse nostrils to let in air,
although the nostrils be little, as though nature were defective therein, not
considering the cause of the perishing of the horses wind, which is not in the
nostrill, and therefore neither helped nor hindered thereby, as the French, and
some English Ferrars suppose: 17 Moreover the straightness for the receiving
of breath is not in the lower end of the nosthrill, but in the caves and
straight passages, high toward the forehead, wherein if by any humors the
same are straighted or hindered, therein is the receiving or delivery of the
wind hindered, or by obstruction or opilation of the lungs and not otherwise,
and then slitting is ridiculous.

18. That he ought to have a great mouth, I answer that it is part of a good
shape.

19. That his head should be like a sheep head, I answer that sheep heads,
being as other beasts are, of diverse shapes, it cannot be directly answered,
for if I should conceive the shape thereof contrary to the writers meaning, I
should wrong them, and therefore leave it to be described hereafter according
to my own knowledge therein, but if you take it according to the proportion of
the most sheep, it is good.

20. That his Mane should be thin and long, and yet not disliking thickness,
and that the thinness betokens aptnes to be taught, so the thicknes
strength, I answer it is no part of shape, but an ornament to the shape, and
as to the thinnes, to betoken aptnes, or thicknes, strength, is of as great
force in reason as the thick or thin beard of a man, gives neither aptnes of
wit or increase of strength, but rather a token of a dry or of a moist
constitution.

21. That his withers and walleyes should be sharp pointed, right and
straight, so as a man may see from thence the departure of his shoulders, I
answer it is perfect good shape, and yet he may be a Jade.

22. That his back would be short, eeuen and plain, I answer, it is very good
shape, but no assurance of goodness

23. That his sides should be long and large, with small space betwixt the
hinder Ribbe and the Hucklebone, I answer it is very good shape, but no
assurance of his goodness.

24. That his belly should be long and great, orderly hidden under his ribs, I
answer it is very good shape and yet no assurance of goodness.

25 That his flank should be full and not gaunt, with natural friezled hair
on both sides, and the higher such hairs mowt the better, I answer, the
fullness of his flank is comely in shape, and the friesled hairs are no part
of shape, neither of any importance other then satisfaction to some men's
delights, although some men of place and special note have greatly commended it
unto me, but I could not conceive any reason from other then a liking of a
received tradition, neither of any moment by observation.

26. That his Rump should be round and plain with large space betwixt the
huckle bones, I answer it is very comely and good shape, but no good horse.

27. That his thighs should be large and long, with bones well fashioned and
full of flesh, I answer, if it be proportionable to natural shape, it is
good, and to the fulness of flesh according to his goodness of keeping.

28. That his hams should be lean, dry and straight, I answer it is very
good, and yet no assurance of goodness.

29. That his hooues should be large and crooked like a Heart, should be a sign
of swiftnes, I answer, the largenes of his hooue ought to be proportionable,
and it is good, but that the crookednes betokens svviftnes, is merely a
conceit, for although some Horses that are crooked be swift, some also that
are straight are swift, and therefore it gives no certain assurance thereof.

30. That his tail should be full of hairs, long down to the ground: or as
some write that his tail should be thin and crispe, I answer that they are
toys, and conceits without reason, neither any part of shape but only an
ornament to shape.

31. That his truncheon should be of measurable bigness and well cowched, I
answer that the bigness is nothing but the comlines of cowching and carriage, is
commendable.

32. That his stones and yard should be small, I answer I hold it fit to be
proportionable to the body, and otherwise not material.

33. That he should be proportioned like a Stag, lower before then behind, I
answer if he be lower before, it is absolutely naught, if in the only seat of
the saddle low, and forward high reared, though he be somewhat reared behind,
it is good, and the comparison in the general naught.

CHAP. 13. The natural good quallities of Horses, in their primary creation.
GEntle Reader, it has been briefly showed, as well what the ancient and late
writers have observed and published, for the knowledge of good horses, namely
from the Countries, Air, Ground, complexion, color, mark, and shape: whereby
appears, that man is a subject wonderfully diverse, and wavering, upon whom
it seems very difficult to settle an assured judgment, I say, a judgment
universal and entire, by reason of the great contrariety and disagreement of
their judgment, which do so many times contradict one the other, in so strange
a manner, that it seems impossible they should all come forth of one, and
the same shop; we alter and we feel it not, we escape as it were from our
selves, and we rob our selves: Ipsi nobis furto subducimur: we go after the
inclination of our will, Anima legit ratio.
and as the wind of occasion carries us, not according to reason: At nihil
potest esse aequabile quod non a certa ratione proficiscatur: Our spirits also
and our humors are changed with the change of time, our proceedings are very
heady and peremptory: for we have no patience to consult with reason, but
determine merely upon fancy: he that is hot in the pursuit of what he likes,
none sooner weary, herein alone he is good for a common wealth, making more
business then time it self, and in a word, any thing rather then himself: and
therefore I affirm that it is impossible without full knowledge of the
original cause of their goodness (wherein I dare affirm the best that have
written reymaned ignorant) certainlye to express, and assuredly to manifest
the natural goodness of Horses, without proof and trial. For how is it
possible to cleanse a river or spring that is corrupt, from corruption, that
begins not at the head from whence the water comes? and if the original
fountain cannot be found, does not the same of necessity, still remain
corrupt? therefore Summa est dementia in little fidem sperare, quorum perfidia
comperta est, It is mere madness to repose trust in infidelity, Sed vbi
cognoscitur vnde morbus sit natus, ibi facilius potest inueniri remedium, but
when the knowledge of true causes are certainly known and understood, there
is great hope of good effects of true judgment: If then it shall appear in
this my tractate, that all former writers of this subject, have been ignorant
of the original causes of the goodness of Horses, marvel not that huius
erroris tantique mali causa sie obrepsit inforum, the great decay of good
Horses, and the manifold errors in Horsemanship, and the increase of the
infinite and intolerable number of Iades, do so swarm within this kingdom,
and elsewhere upon the face of the earth, so as in place of one true perfect
shaped Horse, there are a thousand Iades, to the dishonor of king and Country.
Will any gather fine and pleasant fruit from trees before the same be fully
ripe, and fit to be eaten, but such as are ignorant and without understanding
to know what is fit to be done? and can any truly taste and gather, the true
use and fruit of any Art, but he whose mind and understanding, has been and
is mollified and ripened thorough the knowledge of Nature, Art, and practice
thereof, and has thereunto submitted himself, and disgested by experience,
the whole substance and matter of this Art?

Where is he to be found, that has labored and spent his time in the true
knowledge, of Nature, art and practice of horsmanship (but only in some
particular part thereof) without which it is impossible to have a true and sound
judgment therein, because the same is as a body, consisting of many particular
members, how then can the whole Art of Horsemanship be known, before every
part thereof be known?

If a Gentleman endeavor to be learned in the Laws of this Kingdom, does he
not first come to an Inn of chauncerie,, and there continue one year or two,
to learn the Law French, and to read books fit for a young student, and then
go to an Inn of Court, and must painefully study eight or nine years before
he be called to the Bar, and after he is called diligently and studiously for
diverse years, keep his vacations and exercise of learning, both in the house
and publicly abroad, in Innes of Chauncery to be aprooued of his study, and if
he be then thought and aprooued sufficient, within few years after called to
be a Reader, in an Inn of Chancery, for one, two, or three years together,
before he be suffered or undertake to practice? And is not every base manuell
tradesman an Apprentise, and Iournyman before he be admitted a Master of his
Art? how then shall it be possible for a Gentleman to attain perfection, in
so honorable and difficult an Art as Horsemanship, without many years study
and practice, when as all Kings, Princes, and Nobility, become Scholars for
many years, only to attain to ride well (being but a particular part of
Horsemanship) And shall any that has understanding only in part, presume
sufficiency of understanding, truly to write of the whole Art?

I know there is not any thing more opposite to the practice of this time, and
writings of others, then this my labor, and yet I have notwithstanding
adventured, Lupum auribus tenere, to hold the Woolfe by the Ears, bitten
while I hold, and slain when I lose, knowing that difficult things do
evermore come slowly and dangerously forward, and cannot show themselves
manifestly together at one instant, but are from time to time augmented and
brought to better order, whereby the nature of every thing (according to
natures desire) is most best known and discerned in the end, and the end to a
generallitie of perfection, so as in all Arts their good is the end, and can
the end and perfection of any Art be more excellent good, and more worthy of a
subjects pen to be treated of then of the true knowledge of the honorable
Art of Horsemanship, the increase of strength, the honor of the king, and
preservation of the kingdom? what if the same be resisted with the bitter
humor of Zoilisme and malice, a thing not greatly to be meruailed, for so much
as that which is easiest, is still most usual: but if any are so evil created
to be malicious detracters (whose reason cannot show so reasonable to leave
reasoning in things above their reason) I leave them to their dismembered
fractions, and to the vsarie of their own desires, and only endeavor to
establish the unstable judgment in the true knowledge of a good horse, and will
set down the natural quallities that were in every horse at his first
creation, without which, no horse can truly be called a good horse, which by
man's transgression lie secret and hid in man, and by natural ability of man
may be restored to a full and sufficient perfection for man's use, and though
not in the superlatiue excellency as they issued from the hands of God, for as
God gave unto Adam all perfection that might be in mankind, so he gave all
perfection to those creatures which were immediately created by him: for
nothing issued from the hands of God ill shaped or imperfect, and as Adam was
created Lord of all creatures, and to provide for and preserve them in all
perfection in their kind, the same right and charge is descended upon us his
children. But if every point herein be not, or can be so plain or evident
laid forth, as were to be desired, yet it is a custom in reason to
conjecture probably, where we cannot define certainly, and still by all
artistes more and more to be labored, and to make perfect that which in a
mere admirer can be hardly imagined, yet in a sufficient understanding see it
lively expressed: and if my rules which I express be easily ouerturned, that
which I teach is consequently subject to ouerturning the want of due
apprehension herein, has brought many errors unto all Arts and professions,
so as it is more laborous to purge Art from error, then to teach the true
knowledge and practice of the Art: the due consideration whereof moves me
orderly to set down those only true qualities which naturally were in them in
their primarie creation, and ought to be in every good horse, full and
sufficient for the use of man, and particulerly prove the same by the rules of
nature, Art and practice, the which I reduce only to six: Boldness, louingnes,
sure going, easy going, durable and free going: all which are like unto
Hypocrates twins, sick together, and well together, laugh and weep together,
and always are inseparable, in every excellent horse.

First therefore I affirm, that every good Horse naturally is and ought to
be bold, I mean not (as the proverb says) so bold as blind Bayard, whose
senses are not sufficient to guide him from his own wilful destruction, but of
natural boldness, nearest to his first creation and perfection of goodness,
wherein was no defect of Nature, but full and complete for the use of man, in
all obedience to the true performance of every action: for if he had been
fearful, he had not been fit to encounter the enemy, to pass waters, or
dangerous places, great concourse of people, much noise, strange sights or such
like, which should not now have been, if the affections of nature grafted in
them had remained still uncorrupted: Difinition of fear.
for as fear is defined to be an awe of some evil drawing near at hand, so
having possessed the creature, it depriueth him of many comforts, which nature
originally had affoorded: for the Horse which remains nearest his original
creation, goes forth, as Job in his 29. Chapter affirms to meet the harnest
man, and mocketh at fear, and is not afraid, and turns not back from the
sword. And as Virgil says, Nec vanos horret strepitus, neither does sudden
noise fear him, and thereupon the learned say, Quod alios territ, is non
curabit, that which does astonish and make other creatures afraid, he
regards not.

CHAP. 14 Of Louingnes to man.
SEcondly, I affirm that every good horse is and ought to be by Nature, loving
to man, free from al hurt and mischief: and although love be such a thing, as
cannot exactly and perfectly be definde, as also impossible to comprehend all
things which do appertain to the nature, disposition and efficacy thereof, yet
who does not see the virtue whereby the lover is knit unto him whom he loves,
and yet none able so much to know what, as of what quallitie it is, but by
actions and observations: and therefore when man shall put a loving Horse to
any action, he shall see in him evermore, a following will to obey, and as
thunder pierces the clouds, so violently (for the love he bears his Master)
does he force himself against his Masters enemy: and if inevitable danger
ensue, he either carries his master from the same, or pouring out tears of
his masters ruin, entertaineth present death, whereby the learned, have
truly noted their original nature, saying Victores exultant, sed victi
dolent, when they are victors and ouercommers, then they rejoice, but being
overcome they are sorrowful and mourning, otherwise they could not be
approved sensible creatures: whereof I have given you examples not unlike the
true love that was betwixt Nisus the son of Hictaci, and Eurialus, that when
Eurialus his dear beloved friend was slain, Nisus having taken revenge of his
death, afterward dug him self into Eurialus grave, and so rested with
pleasing death, whereof Virgil in his 9. book says: his amor vnus erat,
pariterq in bella rueba^t, to these was one love, and by fight perished
together: such is the love of the loving horse to man evermore, entombeth his
masters love in the grave of destruction: iealious of his masters safety,
when as the froward dogged-natured horse keeps mischief and malice
inseparable, to wait upon his actions, to give freedom to himself, nam
contra eoru^ eadem est disciplina, for of contraries is like learning:
wherefore as love toward man and man is a virtue commended, so love and
obedience of beasts, with perfection of action to man, is originally the
ordinance of God in his first creation, and therefore as every thing ordained
by God, is in his ordinance most excellent, so all froward and dogged lades,
resisting and opposite to their original creation: with a natural
inclination and perseverance therein to man, is a manifestation of their
corruption.

CHAP. 15. Of sure going.
THirdly, I affirm that every good horse by nature is sure going, and by all
practice appears so to be: for as continually he is sure from stumbling, so
if any accident tends to his dovvnefall, he strives so long as breath or
life lasts to recover, and keep himself up if it be possible with his
masters safety using his joints and limbs with such spirit and nimblenesse,
that he seems to swallowe the ground by his agilitie, betokening rather
flying then struggling, evermore aduenturing his own peril to keep his
master from peril; whereas the roile and Jade that will not adventure the
leaping of a block yet will not fail to stumble (nay to make a downfall) at
a straw, evermore endangering his masters safety by his sluggish and
fearful service, so as his Master never so much attends his own
preservation as when he trusts to a Iades security.

Again, if the good horse were not by nature sure going (no art being able to
help) how should the first creation of horses be perfectlye good, the same
being evermore a principal good action for the use and safety of man, for
whose only service he was created and still preserved.

CHAP. 16. Of easy going.
FOurthly I affirm that every good horse by his original nature is easy
going, as a principal quality of his first creation and therefore so stedily,
justly and duly he lifts and sets, fearing to shake his master,
expressing thereby the effect of his strength, and the virtue of his love,
still striving to be delightful without danger or means of discontent: the
contrary whereof evermore happens by the use of Iades racking every part of
man's body, so as he rather desires a footeboies place, then a Horsemans seat,
not only to the overthrow of men's lawful labors and endeavors, but the whole
use of their perfection of action, whereunto they were only created.

CHAP. 17 Of long continuance in travel.
Fifthly I affirm, that every good Horse is by his original nature durable,
and of great continuance in his labor: the same being a principal quality of
his first creation, for that to enable his service to the use of man, in the
39. of Job. it is said, that his strength is given him of God, and that he
rejoices therein, as purposely ordained by God, for the service of man,
without which man is deprived of his best and hopeful issues of his labors,
by his debilitie and lack of strength.

CHAP. 18. Of free going.
Sixthly I affirm, that every good Horse is free, and full of desire to perform
as a most principal quallitie, of his first creation, in perfection of all
action, befitting the use of man, without which he does bring much more
tedious and grievous labor, then profitable use, and therefore to manifest the
ordinance of God in their creation, for the comfort of man, it appears how he
thrusts himself with joy, to run headlong into the battle: and as Virgil
says, Loco stare nescit, micat auribus et tremit artus, cauatque tellurem et
solido grauiter sonat vngula cornu, he cannot quiet rest, but sets his
ears upright (and being full of spirit) he holloweth the ground, and with the
hollownes of his horned hooues, makes great sound, wherein the great goodness
of God to man, is to be noted, that so strong and warlike a beast, is so
willing to obey, and desirous to perform: when Assensus sequitur authoritatem
dicentis, with his whole assent he follows the authority of the speaker,
whereby al their works might carry admiration, if man were not made tame with
their continual actions of admiration.

CHAP. 19. To prove those six qualities, in their original nature, and what
they are.
NOw it remains that we prove, That these six quallities are always
inseparable.
that these six quallities of a good Horse, their coherens and individual
connection, as linkes in one chain, and so fastened and coupled together, What
is a Relative
as the lack of the one shall be a true relative, the loss and destruction of
the other: for relatiues are always together in nature, beginning to be, and
finishing their being in one, and the same moment. First therefore, you see
that if he be not bold, although he be loving, sure going, easy going durable
and free, yet they all are nothing, to assure the rider from danger. Likewise
if he be not loving, upon many occasions and times, unexpected he may often
spoil his master, keeper, or rider: also if he be not sure in going, what
imminent danger is evermore to be expected, in all dangerous places, the
experience too often approved. Also if he go not easy how can man be free from
bruises, and sorenes in all parts of his body, so as he shall not be able to
make use of himself, for preservation of himself. Also if he be not durable,
and of strength and force to continue his travel, or the action undertaken,
being fit and reasonable for a Horse to perform, how can he satisfy man's use
the end of his creation? Sixthly and lastly, if he be not free and of good
courage, evermore of himself forward, free, and of good mettle, without
compulsion, or stripes, what vexation or loss (yea many times of life) by a
craving dull Jade, who will not acknowledge?

But when all these good quallities are inseperably conjoined in Nature (as
they are in every perfect Horse) what can the heart of man more desire, if
understanding guide his affection to declare unto him what is to be desired,
with what facility of art and practice, will such horses be broken and brought
to perfection, what assurance of their voluntary and durable service, in all
perfection: how delightful to the owners, how profitable to their purses, how
joyful and comfortable to all that use them, how serviceable and honorable to
King and Country, what soul lives that will not acknowledge?

And because there is not any other or more excellent qualities to be desired
in horses for the use of man then the perfection of those six qualities, it
consequently follows that all horses in their first and primarie creation
were absolutely endowed with them in all perfection: for the increase,
preservation and continuance whereof, I purposely composed this labor, all
which I doubt not will be hereafter performed by all breeders of horses, if
they shall observe and make practice of those rules and precepts that are
herein set forth so plain and evident as will give full contentment to all
that shall desire the knowledge thereof.

First therefore intending institution of a good thing I think most fit to
observe, Cicero his rule, and to begin with true diffinition, Difinition of
nature.
and leaving diversities of opinions, I define Nature thus: nature is not the
thing it self, but the proper and peculiar strength of the thing naturally
given unto the Creature in the creation at the time of the framing, and not at
the birth, where it receives that quallity which it has not only of being and
working, but also of begetting etc. and as it is a strength bred and grafted in
the creature at his framing, it therefore comes not by chance or
accidentally, neither is it mutable but natural, peculiar and unchangeable:
but because Nature may be two ways understood, viz: a particular and a
general, I will first show that diversity. The particular nature is that
which in every single substance ministers essence to the whole compound, and
with all is mother to such action and motion as is agreeable to the subject,
wherein it is as the nature of fire causes fyers ascension, the nature of
earth, the earthes going downward. The universal nature is the author and
maintainer of all actions and bodies, to which the several single bodies are
in subjection by their obedience, acknowledging a kind of superiority in that
universal nature, and therefore it is said, quod vniuersalis natura falli out
errare non potest, quia contingenter agit in indiuidius, sed indiuidua sunt
remotu abarte, so there are sundry diversities of natures, as the things be
sundry whereof they be, which being most wisely and many ways divided by the
creator, cannot be knit up to one self same thing: Again, and as the learned
have observed, nature is of that excellency, quod nihil habet vitij, Nature
has no defect, because God is the author thereof, and his providence has so
provided, that every nature by working does declare of what quality it is, so
that his works are most assured testimonies what his nature is, and therefore
very fit to put difference betwixt the things that be wrought naturally, and
that be wrought accidentally: for all natural things are done often and
continually, and those which be done accidentally be not so: The sun gives
light to the world because it is his nature, but when it dazeleth weak eyes,
it is not natural but accidental: and also those things that be naturally
done, be not done with evil will, or by motion of others, but easily and
voluntarily: so whatsoever is natural is accustomable, perpetual, voluntary
and ready: and as it is created and made with the creature, it is reason that
it should bear the nature of his beginning: and that which is of a Horse, to
be the nature of a Horse and of no other Creature. For if a man should call a
naughty Natured Horse the nature of a Dog, we may not thereupon gather,
that a horse and a Dog be both of one Nature, for as each creature is, such
is the nature thereof, and so it works according to that Nature, whereby it
is evident, and with truth not to be opposed, that nature is nothing else but
the temperature of heat, coldness, moisture and drynes, the which is a
schoole-maister to direct the sense of the horse, which he has from his
brain, to cause the natural body to work, wherein if heat be predominate,
then does the sense direct the body to work according to the quality of
heat, which is with freeness, vigor, spirit and courage, and so, and not
otherwise is it truly said, that every creature works according to his
nature: and as of heat, so does it work accordingly in each temperature, and
thereby we may certainly determine the horses disposition, habit, natural
power, lack of power, affection, and such like, as hereafter shall most
plainly be demonstrated, which the Logicians do consider in quality, and so
seek the nature of his quality in his works: so that of what quality his
work is of, such quality we may truly say his nature is: for he is such in the
quality of his nature, as he is tried and found to be: and after this manner
every simple man may learn to know the nature of every horse, but my purpose
is to teach you most assuredly to know his quality without any work or trial,
only upon the view, as hereafter will appear, the which natural qualities are
not gotten by teaching or instructing, by customs or Art, but naturally, and
so to every man an assurance of what quality his nature is: for nature
proceeds so far in every Horse, that she gives them not only a feeling,
but also a power to declare the same

Note this,
and therefore nature in Horses, is not, neither can be any other then an
inclination and forwardnes: knowledge a quickner up of nature, and art, a
guide to keep it in order by general precepts, universal grounds, and
experience, with imitation, conferring both by the continual holding on of
many particular actions: so as nature of it self is now insufficient:
(Crescite et multiplicamini) grow and increase: unto which means being his
own ordinance, he gives his blessing for the increase and preservation
thereof. 2. it may be answered out of the 4. of Esdras, 9. verse, that the world
has lost his youth and the times begin to wax old: and also in the 2. of
Esdras, chap. 5. the question being demanded why the latter age should not be
as perfect in creation as the first? it was answered, ask a woman wherefore are
not they whom thou have now brought forth like those that were before thee, but
less of stature? and she shall answer thee, the same were borne in the flower
of youth, the others were borne in the time of age, when the womb failed:
consider now thy self how that ye are less of stature, then those that were
before you, and so are they that come after you, less then they: as the
creatures which now begin to be old and have passed over the strength of youth:
So as the farther generation is from the first creation, the more nearer to
corruption.

Thirdly, it may be answered, that every Horse is created as man is of soul and
body, and is compounded of the four elements as man, and he that doubts
thereof, may as well doubt whether himself be, or no: but the one which is in
man celestial, never dying: the other terrestial, and dies with the body: and
yet a most excellent pure living spirit, having the faculties, nutritive,
vegetative, motive, and sensitive: so does it by his temperature of the
elements righty rule as man's does, and govern the body of every Horse, which
naturally obeieth to every action, and that is truly called Nature, whereof
only God is the Author, so as the goodness or badnes of the temperature of the
elements is the cause, The cause why one horse does better perform his kind
then another.
why one beast does better perform the works of his kind then another: the
temperature being the schoolemaister to direct the sensitive soul, to every
action, and such is the force of natures custom, to have dominion over all
creatures, and therefore the learned term nature (...) dicta ab eo, quod
aliquid nasci faciat, named from that which makes something to be created,
whose property and cause we cannot without observation find, other then that
God, the author of nature has ordained it, Nam obscurata est ratio naturalis
per in obedientiam primi pare^tis, our natural reason is obscured by the
disobedience of our first parents, and yet nature may not be said to be
imperfect, or faulty, for it has put into all things possibility and aptnes,
and also act and perfection: and thereupon Cicero says, who has reason from
nature, to the same is right reason given, and then coming from nature is also
perpetual, for perpetuum est quod natura, frequens quod vsus introducit, what
nature brings is perpetual, and what use brings is often, so as nature
whether it be armed with virtue or vice, it is perpetual, and the faculties
causes the perfection thereof acordingly: for nature is known by his work,
and nature causes the body to work, therefore such as the nature is, such is
the work, and such as the work is, such is the quality of the nature.

Now the seat or place of those faculties of this nature, is principally the
brain and the heart, The brain is the ^e^t of the sencible soul, the sense
of sense and motion, and of the most noble animal spurits composed of the
vital, and raised from the heart by the Arteries unto the brain.
as the regal and principal seats of the creature, the heart being the
place where the vital and Arteriall spirrits are bred, and do equally;
participate the temperature thereof, from whence they had their being, and are
dispersed over the whole body, and then it may be truly said, Cuius effectus
omnthus prodest, eius et parts ad omnes pertinent, where the effect of any
thing is profitable to all, there the parts thereof appertain to all: and as
the power of that vital spirit is great or small (which is evermore according
to the temperature of the elements) such and the same it causes and enforces
the body, and every part thereof to work, and therefore it is truly said
that every man and beast works according to the quality of his nature,
following the drist of nature (that is the temperature) in their working, so as
the more pure and excellent, the temperature of the Elements are (which
consists in the true harmony, mixture or proportion of the four first
qualities, hot, cold, dry, moist) in any creature, the nearer is the same
creature to his sitst creation, and the more effectual in operation to every
action.

Fourthly it may be answered, that horses do not c^^tinue in the perfection
of their first creation, because in all generation of begetting there is a
proceeding vital spirit before the seed which effects conception, according
to the strength and quality whereof, the creature begotten is in perfection of
strength and quality: as for example, if an old horse and an old Mare do
beget and bring forth a Colt, you will confess there is a decay on both parts
of that vital spirit in old years, which cannot effect equality of strength and
power, which naturally youth (I mean the middle age wherein perfection
consists) preserves and bestows, if there be not a means of defect, as
sickness, natural coldness, inordinate use and such like (which in old age is
also much more imperfect) whereby oftentimes we see not only the decay of
beasts, but of the withering of the noble progeny of man, and therefore no
marvel if the horses of this age be so imperfect, when man is defective and
imperfect in the true natural causes of generation, by suffering imperfect
creatures to beget and bring forth, how can there be perfection in the creature
begotten, and then they being imperfect, do they not also afterward beget
vnperect? For it is an infallible truth, fortes creantur fortibus, and bouis
est in inuencis, est in equis patrum virtus nec imbecillam fercces progeneran
aquilae columbam, the strong are begotten of the strong, and the virtue of the
Syer of the Ox and the Cow, is in the young bullock and in horse, neither
do lusty Eagles beget young Doves: such as is sown such will be mowen, E
squilla non nasc^tur resa of a bramble there grows no rose, discendit inclin
ti^ pr^^^candi quod procreatum est, the good of the begetter is the good of the
begotten. Cicero says truly, n^carboris necequi virtus in opinione sita est
sedin natura: Neither is the goodness of the horse placed in opinion but in
nature, and therefore Secrates execrari eum sol^bat, qui primo vtilitatem a
natura seiunxisset, was accustomed to curse him that separated virtue from
nature: whereunto Celsus concurring says, quae rerum natura prohibet nulla
lege confirmare possunt, where nature refisteth, no strength prevails. Fifthly
and lastly if it be objected that the indurance of a horse in specie or kind,
may be a limited indurance of the particular, and therefore a perpetual
preservation of the species or kind, thorough the faculty of procreation to
propagate his kind, that though every horse must of natural necessity dye,
yet might he leave another of his own kind behind him, as good as himself,
and so a continual succession of goodness, I thus answer, that if they
grant a corruption in the particular (as of necessity they must) it must
likewise be granted in the species, for the species being a thing existent
only in imagination, not having any real being, but as we conceive of it in
the particulars, it is a necessary illation from the corruption of all the
particulers, to conclude the like of the general: for as Nutrition is to the
particular, so is generation to the species, wherefore as by the nourishment the
horse takes restitution of his natural moisture, there is not supplied so
pure humiditie as was lost, the particulers decaying by little and little are
at last clean consumed, so by procreation the maintenance of the species, the
purity of the humors, being by degrees and by time diminished, at length there
follows even of necessity an absolute corruption, now the decaie coming by
the particulars whose function this generation is, being by continual mixture
of outward nourishment corrupted, the seed, the matter and means of
propagation cannot but be tainted with like corruption, and this is the reason
why horses are neither of continuance or goodness as in former time, for if the
natural vigor of the species be by little and little continually weakened,
there must of necessity follow a perfect corruption, but the most of us (like
men at the stop, where many paths meet) insteede of choosing the right way
by judgment of reason do stand still amassed, and in that amazement conclude,
that all comes to one, as who would say, that South and North lead both to one
place, but if we applied our wits as advisedly to judge between truth and
falsehood, as every man in his trade does judge between profit and loss, we
should forth with by principles bred within our selves, and by conclusions
following upon the same, discern true knowledge from error, and the way
ordained from deceitful inventions of our common practice, wherefore to
conclude with the cause of causes, I do resolve that the want of the true
knowledge of breeding is the only cause of the multitude of Iades, because no
man has hitherto either written or practiced the true natural means of good
breeding, and that all nations do err herein, the only number of Iades in all
nations are my witnesses, and I would gladly learn from any, how the contrary
may be defended.

CHAP. 20 How to know a horse that is bold by nature.
FIrst of his boldness, It has been said, and that truly, that every
creature works according to his nature, and that his works do manifest his
nature, and therefore he that has had long trial of his horse cannot be
ignorant of his nature, so as the goodness of nature is considered in his
quality and the quality of his nature in his works, and yet a horse that is
fearful by nature may by compulsary means after long use make little or no
show of fear, although he be fearful by nature, as being in a ship upon the
Sea, where are Trumpets, Guns and such like, not having means to avoid the
same, by use, and continuance thereof, seems not fearful, for as man
(being an understanding creature) by often compulsarie abuses, may be made
tame to be abused, so a creature void of reason and understanding, may seem to
abide and endure that which nature abhors. Now to the matter propounded,
consider that there are natural signs which without will or desire to signify
any thing, do make some other things besides themselves to be known by them,
as the smoke does signify there is fire, and it is well known by the perceiving
of things proved, that there is fire withal, although there does nothing
appear but smoke only, like as a foot-step is the sign of a beast to have
been there, likewise by the forehead countenance and cie of man, nature does
signify the knowledge of the mind, which Cicero calls ianuam mentis, the
door of the mind, and others do say that the eye is the image of the
countenance, quasilumine scintillans, In facie legit^r homo.
and vim speculi habe^s adeo vt intuentibus referat totum huminis fere specie^,
and is as a sparkling light, and has power of beholding, so as to the beholder
it does almost declare the whole quality of man, whereby apeareth that nature
has made and ordained probable conjectures of the insensible parts, as
appears in the 1. K. Ca. 3. when the compassion of the natural mother was
moved, by which commotion of nature the king gave true judgment, and
therefore it is truly said, ex his quae extrinsecus adparent co^ijoiuntur ea
quae non adparent, from those outward appearing things, those things which do
not appear are coniectured: from whence also may be truly collected, that
vultus est animi index, the countenance shows what the mind is: O quam
difficile est crime^ non prodere vultu: how hard is it, a fault by face, not to
bewray, in facit prudentis lucet sapientia, in the face of a wiseman wisdom
shines: Pro. 17. Cor hominis mutat faciem sieve in bonosiue in malo, the heart
of a man changes his countenance whether it be in good or evil. An evil eye
the window of death.
Eccl. 13.26. So as the eye and countenance of man, being the messenger of the
mind, and the window of the heart, the inward secrets of man are disclosed. If
then the mind and secrets of the heart of man may be and are known by outward
signs, having wisdom to conceal, how shall or may a creature not endowed
with reason and understanding, Impudicus oculus impudici cordis est nuncius.
Chry.
avoid the discovery of the secrets of his own nature? Moreover that the
countenance is a discovery of the inward mind, appears in the 4. of Genesis
When Caine was wroth, his countenance feldowne, whereupon the Lord said: Why
art thou wroth, and why is thy countenance cast down, And Solomon, 27. prou:
18. says Quomodo in aquis resplendent vultus prosp^cientum, siccorda hominum
manifesta sunt prude^tibus as the faces of those which look into waters shine
unto them, so the hearts of men are manifested to the wise: and no doubt the
observation of the countenance of the Horse, The outward. Phisiognomie does not
falsify and betray that good promise that Nature has planted in the fro^t
does more certainly discover his inward quallitie, as an Image of his
affection: but if man would know the secrets of man's heart, he must leave it
to the creator, for solus Deus est scrutator cordis, Only God is the searcher
of man's heart, and the knowledge of man touching m^, is but co^iectura
qualitatis, for as he which beholds his face in the water does not discern
it exactly but rather a shadow then a face, even so he that by external
Physiognomy and operations, will divine what lies hid in the heart of man, may
conceive an Image of that affection that does reign in the mind of man, rather
then a resolute knowledge.

But the Physiognomy of a horse is much more certain for he can not keep secret
or conceal as man can, There is nothing that has a truer resemblance, then
the conformity and relation of the body to the spirit.
but being in perfect health remains ever one and the same in countenance.
Therefore to conclude and to make the truth hereof appear: choose a horse with a
broad forehead, a great black full eye standing out like an hares eye, and a
high reared forepart, and be assured that by nature he is bold, and to give
you a further assurance, mark a Horse with a narrow forehead, little eyes, and
a low fore part, which is mere contrary, and assure your self that by nature
he is starting and fearful, and to seal up the truth, herein the trial will
confirm you.

So as the observation, of his natural shape in that part tells you that the
same is so sure, as when you see smoke there has bin a fire.

CHAP. 21. How to know a horse that is loving by nature.
THat every good horse is by nature loving to man: To confirm this
proposition, I think the examples before remembered are sufficient, besides
every man his daily experience, and that Iades are naturally mischeuous and
dangerous to man, whereof I will give some examples, as Fulko the fifth king of
Jerusalem after he had reigned eleven years, was by a mischeuous Jade strooken
in the hinder part of the head, whereof he presently dyed: Bellat the King of
the Pauuonians, Phillip son of Lodowick, Crassus, Seleucus, Calinisius, and
many others by evil natured horses were slain. It is truly said an Ape will
be an Ape, and the Leopard will not change his spots, nor the Moore his skin,
that is perpetual which nature brings forth I have told you that the
countenance is a representative of conditions, amongst which this is one, when
you see a horse with a plain smoothe eye, so as the more you behold his eyes
and countenance in beauty and seemly proportion, the more he seems as Plato
says, the object of your love, whereby you do not only grow in love of him,
but conceive that he has as it were prepared a cherful countenance to
entertain your love, which naturally created with him cannot otherwise
appear: But if he be beetell browed, that is great liddes or lumpes of flesh
covering little eyes that are inward in his head, Lac^rt is like a Newight,
whereof in Italy are many.
and hollow above, or looking as the Lacert, which every way it looks,
leareth awry, and never direct upon you, you may assure your self his
natural desire ever trauaileth to effect mischief in all his actions, for
distortu^ v^ltu^ sequitur distortio morum: A deformed countenance has deformed
conditions, being by the God of nature extraordinarily marked for a discovery
of their hateful affections: But the conttarie, which is a great, smoothe, full
black eye, without hollownesse either above or within, or lumpes of flesh
ouer-hanging his eyes, with a sweet smile inherent in nature and expressed in
countenance, you may assure your self of his good temperature, manifesting it
self in his joyful and merry countenance, so as he seems naturally to
fawn on you to gain your love, if your intemperance hinder not his natural
affection, and the truth of things are never better manifested then by
observation of the contrary.

CHAP. 22. How to know a horse that is sure going.
THat every good horse is by Nature, Plura simul collat a ^^uant que singula
non prosunt.
sure going, I must entreat you to remember that my 6. rules for the knowledge
of a good Horse, are relatiues, and so lincked each in the other, as you cannot
throghly apprehend the one without the other, so inseparable are they, as the
one cannot be approved without the other: and therefore Vhi plur a coniunctim
exiguntur, ibi non sufficit vnum probari, where many things are jointly
required for proof, there it is not sufficient only to allow one: wherefore the
rule to know a horse to be sure going is, that he be very long foreparted, I
mean from his withers to his head, very long necked, and the same broad
toward the breast, thin and slender near to the head, with a high rear, his
head naturally hanging to his neck, so as his nose bear not further out or
more then his forehead, but carrying the same as the Ram does when he is
fighting, and so as his forehead and nose hanging naturally even, his neck
long, his sight lusty bold and perfect, he evermore sees his way without
restraint and at pleasure, where to tread in all fafety, and then having a true
and just trot or amble, together with the perfection of his rain (for that is
the only perfect and true rain) which no other shape can affoorde with
continuance, he trauaileth with such ease and delight to nature (which all
Art is ever to attend) being bold loving and thereby proud and stately in
going, and naturally easy and delightful to man, he goes with great grace,
surenes of foot, ease to the ryder, and pleasure to himself: when as the
contrary shape cannot by any Art be reduced to perfection, longer then he is
most highlye kept, and his pride and heat continues, because nothing is more
offensive to Nature then violence, and restraint from his natural imperfection
to perfection, by means of which coffeehouse, he will either rain and
bear his head to Natures shape, which is most and only pleasing to himself,
or cause the ryder to give liberty thereunto, or else become hard of hand,
with great pain, by means whereof it will be impossible for him to be sure of
foot, being in Nature evil shaped, for nobiles and generosi equi facile
fraeno reguntur (says Seneca) the best horses are most lightly borne, but
contrariwise the Jade not having delight in himself, must be permitted to go
like an Ass or a pack-horse, whereunto if any shall give allowance, I think
an Ass better for such a lump of flesh, and he a fit cover for such a Pot,
except old age, sickness, or other infirmity (which is never exempted from
protection) be the cause.

CHAP. 23. How to know a horse that is easie-going.
THat every good horse is by nature easy going, wherein if either the want of
knowledge, or the intemperance of the Rider, alter the same, (it is not within
my proposition) for I speak not only of nature: which observation I also
gather from the shape, and I do evermore account that a good and perfect shape
which gives perfection of action, with perfection of comelines, grace and
continuance thereof unto the end, for otherwise he is not to be named a horse
of good shape I am not doubtful of any thing I affirm, having had long
assurance thereof without being deceived, therefore in your choice of horse
retain it, a rule infallible, that your horse be high in the withers (if you
will have him easy in going) which being joined with the high reared
forepart and other rules before expressed, he will carry your body very upright,
with great grace, statelines, true rain, safety and ease: otherwise the
forward hanging of your body on a horse that is low before, will half
persuade you that your back is cracked, if not broken, by reason of your
leaning forward: but the high reared horse whether his pace be Trot or Amble
(being orderly ridden) will rain easy, pleasantly mouthed, lift and set,
just, true, steady, and easy, still bearing you as if you were carried in a
chair, and when you are to encounter your enemy, a safety to your person and
disadvantage to him. And if you shall enforce him to a speedy travel, which no
doubt through his violentlifting will alter his easiness, yet when you equally
consider him with a low foreparted horse in equality of place and perfection
of rain, you shall be sure the one will break you before the other bruise you:
besides, the comely, stately, and sure-going of the one, and the great danger
and disgrace of the other, because in action he cannot give grace, and when you
travel in company, observe a man shaked or rocked on his horse back, and you
shall be sure that the horse is lower before, or if he carry his head truly.

CHAP. 24. How to know a Horse that is durable, and of continuance in Journey.
THat a good horse is by nature durable, is also an observation of his shape,
yet must he have all the other rules before m^ntioned, the which I will ever
maintain as infallible truth, being inseperably linked together, to
demonstrate a true and exact knowledge of any horse. First it is to be
considered that strength is the cause of continuance of travel, then in what
part of the body the strength principally and naturally rests in the horse,
for as the strength of the Bull is naturally in the neck, the Lion and Bear
in the paw, the Dog in the chap so the horse in the forepart, where nature
has imposed the burden, and there is and must be his principal force and
strength, the which forepart must be deep and broad, from the point or top
of his withers to the bottom of his chest or breast: his ribs bearing out as
the lidde or cover of a truncke, whereby he will appear broad, full, round, and
bearing out in the Chest and breast, with an eeuennesse of Chest and belly to
the flank, so as his belly hang not deeper then his chest, nor his chest
deeper then his belly, with lean, upright, and straight pasternes, and
somewhat narrow hooue toward the toe, assure your self he will be durable,
and as good in the end of his labor, as at the beginning, if not better, and
perform his travel with great delight: but if he be of contrary shape, then
will his actions be contrary, namely the longer he is travailed, the more Jade,
whatsoever show he makes at his setting forth: for if strength and ability
of body fails, although a good spirit enforces his labor, yet it cannot be
of perseverance, Vbivires dificiunt, ibi laudanda est voluntas, where strength
fails goodwill has all the praise. And therefore when you view a colte, A
^ol^ed does express what his proof will be when he comes to age.
how young soever he be, when he is foaled, his natural shape will never alter,
but evermore grow and continue in the same shape until his death: and
therefore be well assured that he have a perfect natural shape, when he is
most young, such as I do herein describe, and so may you be assured not to be
deceived, either in the choice of old or young: what can be strange to the
knower? Aristotle says that Cognitio nostra est cognitio cognoscentiset
cogniti, our knowledge is the knowledge of the knower, and of the thing known:
and when nature has shaped the colte in perfection, with what facility does
art perfect the quality and use of every action? but if nature has shaped
the same imperfect, there cannot be any hope of perfect action, with comlines
and continuance, for Sordida natura semper sequitur sua iura, like nature like
work, because every creature works, according to his nature, and like
evermore brings forth like: beware therefore of evil beginning, either in art,
knowledge or practice, least by continuance thereof it carry soueraingtie in
you, Natura calamitatum mollimentum consuetudinem iuuenit.
to the overthrow of your hopeful desires, for Grauissum est imperimum
consuetudinis, the soueraingtie of custom is intolerable.

CHAP. 25. How to know a free and perfect spirited Horse.
THis being the conclusion of those six qualities, which every good Horse
naturally has, and retains from his conception, unto his death; spare your
ears as tunnels to your body, to let the same fall deep into your
apprehension, and consider who is the author of the faculties, which are
planted in the creature, at the time of his creation, and you shall find it
the only work of the creator, by those means which his own ordinance has
established, not as a fleshy substance, or as an accidental thing, but a
powerful spirit, proceeding from the vital spirit, and arteriall blood, that
go wandering through the whole body, to stir up the power of the beast, to
give him force and vigor to work, by which the sencible soul performs his
works, which are termed Nature: and the same norisheth, preserves, increases,
and gives power to the creature, to signify the same to others: and the more
it does abound the more powerful it is in the operation, and if it cease his
power in operation, then does the whole body cease his natural power in
working: and as this spirit is of substance most pure, so when it is
plentifully infused it makes and works all the creature and quallitie of the
same creature pure, so as man not knowing or finding the reason, cannot but
wonder at the work and workmaster, and therefore the more excellent, perfect
and pure the creature is created, the greater is his operation and travel: as
we the Sun which moves continually, the moon that is never stayed, the sky
ever moving, the fire never without working, the clouds never cease
remoouing, etc. so when we see a strange, proud and comely shaped Horse, of
pure and perfect substance, described in every part as aforesaid, there is
presented to our senses and consideration some excellent and divine work, by so
pure and refined metal, which is specialy performed by the Element of fire, so
as it seems to represent the Image of Venus, which Apelles for the space of
ten years had employed his wit and policy to paint, being so beautiful, that
the beholders became amorous, as though it had been some live Image, so as by
public edicte, he was charged to keep it secret, for fear to allure youth to
corruption. Or like that brazen Horse which Pausanias the Greek
historiographer, me^tioneth to have been found in Heraclia a Province of
Peloponesus, whose beauty was such, as other Horses with ardent desire and
affection, sought to join and couple with him, as if they had found a proud
mare: wherefore for the satisfaction and confirmation of this proposition, how
to know a perfect, quick, and free spirited Horse, you must still retain all
the description of shape before described, with this, viz. that he have a
slender lean head, lean, thin, and slender jaws, which is an absolute and
perfect assurance of quick and free forward spirit to every action: by all
which descriptions, you shall assuredly know his quallities, only upon the
view, as if you had made trial of him many years, and thereof make no more
doubt, then whether the sun has at any time given light to your eyes: but if
the Horse be defective in his shape, as I have before described, then assure
your self he wants that natural perfection I have referred the rule unto,
for as it is a natural course even in evil, by degrees to come unto
perfection of evil, so is it also as natural, that where perfection of shape
fails, in the whole or in part, there imperfection is present, and the
natural quallities answerable thereunto: observe then I pray you, that a
perfect Horse by nature is thus shaped: viz. a lean slender head, broad
forehead, great black eyes, The description of the most perfect shape of a
Horse.
full and plain over the lids, slender, thin, and lean jaws, broad, thin,
long and high reared neck, the head set to the neck so naturally as a Rams
head when he fights, high withers, a deep broad chest and breast, his ribs
bearing out as the lid of a trunck, with an equal eeuenes from his chest to
his flancke, lean upright pastornes, with a lean deep hooue, somewhat narrow
toward the toe: the most infallible true and approved description, of a most
perfect, absolute and excellent Horse, be he young or old, without any respect
of color, country, mark, or other observation whatsoever, and so sure as thy
self has a being, he will be found in all his actions naturally bold, loving,
easy, sure footed, durable, and free going, the only qualities of his first
and primary creation: and if he be not the most excellent and perfectest shape,
that nature ever brought forth, and the best in action, I shall acknowledge
these my labors, the record of my folly, and imperfect judgment, to all
succeeding ages. But because I know and do assure my self, that Vnius men's non
est capax tantae molis, that it is impossible that one head should be
sufficiently furnished for so many matters, and that to be most true which
Justinian the Emperor records in his 44. constitution. Nihil in rebus humanis
sic vsqadeo semotum ab omni contreuersia, temetsimaximam cum iustitia
contunclionem habeat, quod dubitationem and controuersiam no^ recipiat, si
subt^liter animi curas inte^das, vt nihil prorsus inter homines sicposse
desiniri vt non exquisit is subiaceat impugnationibus illorum, qui suos
adfectus praeferunt veritati. There is nothing in humane things so remote from
controversy, if with subtilty you strain the powers of the mind thereunto,
and nothing can be so exactly defined amongst men, that cannot be subjected to
exquisite cauels, of those which do prefer their affections before truth:
for who knows not but that a playing wit can praise the discretion of an
Ass? wherefore my self knowing that neither my words or pen, can carry with
them the life of my inward feeling, I have the more largely discoursed to
unfold my knowledge by the plainest demonstration for the meanest
understanding for as Lucianus says, Proverb
occultae musices nullum esse respectum, and as Solomon says, Sapientiae
reconditae and thesaur^ abstrusi nullam esse vtilitatem, of wisdom shut up
there is no pleasure, nor profit comes of hidden treasure. I have therefore
herein endeavored, Polipi mentem tenere, to frame all my discourse to the true
lovers of the renowned Art of Horsemanship, and to object against any
assertions, the most difficult objections.

CHAP. 26. Objections against the general propounded rules.
FIrst it may be demanded, whether these observations are both for young
coltes, when as their bodies are not grown to perfection: and for old Horses,
which by leanness seem to be imperfect? I answer, when the Colt falls from
the Dam, the natural body is of that proportion of shape which neither can or
will at any time after alter, and in that shape does it grow and increase unto
the end, not as some do ignorantly allege, one year to grow in the
forepart, and another year in the hinder part, for the faculty of nature
cannot be nutritive in a sound body to one part and neglect the other part,
neither can any part continue without nourishment, without the destruction of
that part, neither can the nourishment of the body alter the form and natural
shape of the body, and therefore the rules are infallible both for old and
young, and to grant them otherwise were absurd because nulla ratione potest
admitti per communem sensum, quia non couuenit humanae societati, by no reason
it can be admitted by common sense, the same not being agreeable to humane
reason. Nulla placidior quies nisi quam ratio composuit
Therefore what Nature has framed is constant and perpetual without change,
and the form of constitution, and shape, such in his age, as you see him a
Colt.

2. Secondly it may be demanded, whether a Horse wanting any of these rules
may notwithstanding be a good Hotse? The degrees of goodness and what is to be
sud good.
I answer, you must consider that there are degrees in goodness, as good,
better, and best of al: Next you must consider, what is good, or what may be
said to be good, for no one thing can be truly said to be good, that
understanding and knowledge does not tell you to be good: for ignorance and
error do call light-darkenes, and darkness light, good evil, and evil good so
as your direction must not be opinatiue, but examined, per Norman rationis, by
the rule of reason, if you be a creature reasonable: for do you not know, the
Fly, the Dog, the Lion, the horse, and man, are al living creatures? but with
difference, for only man is a living creatur reasonable, created for the only
glory of God, so as you must always reason from true definition: then if you
will demand of the most best good Horse, I hold and will defend against all
contrary opinion, that there is not any of the most best Horses, that does or
can want any of my six rules, which I prove thus. When God first created
Horse, he created them in all perfection of that kind, for nothing issued from
his hands ill shaped: he made him perfectly good, Psalm. 8.5
and all that good, only for man, and to that end were all his creatures made,
and as he made man their lord and ruler, so did he appoint them their
preserver, but no destroyer of his creatures, Iustissima pana vt qu^scione
rectu^ non sac^t et a wit^at scire quod tectu^. Aug.
and all this is inheritable to us: then examine what is that which man can
more or less require in a horse for perfection, then these six qualities
before described, being such as are ever inseparable and evermore so to be
apprehended in judgment, and conceit: for if he be bold and fears nothing,
that true wisdom and discretion would have him to adventure, neither
defective in his love to give his life for your sake, and so easy going as
your self can desire, and so sure of foot as no perrill or danger is to be
feared, Neglectis Grenda filix innas uur agri^t Horat.
a Horse may be thick chapped or iawed, and admitted, if ye whole head be lean,
and all the shape otherwise perfect: but yet there will be a great difference of
pleasure in his rain and pleasant mouth besides his voluntary forwardness,
when you shall compare the one with the other.

Lastly, the very high born, proud and stately horse, might also in some part
be tolerated and admitted to a lower rain, and yet a good Horse: but when you
consider the grace, majesty, and high countenance with honor and majesty to
man, being a part of his primarie creation, I cannot admit the least
imputation to man, for whose glory and use they were in all perfection
originally created, neither to admit the consideration of any imperfection,
but rather by all possible means to uphold the perfection of their creation,
least man should thereby take liberty to neglect his duty and charge, which
man's corruption too much of it self: allows, and vpholdeth as the practice
in all ages and times, (in all professions do sufficiently witness) howsoever
they pretend the contrary, and thereby allow to Art such perfection as to
make that perfect which nature has made imperfect, when as Art is but only a
quickner up of Nature, as to endeavor by Art and practice to make a low
fore-parted or short necked Horse to rain well and perfect with continuance,
ad calendas graecas, when God has made another world. For there is not any
learned physician or other learned man that can or will challenge absolutely to
cure a disease that nature has bred and brought forth, because it only
appertains to the Creator. If a man will bend a straight Tree crooked, or a
crooked Tree straight, so soon as it is at liberty, will it not return to his
natural grouth, can the taming of a Lion make him leave his natural roaring?
will Art make a Fox faithful, and harmeles, or make a bird not to delight in
the woods, wherefore then do men seek to have breed, and keep craving dull
Iades, and imperfect shaped Horses, and persuade themselves, that good feeding,
good keeping, and artificial riding and practice, will make them absolute, and
perfect Horses, and here of publishe and set forth great volumes, do they
think that art can bring an ape to beget an ape with a long tail? If this be
not error ignorance and senceles practice, my desire is of those that better
understand, to defend the contrary, and to manifest the same by reason: how
shameless a thing then were it for me to admit, more gross imperfection when
man's corruption transporteth him so far beyond the degrees of reason, to allow
and maintain all seeing imperfection.

Again, some will and do object that Horses of such excellent shape, spirrit
and life, as I have described, will be dangerous to those that are not expert
in the art, and that such will speedely spend themselves, and not continue in
flesh or good liking, and are very chargeable to keep, and besides so unruly
and intemperate, as thereby great danger will ensue, to the most people that
are unskillful of Horsemanship: and such like childish and ignorant conceits,
wherein the multitude do excel, it might as well be objected, that fire and
water, wine and weapon, and many such like are dangerous, and that many have
perrished therewith, therefore very unfit to have them, or use them, the which
proceeds from their debilitie of judgment, not able to apprehend that such
Horses, are the most excellent that ever have been or shall be created, being
compounded of the most just, and true proportion, of mixture of the temperature
of the elements, which gives them that fullness of spirit, vigor and courage,
neither that the temperature of an excellent Horseman which compriseth all
perfection wherewith natural man can be endued with, if he have the managing
of such Horses will not (Animum volentem accendere) blow the fire when it
burns clear, knowing that such natures are to be used according to the
temperature of their own nature, without jar or violence: but the ignorant
rider not able to judge of his nature, does so far distemper nature in the
beginning, as afterward not knowing how to restore him to his former
obedience, is astonished with the admiration of his wonder: and holds Omne
ignotum pro magnifico, All unknown things beyond the degrees of admiration.
The Hebrews do derive the name of Time of a verb which signifies to corrupt,
because it does corrupt all, and as the times are, so are men that live in
them, whereby the best horsemen that ever have bin, do not only carry the note
of the errors of the times wherein they live, but the full stream of the
corruption thereof, which makes me to become like unto the Mariner, who
orders his sails acording to the times and the wind, and does of necessity
turn and wind to arrive to that place obliquely, by fetching a compass when
he cannot do it directly, and by a straight line- Non semper et vnogradu, says
Seneca, sed vna via: non se mutat sed aptat, he saileth not always with one
and the same pace although he follow the same way, he changes not, but
accomodateth himself: whose example I have followed herein, but with the glue
of mutual concord yet adhering to that memorable sentence of Tertullian, That
is true whatsoever is first, Contra pra^
and that is false whatsoever is latter, and therefore the forsaking, or not
knowing, the knowledge of these that lived nearest the first creation, who did
see best, and the adhering to the knowledge of those that have lived furthest
from those times, who did see more dimly, and their knowledge more corrupt,
has been the cause of their manifold errors in Horsemanship, in these latter
ages, and the principal cause of my long discourse, in this tractat, wherein I
have often deliberated to think and rethink, redoubting what may happen, yet
knowing when to fear, I did thereby know safely to go forward, Nam animus
vereri qui scit, scit tuto aggredi, so as I doubt not to affirm the Athenians
proverb after victory, Noctua volavit, the bird of darkness is put to flight,
comforting my self with that saying of Aug. Qui se dicit scire quod nescit,
temerarius est, qui se negat scire quod scit, ingratus est, he is rash that
speaks that he does not know, And he is unthankful that denies to know
that he does know.

Paruus error in principio
Maximus est in fine.

CHAP. 27. Of perfect breeding.
WHen I remembered that Solomon proclaims man's wisdom imperfect, and his
knowledge in each science uncertain, Eccle. 8.
and perceived never man, to have attained such degrees of learning, as to
find himself ignorant, how time the beginner increaser and subuerter of all
humane knowledge, has wrought defects and difficulties in understanding: I
could not but admire the breeders of Horses within this kingdom, seeing them
in this most decayed time of knowledge, to cast their anchor into the deep
and deceaueable sands of the practice of these times, wherein unlimited and
tirrannicall custom, which never admits either dispensation, or
quallification (without notorious affront) rules and reigns in the
superlatiue supremacy of error: and only by referring the effects of al good
breed, to the immediate work of god as though the effect of all such causes
were supernatural, and to be reduced to God immediately, as a miracle,
receiving them from nature, and abhorring the natural means, not considering
that there are effects only natural and only to be referred to nature, not
that nature is an universal cause, endowed with a jurisdiction severed from
God, but that she is a name of order which God has bestowed in the frame of
the world, to the end that the necessary effects might follow the
preservation thereof, thorough which their unanimous consent in practice, they
have long sucked a strong opinion of the possibility of good breed, whereby
there is grown a broad sea of difference, in your point of true knowledge of
breeding and their acustomed practice, so as notwithstanding the great and
invincible power of nature in all creatures, whereof God being the Author, and
whereunto as unto a natural means, he has applied himself for preservation,
there is not one Horse of a thousand bred in the perfection of nature, whereby
all and every of them, cannot but acknowledge his own thoughts and forseeing
doubtful, which makes me cry with Paul, Nihil mihi conscius sum, I know not
how far I shall offend: but when I apprehended with Galen that every science is
a convenient and firm notice, that never departs from reason, knowing the
end where unto I was borne, and to whose benifit I should live, notwithstanding
all stimulatorie causes of progression, I assembled my conceits to pierce
through the hardness of the enterprise, and rather esteemed to walk aloe to
steep downefalles, and with Quintus Fabius to hazard my credit, yea with
worthy Horatius Cocles, my life (for the honor of my sovereign and benefit of
my country) then to be like the beasts who never forsook the beaten path and
high market way, with a guide before them: so as posterity shall still live
without adding increase to former knowledge, and therefore as to the load-star
of my desire, and prefixed period for producing fourth of that truth which this
Art has bin long in travel of: for Nihil magnum subito noscitur I have
adventured to draw the thread of this subject to my determinate conclusion, not
by a dim light soon quenched, but by a Sinopsis or perfect view of the whole
body of breeding, and to show the reason and cause of the errors in breeding,
and the true means of restitution thereof to perfection. An action most
befitting man, The use of reason.
who by nature is reasonable to teach, according to his own nature, the same
being as Seneca affirms, an imitation of nature, so as reason having his true
use, it shall not only behold and contemplate the truth, but also repress
and bridle all affections, that swell and rise against it, as a virtuous
Mistress admonishing, and thereby become the most excellent nursse to suckle
up true knowledge and practice to the full proportion of man his hopeful
desire: but least any should tell me that my passion in the earnest love of this
subject should make me forget my passages, I proceed to set down the only
essential and true observations of a perfect breed, wherein I pray you
observe a principle, most fit truly, to know whence proceeds the most
excellent colts that are begotten.

1. First provide Horses and Mares of the most perfect and beautiful shape,
even such and no other then I formerly described.

2. Secondly truly understand at what age such horses and mares are fittest to
beget and bring forth perfect Colts.

3. Thirdly how to prepare and keep those horses and Mares before they come to
the Action.

4. Fourthly, when, how and where they are to do the action in perfection.

5. Fifthly how to keep them in perfection after their conception unto the time
of foaling.

6. Sixthly and lastly how to use them when they are foaled, and how to preserve
and continue them in their perfection.

Now if any man demand of me why I do not show what grounds are meetest for
breed, and how such grounds are to be severed, Sisiphi saxum voluera, great
labor without profit: for can any man think that every man that would or does
breed horses may go to Corinth, or can have such grounds as may be discribed?
are not most grounds of several natures and qualities? and are there not
infinite numbers of Colts most excellently bred by such as have no enclosed
grounds? and does not every man's experience (being his principal leader)
confirm the sufficiencye of multitude and number that are so bred, so that if
one of an hundred that are bred were good, few could justly complain. I have
therefore herein endeavored to inform the reader with true knowledge, how to
have an excellent breed (so near as man's wisdom may attain) the truth
whereof being laid down, will sufficiently direct every man how far the true
use of all grounds do

CHAP. 28. Of the creation and generation of Horses.
1. IT is twofolde, Supernatural.
and to be considered after a two-folde manner.

1. The first and primarie once immediately by God in his supernatural Creation.

2. Natural.
The second and ordinary in his natural generation.

1. Conception.
The ordinary and natural generation is made by the elementarie force and
forming virtue, which is in the seed when it is in the womb, in such order,
that the 13: first days the seed of the horse and mare do mingle, unite, and
curdle together like Cream, and are made one body, which is the conception.

2. Tormelesse blood.
The next xiii. days this seed is concocted, thickened and changed into a
mass of flesh and indigested formeles blood, which is the proper matter of his
body.

3. Fashioned body.
The third xiii. days following, of this mass or lump is made and fashioned
the body in gross.

4. Perfect body
The fourth xiii. days, the whole body is ended and perfected, and no more
imperfect in shape: and at the fourth month, the Colt has motion and sense,
and tripling this term, which is at the twelve months, he comes forth into
the light.

CHAP. 29. Of the Elements whereof the Horse and every other creature is
compounded.
Every Colt and likewise every creature, and things inanimate are in their
creation compounded of the Elements, which is as much to say, of a pure and
simple thing, which the outward sense cannot discern, and yet the common
beginning of all Creatures, namely of Fire, Air, Water, and Earth, I mean not
such as we daily see with our eyes, for they are bodies compounded, which our
senses do perfectly know, but these Elements I speak of are above, which our
outward senses are not able to discern.

First of the Fire, Fire.
which is the highest and lightest Element placed next the Moon, and of nature
hot and dry, but most of heat: 1. His virtues and properties by reason of his
heat are to move to generation. The virtues.


2. Secondly to sever the bones in the Colt from the flesh, the flesh from the
sinews, the heart from the liver, etc. as the wood that is burned has vapor,
smoke flame and ashes, which the heat seuereth, so in burning of several
mettalls, the heat seuereth the one from the other, and yet gathers the like
together.

3. Thirdly to ripen.

4. Fourthly to digest things raw and undigested.

5. Fifthly to mingle dry with moist.

6. Sixthly to open the Pores of the Colt, that the air being somewhat grosser,
may enter into the body

7. Seauenthly, to break the cold of the water and earth, so as it may not
distemper the body.

The second element is the Air, Aeyr
and placed next the fire, and is light and hot, but chiefly moist.

1. First by reason of his moisture, I mean not a waterish moisture, but a
comforting nourishing moisture, as oil is to the lamp, The virtues.
to make the matter apt to receive shape.

2. Secondly, to make the mixed bodies of blood, fleame choler, and melancholy,
not only subtle and penetrable, but also light, to the intent they may be
neither too gross nor too heavy.

3. Thirdly, to slake the burning of the heart, and of the other members, as
apeareth by the office of the lungs, which (as a pair of bellows) does draw
fresh air unto the same, and also glad the spirrits, and disburdeneth it
self of those fumes and excrementes which oppress it, filling all empty
corners with moistnes: and howsoever the air seem to our senses, yet does it
yield more moisture then the water.

The third element is Water, which though heavy and moist, Water
yet most cold.

1. First, by means of his coldenes (for cold is not active) it does
conglutinate and join his bones with flesh and sinews, The virtues.
and his flesh with sinews and bones: for the nature of cold is to bind,
dirt, wood, sticks, strawes and such like in one mass.

2. Secondly, with his coldenes it does temper the fervent heat of the fire.

3. Thirdly, it does gather that together, which the fire would disperse
asunder: for the nature of heat is to open and disperse that which cold has
conjoined, and of cold to bind that which heat has dissolved.

The fourth element is the Earth, which though it be heavy and cold, yet most
chiefiy dry. Earth


The Colt being a mixed body, the earth does harden and retain his shape, which
the Air and water would make fluxible, The virtues.
as is to be seen in wax and other things, newly wrought, which before it be
hard and dry, will not hold, and when the body dies, those elements, both in
quallitie and substance, return from whence they came, as that which is hot to
the fire, that which is moist to the air, that which is cold to the water,
and that which is dry to the earth.

CHAP. 30. Of the humors.
THe humor from whence the seed and menstruall blood are taken for the framing
of the Colte, are, 1. Blood, 2. Fleame. 3. Choler, 4. Melancholy.

1. The blood which is perfect, is hot and moist, and yet his predominate
quallitie, heat, and therefore full of joy and pleasure.

2. The Fleame is cold and moist, but the predominate quallitie thereof
coldenes, and therefore full of waterish blood, with little heat of spirit.

3. The choler is hot and dry, but the pedorminate quality thereof is heat, and
therefore full of anger when the blood is over hot, not clear but of thick
spirit.

4. The melancholy which is black choler, is cold and dry, but the
predominate quallitie drines, therefore heavy, sad, and fearful, for the blood
is thick and cold, and the spirit full of darkness.

CHAP. 31. The uses to be gathered from the humors.
Humor.
FIrst that the cause of the good or bad temperature of the Colte (which is his
good or bad quality) proceeds from the goodness or badnes of the blood, and
the blood in nature (though not in predominate quality) is like unto the air,
light, hot and moist: fleame to the water, which is heavy and moist, choler
(which is red) like unto blood, hot and dry: melancholy (which is black
choler) heavy, cold and dry, like unto the earth. But the fleame sweetneth
the force of the two chollers, and the melancholy moderateth the sudden
motions.

Blood.
The Fountain of the blood, is the liver (and the use of this fountain is to
keep it pure) from which the veins issuing, are as channells of the first and
natural blood: and the Arteries coming from the heart, as conduits of the
second blood, more subtle and vital: from whence it is apparent, that the
purity thereof dwells in the heart, and yet the liver is the storehouse of
blood, fountain of the veins, the seat of the natural nourishing faculty or
vegatiue soul, made and engendered of the Chyle, that is to saya kind of white
suck or whey fit for the nourishment of the body, which by veins pass unto
the liver.

Fleame
Fleame in the brain, which is cold and spungeous and the seat of the sensible
soul, Vbi sedet pro tribunali, the brain and not the heart, for the heart
having feeling and motion, is not capeable of sense.

Choler
Choler in the liver.

Melancholy
Melancholy in the spleen, which is the receipt and discharge of the excrements
of the liver.

1. From hence it may be truly collected, that every humor has his proper
end and use, Blood chiefly nourishes the body, Fleame helps to move the
Ioints, choler to provoke the body to anoid excrements, and melancholy to
provoke the horse to appetite.

2 Secondly it may be collected, that such as the temperature of the elements,
are in these humors, whereof the Colt is framed in the womb, such will be his
qualities and dispositions in his actions, and if any of these humors are
predominate in quality, when the Colt is framed of them, then he is to be
termed according to the predominate quality thereof. Now there are in every
Colt as well Male as female, four chief or principal isntrumental members,
viz. the brain, the heart, the liver and the stones, otherwise the Female
could not have seed to move her to lust, whereof the first three are only to
preserve the body, wherein they be, and the fourth to preserve the whole
kind, from which do spring other official members which do serve, and do
office to the principal members, as the sinews from the brain, which are
animal spirits, the Arteries from the heart, which are vital spirits, the
veins from the liver, which are the natural parts, and the seed vessels from
the stones as place of generation.

CHAP. 32 From whence these humors proceed, and have their being.
THere cannot be any thing more true or agreeable to reason, The four
faculties viz. Eating. Retaining. Concoction. Expulsion.
then to affirm that nature has provided, for every beast four Natural
faculties viz. to eat, to retain, to concoct, and to expel, of which
concoction altering the food, there are residing in their bodies the said
four humors, blood, Fleame, Choler and Melancholy, whereof nature uses only
the service of one to work the creature, which is an excrement that may fitly
be termed whey or wheish blood, whose engendering is wrought in the liver and
in the veins, at such time as these four humors do take from the beast the
form and substance they ought to have, and of such licour as this, does
nature serve her self to resolve the meat, and to work that the same may
pass thorough the veins, and thorough the strait passages carrying
nourishment to all the parts of the body. What is a Vein.
The veins being a conceptacle or empty place of receite, for the blood mixed
and co^fused with the vital spirit: the which veins have their beginning from
the liver, and their office is to draw from the liver unto them this whey, and
to send part of the same thorough the passages into the bladder, and from
thence out of the body, to free the creature from offense, whereof two of the
veins carry part of ye said whey from the liver to the cods and vessels of
seed, there residing with some small quantity of the purest blood, whereby the
operation of the stones, whose qualities are hot and dry, thereby do make a
perfect seed requisite for such a creature, the which two veins nature
planted, one in the reins in the right side, which ends in the right cod,
and another in the left, both which take their issue from either of the cods
accordingly: Moreover, nature has given to the right cod much heat and drines,
and to the left cod much cold and moisture, so that the right side of the
reins yield matter hot and dry to the right cod, for the generation of the
male, and the contrary for the female: and in ye like manner it is with the
female as with the male: but much more colder and moister, and the liver in
which the natural lust of the beast resideth, has for his natural
temperature heat and moisture to predominate, and from these it never alters,
if the creature be in perfection of health and temperature. The heart.
And as touching the heart, being formed with the liver and brain, and
maintained with the purest blood, having great quantity thereof from the liver
still to preserve the same, then is the heart so hot, as that while the creture
lives, if you put your finger into his hollownes thereof, it is impossible to
hold the same there without burning: hereupon it follows that the liver
being the fountain of all blood, have great store of pure and perfect blood
to maintain the whole body: What is a vital spirit.
And the vital spirit of the Colt is no other then a bodily fume or vapor
very pure and subtle, begun in the heart by the operation of the natural
heat spread by the Arteries and veins to recreate and comfort the whole body,
which stirring and comfortable spirit proceeding from the heart and vittal
spirits being a perpetual agent, and evermore in action, because motion and
agitation is the true life thereof, and so evermore remains in all living
creatures, but not in plants or trees, where only the vegetative soul that is
his natural virtue, has his working, and the vital spirit only in the
Arteries and Veins, as they are severally dispersed in the whole parts of the
body. For as in the midst of heaven there is situated the Sun that
enlightneth all things with his rays, and cherishes the world and the things
therein contained, with his life keeping heat: so the heart, the fountain of
life and heat has affigned to it by nature, the middle part of the body for
his habitation, from whence proceeds life and heat unto all the parts of the
body (as it were unto rivers) whereby they be preserved and enabled to perform
their natural and proper function: Furthermore, if the liver be not full of
pure blood, it cannot perfectly digest the meat, neither can the Cods be hot:
wherein if there be defect of heat, Cods.
the seed of the horse cannot be perfectly concocted, and so the horse is
impotent and without power of begetting, for when God said increase and
multiplye, Note.
you must understand that he gave them an able power for procreation, which
could not be accomplished without abundance of heat, and no less heat did
he bestow upon the faculty nutritive, with which he is to restore his consumed
substance, and to renew another in lieu thereof, so as no one thing can be more
apparent, then that pure and clean blood gives great heat, and that heat
is the cause of joy and mirth, which gives viuacitie, courage boldness, and
fullness of spirit to every action.

CHAP. 33. Of what age the Horse and Mare ought to be, that beget and bring
forth.
Having showed the principal rules of nature touching the beginning of
creation, Observe this discourse.
and the natural means of their bodily composition, it rests to show what
Horses and Mares are to be chosen to beget and bring forth, but because I have
largely spoken of the most excellent and perfect shape, and of the perfections
of their qualities, and actions (which I only admit, and no other) it now
rests to begin and to express the only fit age, when such beautiful Horses
and Mares are to beget and bring forth, and thereof to come to a plain and
true understanding: I think fit first to look back unto the time they were
created of God, in their primary creation, and to follow his example therein,
which was when they were in all perfection, and not in their imperfection, for
when he created them, they were in all parts most absolute and perfect, and
then God blessed them saying, bring forth and multiply, by which example man
being a reasonable creature, having committed unto him from God, the rule and
government of all his creatures, for his only use and comfort, cannot now in
the natural generation, (without the neglect of his example) having reason for
his rule and prescript, but consider nature in the greatest and most
perfection of strength, and to aproach nearest to the entire and perfectest
constitution, when he enjoys al his forces of youth, neither in the
corruption or deprivation thereof, and therefore without all doubting the same
is in the middle age, being the center of all virtue and perfection, and for
farther demonstration to confirm in you this proposition, I pray you observe
that every horse until he be 5. years old is a Colt, but never after, and that
is, his first age, and if after that time he lose any of his teeth, it comes
not again, because the excess of his moisture does then begin to abate, being
until then predominate in moisture, and from 5. years of age until he be 10.
is counted his middle youthful and perfect age, both in vigor and spirit, and
action, because he is then more hot and less moist, and from ten years of
age unto 15. years is his declyning age, because then heat and moisture do
much decay, and from 15. years of age unto 20. his old age, because that then
he is cold and dry, and if he do continue above those years, yet is the same
with great imperfection. Now for as much as all works of generation do only
appertain to the natural power and virtue of his body, which is termed his
vegetative soul, whose faculty is to nourish for the conservation of his body,
whereunto do also serve the attractiue of ye meat, the co^coctiue, the
disgestiue, seperating the good from the bad, the retentiue and the expulsive
of superfluities. The second is the increasing and growing faculty for the
perfection and due quantity of the body, and the third is the generatiue, for
the conservation and preservation of the kind, whereby we see the Wisdom of
the God of nature, where the two first are, for the body or indiuiduum and
work within the body, and the third for the kind, and that has it effect and
oparation in another body and therefore more worthy then the other, and has in
it a great height of perfection, to make another like it self, but not until
there be a perfect and able body, and in all his actions he follows the
motions of the temperature of the body, so as both nature, reason and practice
do approve both horses and all other creatures (of good composition and
temperature) to be in their middle age most strong and perfect, and fullest
of vigor, spirit and courage, and therefore the only fit time to beget and
bring forth, and thereby the contrary reason, the time both before and after
unfit, and most imperfect, Nam natura cum ad summam peruenerit, descendit idq
non aequo gressu, ascensus enim lentior, descensus praeceps. Nature is long
before it come to perfection, but when it is come to the highest it suddenly
decays, wherefore for a full and more plain demonstration of truth, and of
the errors of all ages observe. If two Colts, viz. horse and mare under five
years of age, not having obtained perfection of strength, neither refyned
nature from the excessive moisture of youth (being but few years since they
were created) that of their seed a Colt should be formed, being a matter
endowed with excessive moisture, their seed cannot possibly be of a perfect
temperature, neither is or can be perfect for generation, because all perfect
seed for procreation must be hot and dry, for that otherwise it neither will
or can incite to copulation, with perfection of generation: whereof also must be
plenty, and the same thoroughly concocted, for that the seed of the mare (being
in comparison with the horse, is much more colder and moister, and therefore
the Horse must have a great quantity of seed, both hot and dry, equally to
temper the coldenes and moisture of the seed of the Mare, from which equallity
of temperature, the goodness of the colte begotten proceeds, for every
quality in reason must be abated, by his contrary, and then their seed being
equally temperate, and seasoned without excess of predominate quality, it
always forms the best in his kind, and the stature of the Colte conformable
to the quantity of the temperate seed, and menstruall blood, which it had at
the time when it was framed add shaped, and according to the quality of
temperature al creatures take and carry the conditions and properties of their
Sires, at the time of their framing, and not at their bringing forth. Again,
if a colte should be begotten, of a seed cold and moist, it will be great, soft
of flesh, great limmed, goutye ioynted, thick boned, heavy and dull, according
to the natutall operation and quality of cold and moistnes, which conioyneth
all in a lump without good proportion. Again, if the old Horse and old
Mare, should beget and bring forth, after ten years of age, wanting the power
and efficacy of their natural heat, vigor, and spirit, then will the colte be
formed of a seed over cold and over dry: having outrun two parts of their age,
whereof if a colte be begotten, for want of heat to make an equality of
temperature, by reason of the coldenes and drynes, that is predominate, the
colte will be soon ripe, soon rotten, of small strength, short lived, little
spirit or courage with continuance, faint hearted, and evil shaped, for that
it wants heat and good moisture (I mean a moisture of oily substance) the
two principal elements for preservation of life and good spirit. Again, if an
old horse and a young Mare should beget and bring forth: then would the Colt
be framed of a seed from the Mare cold and moiste, which is Flegmaticke
without any taste, as water, and of a seed from the horse cold and dry, which
is sower and heavy, for as Galen says, the Fleame being a cold waterish
humor, is of no force for ornament of good conditions. Lastly, if an old Mare
and a young horse should beget and bring forth, then would the Colt be framed
of a seed of the horse, little hot, but over moist and of a seed of the mare
cold and over dry, wherein cannot be any perfection of equal temperature, so as
it appears an approved consequent in Reason, that the middle age of the
horse, having a seed hot and dry and the mare a seed cold and moist, with
great plenty of fullness on both parts, in the greatest perfection of heat and
natural strength of body, do make equality of temperature, and compound
themselves in such high degree of perfection that they bring forth a Colt full
of vital spirit, great courage, boldness, and pride, thin and dry bones, great
sinews and Arteries of great strength, loving, of long continuance, and of
such beautiful and perfect shape thorough the natural quality of heat,
purifying the whole body from all manner of dross, and in such resined manner,
as though nature had assembled all her forces for the preservation of her
self, and expulsion of her enemies, for such is the nature of good or bad
seed, when it receives any well or il rooted quality evermore to communicate
to the discendents accordingly.

CHAP. 34. Of the Elements of generation.
NOw I think fit to speak of the proper Elements of generation, that is to
say, of the engendering seed, and menstruall blood, from whence every colte
takes his first being of shape: and herein I observe a difference betwixt
nature and seed, for that which is truly called seed, is like the seed of
Rise when it is sodden, which though wettish yet thick for otherwise it cannot
effect procreation, for the heat has tried it and made it fit to incorporate
it self, with the waterish seed of the Mare, and that which is and may be
termed nature is thin, and not thick as seed is, so as all seed may be termed
nature, but all nature cannot properly be termed seed: and understand that
these proper beginnings depend upon the qualities of the first beginnings
before rehearsed, that is to say of moist, dry, hot and cold, without which
they could do nothing, nor yet be any thing of themselves.

Again, observe that the matter and quality, whereof every colte is
compounded, is so subject to corruption, that at the instant when and where it
begins to be shaped, it begins likewise to be untwined, so as if nature
had not provided the natural faculites, of attraction, retention, concoction,
and expulsion, for the preservation and increase of matter, for continual
supply, the creation thereof being finished, and not any part of that
substance remaining, whereof it was first composed (as in truth there does
not) then had the same presently perished, and because nature is truly said to
be the temperature of these qualities of heat, cold, moistnes and drynes, and
that the same temperature is the schoolemaister which teaches the sensitive
souls of the creatures, in what sort they are to work, and to perform the
works proper to their kind, without any teacher, it is now most fit to
consider and to set forth, from whence the goodness or badnes of this
temperature does proceed, wherein the perfection of creation consists, so
as all imperfection and hinderance to original nature, being removed, the
same may be restored to his former perfection, so far as lies in the power
and ability of man.

CHAP. 35 That the aliment or food, that the Horseeand Mare do seed upon,
before th^ction raises and makes their seed.
THe learned Physicians and Philosophers do hold that all aliment or food is
differing in quality, (after the disgestion and concoction,) in every
creature, and has a different and particular seed, as well in substance as in
t^perature, from which ground it is probable, and without contradiction that the
colt begotten, pertaketh his temperature, and quallitie of the meat, which
their Sires did feed upon, before the action, for who is so much deprived of
understanding, but knows that there are meats and drinks to increase or
mittigate heat, or drynes, or moistute: for though it be true, that all meat
that Horses eat, whether in natural quallitie, the same are hot or cold, dry
or moiste, turn to the nature of the Horse, and of his substance, whereof if
any other creature do eat, it will do the like, yet such as the natural
quality of the meat is in his operation, such will be the natural quallitie of
the humors, after the same is concocted, and disgested in the body, and
according thereunto, such will be the blood, the fleame, the choler, and the
melancholy, that comes from the same, for if the Horse be fed with grass,
sorrel, lettuce, or other herbs, will any man doubt but that the blood and
other humors that come thereof, will be in nature and quality cold, and moist
according to the natural quality of that aliment, or food.

Then if the blood and other humors, after the concoction of such food, be
cold and moist, will any man doubt that the seed of generation, and the
menstruall blood for so much thereof as nature takes from it, but that the same
will be cold and moist acording to the natural quallitie thereof, and that as the
blood thereof is cold and moiste, the wheyish blood thereof drawn from the
liver by the veins, will be cold and moist, and the seed thereof cold, and
moist, because the humors do attain the substances and qualities, which the
meat had before it was eaten, and that the brain of the colt being the seat of
his sense, and has his beginning and maintenance from the purest part of the
seed and measure of spirit, which the Colt has from the liver, heart and
veins, will be of like Nature and quality. For if we consider the Colt and
sound the causes of his essence and nature, and consider the causes which
makes him move, you shall find that it is his heat and moisture which are
two principal qualities, consisting in all living creatures, nourishers of
nature, for so soon as heat and moisture fail in any living creature, it can
no more live nor move, and straight is the body occupied with contrary
qualities, coldness and drynes, the enemies of nature. If you will mount and
ascend higher to know what is the cause of those two qualities heat and
moisture, you shall find that it is because al living creatures are composed of
the four elements, of fire, aier, water and earth, in which the said four
qualities of heat, moisture, coldness, and dryness do consist, and while
heat and moisture rain in the body it lives, but when cold and dryness are
predominate then dies it. Again, if you consider the cause of the heat and
moisture, and the other qualities which we see in the four Elements, and in
the bodies made of them, ye shall find the sun the cause of the heat, and the
moon the cause of the moisture: let us pass farther, and seek the cause
wherefore the Sun is hot, and the moon moiste, and from whence these
qualities come unto them, and we shall find the sovereign cause in God. The
due consideration hereof, (if without partiality it be considered) will most
apparently condemn the practice of all breeders, and the works of all former
writers, and their knowledge of nature not to be defended, for if iudicially
you consider that the power of all begetting does only appertain to his
natural virtue, called his vegetative soul, the which if it have bred and
cherished a raw, cold, and imperfect seed, how can it be defended, but that
the Colt begotten of that seed, will be of the same temperature, and deprived
of the good temperature which it ought to have, according whereunto his goodness
or badnes of action will be, wherefore, seeing all the learned, and true
experience teach us that there are only two ways to come unto the knowledge
of things, the one from the causes and maxims to the knowledge of the effects
and consequences, the other when contrary by the effects and consequences, we
know the causes and maximees. For when we see the earth wax green and the
trees gather leaves, we know by that effect, that the Sun which is the cause
thereof approaches nigh unto us, and we come to receive this maximee, that
the Sun gives vigor and force to the earth to bring forth fruits. And by
the contrary we receive this maxim, to know the effect and to conclude, the
consequence, that the Sun coming nigh us, the earth brings forth her
fruits, and withdrawing from us the earth leaves to bring forth.

CHAP. 36. The means to make theseede perfect for generation.
IT is granted by all learned and understanding men, that the seed of the
horse ought to be hot and dry, and that all excessive moisture of seed must
be abated and taken away: Labor.
Now the means to make hot and dry seed fit for generation, is labor and
spare diet, Spare diet.
by labor the moisture by reason of heat is exhausted, by spare diet the
disgestion is made perfect, and therefore through heat proceeding from labor,
the same is easily and perfectly concocted, and so be comes fit for
generation: wherein also this consideration is to be had, that the meat that
the horse and mare do feed upon be in quality of Nature hot and dry, and then
moderately taken, there is no doubt but that the seed which shall come thereof
will be easily perfected, because naturally it partaketh of the quality and
temperature of the meat, as has bin said, and also the same meat that feeds
both horse and Mare would be one and the same, The cause why Colts are like
their Syres.
because it will increase a uniform seed, and so the Colt be like unto the
Syers: the meat would be old sweet hay or Wheate-strawe moderately given,
his prouender old dried, clean and sweet Oats, wynowed or cleansed from all
dust and filth, mingled with old dried pease or beans, with a scattering of
Baye salt and anniseedes, their water sweet and pure, and every day early in
the morning when they are both fasting and empty, moderately excercised
until they sweat and then painefully dressed, rubbed dry, and thorough cold
before any meat be given unto them, the which does not only perfect disgestio^,
and exhausteth the moisture from their seed, but also strengthens and
cleanses their blood and bodies from all raw and imperfect humors, whereby you
shall perceive them to exceed in pride and lust.

Their prouender is to be given them at three several times in the day, at
morning Noone, and night, and at every time tossed and two hours meatlesse to
cause an absolute and perfect disgestion, for fulness of meat overcomes
nature, and thereby not able perfectly to digest, the disgestion will be raw
and imperfect, whereof can no petfect seed be made, and if they should be
excercised upon full stomachs, then thorough the greatness of heat coming by
their labor, the meat will be more speedely disgested, then nature had ability
to perform, by which imperfect disgestion, the humors must of necessity be
imperfect, the which being so carried, from the liver by the veins into all
parts of the body, the substance whereof the seed is composed, being carried
to the seed vessels, in such imperfection, the seed remains imperfect, and
the blood corrupted, a special cause also of all inward diseases, and outward
sorrances.

Having observed that has been spoken, about 8. or 10. days, before the Horse
and Mare come to the action, being both of them in great lust and courage,
feed them for every of those days, with such sweet oats and old dry sweet
wheat, equal in mixture and quantity, for the wheat is a great comforter of
the heart, and an increaser of the vital spirits, which above all things for
that action is principally to be moved and stirred up, and for the better and
fuller accomplishment of the action, for those viii. or ten days, put into
every gallo^ of the water they drink (if they be of value and estimation) a
pint of white Wine, which will greatly abate the cold quality of the water,
and let them not at any time drink excessiuely, and sometime give betwixt them
a pottle of strong stale Beer or Ale, with a great toste of wheat bread,
and let the Stable be kept most clean and sweet. And if at some times you
will alter their diet, for that peradventure they will not like of that food
(for horses do differ therein as men do) then make them bread in this
manner: take wheat and Oats equal in substance, and grind them together,
and as it comes from the mill (being clean sisted from filth) bake loves
thereof well mingled with bruised beans, otherwise the bread will clam their
mouths, and let it be well seasoned with salt and Anniseedes, and two or three
days old before they eat it, which will be in every part as comfortable as
the other. And then doubt not but this manner of keeping will make a most pure
blood, from whence proceeds a most pure seed, thereof a most temperate and
delicate brain, a great fulness of vital spirits, and so a most beautiful
and excellent Colt, for hereby (as I have said) their vegetative soul, which
is no other then their natural virtue, having only power of operations as a
directer and schoolemaister, to the goodness of the quality of the action,
proceeding only from the temperature of the brain, have their beginnings and
virtues from the perfect temperature of the seed, and the seed from the blood,
it is evident to the uttermost extent of man's understanding that such as the
temperature of the meats are, such will be the temperature of the blood, and
such as the blood is, such is the temperature of the seed, and such as the
seed, such is the temperature of the brain, and such as the brain is, such
will be the direction of the action, and operation of the colte, for the
faculties and temperature on which they consist, are altogether given them in
the womb, without being taught by another, whereby the perfection and
imperfection in generation is plainly discerned, and that the perfect
endowment of good temperature, does possess sufficient power to shape a
perfect body, and to increase and nourish the same in perfection, with long
life, because the knowledge of the sensitive soul takes only his dependence
from the temperature of the brain, as his director to perform all his
actions, in the fulness of perfection. Now forasmuch that from the temperature
of the four first qualities, hot, cold, moist, and dry, which is properly and
truly called nature, all the abilities of the colte, both of virtue and vice
do proceed, it is an evident argument of truth, that the variety of
operation, springs not from the sensible soul, which is one self, in all
ages, but from the diversity of temperature, by means whereof the Horse does
work diuersely, in young age, middle age, and old age, for that it pertaketh
in every age a contrary temperature, Wherefore one Horse is better then another.
and although Horses of equal ages, are contrary in work and one far better
then the other, yet the reason thereof is that one of them enjoys a better
temperature then the other, and diverse from the other, and therefore it is
truly said, that nature makes able, and that every creature works according
to his nature. What were else the cause that two coltes bred by one Horse and
Mare, should one exceed the other in excellency of action, which cannot be from
instinct of nature, but only from the temperature of the four first
qualities, and that is the only cause that one brute beast performs the
works of his kind better then another: being the only schoolemaister to
direct the sensitive soul what to do, but the vegetative soul only knows,
how to form the colte, to give him the shape which he is to keep, to receive
nourishment, to retain it, to digest it, to expel the excrements, and if any
part of the body do fail, she knows how to supply the same anew, and to
yield it composition agreeable to the use which it is to hold. But the
sensitive soul only works so far in the colt, that when it is foaled, it
knows to suck, to draw forth the milk with his lips, to the preservation of
his nature, and presently to eat only those things, whereon Horses
accustomably do feed, and hereby you see what things in nature are proper,
to the temperature, and to the vegetative and sensitive soul.

And although some will say that God has originally given to those creatures,
this natural instincte, yet it may not be denied, but the Natural instincte
must be the selfsame, with the temperature which we see does diversely govern
in young age, middle age, and old age, all which proceed from the temperature of
the seed that begets it, and with the descent of the horse and Mare, which
fashioneth the body in the womb, and yet are there not two souls neither
together nor successively, neither is the vegetative corrupted by the arrival
of the sensitive, nor the sensitive by the vegetative, which being done, the
seminall form vanishes, and the seed cease to be seed, and that
substance without shape to be no longer seed, but a Colt, and when the Colt
dies the soul dies, and is annihilated, according unto that rule, by the
corruption of the subject, the form perishes, the matter remains.

CHAP. 37 Observations for better direction in breeding.
1. FIrst it is to be observed, that which most imports generation, is that
the meats which the horse and Mare that are to beget and bring forth, do feed
upon, be in quality hot and dry, because the seeds and matter whereof the
Colt is framed, must be tarte and biting, growing from the saltness thereof,
and so become hot and dry, where through the seed vessels are stirred to
generation, and do according to their weight and measure, enter into the
composition of the Colt, and so are always to endure in the mixture.

2. Secondly, if the brain be pure, the sencible soul of the colte goes
always united with the disposition thereof, which directs the body to every
action, and nothing offends the sensitive soul, so much as to make his abode
in a heavy body, surcharged with great bones, and heavy flesh, and that is
the reason which Plato yields, that the best and finest mettle Horses are of
thin bone, but if the Horse be not of a just and true proportion of
temperature, then undoubtedly there is not any such perfection in that Horse.

3. Thirdly, the seed is mere vegetative and not capable of the sense, but
only follows the motions of the te^perature, therefore if the seed be perfect
it possesses such force, that after the meat is disgested and altered, it
makes them though bad and gross to turn to his own temperature, and
substance, and yet cannot utterly deprive the same of the inherent quality,
for the humors do attain the quality which the meat had before it was eaten.

4. Fourthly there must be great discretion used in feeding of the Mare, until
she have foaled, least by long use of ouerbad meats, The means to preserve
the colte in the womb.
the Colte in the womb be impaired of that quality of temperature it had
from the seed, for otherwise it little avails to have begotten a Colte of
perfect seed, if you make no reckoning of the meat, which afterward the Mare
feeds upon, and therefore the Mare may not so far eat of contrary meats, as
the Colt shall lose those good qualities, which it receives of the seed
whereof it was made.

And the reason heerof is clear (but never observed by any) for at the
beginning, the same being made of delicate seed, and that the colte grows
every day, impayring and consuming, and is to be repaired by the aliment and
food it takes, it is certain, that if they be bad, and of evil temperature,
that the continual use of them, being in the womb, will make great alteration
in nature, and therefore to continue the colt in the excellency of his
te^perature, it behooves that the sustenance it takes, be endowed with the
same qualities, as the cold do not exceed the heat, nor the moiste the dry.

5. Fifthly it appears that colts begotten, when the Horse and Mare go to
grass (whereof all our practice is witness) cannot be begotten but of cold
and moist seed, how excellent soever the horse and Mare were, neither can the
same colts after they are foaled, by any possibility be restored to perfection
of temperature, by the best keeping in the world, because they take the
qualities of their temperature, at the time of their framing, Nam alteratio
propria est mutatio et progressus a qualitate sensibili in aliam sensibilem
qualitatem contrariorum, vt albo in nigrum: for a proper and true alteration is
a change and going forward from one sensible quality into another sensible
quality of contraries, and therefore can never be utterly deprived, and taken
from them again, no more then that which is naturally white, turn naturally
into black.

6. Sixthly the meat that Horses and Mares do eat, ought specially to be
regarded, least their brains be thereby distempered, because the brain and
the stomach are united and chained together, with certain sinews, whereby
they enterchangeably communicate their damages, and we see that some Horses are
Iadish in quality, and some good in quality, which grows from having their
brain well or evil instrumentalized. And if any do affirm that horses have
no brains, I would have them answer, from whence he has his sense, and what
is the cause of staggers in a Horse, if it be not the oppression of the brain:
and the liver, the heart, and the brain, being first created and truly said
the vital spirits and arteriall blood, from whence the sensitive and motive
sinews have their being, which go wandering thorough the whole body, and their
office is to stir up the powers of the horse, to give him force and vigor to
work.

CHAP. 38. Objections against the former propositions.
IT is said that the good quality of the meat that the Horse and Mare eat,
before the action, is the cause of the good or bad temperature of the seed,
and that the good or bad temperature of the seed, makes the goodness or
badnesse of the Colte, which being admitted, then it is demanded, wherefore
Horses, and Mares, that are Iades, being so dyeted and kept, should not have a
perfect temperate seed as well as the best Horses, and by consequent of the
proposition as perfect and as good coltes, if the perfection of generation
consist only in the temperature.

I answer, that Iades by good direction and order, with continuance therein,
may greatly amend and better their seed, but they never can have a true
perfect and temperate seed, as the excellent Horse and Mare have (of whom my
proposition is) and the reason is apparent, for the seed whereof the Jade was
sormed, was originally bad and imperfect in temperature, otherwise he had not
been a Jade: and the nature of all seed is of such force, that what meat soever
the Horse and Mare eat, and digest, although the natural quality thereof be
most excellent to increase a perfect seed, yet it incorporateth that substance
of seed which comes of that perfect seed, into the substance of their seed,
and natural quality thereof, which never was of perfect temperature, and then
pertaking of the natural quality of the iades seed, it is tainted with the
corruption of the intemperature thereof, and so remains still imperfect
seed, and yet the natural quality of the goodness of the meat, which the
Iades cat, is not utterly deprived or taken away, although the predominate
quality as to the action and operation of goodness, is carried and transported,
by the seed of the Iades, whose quality and power cannot be taken from it, no
more then Art out of an Artificer, and therefore such will be the quality of the
iades colt that is begotten, and also of imperfect shape, because that the
vegetative and sensible soul, are material and corporal in the seed, with
the descent of the Sires, which fashioneth the colte in the womb, and the
perfection of shape concerns only the virtue of the body, that begets,
and the Jade wanting perfection of shape, his colt cannot have perfection of
action, And again I have found that perfect Horse and perfect Mare, may have a
colte that is a Jade, if my former rules be not observed. And moreover if a
present good order should make a present deprivation of a corrupted nature, or
a present evil order, bring a total deprivation of that is naturally good,
then nature should be inconstant to become evil or good upon a sudden, sed
nemo fit repent malus, no man becomes evil upon a sudden, neither can
nature which is perpetual, presently pass from one evil unto another, but by
the mean.

7. Seauenthly the Horse and Mare must be sparingly and moderately fed, that
they may well digest and overcome that they eat, for although the meat in
quality be hot and dry, yet if the quantity thereof be such as their natural
heat cannot digest, the same becomes raw, cold and moist. And also if
after full feeding, the Horse and Mare be travailed, it procures untimely
disgestion, the wheyish blood thereof coming to the seed vessels, is
ouer-rawe, and falsely provoke before it be disgested, and seasoned:
otherwise it increases perfect seed fit for generation, and both having
perfect seed, one must be agent and former, and the other serve for
nourishment, as in the forming of chickens, and birds, in which are two
substances, one of the yolke another of the white, the chick being made of the
yolke is maintained by the white, whiles the form indureth, and which of their
seeds is of the greatest efficacy, of the same is the generation, and whether
of the seeds the generation is, of that the colte retains the condition and
quality: but if the Horse and Mare be kept with ease and rest, it engendereth
coldenes and moisture, and thereby quenches the natural heat and desire of
generation, and corrupts the seed and makes the same imperfect.

CHAP. 39 Now follows the fourth rule, that is, when, how and where, to do
the action in perfection.
THe time when the action is to be performed must be after the Horse and Mare
have been dieted, and are most lusty in the perfection of the body, having
plenty of seed, well concocted fit for generation: for does not the gardener
with the seed that he preserves, attend both the perfection of the growth of
the herb, and until the seed be ripe, and wax dry? for if they pull them
from the stalk before, they will never grow to any use of perfection: for the
seed must have time to settle, concocte and ripen, and be duly seasoned to
become hot and dry, and of sufficient substance, and then the time of the moon
being observed, which is two or three days before the full or new moon, when
the Mare has greatest substance of menstruall or flegmaticke blood, for
composition of the colte: the which the colte through his great heat in the
time of increasing, and growing in the womb, will consume, and that is the
reason why some coltes are much bigger then others.

Now before the time of action or begetting, viz. when the horse and Mare are
both lusty and proud, let some little stoned Jade often woo the Mare, until
you see her very willing to receive the horse, so as she will seem to burn
in desire, always ready and yielding to the horse, as the hen to the cock:
but take great care that the Jade do not leap her unless he have such
trusses that he cannot serve her, and thereby you shall be assured to know her
desire: then let the horse that shall cover her see him busy with her, which
will greatly stir his desire and natural heat, and so inflame his vital
spirits, as will raise great quantity of seed for the action, both in
himself and the Mare: the action must be done in the morning early, when the
stomach has perfectly disgested, and is empty, and not upon a full stomach.
Also when the wind is in the North or west, and not when the wind is in the
south, because all heat makes the seed thin, and the south wind is gross
and moist, and that the air is of such force appears in the winter, when it
does harden water, wood, stones, and other creatures: and all heat as the
Summer time witnesses, opens, dissolueth and makes the same feeble: Also
the horse must cover a Mare sildome, otherwise he cannot have plenty of
temperate seed, therefore once in three weeks or a month is enough, and not
to spend his seed but when he does abound in fullness and perfection of seed
without any respect of the time of the year, and the place where it is to be
done, would be in some house or yard, where no hurt can come unto them, or be
troubled with the sight of other horses, and there let the mare be led to some
slope or falling ground, made of purpose, where the hinder part of her body may
stand highest, then bring the horse in your hand, at whose sight she will
piss, or at the least offer to do it, which she must be suffered to do before
he leap her, least by strayning of her body after the act she loose the
seed, then so soon as he comes off from her, let the keeper cast a paleful
of the coldest water strongly at her shape, the coldness, strength, and
suddenness whereof will cause her to trusse and shrink up her body, and
thereby a great means to stay the seed, and cause it to conioyne and close
themselves in the matrix: for the womb does not presently embrace and enclose
the seed, but some hour after, yet the womb does very suddenly draw together:
then have the horse away, and set the mare in some close place without giving
her meat for two or three hours after, and no water until night, and then
not much. And if you do perceive that the horse did closely and courageouslie
serve her, and she receive it with all willingness, then have him from her,
and let them not come no more together, for if the womb has once drawn
together, and makes as it were a pursse to draw the seed unto it, it will
not suffer it to get out, so as if the first time of serving take effect, all
the rest are in vain, and do great hurt, and the first doing is ever best,
and most effectual, because the seed of both parts comes from the vein of
the right side, and is most hot, plentiful and aptest to conceive, consisting
of greatest substance, and in quality most hot and dry, whereby it cannot be
easily lost, like that which is thin liquid and cold, and if it should be
oftener admitted, then the second seed proceeds from the left side, which
naturally is not so hot, but more liquid and moist, whereby the conception is
most commonly a mare foale in respect of the moistnes and coldness, but if it
happen a horse Colt, yet not of that goodness wanting perfection of heat, for
heat is the cause of hardynes, and courage, because it refyneth the Colt from
all dross and impuritie, as fire does the gold, and then no doubt but a colt
begotten of two excellent natures, in the greatest perfection must of
necessity in all proportion of reason bring forth a Creature of most
perfection both in shape and action, because Nature affects what it best
likes, and pourtrayeth the issue as with a pensill, and fastneth in the womb
with strong root, when as Hypocrates says through the moist and watery seed
it easily vnloseth.

CHAP. 40. Now follows the fist rule, to know whether she has conceived, and
how to keep them in perfection after their conception unto the time of foaling.
Fifthly after she has been leaped and carried away, if she cast not her seed
but eats freshly when she comes to meat, and so continues, and does not
ney nor piss often, neither casts her eye gasing after a horse, and within
one day or two begin to be gaunt bellied, because her womb in conception and
closing it self together to keep the seed, trusseth up and makes her belly
more less to sight then before, as if she were suddenly become lean, and
her hair lies very smoothe, and brighter then before, as also about ten days
after, offering her a horse, two or three days before the full, and likewise
before the new moon and she resists, (abhorring copulation) it assures that
nature is satisfied, and are manifest signs of their conception: and as
touching her keeping, let her not drink so much as nature desires, and still
keep her with the same meat and diet for twelve days after, and then take
away the wine and not before, if she be a Mare of worth, least the seed and
humors whereof the colte is compounded, should be impaired of the perfect
temperature, before it be framed: and keep her so sweet and clean as may be,
without any manner of labor, for the space of thirteen days, because the
seed during that time is but milk, and when you travail her let it be very
moderate, not in great heat, nor with heavy burdens, for fear of
dissolution, and when she is put to grass (if your necessity be to put her to
grass) let it not be in the winter but in the summer time only, and then in
the most dry ground that may be, where the feeding is very short, yet so as
she may once a day fill her belly, and where is pure water and shelter, and in
the winter, let both Mare and colte be housed, and their meat, old, clean and
sweet, and in a temperate air. whereby they will be healthful, and
prosperous, and if she have at the time of her covering a colte sucking of her,
let it not continue with her until she waxes great, for the milk which the
colte will then suck will be corrupt and unnatural, and make both her and the
colte within her poor and weak, and cause the mare at her foaling to want
milk, and never to have a good vdder, and when the Mare is ready to foale, let
her be especialy attended, and put in such convenient place as may not endanger
the Colte when it falls, for she foaleth standing, and at the time of
foaling continually watched to succor her, if the foale should not come
right: and presently after foaling milk the mare as clean as may be, which will
not only draw down her milk and make the same increase, but also keep the
vdder that the milk do not clodde, which if it should, the Mare may easily
become dry, with the great anguish thereof, and if it should so happen, then
draw as much milk from her as is possible, and boil it with the tops of
Lauender, and bathe all the vdder therewith, whilst it is very warm, and so
continue until the clods and knobs in the vdder be dissolved, and the next
water she drinks after foaling, let it be a good mash made of malt, or with
wheate-meale, and within a month after her foaling, give her a mash with the
powder of brimstone, the powder of Sauen or such like, which will be a great
preservation to the Colt, and if she be moderately labored at the plough
only, both when she is with fool and after foaling, the Mare and Colt will
be much the better: and evermore have care that she eat not any raw meat in
the Stable but old, sweet, clean and dry, whereby she will be the sooner in
lust, and the Colt still continue his temperature, which of all other things
is most specially to be observed.

CHAP. 41. The sixth rule how to use them, when they are foaled, and to continue
them in their perfection.
Sixthly and lastly, fail not every winter to Stable and house the Colts, and
let the Stable be open and Ayrie, and the floor paued and not planked, for it
will make them more hard to endure cold, and their hoofes most toughe and
durable: their meat old, sweet, and clean, and very often give them in
their prouender the powder of brimstone, the powder of the roots of Enula
Campana, of white Lillye roots, of Polipodium of the Oak, of Sauen, marshe
Worme-wood, Tobacco, Garlike chopped small, and such like, and make them as
domestical and gentle as is possible: teach them no tricks or apish toies,
gall not their mouths nor noses, neither distemper them, but keep them in all
love and obedience to man, and when they go to grass, let them run no
longer then Bartholmew-tide. Thus by reducing things to their natural causes,
at last we come unto the end in God, by whose virtue all the creatures in the
world do work by way of means as causes or dayned to that end.

Having showed the manner of true and perfect breeding of Colts, manifesting
thereby the errors of all former times, by not understanding the natural
causes thereof, I find many objections engaged and embarked against some of my
principal assertions, as humors that cannot be stopped from the sores in the
body, as adverse and discontented persons associate themselves to the part
grieved, and persecuted. Now because they shall not further limbecke their
brains in the art of coffeehouse, I will endeavor also to take the fuel
from that fire.

CHAP. 42 Objections against the former propositions.
FIrst it is objected against me, that I do admit the Mare to take the
horse at any time of the year, when al writers of this subject admit only the
months of March, April and May, because those three months are ordained
thereunto (say they) by Original Nature, whereof God is the only Author, and
the natural reason and cause thereof, as they affirm is, for that the humor of
blood being the principal humor whereof the colt is compounded, and in it
self hot and moist, does in those three months rule and reign, and
therefore in respect of his heat fittest for generation.

2 The second cause wherefore those three months are fittest for generation is,
for that in the months of June, July and August, the humor of the Choler does
Reign, the which is hot and dry, and therefore unfit for generation.

3. The third cause is, for that in the months of September, October and
November, the humor of Melancholy does reign, which is cold and dry, and
that is also unfit for generation.

4. The fourth cause is, that in the months of December, January and
February the humor of Fleame does reign, which is cold and moist, and that
also most unfit for generation, and so they conclude, that God being the God of
nature, and of order, and manifested as a means for the increase and
preservation of his creatures, has from the beginning ordained the same: and
for the assured confirmation thereof unto man, has more plainly manifested the
same, 1. first by the example of all living creatures, who by the only
instinct of nature, do in those months in their several kinds, beget and
increase.

2. Secondly by the earth, which then brings forth her bud blossom and
fruit.

3. Thirdly by the successiue practice of all nations, and that these be their
motive causes, appears especially by a tractat of Pero Lopez, in reputation a
famous horseman, in his book dedicated to the king of Spain in the spanish
tongue, in the memorable year of our Lord 1588. entitled Libro de Albeyteria
que tracta del principio y generation Delos Cauallos. Ca^primo etc. composed in
Dialogue manner, and allowed, and published by the Kings special license under
the hands of diverse of his council.

Answer.
Touching the limitation of time, namely March, April, and May, to be the
only months and times for generation, in respect that the blood has then
dominion over the humors, I deny that proposition, and my reason is, that the
equality of the temperature of the humors in a sound and perfect creature, are
always in true proportion and harmony, and that the predominate quality of
any of them, is the cause and only true witness of sickness or intemperance,
the which may not be admitted either in horse or Mare, that do beget and
bring forth.

2. Secondly because it is propounded generally, I answer that the humor of
blood in those three months is more often imperfect, and predominate in evil
quality then in any other of the months, and that all the humors in those three
months are more intemperate then in any other, and the practice of Physic
generally more used in those three months, then in all other months of the
year besides, so as it is manifest, that the proposition so generally
propounded, offers great question for the incertaintie, but I do admit
that the perfection of blood in all creatures, is most principally of all the
humors to be respected, and before all times and seasons of the year to be
preferred, and not to be limited and compassed within any certain time, and
therefore I do not refer generation to any particular time, but to the
perfection of the particular creatures, that have a firm standing habit of
body, which is truly termed a perfection of temperature of the four elements.

For if blood do exceed in heat, it does thereby suddenly consume and dry up
the radical moisture, and by the extinguishing thereof, destroys himself:
as we see in the burning of a lamp or candle, the which when the heat or flame
is to great, it does suddenly consume the oil or tallowe, and presently
extinguisheth his own light.

Again, if the oil or tallowe be corrupted, by mixture or matter of contrary
quality, as water or such like, it presently destroys it self, and as of
heat and moisture so of the other humors: therefore reason which is man's only
guide, tells all men that there must be a just and true proportion of
temperate mixture of the humors, to compou^d the seed, and make it fit for
generation and preservation of the creature, that is to be begotten: for the
predominate quality, or contrariety of quality, of any of them, causing a
continual jar amongst them, is as a house or kingdom divided in it self,
which brings destruction to all: so on the contrary the simpathy of their
agreement is the preservation of the whole, and this is only to be respected
and not the time.

3. Thirdly, if I should grant to M. Lopez and his fellows, that they do not
mean, any predominate quality in the humor of blood, but a good and just
temperature, then does not the blood rule and reign over the other humors, and
then were the proposition contrary in it self, but admitting the best, which
is that it rules as the head does the body, in the best simpathie and
coherens to maintain the other humors, without which the body cannot have his
being, yet to say that those three months are only good for generation,
unless it can be proved that in those three months is the only time of
desire for generation, which cannot be generally granted, because daily
experience witnesses that they of themselves, of their own natural desire
beget and bring forth in all other months.

Again, if the other three humors of Choler, melancholy, and fleam, should
rule in the other nine months of the year, how suddenly should the whole
kind of all creatures decay, by reason of the great Iarr of the Elements, and
thereby become mortal homebred enemies to Nature it self.

4 Fourthly, if every humor has quarterly in every year his several rule
and government, (which cannot be proved) and all learning affirms, that
every horse works and expresses the quality of his work, according to the
goodness and badnes of his temperature of humors, then every horse in every
quarter of the year alters the quality of his work, and by consequent the
quality of his nature, which reason and practice depose against, and how
should any man be assured of the natural quality of his horse, which is
perpetual and not variable and unconstant, Nam omnia naturalia sunt
immutabilia. For all Natural things are unchangeable.

5 Fifthly, if nature should allow, or of himself ordain any thing to his own
destruction, or to maintain an enemy to himself, were absurd to admit,
when as Nature has originally, or rather God the Author of Nature, bred a
Sympathy in Nature, to desire his own preservation, and an Antypathy in
Nature, to have an innated hatred to all things that are enemies unto it, as
appears by the young Lamb that runs from the Wolf, and the Dog, the
little Chicken from the Kite, and such like. So likewise when sickness or
infirmity breeds within the body, Nature labors to her uttermost power to
expel her enemies.

6 Sixthly, blood which is the heat of the body, must in all months of the
year, have a kind of dominion in the Horse, over the moisture, as well as in
those three months, for in nutrition the thing nourished, by reason of the
instrument ordained for that purpose, must actually work upon that, whereby
it is nourished, for the heat is maintained by the moisture, otherwise it
would presently consume it self: and it may not be denied, but every agent
must be proportioned unto the patient, in the equality of excess, therefore
the heat being the sole active of nutrition, must have dominion over the
moisture, the subject matter of that faculty, how then can M. Lopez limit the
dominion of blood only to three months.

7. Seauenthly it is a general approved truth, that eury Horse and other
creature is framd in the womb, of the four humors, and that he that has the
one has the other, but not of equal proportion, for every Horse (most
usually) has more of the one humor then of the other, for it does not keep
uniformity, but very few sithence their first and primary creation, from God,
by whom they were created in true proportion of temperate mixture, but
sithence the defiled condition of man's nature, they have been and so will remain
iarring and out of order, from the hour of their creation, unto their death,
but every slight change of the four qualities proportion, changes not his
temperature, who for the short indurance of the distemperatures, the body
returns to his former constitution, but the variation of their original
constitution, is the true proper cause of the diversity and difference of the
work, which proceeds from that inward engendered cause of destruction, the
disagreement of the elements, and thereupon I conclude that the goodness or
badnes for begetting of Horses, cannot truly be appropriate to any season,
month, or time of the year.

CHAP. 43. How to know upon view if a Horse be compounded of a true
temperature of the elements, and when otherwise, and thereupon have a true
judgment of his natural qualities.
THe true and just proportion of the temperature of the elements in the humors,
when the colt is compounded in the womb, frames him in a most perfect shape,
and excellent for action and long life, and in reason impossible that a Horse
of true and perfect shape can be naturally bad, but contrariwise most excellent
in action, for there never was or ever shall be a perfect shaped Horse, without a
true proportion of the temperature of the elements, and it apeareth, that if
the humors at the time of framing the colt in the womb, has not any iarring
or discord of temperature, then do the same frame a most absolute perfect
shape, and ye truth thereof appears in those horses ye were immediately
created by god (being co^pou^ded of the elements as al other creatures) were of
the most and only absolute perfect shape (because at that time man had not
transgressed) and until then, there was not any jar or discord in the
elements, as all divine and humane witnesses confess, soas it appears
without gainesaying, that the true and equal proportion of the temperature of
the elements, in the seed, and the humors whereof the colte is co^pounded,
brings forth (without some contrary accidental means which is not natural)
the most absolute perfect shaped Horse, and of the most excellent and temperate
action, and what a perfect shape is, I have heerin largely set forth, so as it
only remains to show, how you shall infallibly judge upon the view of any
Horse, whether he was composed of an equal temperature, whereby (as also I
have formerly mentioned) will appear his perfection or imperfection of action,
which cannot be truly understood, without the true cause thereof be understood,
for Men's Philosophi non acquescit nisi in causa rerum, the understanding man
evermore labors, until he find out the true cause of the action, he
undergoes.

Aristotle the Prince of Philosophers, in the first of his Metaphisickes, says
that Omne ens naturaliter appetit suam perfectionem, All men desire naturally
to know, and the cause is, for that all things, that have being do naturally
desire their own perfection, and (as much as in them is) to be restored to
their first perfection, and to conserve themselves in the excellencye thereof,
which cannot be attained without the true knowledge of the nature of the thing
desired to beknowne, and how much the more honorable or beneficial the same is
to the King or common weal, by so much ought the same to be in the highest and
superlatiue esteem, and the true knowledge thereof, first and above others to
be preferred. Now forasmuch, as the true knowledge of this subject, even from
the time of man's transgression, has in all succeeding ages been labored to a
restitution, of his primarie perfection, and yet not any thing extant to
establish man's judgment herein, let me now in so weighty a matter, entreat
your favorable ears, and I doubt not to give good contentment to the
judicious and understanding Reader.

It cannot be denied but that the Horse and every other creature is compounded
of the four Elements, viz. Fire, Air, Water and Earth, and that the just and
true proportion of the temperature of those Elements, was in all those
creatures which were first, and originally created by God in all perfection,
without any manner of predominate quality, or iarring, and that the harmony
thereof was the true cause of their perfection, but at the instant of time when
man tra^sgressed those elements in all creatures did jar and rebel each
against the other, for predominate quality, and so will continue unto the end,
and consummation of all creatures, the which as I have said are now become
hombred enemies to all creatures, and the only cause of sickness, and death
of all creatures, yet the Sympathy of nature in all creatures is such, as it
labors and so continues to be restored, to the first and true temperature,
and to suppress the iarring, not only for their preservation, but also for
restitution to their primarie creation, from whence there cannot be any truth
more apparent, then the nearer the Colt does attain the true and just
proportion of the temperature of the elements in the creation, the nearer it
attaineth to the primarie perfection, from whence also it follows to know
how to choose, and to govern the horse and Mare, that shall beget and bring
forth, that their seed and substance of humors, whereof every Colt is
compounded, may at the time of their action be of a true and just proportion of
temperature, and that the Colt begotten, may whiles it remains in the womb,
by the nutriment it takes, be preserved in the same temperature, and after the
foaling so continually maintained, as the true ground of all knowledge in this
subject. Wherefore omitting any farther discourse, I will proceed to set forth,
how all men upon the only view of any horse, be he old or young may know,
whether he be compounded of true temperature of the elements, viz. Every
perfect shaped horse has a broad forehead, and great eye, to express his
natural boldness and love unto man: lean head, thin, slender, lean Jaws
to express his refyned mettell, courage and quick spirit: long high reared
neck, to express the perfection of his reyne, and perfect sight of the way to
keep him sure footed: high reared withers, to set forth the easy going by
keeping the body of his Rider very upright: broad, deep chest and body, with
upright pasternes, and narrow hoof, to give testimony of his great strength
and ability of body, to endure and continue long and great travel: And every
untrue and imperfect shaped horse, having in every part the contrary shape,
viz. A narrow forehead, little eyes, fleshy head, thick fleshy Jaws, short
neck, set on like a Hog or Goat, a narrow shallow breast and body, weak bending
pasterns and fleshye, broad and club-footed, is a most vile royle and a Jade
in all and every his actions, so as all the Artistes and most excellent
horsemen in the universal world can never endowe him with the least perfection
of action and continuance therein, whereby you may as truly and infalliblie
judge the difference betwixt good and bad, as the difference betwixt fire and
water, as also the perfection and imper fectio^ of the composition and
temperature of his elements in the time of his creation, for when you see a
horse or colt that is naturaly lean and dry, and will hardly be made fat, and
continne fat and yet digesteth speedily, of a slener substance of body, short
hayred, and the same hard and full of stirring, it is plain that he was
composed of the predominate humor of red choler, and that the blood whereof the
seed was made, was of a dark and thick spirit, and had much of the Gall, for
if the blood had been perfect, it would have been hot and moist, of an oilie
substance, for want of which radical moisture he does too speedily digest,
never fat and of slender substance, his hair short, dry and hard, for want of
that moisture to pass thorough the pores of the skin, to make the same soft,
of length and substance, and that hair if it be eaten will never be digested
by reason of his drynes, when as his bones being eaten will be digested,
besides he cannot be long lived, wanting sufficient radical humors to feed
his great heat, for the lack whereof he is like to a lamp that has a great
flame and little oil, and therefore speedily consuming the Oil, it
extinguisheth his own light, and this horse is termed choleric, and his
shape must of necessity be defective in substance, because largenes and great
proportion of shape proceeds principally from moisture, so as wanting
substance and fulness of proportion, as I have formerlye said, he cannot be of
continuance but quickly spent, like unto small dry wood which speedily flameth,
and therefore is speedily consumed, soon hot, soon cold, a great bragger but
no performer, a fiery look and countenance: in whom at the first entering into
action there is no temperance, seeming rather to fly then to be content to
stand quiet, and yet the travel of a few miles through his violent heat and
dryness, speedily spends his vital spirit, so that his heart which is the
chariot of his life, and the fountain of those vital spirits, and the hottest
of all other his spiritual members, for want of sufficient radical oyled
moisture to cool the same, is so smothered and choked that of necessity it
yields. Again, when you see a horse that is long, large, loose, and weak
ioynted, hollow eyed, not well compacted (although by hye and proud keeping he
may make show of spirit and vigor) yet not withstanding assuer your self, that
he is co^pounded of the element of Water, which is altogether flegmaticke,
which in predominate quality is heavy, moiste and cold, and therefore a
lubber and a Jade, being weak and loose in all the parts of his body, by
reason he wants the chief element of Fire, which is hot and dry, to exhaust
and dry up his predominate quality of moisture, to purge and refine the
moisture, to become full of vigor, spirit, and courage, to the performance of
his actions.

Also, when you see a horse that has a great fleshy head, thick boned, and
fleshie jaws, a great fleshy upright joint, a great thick short neck, and a
full proportioned body, whereby he seems a puissant strong horse, assure
your self; the chief and predominate Element in his composition was of the
earth, which is melancholy, or black choler, which in quality is cold and
dry, and of the element of Water, which is heavy and moist, so as by the
moisture of water which is fleame, it grows great, so by the cold nes and
drynes of the earth, which is melancholy, he is framed a great heavy lump
or mass, without true proportion of shape, and his actions in quality are
heavy, sad, and fearful, and unapt for action, other then as a great topp,
which never goes well but by strong lashing, neither can he be of other
quality, then according to the quality of the Elements, whereof he is
composed, wanting the two most excellent elements, which are, Fire and Air,
that is heat and oily moisture to raise his spirit to the lively and
courageous performance of his actions, so as after he has come to be ten
years old, he will exceed in stumbling and falling flat down, neither can
be of long life, wanting a just and true proportion of temperature of the
four elements, neither can the best keeping in the world, or the most
skillful horseman of the world, bring him to perform any action contrary to
his nature, according whereunto every creature works, the which nature is no
other, then the temperature of the Elements, when he was composed and framed
in the womb, according whereunto his shape was framed, which being natural,
will be perpetual and unchangeable in him unto his death. And therefore there
is not any truth can be more apparent, then that a just and true proportion of
the temperature of the Elements makes a Horse of perfect shape and excellent
quality: and having largely showed you his virtues, I speak not for them, if
your sight cannot command affection, let them loose it, they shall please much
better, after you have troubled your eyes with the view of the iades
deformities, and then how much more they please, so much more odious and like
themselves, shall the Iades deformities appear, for this true light contraries
give each to the other, that in the midst of their enmity, the one makes the
other seem more good or evil.

Now it rests to consider how possible it can be that a Colte can be
compounded of a true proportion of temperature, if you suffer Horse and Mare
go to grass when they beget, and were all learning and reason banished from
this my assertion, the only infinite number of iades, being a thousand to one
of good Horses, would condemn the general practice of all Nations, and their
errors herein not to be defended.

But if you observe the natural quality of every Element (if the instinct of
original nature be not annihilated, you will reform your judgment and
consequently your practice, in breeding) for the nature of the Element of fire
(whereunto the humor of perfect blood is likened) does sever the pure from
the vnpure, rust and dross from the Iron, the copper and imperfect mettel from
the gold, the silver from the impuritie of the Alleye or Ore, the mas^e and
vnpurified substance of flesh from the bones, the grossenes of the bones into
the purity of bones, and it opens and disperseth the massy and
vnproportionate substance into a pure and fine substance of flesh, and the
reason why the blood of the Mare is more waterishe, raw, grosser, and
vnperfecter, then the blood of the Horse is, for that she wants that
sufficiency of heat, which the Horse has, to refine and perfect the same,
and the fountain of blood, both in Horse and Mare, would be plentiful and
pure, because their seed is first taken from the same (as I have formerly
showed) and the fountain of blood is the liver, from which the veins do
disperse and convey the same to the whole body, and the liver is called Epar
from the word Pyr which signifies fire, now if the liver should be cold or a
fountain of imperfect blood, then no doubt but the colte will be vnpersect, and
the reason is apparent, for that the element of fire in the blood, does
purify all the substance whereof the Colte is framed in the womb, and the
vital spirit of the sensible soul of the Horse and Mare, if the elements in
them be not in perfection of temperature, can not endure.

Again, the element of the air, being a light and pure element, hot and
moist, does most naturallye feed preserve, maintain, and cherish the
Element of fire, even as pure oil does the light of the lamp and makes the
mixte bodies of fleame, choler, and melancholy, light, to the intent they may
be neither too gross nor too heavy. Again the element of water being heavy,
cold, and moiste, according to his nature, does greatly enlarge both bones,
flesh, and sinews, and according to the nature of moisture, does temper the
fervent heat of fire, and keep that together which the heat would disperse.
Again, the element of the earth being cold and dry, but principally dry, does
harden the body, to retain his shape, which the air and water would make
fluxible, the which elements in the four humors of blood, fleame, choler, and
melancholy (whereof every colte is framed) there ought to be a just proportion
of temperature, otherwise it is impossible to have a beautiful and perfect
shape, or excellent quality or action, from whence there follows the truth
of my assertions. That if the aliment or food (although the Horse and Mare be
of perfect shape) whereof the Horse and Mare do feed, be not in natural
quality such as the humors, that proceed from the same, may be fit for the
true proportion of temperature in the seed, and every way ordered as I have
prescribed, when the colte is to be begotten and after, there is not neither
can be assurance of perfect races, and consequently of perfect Horses,
whatsoever M. Pero Lopez, or any other shall affirm, to the contrary.
notwithstanding his lunary or lunaticke observations.

CHAP. 44. The answer to the examples
NOw to answer the examples, the first whereof is, that all living creatures,
in those three months of March, April, and May, do beget and bring forth, I
answer briefly, that if the example be understood, it does not condemn my
proposition, for if it were granted that all living creatures, do in those 3.
months only beget and bring forth (which were most untrue to grant-the word
(all) cannot have an absolute reference to the whole species and kind of all
creatures without exception, so as no creature has, does, or shall beget or
bring forth, but only in those 3. months: but it is true that there are some
of all creatures, that do then commonly beget and bring forth, and some there
be of all creatures, that neither then nor in any time of their lives, beget
and bring forth, thorough the imperfection of some natural cause, neither is
it an infallible proposition, to say, that because they do beget and bring
forth, in those three months, therefore all other months of the year are
unmeet and exempted to beget and bring forth, for if you consider the
original cause from God, when he said increase and multiply, the same was not
particularly limited to any day, month, or year, for the examples are
manifest, that there are some of al creatures, which do beget and bring forth
in all months of the year and the reason wherefore in these three months,
these actions are most usual, is for that the sun having long absented
himself, so as the cold and stormy winter weather has greatly weakened and
impaired the natural strength and state of the body, especially of the
sauadge and wild, which want fulness of food to increase and mainetaine the
same, and for that cause do abstain from generation, until the sun give more
heat to comfort their bodies, with increase of food, the which is to be seen
in the several kind of all creatures, as in conies, pigeons, and other
domestical creatures, which do beget and bring forth in all times of the
year: and to say that those three months are only fit, because blood is then
predominate, is also against the opinion of the learned, who affirm the blood
to increase from the eight of February, unto the seventh of May, and that red
choler increases from the seventh of May, unto the seventh of August, and
that black choler which is melancholy, begins to increase from the
seventh of August, unto the seventh of November, and that fleame begins to
increase from the seventh of November, unto the seventh of February, and yet
not any of them can be said to have dominion only in those times, for that
were to allow the discordand predominate quality of the elements, which is the
only cause of sickness, and the continuance thereof, death.

CHAP. 45. The answer to the second example from the earth.
THe apparancy of that reason, is also taken from the force of the natural
heat of the sun, wherewith all trees, grass, and plants, the vegetative
soul or the natural life and virtue thereof, having ben imprisoned in the
cold time of winter in the roots lying in the bowels of the earth, to shroude
and preserve themselves from destruction, the sun drawing near unto them,
the same being the preservation of their lives, do then begin to show their
life in the greatest glory, but the same is not to be attributed to the said
months, if the sun did not at that time extend his natural heat more and
otherwise, in the other Months, as the diversity of cold and hot countries
do manifest, and therefore I will proceed to the reasons of the practice of
these months.

The reason of the common practice of all nations, is for that a mare goes
with foale twelve months and ten days, or there abouts: and therefore the
most breeders would not have the mare go to horse, before those months of
March, April, or May, because her foaling time should be near the spring of
grass, the which opinion and practice I think fit likewise to examine.

There is not any man of experience ye can truly deny but if the Mare be
lusty, and in perfection of health, when she foaleth, at what time of the
year soever it be, but that she has more milk for three weeks or a month,
then the foale is able to suck, and to continue plentiful in milk, let her
presently after foaling be milked so clean as may be, and so continued
until the curd in her vdder be broken and dissolved, which will make her
plentiful in milk, a thing easily done, if she before be made domestical, and
the same is approved true in all creatures that give suck, so as if she foale
in the beginning of Winter, yet will she have plenty of milk, being housed, she
will have a more lusty, strong, healthful and courageous Colt, of great
stature, and greater strength, and better able to endure hardness, and keep his
flesh better then if she foaled at May day, my reasons are, Although the grass
makes great quantity of milk, yet the same is very thin, and the winter food
less in quantity, but very thick and of greater nourishment, and that a
Colt foaled in the winter will be stronger then that is foaled in the Summer,
because that coldness of air by vnyting and knitting of the body (according to
the nature of cold) gives strength much more then heat, for heat opens,
dissolueth and weakeneth, for all creatures are stronger in Winter then in
Summer, and they will eat much more, and digest better in the cold then in
the heat, because the natural heat is thereby in the inner parts, and not
dispersed, and those are most strong and of greater stature that are bred very
far North, then those in the south. And Aristotle in his politiques says, that
generally such as are bred in colder countries, are stronger and bigger bodyed,
and better couraged, and longer lived, for the coldenes of the compassing air
restects the air into the inner parts, and by that reflection the heates
force is increased, and the parts gathered better and closer together. And
moreover by giving sometimes masshes, made with malte, or with wheat meal, and
mixed with the powder of brimstone, of the roots of Enula campana, of
Polipodium of the Oak, Anniseedes, Licorish, Fenegreeke Turmericke,
Bay Berries, and such like, which will not only increase the milk of the
mare, but also most medicinable for the healthful preservation of her and her
foale, and the Colte being thus wintered in the house with his dam, it will
make it to feed of all manner of winter food, and quietly take any medicine,
and become most gentle, being brought up in the company of man from the day of
the foaling, whereby it shall not need to be tamed or broken, as other Coltes
are, neither to be roughly handled for the curing of any hurt or sorrance that
may happen. Also (if you cannot otherwise judge) you shall thereby find the
natural quality and disposition thereof, and being from his time of foaling,
kept in a paued stable with stone (for so would all stables be) it will harden
his hooues, not suffering them to become broad footed, making him most bold to
tread upon any ground, it will make him loving to the man, and bold to every
action, and to be taught many good qualities, and when the spring of grass
comes, it will little or nothing regard the dams milk. And if any do think
that in the winter for lack of milk it would be in penury or hindered of
grows, they do much err therein, for it will feed fat, lusty, and strong in
the winter, if it be brought up by hand without milk, giving it hay, oats,
bran, barley, pease or beans, and such like: but on the contrary, when the
colte is foaled in May, or in the middle of summer, (which most men desire) not
well considering what they desire, the contrary of all former benefits will
ensue, it is said that the colte will have plenty of milk, which I do not
deny, but being milk from grass it will be thin and waterish, and for a small
time, and when it has least need of plenty (and this is the greatest reason)
but when it is grown and able to take great store of nourishment, then the
winter weather of snow, frosts, and fluds, the colte being then young and
tender, the mare cannot (in reason) but want plenty of milk, wanting plenty of
pleasant food, warm and dry lodging, at which time the colte will only
depend upon the dam, and thereby bring both her and colte to poverty, not
being able sufficiently to cherish herself, and so both become weak before
winter be past, besides the colte will be sauadge and wild, so as if any disease
or weakness come unto it, the same remains remediless, if nature cannot
overcome it, and herein my experience tells us, many to have perished,
neither is it able or apt to feed upon any food but the mares milk, to keep
it self in strength, and thereby also the dam restrained and kept from lust of
generation, and lastly the most material cause of all others, namely the
continual feeding of wet and cold grass, which is in natural quality
exceeding cold and moist, the good and perfect temperature of the elements in
the coltes, will by continuance be greatly impaired, being of all others of the
greatest importance: again whereas they affirm that the mare in may is most
fit to receive the Horse, because the time and season is warm and she much
colder then the Horse, they do little observe the material cause of
generation, namely the coldness and moistnes of seed, which the food of grass
makes, whereof no perfect shape can ensue, only desiring a Colte without any
respect of goodness and perfection, the irresistable witness of all erroneous
practice in breeding. Again, if the mare go to grass, and has a colt long
sucking her, when food and lodging is full of penury, how can she be full of
lust to bring forth a perfect strong and lusty colte: and although thewinter (in
respect of winter) be open and seasonable, and the mare full fed with grass,
can any man doubt, but that notwithstanding her natural desire of generation
will be quenched, and if it were admitted that she has a desire thereunto, yet
can the same be in such perfection as ought to be for generation? Now comes
the true Chimist who turns every thing into silver, that breeds money to the
third generation, neither has it sooner any being then he sets it to beget
more, and he cries out upon charges, and yet would have his Horse cat good
meat, but on his neighbors trencher, and he says that breeding colts in the
stable is very chargeable, but if he did once apprehend, that in that charge
were gain, then were eury face of a colt a new Image whom he would adore with
the highest veneration: if it should be granted, that feeding at grass all the
winter time, is somewhat cheaper then feeding in the stable, yet when the
preservation of mare and colt in strength and perfection of health, and from
the danger of death, with fluds, snowes and such like is considered together
with the foder, which necessity inforceth to give unto them in such seasons,
the great attendance of the keeper, and yet oftentimes loss of all,
notwithstanding his diligence, the spoil of good grounds (for in such they
must then be kept) by their deep treading in wet seasons (they must
acknowledge) if the Horse and Mare be of good worth, the keeping in the stable
much the cheaper, in respect of their service to their King and country, and
the benefit of the purse, as the common practice of the cha^pion countries,
where are few enclosed grounds do witness, breeding if the same were guided with
true knowledge, who would as far excel the colts that are brought up at grass,
as hay exceeds stubble, and if any will be a servant to himself, yea to his
servant, and do such base homage, to that which should be the worst drudge, it
may be doubted he would dispatch himself when corn falls, but that it
greeueth him to cast away money on a cord. Again some whose tongues are like
the tails of Samsons foxes, carrying firebrands to set the whole field of
valourous Horsemen on a flame, for no act can pass without their comment, for
their ears be long, and their eyes quick, but too imperfectious: To confute
tryfling things seriously is a point of those which have no judgment
And they would know, how many mares one horse may cover, how or when to have a
Horse colte or a Mare colte, how to make a Mare cast her foale, when the colte
should be severed from the dam, when to gelde, how to have pied coltes, by the
example of Jacob, in the 30. of Genesis, and such like, not being of any moment
worthy any answer, because these questions are most truly answered in the
knowledge of nature, without which no sufficient answer can be made, I
refer them to the consideration of that has been said, wherein these
questions are easily resolved. And because I would be unwilling to charge the
Reader with answering of trifles, or with much tediousnes, knowing the
knowledge of breeding is notloued enough, because it has not been heretofore
seen, and that the errors therein lose much detestation, because their
ugliness is secret, certainly there are so many beauties, and so many graces
in the face of her knowledge, that no eye can possibly see it without
affection, without rauishment, and the visage of her errors so monstrous
thorough loathsome custom, that if her lovers were not ignorant, they would be
mad with disdain and astonishment, what need you more then to discover these
two to the world, this work will save the labor of exhorting and disswasion,
for heerin is the true knowledge and error of breeding stripped naked to the
open view, see now whether shall find more followers, and if still the vain
minds of men shall dote upon their old mistres, it will appear to be, not
because she is not foul, but for that they are blind and bewitched.

Omne ignotum pro magnifico est.
CHAP. 46. Of a perfect Stable.
FIrst the situation of the stable would be on a most dry ground, if it may
be, so as at all seasons of the year, both man and Horse may come and return
from the same clean and dry, also it would be builded and so placed, as there
may be a continual current for the clensing and keeping the same sweet from
all things noisome to the same: it would be seeled over the Horses, to keep
both Horse, rack, meat and manger, from all dust, it may not have any filthy
gutter or sincke near, in, or under the same, neither any privy, or other
unwholesome favor of hog-sties, hen-house, or such like. Some ancient writers
affirm, that the strong savor or air of a privy will make a Horse blind:
the Horse is naturally a proud beast, and delights in all cleanesse: the
rack would be set high and sloping, for dust or filth anoying the Horse eyes
or maine, or dangering his crest, by crooked or wry feeding, and the manger
deep and strong, for casting prouender out of it with the Horse nose; with
posts and partitions, as you may see in all well ordered stables: the flore
would be paued and not plancked for these reasons.

First it is more durable and lasting, and less charge, it makes your Horse
most bold upon stony and hard grounds, by continual standing upon stones, it
is the most excellent thing that may be for Colts-being vnshooed, for it
hardens the hooue, so as by continuance and custom, they will be as bold on
the stones as if they were shoode, it will not suffer his hooue to run broad,
and the continuance thereof makes the same very tough and durable, and will
much longer and better carry a shoe: the pauement would be eeuen, not higher
before, where the forefeet stand, for it is very paineful to the hinder-legges,
so as the Horse unless necessity compel him, will not stand straight or bold
in the stable: and doubt not of coldenes, for when he is littered at night, he
lies warm enough: there would be diverse windows in the stable, the which
would be so placed, as the stable may thereby be cleared with the air, or
close shut, or open as occasion may serve, in the night time, especially in the
winter: and when Horse have labored, it would be very dark, as well for
warmthe as otherwise for the Horse to take their sleep: at other times it
would be kept somewhat cold, for thereby the Horse will feed and digest the
better, neither shall the Horse be made too tender, which may be hurtful when
upon occasion in other places where a man shall travail not having the like,
whereby the Horse may take cold: all poultry, and fowls, hogs and such like,
would not be suffered at any time to come into the stable, there would not be
any dust or loame walls in the stable or place, about or near the rack or
manger, or wherein the Horse stands, to retain or keep dust, for the Horse
naturally will lick them to their great hurt.

The dung must not by any means lie near the stable, neither any thing of
evil savor. Near to the stable would the Grooms of the stable be lodged,
to be ready at all times, and upon all occasions, and joining to their lodging
would be a convenient room with a press therein to set all their Saddles,
Bridles, Girthes and such like; with all kind of necessary instruments, to
mend such furniture, with all things necessary for shooing, letting blood,
and such like, and all medicinable things, either for inward disease or outward
hurt.

There would be also to the stable annexed certain sheds or rooms to lay horse
litter in, both new and old, for that it is most unfit for the litter to be
under the manger, as commonly is used, least the Horse should either feed on
it, or be offended with the savor, because no creatures do better or more
delight and comfort in sweet and clean keeping then a Horse, being a
special means to show himself cheerful and pleasant, besides, there would
be a little enclosed room, such as horses after their labor might be put
into, to wallowe themselves, wherein most horses take exceeding delight, being
also most healthful for them so to do, the which the ancient writers
affirm, does so much comfort a horse, as if they be tired, having after
wallowed himself, and being clean rubbed, will travel presentlye again with
courage, as if it had not been. Moreover, above all things, there would be also
places or sheds for the horses to be cleansed, curryed and trymmed in, and not
in the stable and place, where they lie stand and feed in respect of the dust,
loose hair, and filth that comes from them, so as the place in the stable
where he stands might and ought to be made most sweet and clean, with
Rack, manger and the place of his standing, being comely, healthful, and
profitable to the owner, for the preservation of his horse, the great fault and
neglect whereof is inexcusable, and of all good horsemen to be respected and
amended: Neither would I have any horse, having the Glaunders, or any other
sickness, hurt or disease, to remain in the stable at such time, but kept in
a shed for that present time from all other horses, by which means, and all
other good diet, which hereafter I purpose to express, there cannot be any
doubt of health and long life to the horses, the contrary whereof has
discomforted a number of worthy Gentlemen from keeping of horses of value and
worth, and content themselves with Iades. Thus having very shortly described
the Stable, it next follows to speak of making the Colts to amble without
any handling of them, wherein also I purpose to be short, because there are there
of many practices.

CHAP. 47. Of making Colts to amble from the time of their foaling.
FIrst understand, that every Colte when it is foaled and remains tender of
his hooues, has no other train or pace how slow soever it be, but the same is
an amble, and by observing his treading, is apparent to the eyes of all that do
or will behold it: and because the same shall not be enforced to any faster
pace then only to go, keep the colt with the dam in the stable, and the next
day after the same is foaled, put on a halter, bridle, or snaffle, at your
pleasure on the Mares head: in the morning early lead her forth, let the
Colte follow her so gently and soft a pace as she can go, into some eeuen,
plain, and hard ground, and be sure that the Colte be not enforced to go
faster then you lead the Mare, and then observe and you shall find the Colte
going by her, that he does altogether go and train his legs in an amble.
thus continue leading the Mare in so soft and slow a going, about half an
hour, and the Colte of himself will not go faster then his dam, by which
means all his pace will be an amble: then have them into the stable again, and
suffer not the Colte to come from his dam, after about 12. of the clock lead
the Mare and Colte forth again, going that pace and no other then you did,
for half an hour more, all which time observe, and you shall see the Colte
tread an amble, then pace them into the stable again, and keep the Colte from
going abroad, and then after about 6. of the clock at night, have the Mare and
Colte abroad again, leading the Mare as aforesaid, and after have them both
into the stable again, and beware that you never go faster with the Mare then
that the Colt treads an amble. And thus continue every day with the Mare and
Colt for 10. days, and as the Colte increases in swiftnes of pace in his
amble, so increase the pace of the Mare, and he will amble most swiftly and
perfectly: if you begin in that slow manner aforesaid, and never enforce him
to go faster, use will bring him unto all perfection: And thus you may make
any Horse to amble most perfectly without any other practice.

CHAP. 48. Of shooing.
Although that most famous Ferrar M. Martin Alman deceassed, has set forth by
May. Blundeuill, a very good work of shooing, and that I must confess my
self to have received my first knowledge therein from the said M. Martin, yet
I may not herein extinguish the worthiness of M. John Orpen, of Greenewich,
fellow Ferrar to the said Martin, from whom as from my chief instructers, I
increased both my skill and desire, whose excellency of knowledge was suchas I
think worthy Hanniball did not exceed those two worthy Ferrars.

And because I would not have any Gentleman acount himself a Horseman, until
he have in some measure attained knowledge in every part of Horsemanship, for
that the name of a Horseman, does truly contain the whole parts of the
knowledge of Horsemanship, and if the true knowledge of hooues were rightly
understood, then were the true knowledge of shooing without great difficulty,
but fearing every man to follow the practice of this living and ignorant age,
and to read a little, and less practice, and that a part of knowledge is taken
and accounted a full and competent knowledge, I am enforced to entreat something
hereof, although there be a practice thereof in every parish within this
kingdom. First therefore I will set down what is a perfect hooue: namely a
perfect hooue, is lean, smooth deep of hooue, tough, something narrow toward
the toe, and conveniently broad in the heels, much like an Ass hooue, for if
it should be a round hooue, then you will have a club or fleshie hooue, which
are both naught, and if it be broad before and spreading out of the sides, it
has narrow heels, and is pomish footed, that is a broad hooue without
deepenes of hooue, both which are naught, and not able to continue many years
with long travel, not being deep of hooue in the quarters thereof, where all
the strength, burden, and bearing of the Horse rests, I mean of the
fore-feete only, and so for want of deepenes of coffen, cannot be of long
service, and commonly all Horses bred and continued in very wet and soft
grounds, are flat and broad footed (except their Sires be Iennet or Ass
hooued: and where some would have the hooue very short, because the horse may
tread most on the toe, I cannot allow that opinion, for every Horse ought to
tread plain, eeuen and full in all parts of his feet, because the horse that
treads most on the toe, does not lift and set eeuen and truly, neither can
be so sure footed, as the Horse that treads eeuen and just, and in all parts
alike, or so easy for the ryder, and in the true paring of the Coffin of the
fore-feete rests all the skill (except it be for enterfering behind) And
therefore you must not only spare, but to the uttermost you may preserve the
hinder quarters of the fore-feete, taking little or nothing away from the edge
of the coffin, because all the weight and burden of the horse rests upon the
quarters and heels of the fore-feet and therefore those quarters, I mean the
edge of the Coffin on the hinder parts of the forefeete must be maintained and
taken of the butter as little as may be, especially on the inside, for thereby
the horse treads and bears equally, and a special means to keep the
horse from enterfering, which few Farriers little think upon, but the toes of
the fore-feete being naturallye thick and hard, must be always abated and
pared thin as the edge of a knife, whereby you shall make the hooues of the
forefeet to be lo before, and high in the quarters, by the only paring and
preserving of the Coffin of the quarters, and thereupon, and upon no other
reason, is that ^^ouch proverb, Deuant ^ariar, dariar deuant; before behind,
behind before, that is, spare the fore feet in the quarters behind in paring
of the Coffin, and the hinder feet in paring the toes thin before, the which
must be observed also in the piercing of the shoe, and not upon any other
cause as some conjecture and have published in their works. Again, for
preserving the Coffins of the fore-feete from growing narrow together, being a
matter of great importance (although through ignorance) little regarded and
practiced (except some Farriers brought up in special place of service)
therefore when you do pare the coffins of the forefeete, the which must be done
so even and plain as the eye can discern, so as the shoe laid upon the
coffen, may seem to be glewed thereunto, for that you cannot see light betwixt
the shoe and the coffen in any part, for otherwise the shoe is not well turned
or welded, or the hoof truly pared, but before it be nailed be sure to amend
the fault so as it may bear eeuen and just upon the edge of all the coffin,
then before you set on the shoe, in both the quarters of the coffen of every
fore-foot next the frush, cut out of the end and corner of the coffen, as near
to the quick of the heel as may be, as much of the coffin as you may lay your
finger in it, whereby the coffin shall never gather too near the frush, to
close up, and become narrow in the heels, so as when the horse is shod, you
shall have a very good distance betwixt the broad end of the frush, and the
sponge of the shoe, whereby al grauel and stones will wash and work out the
sponge of the shoe, being cut a slope in the sponge in this manner. diagram
showing how to cut a horse-shoe shaped sponge

Then when the shoe is tacked on with nails, set down the horse foot and
stand directly behind the Horse, and view whether the frush of the Foot be
directlye, and of just proportion, even betwixt the Webbes of the shoes, and
whether the Horse stand right, and be supported upright thereby, then seeing
the shoe to stand right, and the frush equally betwixt the webbes or Spunges
of the shoe, you shall be assured thereby, that the shoe stands right, the
continual use whereof will cause the Horse to tread and travel boldly and
surely, because his quarternes being the bearing place, will be broad and
eeuen to support the whole body.

And for the true making of the shoe, all the web would be strait and
plain, not drawn in at the heels, and quarters narrow, or beaten to the
heels which many use to do, neither hollowed, if the feet be perfect, but
eeven and flat, with a broad Web, the Spunges thicker and more substantial,
then any part of the shoe, to cause the joint to stand upright, and so wide
in the quarters, as both sides may disbord the Coffin of the hoof the breadth
of a straw, to guard and save the Coffin of the hooue, being the only
strength of the whole foot, and also the shoe so far set back to guard
the heels, as may save the same from brusing and cutting with Stones, and
unless the Coffin be continuallye so kept open from hard oppressing and
enclosing the Tuell of the foot, which is enclosed within the Coffin, whereby
the Tuell becomes bound and imprisoned to the great grief and lamenesse of
the horse, but the foot and joint of the horse maintained as a principal
post to support the whole building, for otherwise the horse will become
hooue-bound, which many ignorantly call dry foundred, and also make the joint
become weak, lame, and full of windegalles.

And therefore when you come to the peircing of the shoe of the forefoot, spare
not to pierce it from the quarter to the hard toe, but not backward to the
heel, and let the shoe be so peirced, as the holes be much wider on the out
side of the shoe then within, for the holes of the inside of the shoe would
be no wider then the Shanke of the nail may well fill, otherwise the shoe
will never sit fast and steady, and the circle of the peircing more distant
from the edge of the toe, then from the edge of the quarter, because every
Smith knows there is more hold to be taken with less danger, in respect of
the tuel and quick of the foot, and all the nails would be vntoled without
shoulders, which will so sink, and strongly fill the hole, as the shoe will
sit most strong, then drive the nails eeuen, leaving as little clime as may be
possible, and by cutting the hoof a little with the point of a knife, let the
clinch be clean hid, the which shooing would always be done, eight or ten
days before you travel your horse, for by that time the hoof will be grown
to the nails, to hold the shoe fast.

And for helping of enterfeting, you must keep him full of flesh, and always
preserve the Coffins on the inside of the hoofes, without paring away more then
to make them eeuen for the shoes, and abate the outside of the coffin of the
same foot, and besides, make the spunges of the shoes of the inside of the
shoes much more thicker then the outside. Now having given a perfect direction
for shooing of hooues fit for use and travel, I purpose not to spend time in
directing how to shoe imperfect hooues, namely broad, flat, fleshy, pomish
and club hooues, and such like, all which if they be natural are only incident
to Iades, not fit for the use of man, wherein if I might prevail, none of them
should be suffered to beget or bring forth colts, because it is impossible for
art^ to make perfect with continuance, what nature has made and brought forth
imperfect. It now rests to show, how to tame colts before they come to the
ryder, for it is not a proper attribute to a famous and skillful ryder to be a
tamer of coltes, no more then a great learned physician, to be both Apothecary
and physician.

CHAP. 49. Of taming of coltes.
ALthough I have formerly showed that the yearly wintering of coltes in the
stable, will make them most tame and domestical, as also bring many other
benefits both to the owner and to the colts, until they come to be ridden,
which would not be before five years of age, if you would have strong, sound,
and durable coltes, which all men desire: and although they are more then half
tamed thereby, yet many things remain undone, which must only be directed by
knowledge and practice. Now when the Colt is made gentle to suffer saddle and
crupper to be set on his back, shoes on his feet, and also led to water, and
walked in the hand, in all gentleness, then take another gentle Horse, and
saddle him and the Colte also, and ride upon the old Horse, leading the Colte
in a halter, let the saddle of the Colte be cross girded, because the same is
a sure way to keep the saddle in his due place, and the rider from casting,
for if you do not cross gird the saddle, when the Horse is empty, the saddle
and girthes will be loose, and if any striving should be with the Horse when he
is full (if the girthes be not cross) by striving to try his strength, the
thrusting out of the wind of his belly, will make either girth or strapp to
break, whereby if he should have advantage, he will ever after upon like
occasion make like adventure, which may turn to the spoil of Horse and man,
and beside the girding of a Horse over the belly, when he is full, may breed
pain or cholicke in his guts, and other such like infirmities.

Thus done ride forth a mile or two, leading the Colte in your hand, and so
come home again, in all gentle and loving manner, but never go out and come
home one way certain, neither usually alight at one place, for fear of any
evil habit to settle in him through custom, wherein if you find him without
resistance to follow and to lead, sometime alight from your Horse, when you
are abroad, and give the colte a piece of bread, grass or such like, and stand
still with him, making much of him, then mount upon the old horse again, and
after you have ridden half a mile or such like, alight and give him the like
reward, still using him in all love, and when you come home again, reward the
colt as be fore, and then have him into the Stable, letting him stand an hour
or two without meat, and then come to him and reward him, and give him some
good prouender, by which usage the Colt will love you, and desire your company,
and when you have several times thus used him, give him to eat such meat as I
have prescribed in the title of cures, to cause him to follow you wheresoever
you go, although he be loose.

And oftentimes when you are in the stable with him, cause some drum, gunne,
music, or such like to come into the stable, and to play or shoot, or some
extraordinary noise or fear, at which time, do you stand by him, comfort and
cherish him so much as you may, whereby he may be assured of your comfort and
love.

And if you find that after 8. or 10. days usage, he becomes very
conformable unto you, ride him still abroad with another horse, laying a
cloake-bagge or some heavy burden in the saddle, and so let him carry it
several days, until you see him as gentle as an old Horse, but take heed
you do not distemper or vex him in any thing, till he know good from
evil, but ever feed him and reward him to gain his love, neither let him
wear any bytt or snaffle, but only a Halter, thus doing you shall be sure
to have him obedeient unto you in all things, without resistance or hurt to
himself, then commit him to a discreet and temperate rider, that has
knowledge and practice answerable to his profession, and he will attain
perfection with great excellency and pleasure, and preserve his body in
health from surfeits, and all his limbs from strain or hurt, which is a most
special means to have your Horse most loving and tractable to man, and of
long health, life, and continuance, to your great contentment: and beware of
Horse coursers taming, if you love your Horse, unless they be of great and
approved temperance, the mother of all virtue.

CHAP. 50. Of ryding.
BEfore I enter into the unfolding of the parts of this art, I think fit
first to show the natural instinct and temperature that ought to be in every
perfect ryder, the only motive and true disposer of his desire, namely the
rejecting fear of perrill, and force of pain, the true properties of his
fortitude to guide his noble nature, thorough hard and difficult things, to the
attaining of the end of his just desire, because the perfection of every work
consists in this, that it be done by a staide and constant reason, for
thereby shall he undertake without rashness, and perform without fear, so as
he shall not in any thing shrinck or yield unto perturbations or any other
humane accident whatsoever.

For though he look like death in the face, he will pass by with a smile,
Minus timori^ minus periculi, audaciam pro muro esse, essugere mortem, qui eam
contemait.
and rather have his blood seen then his back, which being well imprinted in
his mind, pricketh him forward to enterprise and perform those things, that
are most excellent, difficult, and fullest of labors and perrils: for as
Aristotle affirms: Whosoever will be valiant, must be free from all fear of
death, constant in adversities, void of fear in perrils, choosing rather to
dye valiantly, then to save himself cowardly, and so balanced, he floats
steadfastly in the midst of all tempests, because his constant reason and
temperature (the eyes of his valor) refine both judgment and will, from those
gross faults and errors, wherein if nature were his only guide, he would fall
into, the want whereof is to be holden a just exception in a professed Ryder,
Nam nisi su^mum praestes artificem, ridiculas sis, et aut laudem eximiam aut
risum auferras oportet: And because every rider is a creature reasonable, so
ought he to be able to yield a reason of his doing, for that he only
teaches by reason, an inherent pecular property to man, and yet it can not be
truly said, that every reasonable man is a perfect Rider, because every man
has not attained the reason of the art, and therefore unable to teach, Nam
quod nemo didicit, nemo decere potest, For no man can teach that he has not
learned, neither can the true order and use of any art be understood, wherein
every perfect Rider ought to stay and follow, otherwise contrary effects
will evermore ensite: for amendment whereof (presuming himself a Ryder)
proceeds from one violence to another, and thereby the Horse being a creature
sencible is become a creature senseless, for as continual correction is
violence, so all violence takes away pleasure: but if correction be to remedy
a fault, and ease grief, therein is Art and reason, and the effect pleasure,
so as it is evident, that when the Ryder is not endowed with valor, true
knowledge of the Art, Neglectis v^enda filix inuascitur agri^
temperature and practice, then are the fruits of Nature such, as Ground
brings forth without mannuring.

And therefore the Errors and Faults of this Art in a man of good
constellation and temperature proceed only from want of true knowledge and
practice. For as a good player on a Lute or Violl, touches no other stringes
then those that are touched by him that is most unskillful, yet because the
good player is informed with knowledge and practice, he knows what Stringes
make that sound, which the care judges by the harmony and agreement of sound
to be delectable, so as thereby he is truly taken for his craftsmaister.

Even so, he that will be a good Horseman and perfect Rider, must not only
have natural gifts of true valor, wisdom and temperance, but also true
knowledge and practice to attain perfection.

And although it must be confessed that every good beginning comes unto us
by Nature, yet the progress and growth therein comes unto us by precepts of
reason, and the accomplishment by knowledge and practice: for nature without
knowledge is blind, knowledge without nature wants, and practice without the
two former, imperfect:

Hereof it comes, that unless Nature, Art, and practice be conjoined, it
will be impossible to become a good Ryder, or be able to know, how, and
when to help his Horse, how or when to correct his Horse, neither how or when
to cherish his Horse, the only and principal things required in a perfect
Ryder, And yet if the Ryder that is inritched with Nature, Art and practice,
shall bestow all his labor and skill upon a Royle or Jade, and think
thorough his excelling knowledge and practice to make perfect his natural
imperfections: let him assure himself, that he shall oleum and operam
perdere, lose all labor and pains bestowed upon him, because Art and
practice shall never attain perfection upon that subject wherein Nature is
imperfect, no more then Art can assure it self to make strong Gables of the
purest Sand: for although every Horse be a Creature sensible, moved by
sense and feeling, as things propper to Nature, and takes his instruction by
speech, as man instructs man, which is either by cherishing him when he does
well, or by punishing him when he resists, yet nevertheless, when a Jade
begins to be taught, and proceed with a continual perseverance therein,
yet shall he never attain the perfection of action, because all art must
imitate the natures of the Horse, which to content and please, is the end of
the whole Art, but where contrary natures are, there, of necessity must be
contrary working, and then must needs ensue contrary effects, for every
creature works according to his nature: for amendment whereof the ignorant
and pretended Rider proceeds to violence, which nature abhors, as Art
does error and reason unruly passion, whereby the horse is moved to
perturbation, and then his riding becomes grievous and painful, so as he
knows not what to do, no more then an untoward scholar by whipping to say
his lesson delightful, and were it granted that the horse were of a good
disposition to yield all obedience to the most skillful Rider, yet shall he
never attain to any perfection of action, because nature has not shaped nor
given him aptness fit for such purpose, no more then a natural fool can by
education attain to true wisdom. And yet very few Riders neither have or do
truly judge hereof, for that no one thing is more manifest in all their
writings and actions, then provisions and means to help to make perfect that
which is most imperfect by nature, as though they had never learned, that Art
can never overcome the necessity of nature, wherefore I do wish all such as
desire to be Riders, let them first examine their own natural dispositions.

Secondly, to learn to know true and perfect shape of Horses; Thirdly, the
natural causes of their goodness and badnesse. Fourthly, to be taught by an
understanding Master, and not to begin without his direction. Fifthly to
practice, and evermore examine the reason of thy practice, then shall thou see
what a hand-maide, all Art is to nature in beholding the actions of the
perfect shaped Horse to be easy, ready and perfect according to his
perfection of nature, as true qualities bred and brought forth by nature, not
by correction, but by all mildenes and gentleness voluntarily performed, the
which all true and perfect Ryders will and ought altogether cherish, seeing all
the Horses doing in that beautiful form, that himself does express when he
desires to appear most beautiful, so that he does appear to the beholder
both noble, terrible, and beautiful, being just in his pase, just in his trot,
just in his gallop, just in his carriere, just in his stop: just in his manage:
just in his bounding: just in his head: just when he stands still: just in
union with the will of the rider, and his head and neck will be so just, and of
such staidenes, and the mouth of so sweet and perfect stay, as it will seem
nature and straineth to set forth her own glory: al which natural, and not
accidental in a perfect and true shaped horse, as thereby is brought to a sound
conclusion and ground by sweet and gentle means, without force or violence,
wherein all arts have their beginning, proceedings and perfecting, howsoever
the brainelesse and ignorant Ryder (whose anger fore-seeth nothing) pretends
the contrary.

It rests now to speak of those things which most principally are required
by the Art for the true performance of such actions, as Art, requires either
for helps, corrections, or cherishings, for reducing the Horse to perfection
of action, fit for the use of man.

For he which knows truly how to aid, to correct, and cherish a Horse in his
due time, is, and so ought to be accounted the most grounded in this art; the
which cannot be in small time either attained or performed, and therefore for
the true attaining thereof, I would wish that at the first, none should
undertake the same but by the direction of a good schoolemaister, least it be
said unto him, as Timotheus the best player of the Flute of his time, who when
he took a scholar used to demand of him, whether he had made any entrance
into that play? which if he had, he took a greater reward by half, then he
did of them that knew nothing, saying that his pains were greater in taking
away from his scholar that which was naught and unskillful, then in teaching
that which was good, to such as understood nothing at all thereof: whereunto
Aristotle well agreed, when he said that he which does any thing at all
adventure, not considering how well he does, ought not to be called virtuous,
but he only that puts in execution, after knowledge, consultation, and
election. The things that are principally to be used, for helps, corrections,
and cherishings, I think may be well contained in these three: viz. the voice,
the hand, and the leg: because the voice by words of art helps, and with
mild, meek and gentle words cherishes, but by tanting words terrifieth and
corrects. The hand (being the instrument of instruments) upon the true use
whereof the ground of the art rests, by the temperate and sweet stay thereof,
it helps: and by clawing or gently patting the Horse, it cherishes, and by
striking corrects: Again, the hand by the stroke, ierke or sound of a wand
or rod, it often helps by using it mildely and gently, or clawing or
scratching him therewith it cherishes, and by striking hard corrects.
Again, the hand with a bridle in slacking it cherrisheth, and by drawing it
corrects, and by the guiding thereof it governs the Horse as a stern does
the Ship, which in all motions and actions answers to that motion which the
hand moves. The leg when it gently provoke with the calfe, helps; when it
hardly strikes corrects: the spur also by gentle means helps, and by
hard strokes corrects; so as to bring a Horse to true obedience and
perfection of action, he is to be helped, corrected, and cherished: he is to be
helped to the end he should not err, and therein is great knowledge required:
he is to be corrected, for his erres and faults committed; wherein is knowledge,
fortitude, and temperance to be used: he is to be cherished for his well
doing, wherein is both knowledge and reason required, whereby appears how
every good rider ought to be qualified. Of which, namely of the voice, the hand
and the leg, before I come to speak of the action, wherein the true
understanding hereof is most proper, I purpose to give a little further
introduction: and first of the voice. When you mind to help your Horse
therewith, it must be with most mild and cheareful voice, as to say, hey hey:
hola, hola so boy so, hup, hup, enough, enough, no more: and many such like:
but a correction is all contrary which is with a terrible or thundering voice,
as villain, Traitor, and many such like, and in cherishing the most mild and
sweet voice is used, as my good boy, so my good boy, with an inclination of
bending your body to him, and such like, so as also the sound of the voice is
to be used, as well as a voice pronounced, by giving a chirke with the tongue,
which may be called clacking, in pronouncing whereof the tippe of the tongue
strikes the roof of the mouth, as it does in making the supposed sound
drawing near the greek word Clognus, and so also there is another sound of
the voice, as hah hah: The next, is the hand, which as I said is the
instrument of instruments, in the true use and government whereof is the ground
of the whole Art, and as for the bridle and the Rodd, they are but dead and
senseless instruments, without all use, when they are not appointed for that
use, and the temperate and firm hand-bearing upon a firm and sweet stay,
neither too much slacking nor to much drawing in every good horse, causes a
true and just rain, a just bearing, a just staidenesse, with a light and
sweet mouth in all actions: so as, whatsoever the horse does, is both easy,
ready and perfect, and being done by delight, must of necessity be best done,
because it best pleases both man and horse, neither of them being moved to
perturbation greef or pain, and as for the rod and wand being instrument only
for the hand, how or when it is to be borne, offered, used or not used, I
think fittest to refer the same to the proper place hereafter set forth,
and for the Bridle which the Italians properly call Il manico del timone, the
handle of the stern, because the Bridle go uerneth the Horse, as the Stern
does the ship requiring reason and discourse therein, I think also fit to
refer to his proper place, where the horses lessons shall be taught.

The third thing is the legs, wherein the use of the calfes of the leg, the
heels, the stirrup, and the spur are to be handled, I refer also to his
proper place, whereby I would avoid all teadiousnesse and disorder both for
the easier attaining of understanding and the sure-keeping thereof in memory,
for the blindness of man's wit through the disobedience of our first parents is
such, as not having a certain prescript to follow, presently runs into
error, the which whosoever does not know, he knows nothing, and is ignorant
of himself, dispising al divine and humane witnesses, and the example of all
ages; and therefore I have only divided the same into certain prescript
general grounds or rules to follow, whereof the Ryder shall have daily use
in the teaching of the whole art to his horse and scholars.

First when the Ryder begins to teach a young horse, or a young Scholar,
let him follow the order of a discreet Schoole-maister, that teaches Children
to write, who at the first entreats and entertaineth the Scholar into his
school in all loving speeches and gentle usage, assuring him, that in his
school is nothing but pastime, pleasure, and delight; and so winning and
calling him unto him, causes the schol let to take pen, paper and ink, and in
a most mild and gentle manner shows him how to carry his arm and hand,
and hold his P^^, and then how to make the first letter, the which when the
Scholar attempteth, although it be very bad don, yet in respect of the
infancye of his knowledge and willing mind to perform, is not only to be
commended, but rewarded of his master, whereby the scholar is so far
encouraged and imboldened, as he seems over ioyed and still desires and
labors to go on to be taught, and to ma^e many letters, but the discreet
understanding schoole-maister very mildelye and comfortablie restrains his
desire, to write otherwise or more then he knows fit, until he have made the
first letter most perfect, in all which time the Master will not suffer his
Scholar to use his own way, or to write fast, always directing him, until he
have made the first letter most perfect, and so teaches him fom one lesson
unto another, until he can do every one in perfection, and then afterward in
a gentle and slow manner teaches him how to join those letters in all
perfection, and still keeps the Scholar in the continual use and practice
of perfection, so as oftentimes the Scholar through his aptness of nature,
joined with the apprehensiue love of his discreet and loving Master, comes
oftentimes to greater perfection then his teacher, both in fair and swift
writing: even so would young Scholars in Riding, and young Horses in their
beginning be taught, whereby all their actions might bring delight and
admiration to the beholder. For by mild teaching, slow teaching, not weried
with long teaching at one time, but giving often breath, high keeping in
courage, often rewarding, great familiarity, no change of ryder til he be
perfect, no change of bitt, no rough bitt, no cutting or galling nose or mouth,
but gentle feeling, no beating nor whipping, no violence nor passion, but with
all ymitation of natures delight, makes all the Horses actions more then
wonderful, because Nature has a natural love to it self, and an innated
hatred of all things that be enemies unto the same, which is plainly testified
by that natural Sympathy and Antipathie, which may be observed in all
creatures, as the Lamb which never had experience of the Wolves cruelty, yet
at the first sight of him does tremble and fly for fear.

CHAP. 51. Correction.
SEcondly, that the Rider never correct his horse, but when gentle means and
cherrishing will not prevail, for no doubt he will willingly yield by gentle
means, if it be made sensible unto him, what, how, and when to do, but that
Horse that will not by gentle means be moved, let the rider assure himself,
that he is of a bad nature, but if any thing shall happen wherein of necessity
correction is to be used, then let Salomons direction be followed, who as he
was the wisest that ever was, or shall be, so did he keep more horses then
any King, that history mencioneth, who says, that an untamed Horse becomes
fierce, but if he offend, correct him (says he) in the instant time that he
erreth: wherein how many do offend, all men's eyes are witnesses, beholding the
common horse-breakers and ignorant ryders to minister violent and horrible
correction, when the beholder cannot find a cause, nor himself express the
reason: but Solomon says, that correction is to be ministered in the instant
time, that he erreth, and not when he is ignorant, whereof I have before showed
the difference; for error evermore takes that for true which is false, so as
it appears, that when a horse has been taught, and yet notwithstanding erreth
in the same, he has been truly taught, Solomon would have him in that
instance of time punished for that error, but not to punish him for ignorance.

CHAP. 52 That teaching is not fit for such Horses as nature has not framed
fit to be taught.
THirdly that all Ryders lose no time in teaching, club-headed, distorted,
hateful countenance, fleshie, gourdy lymmed, short, thick necked, fleshie
chopped, having their heads set to their necks as a Hog, low fore-parted,
narrow, shallowe brested, and evil shaped Iades and roiles, but turn them
either to the Carters, Carmans, or Paris-Garden stable: for every particular
nature (that is the temperature of the elements in every particular body
(without al co^tradiction) causes and maintains the particular actions of
the body wherein it is and as I have formerly showed, and will defend against
all that shall oppose the contrary: and that such shaped Horse were never
compounded or framed of a true temperature of the elements, and therefore
impossible to be reduced to perfection of action, other then by great force,
which nature abhors, and that is but for a very small time, whereby they
shadow the glory of the kingdom, disparage the judgment thereof, discourage
many noble and heroical gentlemen, either to become breeders, riders or
maintainers of Horses, and cast mists over the perfection of our English
riders, when not any nations of the world have better, as evidently appeared in
that late renowned and famous rider, Sir Robert Alexander knight deceassed, I
may not compare him with Alexander Magnus, but in the true art and knowledge of
riding, I ever esteemed him Alexander Maximus, whose excelling knowledge and
practice of himself, and his worthy scholars, of this English nation, might,
and may, not only range themselves in the former rancks of the best Horsemen
of the world, but reach with victorious arms at the golden fleece, and
meritoriously wrest and wring the victory out of the victors hand, although
sometimes (yet a small time) their glories have been ecclipsed and their hearts
wounded; with the strangers good, as about the 18. year of the reign of that
most blessed and ever renowned queen Elizabeth deceassed, when Prosper the
Italian Horse-courser flourished, may be remembered, sed dies dedit, quod dies
negabat, for within few years he was meritoriouslie with infamy rejected, as
not worth ye the unworthiest horsemans place, raise therefore your spirits, and
daily more and more endeavor the true knowledge and practice of Horsemanship,
which principallye consists in the true knowledge of breeding, wherein you
shall see your understanding enlightened with the beams of divine Nature, and
because in every part of this tractat, I have desired all and every one in
his place and calling, to put all strength thereunto, I here conclude, and
heartily entreat all and every one.

Add manum.
CHAP. 53 Now of the Bridle, Saddle, bringing the Horse to the block, the
mounting and seat of the Rider, and then to the execution of the action of
teaching.
WHen the Horse is made gentle, familiar, and fit for the Ryder to teach, put
on a headstall, with a Chain or Cauetsane over his nose, with a pair of
strong raines, but so loose and easy for his nose, as may neither hurt nor
abate his courage, or his quick and fresh feeling, and in all gentle manner set
a saddle on him, with an upright short pomell, so as the true use of the hand
may not be hindered or harmed, the bolsters whereof would be broad in the top,
to enclose the thighe, and yet to bear so slope as the knee be not pinched,
neither the thighe kept from the true resting place, the seat whereof would be
of reasonable length and largenes, the Bolsters behind bearing forward to
enclose and support the thigh to the former bolsters, the strappes thereof
broad and very strong, with broad girthes, and very strong and broad
buckles, and cross girded, so as the saddle may rest firm on his back,
whereby the seat will be easy, sure, and certain without motion, leaving the
near stirroppe leather almost half a hole longer then the right stirrup, and
although the Horse be gentle, yet because he has a new master and rider not
known unto him, being neither assured of himself, nor of that his Ryder
would have him to do, so as it may be truly said, he is not himself, that
is troubled in mind, therefore to keep him from fear and perturbation, I
would have a quiet, slaide horse also sadled to be rid before him, and then
bring them both to the block, but the old Horse first, and then the Colt, at
which time let the Ryder use all mild and gentle words to the young Horse,
making the Raynes of the Bridle eeuen and just, holding them in his left hand,
not stiff, nor altogether remiss or loose, and so soon as he is mounted on
his back, sit quietly there a while, least any sudden motion should breed
perturbation in the Horse, and until the Ryder have settled himself in the
Saddle, his Nose directlye answering the Horse: his fore-toppe betwixt his
ears, his legs hanging straight down, neither thrusting down the toe, nor
lifting up the heel, but with his foot in such eeuennesse in the stirrup, as
as if he stood upon the ground, the stirrope leathers rather short then long,
winding his toes something nearer to the horse-side, then the heel, holding
the Raines eeuen and just with his Crest, eeuen with the point of the withers,
little above the Maine, with his Thighs and Knees close to the Saddle, and his
feet resting in the stirroppe in due place, not too far thrust into the
Stirrup, with an upright and strait body: his Ridge-bone answering the
Ridge-bone of the Horse, so as the Horse and Ryder may never seem but as one
body in all motions, during which time, clawe the Horse with your hand, to put
him from fear or hard conceit of his Ryder, that done, go forward about two
paces fair and softly, and stay again, making much of him, and so softly and
quietly to the place, where the rider means to tread out a ring, all which
must be done by the ryder, bouldly and without fear, and as he must be thus
used in going forward, so must he be used in treading and pacing out the ring
in some new plowed ground, that is most deep of mould, where first let the
old Horse enter, betwixt two furrows, so far as the rider may have space
enough and mould enough, and follow with the young Horse close unto him, which
will cause him the willinger to go, because he is directed and guided by the
old Horse, by which means he shall not be any ways discomforted, then let the
old Horse (the young Horse following) enter on the right hand, overthwart the
furrows, and tread out twice together a round ring, containing in circuit
about 30. paces, and being come about the second time, where he began, tread
out the like ring on the left hand, and after he has so gone twice about, let
him begin again on the right hand, and so continue until he have gone about
the left ring 4 times, and the right six, that done, go fair and softly out of
the self same furrow where he began, about 30. or forty paces, and there
stand still, keeping his head and body right in the path, remembering always
to have some go by, to signify his true doing, and to help if need be, and
then go very gently back again from the place he came, and there let the
rider alight, making much of him, by coying him, giving him a little grass,
hay, or bread, in his mouth, to procure and win his love, and thus let him be
used for two days with a Horse before him, and after let him lead and begin
himself, to tread and pace the Ring in this gentle manner by the space of ten
days, keeping a temperate, staide and firm hand upon the Reins, with a
sweet feeling stay, carrying his forehead as Rams do, when they go to
fight, whereby he shall not only Reine well, but bear his head just,
stayed, and light, and when he knows what to do, and that for the same he
is evermore cherished, he will strive to do it faster and faster; with the
continual keeping of your hand steadye, he will do it with a wonderful
pride and delight: and by giving of liberty and hasty doing, will work the
contrary.

In the pacing of the Ring, you may not carry over hard hand, to dull the
sense; but so temperately, as the feeling may be always fresh, otherwise by
the violent haling thereof, by much galling his Nose, whereof he would
willinglye have ease, to avoid the same, he will set his head and neck awrie:
the true use therefore is, that standing in the Furrowe just and straight with
his body, you moooue him gentlye to go forward, and in the very motion turn
him on the right hand, by drawing very softlye the right Rain shorter with
your right hand, low, under the Pomell of the Saddle, whereunto if he yield
(as no doubt but he will,) especially having trodde the same before,
presentlye make much of him, neither drawing nor slacking the Reyne: at which
time of doing, both for ease of the Ryder and Horse, if need shall be, let
some, skillful body (but his Keeper were most fit,) come on his left side
to his foreshoulder, and thrust him in by little and little, and then the Ryder
also by the Calfe of the left leg, and the clacke of his tongue to be a
help to make him go forward, but if the horse be such as I have described,
he will do it voluntarilye and perfectlye without such helps; but if he
should not in the very motion of the turn, to draw the Reyne with your hand,
as before, whether it be on the right hand or on the left, all which must be
done by gentle dealing, so as he may hope for rest and quietness, whereby he
will be ready to do whatsoever you will: but if he be a ramadge Jade, or
of evil disposition by Nature, for my own part I esteem him not of any worth
to be kept, as I have before said, and therefore the excellent breed is
evermore to be increased and cherished: for do not all Ryders use all means
of Art and practice to remove imperfection, and to reduce them to perfection
for the use of Man, for whose only use they were created? whereunto the
imperfect shape by all the Art and knowledge of man, cannot have perfection
with continuance.

Having spoken of pacing the Horse in the Ring, it follows, that after the
ten days expyred, the Horse be taught to trotte the Ring, which must be begun
in as slow and gentle trot as he was in his first beginning of pacing, increase
his ring-turns by two and two every day, until he make ten turns for the left
ring, and 12. for the right, which will increase his swiftnes, whereof he would
be restrained until he be most perfect (as I have showed in teaching the
scholar to write) and then will he do it in the greatest grace and pride that
may be, which is the true property and quality of all Art, evermore to effect
perfection, during which time of beginning of trotting, he may not be ridden
with wand, nor wear any bytt, until he be most perfect in trott, stop, and
turn well on both hands, and not by any means suffered to gallop, until he
can also perfectly advance, by which means he will be just in his pace, just
in his trot, just in his stop, with a staide head and neck, being the chief
goodness that nature and Art affords.

Wherefore when you begin to trot the Ring, be sure that at the first he be
moved thereunto, as gently and quietly as you can devise, and so to every
action whatsoever, upon a stayed, temperate, and firm hand, with a sweet
stay, and with a true reyne, that is, that his nose be just under his
forehead, neither too much out, nor too much in, which is the just placing and
settling of the head, which will make him have a pleasant mouth, when he
comes to wear the bitt, and in this consists the chief point of
Horsemanshippe, because he is so to be maintained in all his actions, the
which is most easy to be done, and continued, if the horse be of perfect
shape and spirit, but if he should make resista^ce for that he is either rammage
or evil broken, then trot him swift with quickness of voice, rod, and spur,
for the time of his trotting is the fittest time to make him forgette his
toys, and to attend his way, and if all this will not help, then spare not to
gallop him, and then be sure he will be a I ade from the beginning to the end,
for a Horse of good temper and perfect shape, can never be of so bad nature and
quality.

Wherefore I think fit now to show, how to make your Horse perfect in stop,
after you have ended the number of your Ring turns, which is to trott your
Horse right out in the middle furrowe betwixt the Rings, until you come at the
place of stop, and there to make a pretty stay, keeping his body right in the
pathe, wherein, if the whole body, or any part stand overthwart, seek not at
first to correct him for the same, but let a foote-man direct him to stand
right in the pathe, by thrusting in that part which stands out of order, or
you may cause the horse to go farther in the same path, and stop him,
holding that rain straiter on that side, whereon he most forces your hand,
then on the other, which will enforce him to keep right, which when he
yields, evermore cherish him, and after it will be good to trot and stop him
on a ground that is a little steep, which something falls, and immediately
rises, but when he is perfect, then you may do it on a ground very steep:
but to teach him to go back, you must (as I have said) keep a firm stayed
hand on him, without giving liberty, and then striking him on the neck with
your rod, and in that instant time say back, back, but if he refuse, let a
foote-man with a rod gently strike him on the knees, and so by gentle pulling
in of your hand and fair means win him, and when he yields, cherish him.

Having showed how to ride your Horse without wand, bit, or spur, I will now
show you how to ride with all three, and the true use of the hand upon the bit,
the chief and only principal point of horsemanship. First therefore when you
ride with a wand, take it very warilye, that the Horse be not feared
therewith, and to assurethe horse thereof, presently after you have received it,
coy and scratch him about the neck with the end thereof, and for the carrying
thereof it must be in the right hand, with the point upright, and when you
would use it, let the point fall close unto him as occasion shall require: but
in your manage lay your hand on your right thigh, and the wand cross the
Horses neck, and when he has made his course and turned on the right hand,
then before the end of his second course, when he is almost ready to turn on
the left hand, list your hand and rod, and hold the point right forth on the
right side, against his eye, and as he changes turns, so change your rod of
the one side and of the other; but if your Horse will not turn on the side you
would have him, evermore beat him on the contrary side: and when he is any way
disordered, carry the wand on the contrary side, and when you would have him
carry his forepart light, strike him on the shoulder and forelegs, and when you
would have him light behind, strike him one the rump and hanches: and thus
much for the use of the wand as occasion shall serve.

Now for the true use of the bit, which is an instrument only guided and
directed by the hand, and because the ground of the art of riding depends
wholly upon the use and true government of the hand, being guided by reason and
discourse, so as the Horse in all motions and actions is and ought to answer
to that motion, which the hand moves, I may not pass the same ouer-lightly.

First therefore let the bit that you first bit your Horse withal, be gentle
and pleasant, yet so that the gentleness cause him not to despise you, nor the
hardness drive him to despair; for you must understand, that knowledge always
presupposes reason, and reason sense; and sense and reason consist in true
mediocrity, and therefore amongst the most learned precepts that were written
in the temple of Apollo in Graecia, this was in the second place nothing too
much.

SOLON said nothing more then enough, PITTACHVS do all things by a
mediocritie, so that all difference betwixt good and badde consists in a
certain mediocritie, which CICERO calls the best of all things; for when
you press him with the bridle, if he carries his head well, yet must you
presentlye ease your bridle hand, and make much of him, because he shows
himself obedient unto you, and whenever he does any thing well, and with
delight, you must be very heedefulnot to vex him, as if your desire were to
torment him, but ever so win him, as he may be willing to please you.

So likewise when you bear a firm hand with a stay; and thereby the Horse
does bring in his head, and yield to your hand, yet you must shorten the
raines of your bridle, till his head be settled in due place, that is neither
to carry his forehead too much out, nor too much in, and still maintain him in
ye form in all his doings, yet that it exceed not mediocrity or temperature,
but remain light on the hand with a sweet mouth. Thus having showed you, that
it must be done, I will show you how to do it, by keeping this order: stay
your horse temperately with the bridle upon a stayed hand, as his resistance
shall require, without giving any liberty, then with your rod strike him
gently upon the bowing of the neck, provoking him with the spur on that side,
he most wryeth his buttock, to the end he may go just, until he draw back
one of his forefeete, which if he do, make much of him, and then stay a
while, and do the like, drawing only the bridle, for the former cherishing
will cause him to understand you, and then will he go lightly back with both
the fore legs, when you touch him on the neck with the rod, saying with a
loud voice, back: at which voice with the feel of the rod, and drawing of
the bridle, he will go back to your desire, and always after, when he is
out of the due and true stay upon the bridle, do the like, that is to go
back in form aforesaid, and although some disorder be committed, have no
despair, for you shall find him easily won to a good mouth, by this use of
a temperate and firm hand, which is by the mediocritie of slacking and
drawing, which is propperly termed a sweet stay, What is a te^perate and firm
hand.
which the Italians call Dolce Appoggio, making him light upon the hand,
champing the bitt with great pleasure, and a stayed head in due place, the true
tokens whereof are just rain, just staide, and light borne head with pleasure
on the bit, being properties inseparable in every perfect shaped Horses
actions, but because it may seem very difficult to have continuance of
perfection in every action, although it is common upon stop, or standing
still, to be in order, yet perhaps upon motion, he will leave playing on the
bit, and bear upon the hand, especially upon the maine careere, which comes
for want of true knowledge how to maintain and continue the hand just and
firm with a sweet stay, so as he may take pleasure on the bit, and therefore
how to maintain a Horse both in furious and quiet doings, is to be considered
of, if then at any time he make any disorder, note it dilligently, and by and
by stay fair and gently, and make him go back as you did before, for in going
back he will bring himself into his right order again, then presently make
much of him, and forthwith move him forward, fair and gently, till he come to
the place of stop, and as he must be thus used in going forward, so must he be
used in treading of the rings, first gently upon the pace, upon the trot, and
so upon the gallop, in practicing whereof you must precisely observe that it be
done with a temperate, stayde, and firm hand, otherwise he will gape, thrust
his tongue upon the bit, or over the bit to defend himself, thrust his head
out sudd ainely, pluck it in disdainefully, or else shaking or moving his head
one way or other, to be freed from the pressing of the intemperate hand which
is to him violence and contrary to Nature, the which Art should evermore labor
to please. The true form and practice of drawing the bridle, is also to be
learned, which is, that being mounted in the Saddle, let the Ryder draw the
Raines equal, and if the Horse know not the Bytt, then let the Bytte be very
slack, and hold the Raines in his left hand, with the little finger and ring
finger between, under the pomell of the saddle, as near the withers as he
can, and then with the right hand draw the raines softlye and equally together
through the left hand, so as the standers by can scarce perceive, the which he
may not remove, until he feel the Horse begin to stay upon the bytt, and
then there hold them without slacking or farther drawing, until he peruse
whether the head stands in true form, which if it be not, then let him a
little yield his left hand again, and standing so a pretty while, bring his
left hand to his former place again, where the Horse made the first stay upon
the bytte, but if you perceive the Horse doubts whether to put it out, or
bring it in, which will be hardly perceived, other then that then, he
stands without motion upon the bytte, then draw the Raines with your right
hand, somewhat more through the left hand as before, but so little and gently
as can scarce be perceived by the Beholders, for so must all the motions of
the hand be, and then keep it firm and stayed a pretty while, and then if
he yield, though very little, keep your hand still at one stay, neither
slacking nor drawing it, wherebye he will feel the ease he has gotten by
yielding, and then presentlye make much of him, but if it happen the Raines
fall slack, remove not your left hand, but draw the Raines through your left
hand, as before, for they may not be slack until he stay again upon your
right hand, whereunto whenever he yields, make much of him, continuing
still in this sort to solicit him, till his head be in his due place, that is
neither too much out, nor too much in, after which time, if he bear not
light, let his keeper strike him gently on the knees of his fore-legges to make
him go back, whereby he will bring in his head, and then will the bit move,
and your hand find ease, but be very careful at that instant, to keep your
hand so firm, as you neither slack nor draw in, to the end he may feel and
reteyne the ease of his own motion of yielding, which willingly he will not
loose, being delightful to nature, but take delight to stir the bit in his
mouth and go back withal likewise, the which when you find, are tokens of
the winning of his mouth, which being won, with observation of good order, may
be brought to continual perfection.

Thus I have showed you so much as Art may help, but if the shape and nature
of the Horse be opposite and repugnant, as in the greatest number of Horses it
is, howsoever for a time it may seem perfect, yet no doubt it cannot be of
continuance, and therefore still desire all men, to put their uttermost help
for to increase a perfect breed of Horses, and increase of temperate teachers.

But because in the whole Art of Ryding there is no one thing more difficult,
then to make a Horse Trott just, and that the pefection thereof is the
perfection of all other his just doings, I purpose a little farther discourse
herein, fearing that I have been too brief, so as diverse doubts may still
arise amongst such as have not had long knowledge and practice therein.

Wherefore observe that when you are teaching your horse herein, or in any
other lesson, that you do not trouble him, with any other lesson at that
time, neither suffer him to begin to learn any other, until he be very
perfect in that he is in learning.

2 Secondly that you do not suffer any other to ride him until he be perfect
in such lessons you purpose to teach him, least he be confused by diversity of
hands, and man-ner of teaching.

3. Thirdly, when he is brought to a just stay of head, and assurance of the
bytt, then do you mainetaine him therein to a full perfection.

4 Fourthly, when he is out of order, then stay him and make him go back, as
before is mentioned.

5 Fifthly, when he is in order, then make much of him, and stay not long, but
with a firm hand fair and gently put him into his pace again.

6. Sixtlye, if he continue in his good order, make much of him, giving your
body, with a gentle motion of the calfes of your legs, move him to do it
more speedily, the which if he be by nature good, he will quickly perform,
always remembering to keep a firm hand, unless by bringing in his head, the
Reins fall slack, which must be then drawn as has been told you.

7. Seauenthly, if his trot continue not light upon your hand, stay him, cause
him to go back, which will bring him in order again, and then gently put him
into his pace, and so to his trot as before; which being well done, cherish and
coy him by all the sweetest and best means you may, so that you may ouerwin
his love thereby, and so for that time leave him, and lead him home by some
leading line, in which time give him a little grass or hay on your hand, and
scratch him, and speak to him with the most loving words you may, which will
make him at your next exercise, do all things to your greatest content, and
within twenty days he will pace and trotte in such order, as always after
you may trot him most swiftly in the rings or in manage.

8. Eighthly, in his swift trot, by all means keep your true feate and firm
hand, so as he lose not that excellent form and grace before prescribed, but
do not galloppe him until he be just and perfect in his swift trot, and then
out of that trot, to put him to a quiet gallop in the large ringes, even to the
stop: but beware you draw not your hand hastily to you, but by a little sway
of your body, back and hand together, and stay your hand there til he come
back a step or two, and there stay him and suffer him not to go forward, and in
that instant make very much of him, and so let your hand and body go to the
place again.

9. Ninthly, if he should then offer to go forward, stay him with the like
sway, and then alight and lead him home, making much of him, as before.

10. Tenthly, to assure your self of the right use of this has been said,
and of the perfections thereof, pace your Horse overthwart some deep fallowe,
as fast as you can for half an hour but suffer him not by any means to trot,
keeping your hand in a firm and temperat stay, as before: and if you still
find his head in due place, his carriage light and pleasant upon the bit, you
are assured you have gained the perfection of the hand, and the true use
thereof for the teaching and making of a young Horse, wherein observe that if he
be of perfect shape, his head will be in due place, and light upon the bit,
without art.

Now a little I purpose to speak of the Horse that is already taught, and
brought to perfection, wherein a good rider has small need to use any rod, or
other help, but to keep his true, just, and perfect seat, because the Horse by
the least token or motion of bridle or spur, will do all things in such time
and measure, as the beholders will judge the Horse and rider but one body, one
mind, and one will; and therefore how the reins should be carried, placed and
used, is the only thing to be spoken of. The reins you must hold in your
left hand, placing the little finger and ring-finger betwixt the two reins,
and the thumb close up on the reins, so as the hand remove not from the
crest of the Horse, for by the motion of the hand it is signified to the Horse
which way you would have him turn: which is by streyning the reyne on that
hand you would have him turn, and slacking it on the other: the order and
manner there of has been and is yet diversely used of the best horsemen, and
therefore I leave it to every man's use as he finds it most fit: but in
running at the Tilt, where the Horse neither does or can turn, the rider must
not draw the bridle toward the Tilt, but only strainethe reine that is next
the Tilt to make him carry his head toward the same.

1. But because the true shape and goodness of nature of the Horse is, it that
art attends and works upon, in those Horses the rules of art have
perfection with continuance, so as the Horse that is of perfect shape and well
taught, shall not endanger wind or limb, or deformity of body.

2. Next, your person shall neuerbe in peril by rearing or running away.

3. Thirdly the rider shall never be grieved with heavy bearing upon his hand,
but perform all with great delight: neither shall you need Cauetsane, musrole,
martingale, or such like, but only false reins.

4. Fourthly and lastly, this teaching will manifest the difference betwixt
true knowers and ignorant ryders, which doings the Horse does represent and
express when he would appear most beautiful, and thereby make both the rider
and himself appear most noble, terrible and beautiful to behold, with such
delight to the beholders, as they will seem to be ravished with delight; all
which is attained by good discretion, taking of time with temperance, which of
few is little regarded, rather ryding without order, and with such extremity
of spur and rod, that for want of breath they commit many diforders, whereby
the poor Horse is cruelly tormented being no other then to ride as mad men
without discretion, and as passionate and furious men without reason.

After your horse has pefectly learnd swiftly to trot perfectly to stop, and
perfectly go back; thon ought he to be taught perfectly to advance, which is
by lifting up both his fore-feete just and even together, like unto a goat,
somewhat above the ground, and so let them fall even and just, twice or thrice
together: the true doing whereof will cause him to make a just perfect manage,
and a ready and perfect turn: for the attaining whereof, trot him gently
forty or fifty foot in some plaint way, then give him a just stop, which he
will truly perform, because he has before perfectly learned the same, always
keep a steady, pleasant, and perfect hand on the bridle: then instantly with a
mild voice, say, hup, hup, striking him in that instant with your wand on the
right shoulder, and also with both the calfes of your legs together, but spur
him not, if possiblye without it he will advance, the which with a little
labor, and patie^t teching, no doubt he will attempt to do, 2. or thrice
together; the which if he do, then in that instant make much of him (although it
be very meanly done) and pause a little time and give breath, then trothim
again in like manner, the like distance of ground, and as before, so gently use
him again, ye which if he do better advance, make much of him but if he do not
better every time he is taught, you must still folicite him until he do
better, and then presently coy him, and make much of him: all which must be
with temperance, and not with fury, and be sure to give him breath, and not to
be rash or hasty, neither forget to make much of him, when at your direction
he does any thing well; so shall you cause him to do ye same most
delightfully, and also sencibly aprehend when he does well whatsoever you
desire, and after that he can in plain ground perfectly adui^ce, then teach it
him gently upon the hanging knole of a hill, to bring him perfectly to stop,
and run slyding upon his bu^tocks or hinder legs, which is most
praiseworthy, beautiful or graceful for manage and turn, and therefore let
him do it most perfectly before you teach him any other lesson: and when he can
do it perfectly upon a soft trott, then upon the swift trot and afterward do
it upon a soft gallop, and not before, but never upon a swift gallop, until he
be perfect both in turn and manage, remembering the manner how I told you to
make a Scholar write as fair and perfect as his master: and be sure to
observe (if it may be) when you teach him to have one by that can judge of the
good or evil doing thereof, the want whereof is a principal cause of most
errors, because the Ryder cannot iudicially see whether it be as it ought,
that is just and true, and with comelye grace: whereby many faults and errors
are committed and continued, which by the help of a skillful director, would
be easily amended in the beginning, for principio mederi multo melius quam
fini, to amend a fault in the beginning, is far more easy then when it has
been long accustomed: for if he advance too high, and not just and even, and
with a good grace, as he ought, then may the fault be speedily found, and
easily amended by immediate correcting him, with one, or with an even stroke of
your legs and the wand, with a sweet stayed hand on the bridle, which with
few trials, will amend what is amiss, and the end full perfection.

And for the teaching of your horse to yerk, because thereby comes much more
hurt then good, I leave to entreat thereof. And whereas some apoint many helps
for Horses that are harder, to turn on the one side, then on the other
(although I confess their general desire is more apt to the left hand then to
the right) yet to a Horse of good nature and perfect shape, little Art will
speedily help, and to teach those Horses that are otherwise shaped, is but to
teach an Ass to run under a bridle, and may truly say with Horace, O infelix
operam perdas, O unfortunate skill to loose thy labor, and so soon shall a
ryder bring a Jade to perfection, as an Ass to play on a harp: for as a good
Horse by the sound of a trumpet is stirred and moved to battle, so Suem
abigat citius, quam animet ad pugnam, the Sow is thereby sooner chased away,
then encouraged to fight, because nature has not made her for that purpose.

It now remains to show when to make the half turn and the double turn,
the chambetta, the manage, to pass a swift cariere, the coruet, and such like.

The next lesson he is to learn, after he is very perfect in those I have set
down, is to make a true and just half and double turn, which would be in this
manner. First when you have gently trotted, stopped and advanced your Horse the
length of a short cariere, teach him gently and mildly to make the half turn
(beginning always on the right hand) that is to turn him with the help of
your left leg, that his head may stand that way which before his tail stood,
which is called a half turn, because he makes but half a circle; but if in
the turn he set his head that way it stood at first, that is a whole circle,
and therefore called a whole turn; but let him first do the half turn
perfect, and let that be his first lesson, and learn it very perfect before
you teach him the double turn, which must be done by helping him with your
voice, and Calfe of your left leg, and not at first by any means to have him
spurred, if he can be otherwise brought unto it, because to spur is a
correction, which may not be done but in that instant when he has committed
an error, and not while he remains ignorant what to do; by which means
undoubtedly being a sencible creature, he will evermore perceive his errors and
offenses, whereby with little correction he will easily amend any fault; and
never drive him to despair, for having formerly attained a perfection of a
just, eue^ and swift trot in the rings, (the very true ground of all other
lessons) he will easily turn on the right hand, setting his head that way his
tail stood; the which being perfectly attained, then close it up with another
half turn on the same hand by the prescribed helps, setting his head and all
his body in the same pathe it was at the first: then give breath, and make
much of him, and then make him do as much on the left hand, and so to change
from hand to hand, leaving alvvaies on the right; remembering that the two
first half turns be done more leasurely, then the two last half turns,
which must be done more speedily, and then make him do as much on the left
hand, and so change from hand to hand, leaving alvvaies on the right. Thus by
often making much of him when he does well, taking leisure, and giving
breath, you shall undoubtedly, if he be of good nature and perfect shape, make
him do swiftly, loftilie, and justly, and with such grace as shall bring to the
unlearned beholder wonder, and to the skilful, admirable delight.

In the doing whereof, first observe whether he bring on the contrary leg
orderly.

Secondly, that he do it after the first bound of advancing, and after at the
second or third bound.

Thirdly that you always begin on the right hand and end on the right.

Fourthly, that after he is perfect in doing of the whole turn, that you make
him do it swiftlye and roundly, without stop or stay of the half turn, and
speedily in the closing of every whole turn, and in so narrow a room as may
be.

Fifthly, after he is perfect as aforesaid, give him on each hand three whole
turns, whereof let the first be very fair and softly, beginning at the right
hand and ending at the right, in the doing whereof you must always help him
with your tongue, your rod and your leg, whereby a continual use before you
teach him any other lesson (which would never be done unless he be perfect in
the lesson he is learning) you shall in the end with discreet and temperate
teaching, bring him to an admirable perfection, keeping time and measure, that
the one be not swifter then the other except the last, which evermore would be
most perfect and speedy.

Now to proceed to the managing of a horse, the true signification whereof is
to be rightlye understood, by such as endeavor Horsemanship, for ignoratis
terminis ig noratur and ars, to be ignorant of the terms, is to be ignorant
of the Art, I take it to be a compound of these lattin words, manus and ago,
for as the stern of a ship does guide and govern the same by a sweet and
gentle motion, so the hand (being the instrument of instruments) does guide and
govern the Horse to enerie action, and therefore may fitly be said manu
agere, or as the Italians properly call Maneggiare, which is as much as
skilfully to handle. And therefore when the rider shall exercise the Horse
perfectly and gracefully in his place, trot stop, advance, double or single
turn, cariere, gallop, leap, caperiole, coruet, assaut, or whatsoever, the
hand being the principal actor or primus moter, may truly and aptlye be
called manage, which cannot truly be done without the general knowledge and
practice of the general precepts of the whole Art. And as all the former
exercises must be taught and begun to be exercised upon a soft pace or
trott, and not with a galloppe, even so ought his managing to be.

And although many worthy Horsemen have and do only restrain managing to
gallopping, and to bring too and froe in one self pathe, by half rest, whole
rest, or without rest, as when the rider manageth with half rest, causing the
Horse at the end of every managing path, after he has stopped to advance
twice together, and at the second bound to turn and rest one bound: does not
the Rider therein exercise the trott, the stop, the advance, and the turn
which he formerly learned, and according to the same manner: or when he manageth
with whole rest; and turn him at the third bound, and rest two bounds: Or
manage him without rest, by turning him immediately upon the stop, without any
taryance or rest at al, which only is most common with us in England, and yet
the manage with the half rest is most necessary for attaining of perfection;
does not the Ryder keep and maintain the Horse in one path, one place of
stop, making him keep his ground, and therein carry his head, neck, legs, and
all his body just, closing his turn roundlye, and in narrow room, with true
time and measure in every action, as he has been formerly taught? how then can
managing be properlye referred to one only action, when it is the perfect
acting of every action and lesson he has learned? wherein when your horse is
most ready and perfect, you may increase the often doing of his lessons at
your will, and make alteration of his turns and exercises, to find out the
perfection of his obedience, and when the same are artificially and perfectlye
performed, then may the rider be truly said a perfect manager, in all which
alterations beware of furious passion, or of longer exercise, then you find
full breath and delight in the horse; wherein if there be any omission, be sure
there cannot be perfection of the thing desired: for as patience is a branch
of magnanimity, fortitude and greatness of courage, so impatience is a weakness
and imbicilitie, of a base, vile, and contemptible nature, because choler and
anger are enemies to al reason, and therefore says Solomon he that is slow to
anger is better then a mighty man, and he that rules his own mind is better
then he that wins a City.

Now rests it to show what are the principal things that are to be observed
in the true managing of a horse. First he is to be taught his manage with a
soft trot and not with a gallop: my reason is, because thereby he may at the
first, sencibly apprehe^d what he is to do, and how to do; the which when he
knows, if he be of good nature and perfect shape, he will not only do it most
willingly, but perform it most beautiful, graceful, and praiseworthy, which is
by bowing of his houghes behind, to turn round with the cha^ betta, which is
by holding up the forefoot on that side he should turn, whiles he brings over
the contrary leg, and sets it not down until he have closed his turn, so as
thereby he shall carry both his forefeete above the ground, to his great praise,
and not trayling upon the ground which is disgraceful.

When you teach your horse (which is after he can stop well, advance before,
and turn readily on both hands) then with a soft trot come to the place of
stop about 20. paces in length, and make him advance twice together, and at the
second bound turn him on the right hand (for on that hand you must always
begin) helping him so, that by bowing his houghs behind, he move his
forepart orderlye, then immediately in gentle manner trot him back to the place
you came from, and then and there after he has made his stop, at the second
bound of his advancing turn him on the left hand, observing the like order
until you have gone 10. or 12. times, and at the last, cause him to advance
twice together, and thus much for the half rest, the which when he can
perfectly do, you may teach him the whole rest, which is to advance thrice,
and at the third bound to turn, but be sure he be perfect in one lesson before
you teach him another.

Now because the manage without rest is most propper for Iades, I omit to
entreat thereof, because I would not admit Asinum sub freno, an Ass to wear a
bridle: in all your managing let your body still accompany your horse in the
action with a good grace, And when he has very perfectlye learned his
manage, on a soft trot, then may you manage him with a gallop, giving him on
each hand one single turn: and a little before you turn him, hold your rod
on the contrary side, whereby he shall know on what side to turn, and at
the stop make him to advance, either with voice, rod or spur, alvvaies
remembering to give breath, and evermore begin with a gentle gallop, until
he be very perfect, and then time will bring him to a perfect and swift
manage: but I wish you so to use and exercise your horse, as when he is become
a perfect Horse, you may long be master of a perfect Horse, and not to spend
or spoil him in a little time, in teaching of him needelesse toys.

There might be much more spoken of helps and corrections in managing, but
because they are proper to Iades, or else to horses that are evil taught, I
omit them: for if your horse be such as he ought, and your self temperate and
discreet (otherwise I wish you not to profess your self a Horseman) you
shall herein find sufficient.

After your Horse is perfect in such lessons as have been formerlye remembered,
Cariere.
and grown to his full and perfect strength, having learned al his lessons
without swift gallop, and therein so ready as may be wished, then begin with
him with a short Cariere, in a fair sandy way, and with a lively voice put
him forward, forcing him to run swiftlye; roundly, and smothely, with a
steady head, and lightly to stop him self on his buttocks; then turn him on
the left hand, and softly pace him to the other end of the Cariere path, and
there stop him and turn him again on the right hand, and so leave. And as
this passing a cariere or swift gallop, must never be done or taught, until
he be most perfect in all the lessons, so must it be done very sparingly, as
once or twice in a month at the most, so shall he do all things with
admiration, and of long continuance.

CHAP. 54. Bound and Leap.
SOme have a desire to have their Horses to bound, leap and yarke, and because
I know it would be most exactly done, which cannot be but by the best spirited
Horses, tending altogether to their destruction, and a matter rather of
delight, then good use, I leave it to the disposition of the owner, wishing
much rather to have it omitted then practiced, unless there were more plenty
of Horses that are meet for the same.

CHAP. 55. Of the Capriole and Ooruetti.
THe difference betwixt these twois, that the Capriole or Goats leap is
always in going forward, and the Ctorueti still in one place: these are to be
learned and taught by one order, but neither of them shall ever be well learned
and exactly done, unless your horse be very perfect to stop, which is by
much bending the elbough of the hinder houghes or heels of the horse: now the
Coruetti may in some sort resemble the dancing of the Bear at a stake; for
when he daunceth and praunceth up and down in one place, lifting his forefeete
even and just together, seeming to turn if he might be suffered, that is
properly the coruet, the which is never well done, unless he be just and
steadie of head, and body, bowing the hammes of his hinder legs, as if he
would sit or slide on his buttocks. And the Capriole is in the same manner yet
still going forward, seeming as though he would yark behind by advancing his
rump, but does not: and as he does it forward, so will he do it backward and
side-long.

Now you are not to teach your horse either of these, until he be absolutely
perfect in those former lessons before mentioned, because these lessons before
mentioned, because these lessous are only learned by stopping and advancing,
the which if he have once perfectly and long practiced, then trot him for
diverse days upon some hanging ground: and upon the knole of the hill on the
same ground, make him to advance twice together, the which he will very quickly
do; then help him with the sound of your lips, to trot two paces farther, and
there to stop and advance twice together at the end of the two paces all the
length of a hanging hill downward, remembering evermore to cherish him when he
does well, and to give breath, that all his doings may be done with delight,
otherwise he will never do it worthy commendations; and by this using of him,
you shall have him within a little time at every time that he stops and
aduanceth, if you help him with your word in saying hup, and with your rod
by striking him upon the forepart of his shoulder; and in his well doing
thereof make much of him, he will go from stop to stop, advancing both
forefeet and hinder loins with time and measure so often as you vvil, and in
such just, even and staid manner, as will be very delightful to behold,

Now because I would not have you begin any lesson, but by the direction of a
perfect schoolemaister, and in that course to continue, so must you endeavor
your self to know the reason of all your doings, and therefore be sure to be
always present at the excercises of the most skillful Horsemen, and as Solomon
says, let your foot tread often upon their threshold, read the best writers,
and when you are able to judge truly, and to make difference betwixt good and
bad, make as much practice as you may, and then never doubt to become a perfect
Horseman, and be able to teach your Horse whatsoever is fit for a Horse to do,
and a man to know.

And if I should now discribe the form and fashion of all manner of bitts, I
think it needelesse, for two respects: First for that Laurentius Rusius, in
his book written in latten, entitled with the Greek word Hyppoateia,
signifying the medicine or cures for Horses, as also Master Blundeuile in his
book, and diverse others have very painefullye performed the same. When you
shall know the perfect shape of good Horses, and the perfection of the true
knowledge of their nature, in this treatise most plainly described, you will
acknowledge the multitude and variety of bits, not to be of any use, and
besides, having diverse good Bit-makers within this kingdom, who can exactly
make as many perfect bits as art ca^ require, I have thought fit here to rest,
and not to make volumnes of needles matter.

Nulla placudior quies nisi quam ratio composuit. Gentle Reader, thou see how
briefly I have entreated of the Art of riding, and yet I doubt not but
sufficient to the understanding Reader, And much better then teadiousnes to a
young Scholar: But whosoever he be that desires to be a perfect rider, and a
good Horseman, must labor and study to attain the true knowledge of nature,
because nature and Art are joint pattentees with practice, without which it is
impossible to attain to perfection in either, so must he also abandon the
study and practice of apish toies, and violent helps: I know, Non omnis fert
omnia tellus. Every ground is not fit for every seed, nor every man for
every action, nor every Horse for the saddle: sand does not makegood cables,
neither hemp good mortar. Let me without offense putyou in mind of that
famous and worthy ryder M. Frederick Grison, and others whose works of ryding
(if without affection) they be read and digested, there will apeare therein a
perfect picture of ignorance, in the true knowledge of natural causes, or at
least the rejecting of the force thereof, which no doubt caused him and them to
publish so many needeles, forced, fond, and frivolous helps for the perfection
of riding, and to set forth in number Fifty several forms and fashions of
bits, thereby to persuade, that art can perfect the imperfections of Nature,
wherein there is not any truth, more manifest, then his and their imperfection
in true judgment.

And yet who sees not, that the Byas of men's consent has drawn the same to
be applauded and practiced of all horsemen, in all nations, and believed as an
Oracle from a divine power. I do entertain, and reverently esteem the most of
his grounds and rules of riding, and account not any to have written better;
but to set forth so many and infinite helps and corrections, only proper and
peculier for Iades, whom all art, knowledge, and wisdom of man shall never
perfect with continuance, cannot but manifest a weak judgment, and palpable
ignorance of nature; and therefore all must acknowledge, that every man by
nature, is the object of change. A tree, the fruit whereof is never ripe but
in the latter season, his nature cannot easily be discerned whiles it is
green: you must see the bud, the blossom and the fruit, before you can
judge, Ildi doda la sera, it is the evening must comend the day, says the
Italian, and so must you cleanse and grind the corn before you can eatit, and
then no doubt, shall our virtue grounded upon rules of reason, pursue and effect
that which our fate has promised, Inueniet viam aut faciet, she will either
find a way, or make one: for God does nothing that concerns us without us,
were it not then a Star of merit for every man to give his thoughts a stronger
wing to fly, with petition to our most sacred Sovereign for the placing and
planting within every shire and county of his kingdoms, a sufficient
understanding ryder? But alas, who sees not, that the best enterprise is
blasted in the blossom, by a sinister and scandalous persuasion? and yet I am
assured, Faciliu^est errare naturam, quam dissimilem sui princeps possit
rempublicam formare. And therefore I do wish the sentence of Brutus deeply
planted in the hearts of al Brittanes, Vicit amor patria, ^uida est peri culo
^^rtus:
laudisque immensa cupido: that one and all did thirst in husbanding the honor
of their country and their own virtue: and withal, ad their industry to the
invocation of divine assistance: so as great Britain may so flourish in
Horsemanship, as they may say to all Horsemen of other nations, as Plato said
to Dionisius, Quid enim communicabit, Olla adcacatum? wherein can their earthen
pipkin benefit our brazen pot?

Quem sua culpa premet, deceptus omittetueri.
CHAP. 56. Short infallible rules to be observed and practiced by every
Horseman.
1. Do not gallop your horse before he can stop well.

2 Do not run him before he can stop in his gallop.

3 Do not swiftly gallop him before he can stop, advance, and turn readily.

4. Do not make him a runner before he be six or seven years old.

5. In all his dooinges, from the beginning to the end, keep his reine true,
and his head steady, for it is the foundation of all.

6. In the morning early when he is empty, and before he eat any thing,
teach and exercise him every morning once, until he be perfect, and after,
twice in a week is sufficient.

7. In all his teaching and exercise, do it moderately and temperately, and
leave him always after the well doing of his lessons, both in breath, and
with a good mouth.

8. After he is perfect in his lessons, exercise him not always in one place,
neither keep your self to a just and certain instance of time, viz. neither
more nor less, neither longer or shorter.

9. In managing your horse, do not gallopp him swiftlye at the first, but with
a soft pace, and seldom with a gallop.

10 In correcting your horse for an error, correct him even in the instance of
the time that he erreth, and not otherwise, and when he does well be sure to
make much of him.

11 In the time when your Horse is fit to run, that is, when he is of full
strength, and in perfect breath and empty, observe in him five things: viz.
that he This must be after, and when he is perfect in all his lessons, and in
greatest perfection of strength, for before that time it does, 1. Distemper
hand and mouth. 2. Diminishes strength. 3. Makes him ouerreach. 4.
Faint-hearted and yielding. 5. Performs all things disgracefully.

1 Gather roundly. 2. Go smoothly. 3. Bear his head steadily. 4. Run
swiftly, and 5. Stop lightly.


12. In all his teaching and exercise: 1. Begin softly. 2. Go forward more
speedily. 3. Perform the last courageously.


13 Lastly exercise and perform all your actions with an upright body, your
stirrops short, and keep your legs and your seat gracefully, and comely, and
do all without fear or perturbation of mind.

Imperia dura, toll, quid vitus erit.
CHAP. 57. The causes of sickness and death: in the true knowledge whereof
consists their preservation.
WHen I had learned the double consideration of nature. Frst in the incorrupt
state and purity of creation. Secondlye in the degenerated condition of
corruption, I could not find the least jar and disagreement in the primarie
nature of Horses, though compounded of the contrary natures of the four
elements: but as an undefiled nature tempered by proportion, without the least
discord, but after man's pride had broached the devils suggestion by the taste
of the forbidden fruit, then appeared the Rebellion of the elements in all
creatures, since which time there is not found a difference of any other cause
of their diseases. But to leave the testimonies of long experience, let us
proceed to show the truth here of more particular, and to know that the first
cause of natural diseases and death of all horses is contrariety of the
elements in the compound: for all corruption presupposing alteration, which is
only betwixt, and by means of contrary qualities, contrariety of the
inherent qualities (being the only cause of alteration) is also cause of the
compound corruption: for our experience tells us, that those things wherein
are left disagreement, are of longest continuance, and so the inherence of
contrariety, one special cause of the horses dissolution; the reason is, for
that their bodies consisting of the euer-^arring elements, Fire Air, Water and
earth, have always an irresistable homebred cause of dissolution.

For by consent of Philosophers, and reason it self sets down (as an
undeniable truth) that safety from diseases, Wherein health of horses
consists.
and the life of horses, and the chief maintenance thereof (consists
principally) if not wholly, in the due and just proportional temperature of the
four first qualities, heat, cold, dryness and moisture, and til their
disproportion there is no danger of sickness or any growing death: What is
sickness.
for sickness cannot be defined other then the disproportion of those four
qualities, whereby the part whereunto the same is incident, is disabled to
perform his natural function, so as the disproportion of the four first
qualities, and their swaruing from their just temperature, is the cause of the
horses dissolution, whereby in every horse we see a declining from his
ingrafted Nature, The cause of their dissolution.
which increases according as his age alters, and therefore his dissolution
cannot be avoided: but Nature, like a kind mother is never wanting to the
necessities of her offspring, and therefore has bestowed on the horse a
faculty to restore that disabled part of sickness through the assimulation
of nourishment applied thereunto, least there should follow a sudden
destruction, against which I doubt may be propounded, viz.



perpetual preservation of the species or kind of horse, because they have a
faculty of procreation, to propagate their kind, that though every horse of
necessity must dye, yet may he leave another of his own kind, of as great
perfection behind him, whereby there might be a continnall and everlasting
succession.

Note. The reason why Horses are not of so long continuance as in former time.
the particulers decaying by little and little, are at last consumed, even so
by procreatio^ the maintenance of the species, and the purity of the part
disabled, being by degrees and by time diminished, at length there follows
even of necessity an absolute corruption; by reason that the particulars,
whose function the generation is, being by continuance of outward nourishment
corrupted; the seed, the matter, and means of propagation cannot but be
tainted with like corruption: and this is a chief reason why Horses are not so
health-full, but of less continuance then they were in the first creation,
like as the division of any thing finite, that by often detraction, though but
of little quantity, the whole becomes at length incapable of division, so by
continual wasting of the kind, there follows at length even of necessity a
total and invincible extinguishing: from whence I conclude, that it is
impossible for horses to be of such perfection of excellency, as in their
primarie creation, or to last and continue without diseases and death, having
inwardly in their nature, sufficient and vnpreuentable causes of dissolution.

Having thus euidenced the truth of these two positions of diseases and death,
and that there is a time of endurance unto every particular horse, and unto
the whole kind; and learning by experience (the natural and true mother of
knowledge) that among the particulars there are differences in nature of
diseases and death, both in length and shortness of time in continuance, it
remains that I set down the causes of this natural difference, which cannot
be done, other then by propounding the received causes of the length and
shortness thereof, according as they are more or less in the Horse: and so
judge of the effects.

CHAP. 58. The causes of long life.
IT is evident, that all Horses that were nearest unto the beginning, were
clearer and less tainted with corruption, and therefore in this last age of
the world, they are in a more extreme degree of corruption, by reason of that
frequent alteration in the elements, when every mutation adds something to
the begun impuritie.

Now touching the causes of long life, I will briefly discotomise them, because
they are either Inward, or Outward.
The inward causes are either naturally engrafted or obtained by Art.
Industry, and Wisdom.


Now that which is natural, is of necessity in the good temperature and
proportionate mixture of the four first qualities in the body. For heat that
is vnproportionate to the quantity of moisture, rather hastneth death, by the
too speedy consumption of his moiste food, then any way prolongeth life.

So also too great cold that ouerswayeth the quantity and virtue of natural
heat, shortneth life: and so likewise it may be said of the excess of the
other two contrary qualities, moisture and drought: for too much moisture
oppresses the natural heat; as we see green wood quench an unequal
quantity of fire: so that the good and just proportion of temperate mixture
are true causes of long life, for all mixture of superstuities is against these
three: 1. Nature. 2. Enemy to good digestion. 3. And found Nutrition.


The first cause
Temperature is a firm and standing habit of the body.
Now if it be demanded what this just proportion is, and when they are truly
tempered, so as may be best available for long life? the answer is, that
heat and moisture are then well proportioned when neither the moisture with
his too great quantity, deuoureth the heat, nor the overmuch heat too
suddenly consumes and eats up the moisture: yet must the heat have a kind
of dominion over the moisture, else it cannot be able to nourish the body. For
in nutrition, the thing nourished by reason of the instrument ordained for that
purpose, must actually work upon that whereby it is nourished: and because that
every agent must be proportioned unto the patient in the equality of excess,
therefore must the heat, being the vegetative souls active instrument of
Nutrition, have dominion over the moisture, the subject matter of that faculty.

The second cause
The second cause of long life, is the moderation of their natural appetite of
eating, being available, either in excess to kill, or in moderation to save,
by which moderation, the horse shall daily repair the decay of his humidity by
supply of moderate nourishment, and never ouerwhelme his heat with abundance
of moisture, neither mingle his radical moisture with too much superfluous
impurities; for the extremes are dangerous, both excess and defect:

The third cause:
The third cause of long life is moderate labor, a thing very available to
digestion, dispersing the nourishment into the parts of the body; and as a
bellows to kindle and revive their natural heat: for ouer^ ^^h rest, by
excess of humors, cools the body. And as the elementish fires which we
use, unless it be sometime blown and fed as it were with air (which in
natural quality is moist) is extinguished, so their natural heat without
moderate labor and exercise, is after a sort cast a sleep, or rather
benumbed: whence proceeds that other daughter of dulnes (collection of
excrementall superfluities) their heat not being able to digest their received
nourishment; and thence comes their many corruptions, and sincke of unnatural
humors, as we see standing water soonest putrify and gather filth. And
therefore beware to travel Horses before they have thoroughly digested their
meat, for thereby they clog their stomachs, and make them unfit after
concoction, and withal fill their bodies with over raw humors, which by
exercise are dispersed thorough the veins, into all the parts of the body.
And therefore neither too much labor, neither to vehement nor yet continual,
for these by consuming of the spirits, are like hurtful; neither too little,
for continued rest and idleness engender putrefaction.

The fourth cause of long life.
The fourth cause of long life, is moderate use of sleep and waking, for they
are the maintenance of life in their mediocritie, and both hurtful if beyond
measure; for the immoderat watching wastes the spirits, and consumes the
vital juice; causes leannes, hinders the operation of the sense, and dries
the marrowe and the brain, and the moderate sleep hinders health, dulleth
the natural heat, and consumes the moisture: and sleep is but a vapor
ascending from the stomach to the brain, which benummeth the brain for a
time, and keeps the body senseless, and the sooner and more provoked by
full feeding.

The fifth cause;
The fifth cause of long life, is to keep a Horse from excessive spending
himself upon Mares, for it is deaths best harbinger, for it wastes the
spirits, weakeneth the stomach, and dries up the brain and marrowe, and
therefore the reason why a Mule, being a mixed creature, begotten betwixt a
Horse and an Ass, is longer lived then either of them, is for that his iusting
in that kind is but once only in the whole course of his life.

The sixth cause of long life, The sixth cause
is moderate riding in long iournies, for by the immoderat emission of heat
into the outward parts of the body, it kindles the fire of cholor, which being
vehement, is an horror unto nature, and inflameth the blood, so as if the Horse
at that instance be not very empty and clean, in the body, the blood and
humors being mingled together, are through the violence thereof, dispersed into
all the parts of the body, and then a suden cold taken upon it (which
seldom escapes) the same does presently putrify the blood, and congealeth
it to the in^uitable danger of the Horse. The seventh cause:


The seventh cause is wholesomnesse of air, and soil, clean keeping, the
stable sweet; clean, old and dry meat: when he is in the stable, dressing
him in some shed out of the stable, that the filth of his body do not come
near his manger, neither stinking litter lying under the manger, continually
fuming up to his head, neither evil savor near to the stable.

The eight cause is, The eight cause.
not to travel or labor a Horse that is taken from grass, until he be
purged and cleansed from his superfluous humors, which he has gathered at
grass in the time of his rest and full feeding, the which being many, by his
travel and heat, will by the veins be dispersed into all the parts of the
body, which afterward cannot be taken away without great perrill; and when
he is made clean, he will draw his breath long, and be clean and empty
betwixt his Jaws, without any impostumation, The ninth cause:
knob, or kirnell.

The ninth cause is, to keep the Horse whiles he feeds in the stable, from
all raw and green meat, the mother of many unnatural humors, and the nurse of
many inward diseases, proceeding from the abundance thereof, and the
corruption of blood.

The tenth cause is, The tenth cause.
to keeep the Horse from eating and drinking, whiles he is hot, for that
weakeneth the heart and spirits, hinders appetite, and makes digestion
imperfect, and often times present death.

The cleuenth cause is neither to wash nor walk him after travel and labor,
The eleventh cause:
but to set him in the stable, warm clothed and painefully rubbed and dried,
and if necessity enforce, to wash his legs with beer and butter, or dish
water, or beef broth made warm, and cleanse, clear, and rub them thoroughly,
both clean and dry, and litter him with plenty of sweet straw, and if he
have not drunk in the time of his travel, then when he is cold, and has well
eaten, give him warm water to drink with a little Malte, Meal, or Bran.

The twelfth and last cause of long life, is, The twelfth cause.
to put often times into his prouender, the powder of Anniseeds, Licorish,
Fenegricke, Turmericke, Bay Berries, the powder of brimstone, white Lilly
roots small chopped, Ennula campana roots small chopped, or the powder
thereof, Roots of Polipodium of the oak small chopped, or the powder thereof,
Sauen small cut, Marshe vvoorme-vvood small cut, or the powder thereof,
Garlic small chopped, Tobacco small chopped, Herb of grace small chopped,
Isop, Horehovvnd, and Coltefoote small chopped, or some of them, which will
keep him sound and perfect from all inward diseases.

Thus having briefly set down the inward causes of long life, wherout you
may deduce the co^traries, sickness and short life, for such is the disposition
of Horses, and of all creatures bodies, that by the continual combat and
enterchangeable dominion of the euer-iarring elements, they often change their
primary constitution, so that if there were no cause of transmutation, which
notwithstanding are many and manifold, yet having that homebred cause within
them, that would in time alter their temperature; for we see, the same bodies
in youth and old age, diversely tempered even by the variation of their
original constitution, and the infallible cause of their diversity and
difference, although many times not the only cause, but that only which
proceeds from the inward engendered cause of destruction, thorough some
accidental, immoderate contingent or unnatural action, which sometime
happens in their full strength and perfection, for that which is only
natural, never passes from one extreme unto another, Aristotle in his
tripertite division of ages.
but by the mean.

And although experience (the natural and true mother of knowledge) and time,
the mother of truth, who evermore brings her own daughter to perfection,
approve the contrariety of the inherent qualities of heat, cold, drynes, and
moisture, the only causes of inward diseases, and the continuance, and
vnperceiueable lingering thereof, the principle cause of their untimely death;
knovving a successiue impairing alvvaies, imports a small dissolution, so
that the prevention of the extremity, and suppressing the dominion of the
contraries, there is not so much as an appearance of their perpetuity: yet who
is he that sees his Horses enjoy but a small perfection of health, does not
possess himself with the forgetfulness thereof, and of their mortality?
whence you see how far they wrong their senses, and themselves from
judgment, standing still to behold the execution of doubtful issues, never
remembering that as from the firmest friendshippes, do spring the greatest
enmities, so from soundest health the deadliest maladies. Therefore qui causam
rei praestat, is remprestare videtur, he that preuenteth the cause of
sickness, preuenteth the sickness it self: and it is not better, occurrere
malo quam postea remedium querere, to prevent the disease, then afterward to
seek remedy for the disease, but how a perfect order and stability should
consist in these disioyned subjects, unless the origionall causes there of
had been formerly expressed, (without begetting error the child of confusion)
extends beyond the limits of understanding. It therefore remains how to
cure those horses that have inward diseases, and afterward the outward
diseases.

CHAP. 59. The means to help and preserve horses from the inward diseases.
THere are four ways or means to preserve and keep horses from their inward
diseases, viz. purging, sweating letting blood, and vomiting, whereof in order.

First of purging, which may be said two-folde, outward and inward: the time
of purging or clensing, the outward parts must be presently after the taking of
the horse from Grass into the stable, which ever would be at or before the
feast of Saint Bartholmew, by reason of the great moistnes and cold that then
usually happen, and to be taken up very gently for fear of heating of him,
least his humors thereby should be dissolved by the veins and Arteries into
every part of the body: and that every horse at such times are full of humors,
appears in the best spirited horses, if you then perceive their actions, how
lubburish and heavily they perform the same at such times.

The manner of purging or clearing the outward parts of the body, would be in
this manner: First, sheare his ears, and a little place behind for the
head-stall to lie flat and even. Then take Soap, and anoint his head and jaws
therewith, and then take warm Buck-lie, and wash and cleanse the same in every
part so clean as is possible from all sweat and scurffe, and presently rub
his head and every part with clean linen clothes, and after with woollen
clothes very dry: then put on his head a double whood or beggin made of
purpose to keep all the parts of his head very warm: Then if it be a fair
warm day, in the Sun, in like manner, wash, purge and cleanse all his body and
every part thereof, especially his maine, tail and cods: then rub him and
clear him very dry, and cloth him, and stuff him very warm, and give him
plenty of sweet and clean litter: Then anoint all his hoofes, (having first
washed them and made them dry with this ointment: Take of Turpentine and sheep
suet, half a pound of unwrought wax: a quarterne of Allom; of Sallet Oil,
half a pint: of Tar a quarter of a pint: boil themll together until they
be well incorporated, and keep it in a pot, and every day (his feet being
clean) anoint his hoofes therewith: neither let him go at grass (if he be a
horse of worth) above one month in the year, at any time after.

The manner of purging or clensing the inner parts of the horse, A most
excellent Glister to be given within a day or two after the horse is taken from
grass.
(must evermore be done before he be labored or exercised) in this manner.
viz. First, anoint your hand with soap, and thrust your arm into his
fundament, and rake out all the dung; and then give him this glister: take of
Malloes, three handfuls: Marsh mallowe roots, two handfuls bruised: Violet
leaves, two handfuls: Flaxe-seed, three spoonefuls: and a good quantity of the
white Lilly roots: and boil them together in a Gallon of fair water to a
Wine quart: strain it: and put thereto of Seen one Ounce, let it steep in
the lycour three hours over embers, then put to it of Salletoyle, half a
pint, and being blood vvarme, give it him in a glister, and make him keep it
so long as you may, and this would be done three or four days before thefull
or new moon.

The next day after he has taken the said glister, give him early in the
morning this drink, viz.

Take a quart of the strongest and best alevvorte, a quarter of a pint of
honny, and six penny vvorth of the best treacle, well mixed and brued
together, and keep him meatles after, six hours, and let him not drink any
cold water but a mashe, and eat svveet wheat straw, and old clean
svveet oats.

The next day after he has taken the said drink, give him early in the
morning this drink, viz.

Take a pint of the best white wine, wherein has been steeped all night an
ounce of Sense, strain it and put into it one ounce of the best Aloes beaten
into powder, half an ounce of Agaricke, and a spoonefull of the powder of
Licorish, vvarme them a little on the fire, and brevve them well together, and
then give it the Horse, ride him gently or walk him a quarter of an hour,
set him into the stable very warm clothed, let no air come to him, and let
him neither eat nor drink 6 hours after, and at night give him a warm
mashe, svveete wheat straw, old clean svveete oats, and plenty of litter.

The next day (if the sign be good) let him blood, if the blood be very bad,
take from him two quarts, if indifferent, but one quart; keep him very
vvarme and with vvarme mashes, in which mashes (if possibly he will take it)
put the powder of brimstone, Fenegreke, Turmericke, and of Enula campana, of
each one spoonefull.

The next day after (if the weather be fair) ride him very gently a mile, and
so back again, and at his coming home, presentlye have him into the Stable,
and cloth him so warm, as he may sweat, but not violentlye: and so fail
not to ride him when he is fasting every day moderately, a mile or two, upon
some pleasant ground, and every day to sweat a little for six days, and
keep him warm, and with warm water, and the Stable close when he is in it.

Hitherto you have heard how to clear him outwardly by washing, and inwardlye
by purging, bleeding, and sweating: and for vomiting take a great root or two
of Polipodium of the Oak clean scraped, and laid all night in steep in
Spike oil, tied fast to his bitte, and every morning fasting let him be
ridden with it, and if he have any cold or filth in his stomach, it will
force him to cough, and rear it from the stomach; and by this means you shall
be sure to cleanse and refine his blood, to exhaust his watrish humors, and to
make his inner parts clean, so as with temperate order before prescribed, you
shall be sure to keep him long, a sound, perfect and serviceable Horse.

Now because the Liver being the fountain of blood, and the Lungs the bellows
of breath, and yet not unlike a standing poole, which continually gathers
corruption, the which being corrupted or stopped, speedilye destroys the
subject; I will set down excellent means to preserve both the one and other
in perfefection, otherwise he will be but as a silthye vessel which is seldom
cleansed.

CHAP. 60. To refine the blood, and preserve the Liver from infection.
TAke a root of polipodium of the Oak made very clean, cut it into small
pieces, a handful of Liuer-wort, cut in small pieces, and six pence weight of
Ruebarbe cut small, and every morning for three or four days in a month,
give it the horse in his prouander, very earelye, two or three hours before
his watering, and once in half a year make trial of his blood how pure it
is, and accordinglye minister help if need be.

CHAP. 61. A most sovereign drink to preserve his lungs clear, the most
excelling knowledge in Horseman or Farrier.
TAke the Tartar of white wine lees, which is always at the Apothecaries
(which is no other then the lees of white wine dried to powder) one ounce and a
half, of I sop two handfuls, of Coltesfoote two handfulls, of Horehownd one
handful, of Ennula campana roots one ounce, four Licorish sticks bruised,
Anniseed one ounce, red Sugar candy four ounces, boil them all in a quarte of
ale, and when it is half boiled, put to it of Isop water twice distilled one
pin^te, of Coltes foot water twice distilled one pint, boil them again,
then strain it and give it him very warm to drink.

The charge here of is small, you may make what quantity you will, by doubling
or trebling the simples. If you have a delicate Horse and have cleared him and
dieted him, as I have prescribed, then every morning that you will hunt him, or
exercise him, give him fasting a pint hereof, and so continue him until you
find him clean, and in perfect breath, and then the moderate exercise of him
will be sufficient to keep him clean.

The reasons why the Horse should be thus cleansed and cleared after long rest
and full feeding, are, First the pores of all the skin being opened, the
Horse will easily sweat, and therebye clear the body from the imperfect
moisture.

Secondly, it makes the whole body to receive Air, (which of it self is
naturally moiste) to help to cool the burning and violent heat of the heart,
and of the other members, when the Horse does labor, as appears by the
office of the lungs, which as a pair of bellows does continuallye draw
fresh Air unto the same, filling all the empty corners with moistnes, and
therefore the Lungs, most principally ought to be kept clear, to draw breath
to cool the same, and that is the reason why Horses are broken winded, because
the lungs are imperfect to do their office: and likewise the reason why broken
winded Horses when they are kept at dry meat, do draw their breath much
more shorter, and with more violence then when they go to Grass, because
grass is naturally cold and moist, and thereby his heart being more cold,
the Horse draws his breath more at length: but if the Horse be clear,
empty, and sound in the body, then does he always draw his breath alike, and
so does every other creature also, from which ground of reason, three things
may be collected and observed. The first is, that the horse head be kept very
clear from all obstructions, (the which evermore comes by cold) which
greatly hinders drawing breath into the body: Secondly that the skin of
the Horse be kept clear and open to draw breath, at the pores of the skin
into the body. Thirdlye, that Canales Pulmonis, the pipes or Canes of the
Lungs, be not opilated or stopped through viscous fleame or tough humors like
bird-lime, or with impostumation in the pipes, and so become putrified: every
of which with continuance thereof, will destroy the horse: and there is no
truth more apparent then that the causes of all these inward corruptions and
infirmities proceed only from great rest, full and foul feeding, and the
distemperatures of heat and cold; and that by the taking away of these
causes, such effects cannot follow: so as you see the preservation of health
and long life, is the moderate and temperate labor and exercise, the spare,
clean and sweet food, as has been formerly expressed.

CHAP. 62. Certain rules to be observed by such as shall either travel or
exercise their horses.
FIrst, when your Horse is lusty and pleasant, and clear in body, then is he
fit for labor or any exercise, but if he be sad, heavy or dejected in
countenance, although he be clear, do not labor him until you have found
the cause, and removed it.

2. Secondly let not your horse eat any thing by two or three hours before
you travel him, and then not much, until you come to your lodging; for
bayting at noone is naught and hurtful, except you rest 4. or 5. hours, so as
he may not travel upon a full stomach, and let his bait be small, and be
sure he never wear a rusty Bit or Snaftle for fear of the canker.

Thirdly, let your travel be moderate (except necessity (which cannot be
limited) enforce you, and come to your lodging long before night, so as your
horse may neither eat nor drink until he be very cold: and if it be in winter
time, be sure to cloth and cover his head and breast very warm after travel;
and every morning either squirt a little vinegar into his nosthrils, or else rub
them with oil de bay, with a cloth nointed therewith fastened to the end of a
stick, and thrust up and down his nosthrils, to purge his head.

Fourthly, neither wash nor walk your Horse (especially in the winter time)
for when he is very hot, to walk him in the cold air, reason tells you,
that it is not sufficient to keep him in moderat heat: and to wash him, it is a
preparatiue to a speedy end, or the least that may befall, to bring him to some
dangerous disease: And to confirm the truth herein, I affirm, and will by
good and propable demonstration of truth make it manifest, that there is no
dangerous disease incident to Horse, but the same proceeds from the cause of
heat or cold, and none more dangerous then this: neither can any Horseman or
understanding Farrier truly instance unto me any particular disease to the
contrary; and to all young Horses the common messengers of death.

Fifthly, when you travel, alight often from your Horse (if cause of necessity
enforce not the contrary) and lead your Horse to some place of grass, straw,
or brakes, and there stay, and vvhistle, until your Horse piss, which by
little custom he will usually do, for the long retention of his water, is
many ways hurtful, and (except it be in such places) he is most unwilling to
piss, because the sprinckling thereof will scalde his legs.

Sixthly, if your Horse be very hot, let him not drink cold water, but rather
at some house and village give him a quart of good beer, or a pint of wine,
and if you do water him by the way, let him not drink until he have
vvashed his mouth, which is done when he thrusts his head into the water,
presently pull up his head, which will cleanse his mouth, and let him drink
but little, although there be necessity, and let it be five or six miles from
your Inn, and then ride him so as he may still keep the same heat he was in
when he did drink, and when you come to your Inn, dress him clean from
sweat, and keep him very vvarme, and let him not eat until he be cold, and
let it be gigiuen him by little and little at a time, and after drink if need
be.

Seauenthly, after his labor, if you can have a convenient place, let him
vvallovve himself, for it does exceedingly comfort him, and gives delight to
his whole body.

Eighthly, if he happen to fall sick in your travel (which comes commonly
either by eating or drinking too much at one time) by any accidental means,
the which being suden, may be doubtful truly to judge. Give him a pint of
sack or malmesey, a quarter of a pint of Aqua vite, with six penny worth of
the best treacle, and a quarter of a pint of the best sallet oil, brew them
well together, and give him a draught, and then take a new laid egg, and pull
out his tongue, bruise the shel, and thrust it into his throat, and then let
go his tougue: then give him another draught, and after that another egg in
the same manner; and after all the said drink, then let him blood in the
palate of his mouth, and then rub it well with salt, and put on his bridle,
stop him, and clothe him, head and body with clothes, and give him litter
enough and fear him not, but if you cannot have sack, or wine, nor treakle,
give him half a pint of Aqua-vite, or any other comfortable water, and two
eggs in form aforesaid, to comfort his heart, which is the Chariot of his
life.

Ninthly, at the night give him a good comfortable mashe if he will eat it,
and clean svveet prouender, such as he will eat; bath all his legs with
butter and beer, cleanse his feet and stop them with cow-du^g, and after he is
sufficiently fed, give him plenty of sweet litter, and then suffer no man to
come into the stable, and shut all the windows and doors, so as it may be
very dark, and early in the morning let him be thorougly dressed and rubbed,
and before you ride, two hours, let him eat half a pecke of old sweet
Oats, with a pint of the strongest Ale, Beer, Malmesey or White Wind, for
his breakefast.

Tenthly, if that your Horse be young that you do travel upon, (which is the
overthrow of al fine mettell Horses, when you come home and may rest, then let
him blood, and if you find his blood hot and dark colored, spare not to let
him bleed until there come perfect blood, after for three or four days keep
him with good mashes, and give the purging drink before mentioned, and with a
pint of white wine, one ounce of Alloes dissolved into powder, half an ounce
of Agaricke, and a spoonefull of the powder of licorish, made blood-warme, and
well brewed together, and let him not drink cold water for four or five
days after, and in his prouender put the powder of Brimstone, Ennula campana,
and Polipodium of the oak, well mingled together, a good spoonefull at a time,
two or three hours before his water, and he will remain a most healthful and
sound Horse, if he be thus used until he be eight years old, for then the
chief danger is past.

Vita carnium est cordis Sanitas.
CHAP. 63. The order of curing Horses that are diseased, the causes thereof,
the signs thereof, and the cure toereof.
I Have before showed that the distemperature of the Elements, and of their
qualities of heat, cold, dryness, and moisture is sickness, and their
continuance their death in all creatures, the which I pray you observe as the
only causes thereof: and that all cures consist in the contraies, and that the
safety and preservation of the creature: is in reducing them to a true, just,
and equal proportion of their temperature, the which being well imprinted in
your understanding, will remain an everliving schoolmaster to direct you, to
the perfection of al Horsemanship.

CHAP. 64. Ague or Fever in Horses.
THe learned do hold three general kinds: First, when the vital spirits
are inflamed, wherein heat is prdominat more then Nature requires. Secondly,
when the humors are distempered by heat. Thirdly, when the firm parts of the
body are continually hot, so that the ague comes either by excessive heting
the horse, and thereupon a sudden cold, or by fulness of bad bumors, which
principally grovve from full, foul, or raw feeding, and great rest, and for
that reason it takes the horse either hot ot cold: now he cannot be cured but
by the contrary, viz. by spare feeding, clean feeding, dry feeding, and
moderate labor: and to this end, the cure must be ministered. But to be
curious in the destinctio^ (having sufficiently expressed the same in this
tractat) I purpose not: it is sufficient to know that learning and practice
acknowledge a horse to have an ague as well as man, and to keep due hours to
make him shake and tremble as a man, and to know the same also, appears by
the inflammations from the heat of the stomach, which scaldeth and makes the
tongue raw.

CHAP. 65. The Cure.
FIrst, when you perceive his deicted countenance, and that he begins to
tremble (or before,) enforce him into a heat, and give him this purging drink:
Take a quart of white wine, put thereunto one ounce of Alloes small beaten: of
Agarick, half an ounce: of licorish and Anniseeds half a dram: and a little
honey: warm it a little on the fire, and then ride him until he be hot, and put
him into a sweat: then have him into the stable, let him stand on the bitt,
cloth him, and stop his breast, head and body very warm, so as he may
moderatelye sweat: let him have plenty of litter, and so let him stand five
or six hours: then vncloathe him, and rub him perfectlye dry, and then
cloathe him again, but not so hot, and when he is cold vnbit him, and wash
his tongue with Allome-water, vinegar, and sage, and give him sweet wheat
straw to eat, and a gallon of old, svveete and clean oats; and at night
give him a good mashe, and the next day after let him blood a quart, and if his
blood be very thick, black, dark oryellowe, let him bleed two quarts, and
afterward keep him warm from the Air for 4. or 5. days, and give him
vvarme water to drink, and a little sallet oil in it, if he will drink it.

CHAP. 66. For the same.
LEt him blood in the neck and temple veins, and before or when he begins
to tremble, take three new laid eggs, and six or seven spoonefull of
Aqua-vite, break them and beat them together; give it him and ride him until
he sweat, then clothe him very vvarme, and make him sweat, and after he is
rubbed dry and cold, give him clean food as aforesaid, moderately, let him
not drink any cold water, but vvarme, wherein has been boiled mallovves,
sorrel, and purslaine, of each three or four handfuls, and keep him vvarme.
probatum.

CHAP. 67. For the same.
LEt him blood, take of Germander four ounces, of Gum Draganet, and of Dead
Roses, of each an ounce: of Oil Oliffe four ounces: of Honey four ounces: put
them into a quart of strong Ale, and give it warm to the horse to drink, then
ride him until he sweat, and cloth him and keep him warm as aforesaid.

CHAP. 68. Ache in the head.
THe cause of this disease comes either of cold, takan after a great heat,
or of a raw or imperfect digestion of stomach, proceeding principally from
full and foul feeding, and betwixt the stomach and the brain is such
affinity, as they do equally communicate their damages: the signs are these,
the hanging down of his head, his eyes will swell and run of water, and will
forsake his meat.

CHAP. 69. The Cure.
LEt him blood in the pallat of his mouth, and rub it with Salt to make it
bleed well, then take a stick with a linen cloth fastened at the end thereof,
well anointed with oil of Bay, thrust it up and down his nostrils, thereby
to open and purge his head: also perfume him with the smoke of Garlic
stalks broken into small peaces: also air him with the smoke of Frankincense,
holding the same in a chafingdish under his Nostrils, with a great cloth cast
over his head, and let it be done morning and evening: keep him with spare
diet and moderate exercise, the which will cleanse his stomach and make it so
clean and empty, as his brain will not be disquieted: afterward let him
blood, and give him good mashes to drink for two days after and no cold
water.

CHAP. 70 Of the sudden sickness of a horse.
THe cause is, for that the heart which is the chariot of his life wherein the
soul of the horse lives, wanting the use of the veins and Arteries to carry
the vital spirit of heat to all the parts of the body, to give the horse
feeling, and ability to operation, by reason of some obstruction of humors or
cold, which for want of heat cannot be dissolved, for that the nature of
cold is to bind and conglutinate together, and to keep them from their
natural course, proceeding from some violent exercise or immoderate feeding and
rest, by reason whereof there is great jar and discord amongst the qualities
of the elements: the motion of the vital spirit, whereby the horse lives and
moves, is imprisoned for that time, and so seems taken as a dead horse
without action. The sign is the sudden deiecting of his countenance.

CHAP. 71. The cure.
LEt him blood on both sides the breast, next the heart, whereby the veins and
Arteries being euacuated and emptied, they may begin to do that office
whereunto nature has appointed them, and let him bleed the quantity of two
quarts: then give him a comfortable drink, to stir up the vital spirits to
action, viz: take a quart of the best sack, and burn it with Grains, Cloves
and Sinamon, and a quarter of a pound of the best Sugar, and burn it well
together with half a pint of Sallet Oil, and four penny worth of the best
Triacle, then ride him very gently until he begin to sweat, and so have
him into the Stable, keep his head and heart very warm, and cloth him and
stuff his body with sweet straw, and keep the stable close, and so let him
stand 6. hours meatles, but beware you cloth him not too much, for the drink
will thoroughlye warm him and make him sweat, let his drink be warm water,
wherein boil Mallows a handful, water Cresses a handful, of fennel and
parsley seed, of each an ounce, and twice a day morning and evening, when he is
most fasting, ride him gently a mile or two, let his meat be sweet wheat
straw, old clean dry oats, mingled with wheat, and sometime with old
pease, and sparingly given and often, but not much, until you see him wax
very hungry, and let him be well rubbed, and all his litter clean and sweet.

CHAP. 72. Staggers.
THe cause of this disease, is for that as I have formerly said, the brain
and the stomach are united and chained together with certain sinews, and
thereby enterchangeably communicate their damages, so as when the stomach is
oppressed with gross and tough humors, or some strong vapors, as when the Horse
has eaten some strong herb, as the wild parsenip or such like, by the strong
vaporous spirits proceeding out of the stomach to the brain, opressing the
same, as the strong vaporous spirit of wine, Aqua vite, and such like does the
brain of man, he is dizzie and reeleth, as if he were drunk: and hereof I
have had often experience, but at the first the horse does only reele, and
stagger, as if his back were swayed, and will eat his meat, but after he will
forsake his meat and not be able to stand.

CHAP. 73. The Cure.
Aqua-vitae, and put it into the Horse ears; then take wool and wet it in the
medicine, and put it into his ears, and bind them close, and so let it
remain 24. hours, and wash his tongue with vinegar and salt, let him not
drink any cold drink, and once a day gently walked.

CHAP. 74. For the same.
TAke of bitter Almonds one ounce and a half: of Ox gall two drams: of black
Elebar stamped one half penny worth: of Grains, of Castorum, of vinegar, of
varnish, 5. drams: sees them together until the vinegar be consumed, and
strain them and put it into his cares, as aforesaid: but bind them with a
woollen list, and not with any cutting string.

CHAP. 75. For the same.
LEt him blood, as before said, then with a knife make a hole of an inch long,
overthwart his forehead, hard vnderhis fore-top, and raise the skin with a
eornet, thrusting it upward toward the head-stall a good handful, and then
taint it with turpentine and hogs grease molted together, and do the like upon
the ridge of the rump, and remove the taintes every day, and keep him with
warm water.

CHAP. 76. Crampe or conuulsion of sinews.


I have seen a horse, his head, Jaws and neck so stiff, and stark, as he
could not bow it any manner of way, nor the strength of men open his Jaws or
mouth without breaking them; as he could not eat, neither drink, but by
sucking of his drink by little and little with his lips: and for my
instructions, I did see the manner of his death. And the same came by full and
foul feeding, and great rest, being exceeding fat when he died. I would
willingly have adventured his cure, if many Smithes had not taken the same upon
them, never understanding the cause, as his end manifested.

CHAP. 77. The Cure.
TEt him blood in great measure, take him behind, and give him the glister I
prescribed before for a horse that is taken up from grass, rub him with two
or three lusty strong men, and have him into a very warm room, then take
two quarts of strong Ale, and two pound of back soap, and boil them together
until they look as tar, and anoint and rub all his body therewith, so as
it may drink in, then cloathe him, and stuff head and neck, and all the
parts of his body, to bring him to a great sweat, and if it may be give
him a pint of white wine, and two ounces of Alloes, and half an ounce of
Agaricke infused therein, beaten small, putting therein three spoonefuls of the
best clarified Hog's Grease: and if that cannot be done, give him every day a
Glister, and keep him with continual rubbing, and in a warm room, and give
him to drink small Ale, wherein mallows and licorish have been boiled, and let
his diet be spare, but sweet and good.

CHAP. 78. Cold in the head.
The cause
THe cause here of comes by some heat and standing still, or having some
cold air, piercing his head when he is hot, or by some humors congealed after
long rest, and full feeding, wanting moderate exercise to expel the same. The
signs are a continual distilling rewme, waterish cies,

CHAP. 79. The Cure.
casting a cloth over his head, that the smoke may ascend into his head, use
him thus nine days, together, and give him warm water or good mashes during
the said nine days: for all rewmes having continuance are dangerous, and many
times having continuance, remedisesse, leaving a worse disease then themselves.

CHAP. 80. Glaunders.
The course.
and become so great in the end, that they seem to strangle and stop the
breath of the horse, from whence he is said to have the Strangles, and by
continuance of time, the same perish either the liver or the Lungs, by a
continual distilling of putrified and corrupt matter,

CHAP. 81. The Cure.
FIrst clear his head as is perscribed for the cold in the head, in every part
(if he be able to be rid or walked) that he may receive breath: then give him
this drink: take a pint of malmsey, 6. penny worth of the best triacle, and a
quarter of a pound of sweet fresh butter, then presently rub him under his
Jaws, with plenty of sweet hogs grease, and leave it thick anointed, then
make him this poultis, Take 2. handfuls of malowes, a handful of wormwood,
as much rue, and as much smallage, a quart of wheat bran, and a quart of hogs
grease, boil them together, and stir them continually in boiling, until the
hogs grease be almost consumed, and being hot as may be suffered, bind it
under his jaws and thropell, and wrap all his head very warm, leaving air for
his mouth and nostrils: then air him again with frankincense, and keep him
warm in the stable, and so let him rest with that poultis 24. hours, the next
morning early give him a quart of the best new ale with a spoonefull of the
powder of licorish and anniseeds, and a good piece of butter, blood warm, then
rub his nostrils with a clowte bound to the end of a stick, well anointed with
oil of Bay and butter, then remove the poultis, and if you find the kirnels
and inflammations to be very soft, lance them thorough, and stop the holes full
of hogs grease and Turpentine boiled hot together, and soft towe boiled therein,
and then warm some of your poultis, and bind to it as before, but not
altogether so hot, and so let it remain until the next day, and his head kept
very warm as before. If he will eat, give him clean sweet oats, steeped in
new ale or malmsey if he will eat them, and wheat straw, but no hay: give him no
cold water for 9. days, but good mashes if he will take them: keep him with a
spare diet, and every day, gently walk or ride him, if he be able, and then
keep him warm after it, and let him sweat every day a little if it be
possible, and after rub him very dry, and let him not drink in his own swet.
In his prouender take of the root of the white Lilly, of the root of Ennula
campana, and of the root of Polipodium of the oak, very sinely cut or chopped,
the quantity of two spoonefuls at every time you give him prouender, and be
sure that he be hungry and eager of prouender when you give it him, and so
continue for 9. days, and beware you keep him very hungry, and with spare
diet. At the 9. days end give him this purging drink. Take a quarte of white
wine, or of strong ale worte, one ounce and a half of Alloes, beaten into
powder, half an ounce of Agaricke, 2. spoonefuls of the powder of the root of
Ennula campana, three spoonefuls of honey, brew them well together, and give it
him blood warm, and keep him warm: with in 6. days after let him blood, and
if it be good take but a quart, but if it be very bad, take two quarts at
least: after this, use him both in feeding and labor moderatly, and he will
ever after be perfect in health.

CHAP. 82 Mourning of the Chine.
THe cause hereof is great heat, corruption and consumption of the liver or
lungs. And therefore there is not any thing truer, then that this disease
comes of a violent heat and sudden cold, which enflameth the blood, and so
corrupts by degrees (as I have said) the substance of the liver: by which
distemperature, and inflammation (the liver being the fountain of blood)
becomes extraordinarily distemperated with heat, by which excess of heat,
cholor and cold, fleame are engendered, from the which all the weakness of the
liver proceeds, and from thence obstruction and stopping, whereby the gross
and tough humors, by the violence of heat, by labor, are drawn into the
springs of the fountain, that is to say, the small veins which carry the blood
from the liver, whereby the Liver cannot give perfect nutriment, by which
obstructtion and stopping, the humors being chollericke, breed many hard knobs
in the liver, and then the inflammation breaks out, of the veins, and flows
into the body of the liver, and there being out of his propper vessels, does
immediately puputrifie, and therewith corrupts so much fleshy substance of
the liver, as it is imbrued withal, and so by little and little perishes the
whole liver, and then the bloody matter afterward becomes corruption: and
when it breaks out, it is as a filthy sore, (which is this usurped mourning
of the chine) and in the end this filthy matter, flowing abroad with his evil
vapors, corrupts the heart, and causes death, as you see the end of all
Horses that have this disease. From whence you see, that an inflammation
begets Apostumation, and appostumation exulceration, and then the liver
being thus corrupted, there cannot be good digestion, for lack whereof, the
body wanting perfect nutriment, does cousume and perish.

CHAP. 83. The signs to know the disease.
1. FIrst, the continual distilling reume in the head.

2 Secondly, the continuing knobs betwixt the Jaws.

3 Thirdly the keeping of his hair without casting.

4 Fourthly, the continual running of thick stinking matter at the nose.

5. Fifthly the fastening or growing of a knob as big as a walnut, to the inside
of one of the Jaws, and then commit his carcass to the croes, for then he is
past help.

CHAP. 84. Thecure
FOr the first, which is the reume, cure it is mentioned, for the cold in the
head.

For the second, which is a congealed substance, gathered into knobbes betwixt
the Jaws, cure the same as the glaunders.

For the third, which is keeping still his winter coat, and the not casting of
his hair, let him blood often, until you see that he have pure and fine blood,
and give him good mashes made very strong with malt, and put in his prouender
polipodium of the oak, small cut, the root of the white Lilly small cut, of
each a good quantity, if he will eat it, and shred in it also a handful of
Liuerworte, and if he be a Horse of value, at every time, a six penny weight of
Ruebarbe, and every morning being fasting, give him a pint of the drink,
prescribed for the preservation of his Lungs, and keep him only with wheat
straw (but no hay) and old sweet and clean oats, and every morning after he
has taken that drink, ride him gently two or three miles.

For the fourth, which is the thick running at the nose, continually clear
his head, as has been prescribed for the cold in the head, and so in euety
part as in the rest are prescribed, only adding purging drinks, viz. after
all these prescribed orders, give him two several mornings, a pint of white
wine, one ounce and a half of Alloes, half an ounce of Agaricke, two drams of
Licorish and Anniseeds, and a spoonefull of pure hogs grease warmed and well
dissolved together, and after he has purged, the next day let him blood in
both the breast veins, the quantite of a quart, and still keep him with good
mashes and moderate travel, when he is fasting, giving him every morning
fasting for nine days after, a pint of that drink prescribed for clearing of
his Lungs.

For the sift, if you find no amendment, but a knob grown to his Iawe, you
may give him a purge, with pills, as I have prescribed, and if that help him
not, then he is remediles without all doubt.

CHAP. 85 These things following are most excellent to put in Horses prouender
to preserve them from these and all diseases.
THe powder of a Wolfes liver.

The powder of Ennula Compana.

The powder of pollipodium of the Oak.

The fine cut pieces of Ruebarbe.

The powder of Brimstone made very fine.

The powder of Licorish, Anniseedes, Fenegreek, Turmericke, Bay Berries,
Long-pepper, Agrimony, Camamile, wormwood, Sauen, Linseed Smalage, Perseley,
Rue, Isop, Coltesfoote, Horehownd, and such like.

CHAP. 86. Of a broken wind.
THe cause of this perrilous disease, has not been truly foreopened by any,
not being truly understood, and therefore accounted of al Horsemen incurable.
And therefore as plainly as I can, I purpose to unfold the same, and I will
divide the same into three kinds, every of which may be truly termed a
broken wind, because the breath being drawn very short and thick, contrary
to original creation, the which is long cold, and quiet, for so every
creature is by nature, but when any accident of violence of the body is used in
any creature, then every man's experience tells him that he pants and
fetches breath very short and thick, and therefore with the cause thereof I
will begin, the which being understood, the effects can not be hid. Now the
causes why a Horse draws his breath short, may be many, as sickness, great
fulness, or violent exercise: but the reason of the cause is, for that the
heart being the only hottest part of the body, from whence the Arteries and
veins do carry the vital heat into every part of the body, (and therefore is
truly said to be the chariot of life) when the same by sickness, fulness, or
violence of exercise is choked and as it were smothered with great heat, then
does the lights being the bellows to draw breath, according to that office
that nature has ordained them unto, presently labor with all violence to draw
breath to cool and comfort the heart, and so consequently all the other
members and parts of the body, to fill all the empty corners with air, which
naturally and in predominate quality is moist: and when they have drawn
sufficient breath, the drynes and heat by the moisture of the air is quenched,
the which being done, then does the creature draw breath leasurely and
coldely, and not before: but so long as the heart is oppressed with the violent
heat of sickness, or by great fulness, or violent exercise, the canes, pipes,
and passages for breath, are almost stopped or choked up, then does the lungs
labor very extreme thick, to preserve the life of the creature, which is the
heart, and therefore it is said to be the first thing that lives, and the last
that dies. And to make the same a little plainer, observe a Horse that is
brokenwinded, (as the usual term is) and you shall find that he fetches his
breath much more shorter when he is kept in the stable only with die, meat,
then when he goes to grass, and the only reason is, the coldenes of the
moist food, which keeps the heart and all the body in coldenes, because the
humors that come from the digestion of grass are cold and moist, according to
the natural quality of grass, and raw herbs. This rule being kept in
mind, it is a truth apparent, that all things which hinder and stop the free
passage of breath, breaking the natural course thereof, are the only causes
of broken wind: so likewise the cure of broken wind must be the remoouing of
the stoppings of air, and then the lungs will perfectly do their office, and
then the creature is perfect from the disease.

The differences of broken winds both in cause and effect are diverse, and yet
may be truly termed broken, namely shortness of breath, Pursicke, and broken
wind. Shortness of breath:


1. And first touching shortness of breath, it may come by some gross and tough
humors, cleaving to the hollow places of the lungs, stopping the windepipes, so
as the horse cannot easily draw his breath: and the sign thereof is his
coughing often, daily, and vehemently, without voyding at the nose or mouth.

2. Secondly it may come by hasty running after drinking, or upon full stomach,
or by the dissolution of some humors discending into his throat or lungs, by
reason of some violent heat dissoluing the same. And the signs thereof are
continual panting, sending the same forth very hot at his nose, in a squeasing
manner, and his flanckes will beat so thick as he cannot fetch breath, but by
holding the neck right out and straight, and this may truly be called broken
wind, although in truth no broken wind.

CHAP. 87. Thecure
TAke a close earthen pot, and put therein three pintes of strong wine vinegar
and four new laid eggs, with the shelles unbroken, and four great garlic
heads, clean pilled, and bruised, then cover the pot close and set it in some
warm dunghill, and there let it stand a whole night, and the next morning take
forth the eggs, but break them not, then strain the garlic and vinegar
through a clean cloth, then put thereunto a quarter of honny, half a quarter
of sugar candy, two ounces of licorish, and two ounces of Annyseedes beaten
into fine powder, and then the Horse having fasted all night, in the morning
open his mouth and pull out his tongue, and put one egg into his throat, and
then let go his tongue, so as he may swallowe it down, and then power after
it a hornefull of the said drink, being luke warm, and so all the eggs in
that manner, and all the drink being spent, then bridle him and stop him, and
cloth him very warm, and so let him stand four hours, then vnbit him, and
if it be in the winter, give him wheat straw, but no hay, and if in summer
give him grass, and for nine days give him only mashes to drink, with some
sallet oil or hogs grease in it.

CHAP. 88. For the hawe in the eye.
THis is known to all Smithes, and no doubt is ingendered by some gross humor
defending out of the head: the cure thereof, is to pull both the eyelidds open
with 2 several threads stitched with a needle, to either of the lidds, then
catch hold of the hawe with the stich of another needle and thread, and pull it
out so far as you may stay it with your singer, to the intent it may be cut
round the breadth of a penny, and leave the black behind, for by cutting away
too much of the fatt and black of the eye, the Horse many times becomes
bleer-eyed, and therefore you must spare the fat which is the wash of the eye
and the filme, wherein the eye grows, but cut between the filme and the
crush and then squirt in a little white wine, or beer.

CHAP. 89. For the Lunaticke eyes.
FOr as much as they are so called, I am content so to continue the name, and
it is said that the Horse becomes blind, at certain times in the moon, and
thereupon, most men do gather that his sight is good or bad, according to the
Natural course of the Moon: but the truth thereof is from the Natural sight
of the eye, which is a bluish eye or sight, and all Horses that are so
sighted, after extraordinary heat and travel, will be blew, and have a filme
ouergrow the sight, so as he cannot see, and although it be cured, yet upon
like occasion will fall blind again, which I have often seen: and therefore
horses that have such blew eyes are to be anoided, the full experience whereof,
I had from that worthy Ferrar M. John Orpen of Greenewich deceassed, who
always cured the same by thrusting Tutty into their eyes with his singer: but
if you lay upon the temples of his head a plaster of pitch, rosen and
masticke, and then with a sharp knife make two slitts, on both sides of his
head, an inche long, somewhat toward the nose, a handful beneath the eyes,
not touching the vein, and with a cornet loose the skin upward the breadth of
a groat, and thrust therein a round piece of leather, as broad as a two penny
piece, with a hole in the midst to keep the hole open: and look to it once
a day that the matter may not be stopped, but run ten or eleven days, then
heal it with Turpentine, Hogs grease and wax, boiled together, with flax
dipped in it, and take not away the plasters til they fall away, then burn
him with a small hot drawing iron, made like a star with a hole in the
midst, in each temple vain where the plaster did lie, in this sort, * * and
if this help not, set him to carte: beware you breed no colts of Horses that
are so eyed, for upon every hard travel, he will be blind.

CHAP. 90. For the canker in the eyes.
THis comes by corruption of blood, by means whereof you shall see many red
pimples both within and without the eye, and thorough inflammation the eye will
look red, and be full of corruption. The cure is to let him blood (on that
side the neck that you see the eye is grieved) a pottle or more; if you see
the blood very foul, and the inflammation great, then take 3. pintes of fair
water, and of roch allome and green copporas, of each half a pound, and of
white coppor as an ounce, and boil them until half be consumed, then once a
day being made warm, with a fine cloth cleanse the eye, so as it look raw,
and thus do every day until it be whole.

CHAP. 91. For impostumes in the ear.
THis comes by some blow or evil humors: The cure is, take the powder of
Linseede, and of wheat flower, of each half a pint, of hogs grease one pound,
warm them in a pot on the fire, until they be thoroughly encorporated, by
continual stirring, then take a piece of white leather, somewhat biger then the
impostumation, and spread it, being very warm, as far as will cover the
swelling, and renew it every day until it break, then lance it, so as the
corruption may go dounwarde, and taint it to the bottom with a full taint of
slaxe, well dipped in this ointment following, of melrosatum, of Oil olife and
turpentine, of each two ounces, and mingle them thoroughly, well together, then
make him a biggin of Canuas to close in the sore, so as the taint and ointment
may abide with in, renewing it every day once until it be whole, But if the
pain be in the ears without great swelling, which may be only with cold, then
take black woole dipped in the Oil of Camomil and thrust into his ears.

CHAP. 92. For the Poole evil.
THis comes of like causes, and grows as a fistula betwixt the ears or
nape of the neck, you shall perceive it by the swelling: if it be not broken,
ripen it with plasters of white hogs grease, as though you would scald it
therewith, and make him a biggin to keep it very warm, and renew the plaster
twice a day very hot, and the sooner it will ripen: then where it is softest
and where the corruption may best issue forth, with a round hot iron as big as
your little finger, two inches beneath the soft place, thrust it upward, so as
the point of the iron may come forth at the ripest place, then taint it with
flax dipped in hog's grease, and lay also a plaster of hoggs-grease upon the
same, renewing it 4 or 5 da: then after take half a pound of turpentine clean
washed and dry from the water, with two yolks of eggs and a little saffrone, and
mingle them together, then with a quil search the depth of the hole, and taint
it with a sponge so big as the hole to the bottom, well anointed with that
ointment, and so thrust it with a quill into the wound to the bottom, and a
warm plaster of hoggs grease to cover it, renewing it twice a day, but when
the swelling ceasseth use no plaster.

CHAP. 93. Of the Viues.
THis comes of corruption of blood, the cure is, draw them with a hot Iron
right down in the midst, from the root of the ear, so far as the tip of the
ear will reach being pulled down, and again under the root of the ear,
with a hot iron draw two strikes on each side like a broad arrow head thus ^,
then in the midst of the first line lance them with a Lancelet or Rasor,
taking hold of the kirnels with a pair of pinsers; but beware you touch them
not with your bare finger: pull them so far out with your pinsers as you may
cut the kirnels out without hurting the vain, then fill the hole full of salt.

For the same.
TAke Egremony, honey, and violet leaves, stamp them together, and flit the
sinew underneath the care, and lay a plaster thereunto three days.

For the same.
TAke a handful of sorrel, and lap it in a bur-dock leaf, and roste it in
hot embers like a warden, then take it out and very hot apply it to the
kirnels, and so let it rest a day and night, and still so renew it until the
kirnels be rotten and break, and after all is rotted and gone, take the yolke
of an egg, honey, and wheat flour well incorporated and made thick, and make
plasters thereof to heal it.

CHAP. 94. For the Canker in the nose.
THis comes of a corrupt blood, consumes the flesh, and makes it raw
within, and in the end will eat the gristle thereof: it will also cause the
horse to bleed at the nose and yield filthy savor: the cure is, take of green
copperas and of Allom of each a pound, and of white copperas, one quarter,
boil these in a pottle of running water until it be almost half consumed,
then take it of and put into it half a pint of honey, then hold up his head
with a drinking staff, but not too high, and with a squirt of brass or elder,
squirt the same water being luke warm, three or four times together into his
nostrils, and give him liberty to blow out the filthy matter, least you choke
him: and with a stick and a ragge wash his nostrils twice a day until he be
whole.

For the same.
IF you see the canker be of great heat and burning in the sore, with
exceeding pain, take the iuce of purslaine, lettice, sorrel, and night shade,
and wash the sore with a sine clout, and with a squirt, wash the same and this
will kill it.

CHAP. 95: For bleeding at the nose.
THis may come upon many causes which cannot be truly known, coming from
within the body, and therefore I will show how to cure the same: take a pint of
red wine, and put thereunto a quarter of bole armony beaten unto fine powder,
and put the one half thereof into his nostril that bleedeth holding up his
head; and this may do well if in the nostril or head there be the original
cause: the next day give him the rest into his body, and that will surely bind
his body and it may help the bleeding, being inward.

For the same.
LEt him blood in the breast veins, of each a pint, for that is most likely to
turn the course of the blood: take 2 or 3 sponefuls of his blood, and put it
in a saucer, and boil it until it be dried to powder, then take the powder
thereof and blovv it into his nostrils and if it come of a vvound, put it into
the same and it will presently stint it: horse-dung, asses dung, hogs, dung
sage leaves bruised and put into the wound, or take of frankincense an ounce,
alloes half an ounce, and beat them into fine powder, and mingle them
thoroughly with the vvhites of eggs, until it be so thick as honey, and with soft
hares hair, thrust his nostrils so full as it cannot fall out. And lastly, some
will throvv cold water upon him against his hair, and it is likely that the
over-cooling of him that vvayes may stop the flux thereof: and this did M: John
Orpen a worthy Farrer use, if at any sudden such an accident did happen.

CHAP. 96. Of the riftes or corruption in the palate of the mouth.
TAke sharp vinegar and salt and wash the same, and then anoint it with
honny. For the lampas or bladders in a Horse mouth every Smith can cure.

CHAP. 97. For the canker in the mouth.
VVash the fore place with strong vinegar, made thick with the powder of
Allome, two or three days together, to destroy the exulcerate matter. Then
take a quart of fair water, of Allome 4 ounces, of honny 4. or 5. spoonefulls,
of maudlin leaves, Sage leaves, and Collumbine leaves, of each a handful,
boil al these together till half be consumed, and then every day wash the
same two or three times being warmed, and it will heal it.

CHAP. 98. For the Gigs in the mouth.
THey are swellings with black heads, growing in the inside of the lips, the
cure is to flit them and thrust out the corruption, and to wash the same with
vinegar and salt.

CHAP. 99: For the heat in the mouth.
TVrne up the upper lip and iagge it with a lancet, that it may bleed, and
wash it with vinegar and salt.

CHAP. 100. For the Camey in the mouth.
THis comes by eating of filthy hay, that cats, dogs, and other vermin have
pist upon, which will cause the Horse mouth to be furd or clammy, as he will
not not eat. The cure is to let him blood in two great veins under the tongue
and to wash his mouth, with vinegar and salt, and to give him new bread that
is not hot.

CHAP. 101. For the hurt of the tongue with the Bit.
THe cure is to wash it with Alome water, then take black bramble leaves and
chop them with larde, then put them within a cloute and make them as round as a
ball, then dip the same in honey and anoint the tongue therewith until it be
whole.

CHAP. 102. For the Barbels or paps under the tunge.
THe cure is to clippe them away and to wash the mouth with vinigere and salt.

CHAP. 103. For the swelling in the gummes.
THe cure is, make him to bleed well in the pallet of the mouth and also to
scarifie the gummes that the rank blood may come forth and then rub them
thoroughly with vinegar and salt.

For to draw the wolves teeth. CHAP. 104.
THese are two little teeth growing in the upper Iawe next to the great grinding
teeth, which hinder the horse for grinding his meat, so as he will let it fall
vnchewed, and sometimes, you shall see some teeth so long and ouerhanging in his
Jaws, that they do race and cut his cheeks so as he cannot feed: The cure is,
tie the horse head to some rafter or post, and his mouth to be openned with a
cord, so as you may see every part thereof, then take a round iron tool half
a yard long, made at the end like a Carpenters Gouge, and with your left hand
set the edge of that tool at the foot of the wolfes teeth, on the outside of
the Iawe, turning the hollowside of the tool dou^ward, holding your hand
stedily, then with a mallet in your right hand strike on the head of the tool,
a pretty blow to losen it, and make it bend inward, then wrench the tooth
outward, with the inside of the tool, and thrust it out of his head: and do
the like to the other tooth, and fill the holes with salt, and if any tooth
ouerhang the nether teeth to the hurt of the horse, then with your mallet and
tool pare the tooth, or as many as do ouerha^g for hurting the horse mouth.

For the crick in the neck. CHAP. 105.
THere are many opinions how this should come to a horse, and therefore I wish
many means to be used before any extreme means be used: first therefore, if
the horse have such a crick that he holds his neck straight and cannot have
the use to lift the same up and down as is usual, then let two men one on the
each side rub his neck, so long as by common intendment it is grown very hot,
which being done, put a bit into his mouth, and make trial if he will or can
reine in any seemly proportion, the which if he do, then it is to be intended
either the same came by some cold or some strain, and then I would have him
let blood on both the breast veins, and all his neck thoroughly anointed, and
labored with Aquauite and Nerve oil, that it may drink into the skin, and two
sheep skins wraped about his neck with the wool next the neck, to keep it in
a great heat, and so to rest 24. hours, and if he do not heerby amend, but
carries his head still down and feeds slowly, then make a hole in his
forehead hard under the foretop, and thrust in a cornet to raise the skin from
the flesh a handful deep, then take a goose feather well nointed with hoggs
grease to keep the hole open that it may run ten days together, and every day
twice let the feather be cleansed and newly anointed, and let his neck be still
labored with rubbing, and kept very warm to keep it in a sweat, and if you
perceive no amendment, then draw him with a hot iron from the root of the ear
on both sids of the neck through the midst of the same, even to the breast a
straw deep, that both ends may meet on the breast, but if he carry his neck
awry on one side, then only draw the contrary side with a hot iron, and fail
not eury morning when he is fasting, to ride him with a bit til he sweat, and
the hotter he is, the more pull in his reine, and when he comes to the stable,
keep him warm the he sweat, and after cool him moderately, and rubat him
thoroughly.

CHAP. 106 For the wennes or knobs in any part of the body.
THe cure is, take of mallows, sage, and red netles of each a handful, boil
them in running water, put thereunto butter and honey a little quantity, and
when the herbs be soft, bruise them, then put thereunto of Oil of bays two
ounces, and two ounces of hoggs grease, and warm them together over the fire,
which being well stirred and very hot, make a plaster as big as the wen upon
a piece of leather, and so renew it by the space of eight days, always laid
to so hot as may be, and if it come not to a head, then lance it very deep,
then heal it with very clean washed turpe^tine, the yolk of an egg and a
little saffron well wrought together, with a taint of flax well rould therein,
renewing it every day once.

For the same.
Take a pound of strong lie and soap, a quarter of vitreall roman, one ounce
of Salarmoniacke, as much of roch-allom and boil them together til they are
thick, and use it for an ointment.

For the same.
Take of Gipsiacum, the strongest, and lay it on with cotton three or four
times and it will take it away.

CHAP. 106. For the falling of the Crest.
THe cure is, first let the crest be supported to stand upright, then on the
contrary side that it falls, draw his crest the depth of a straw with a hot
iron, the edge of which iron would be half an inch broad, and make your
beginning and ending somewhat beyond the fall, but the first draught must go all the way upon the edge of the maine, even underneath the roots of the same,
bearing your hand right dounward into the neckward, then answer that with
another draught beneath, and so far distant from the first as the fall is
broad, compassing all the fall: and betwixt these two draughts, right in the
midst draw another draught, then with a button of an inch about, or else
crossing the same with your iron, burn at each end a hole, or else cross the
spaces betwixt the draughts: the reason is, that by the pursing up and
shrinking of the skin on the contrary side, the crest may stand upright: some
will afterward anoint the same with fresh butter, or something aswage the
heat, but Master Orpen of Greenwich an excellent Farear, would not do any
thing that might enlarge the skin: and for my own opinion, I hold it best
until 9. days be past, and then to take away the scab it will not be amiss.

CHAP. 107. For all manginesse.
THis is diuersely cured, some thus. Take of green copporas, of allom, of each
a pound, of white copporas a quarterne, boil them together in 3. quarts of
running water, in a strong earthen pot, until half be consumed, and being made
warm, with a clout on a stick rub him once a day, until he be whole.

For the same.
LEt him blood a pottel at least, then put presently unto it, a quart of bay
salt, and labor them together, and anoint al his body therewith, and let it
dry in. Also to anoint him with the fat of a Seal, is excellent.

For the same.
TAke of fresh grease a pound, of quick silver half a pound, of brimstone one
ounce, of rape oil half a pint, or else double or treble the simples, as you
shall have occasion, then work them so as the quick silver be not seen, then
take a woolcarde and clawe him until it be raw; and anoint him therewith,
but in this cure be sure first to let blood abundantly, and give him in all
his prouander, or with hot grains or mashes plenty of the powder of brimstone,
to drive it out of the body, and when you think it dead, take a pound of black
soap, and strong bucke lie, and wash body, main, and tail, all over, if he be
clean from all medicine, and a bout 5. or 6. days after purge him with
Pills, as has been prescribed, and then within 5. or 6. days after, swim him
in a river, and rub him, and clear him of all medicine, and cloth him very
warm, and if you do first purge him, and then let blood, and after minister
salues, it is the better.

CHAP. 108 For swelling in the withers or back
THe cure is, presently to lay a good quantity of Horse-dung (new made) upon
it, and if it be new done, it will aswage it: If not, then prick it with a
fleame or fine penknife through the skin, to make the blood issue out: then
take of mallows and smallage, 3. or 4. handfulls, boil them till they be pap,
strain them and bruise the herbs in a wodden dish, and put thereunto a little
hogs grease or sallet oil, sheep suet, or other fresh grease, boil them
together, not frying them hard, and then with a cloth bind it warm to the
swelling, renewing it every day until it be gone.

For the same.
SOme will shave the hair from the place, and lay wheat flower and the white
of an egg beaten together upon a plaster, and not remove it for 2. or 3.
days, and that will bring it to a head, and then in the lowest part where the
corruption is, pierce it upward with a sharp iron somewhat hot, and anoint it
every day with hogs grease, and after wash the place with water and salt, and
throw some dry thing upon it.

CHAP. 109. For inflammations or cankers in the withers.
IF the inflammation be great, draw round about the swelling with a hot iron,
and cross it, then take a round hot iron sharp pointed, and thrust it upward
in the swelling place, toward the point of the withers, that the matter may
issue downwards, then taint it with hogs grease, and anoint all the swelling,
continuing so to do til it be asswagde, renewing the taint every day until the
fiery matter be fallen away, then taint it with turpentine, the yolks of eggs
and saffron mingled together, as aforesaid, renewing the taint every day till
it be whole. But if the swelling go not away, then be sure the same is greatly
inflamde and grown to impostumation, then lance it and let out the
corruption, then take half a pint of honey, of verdigrease two ounces beat to
powder, mingle it with the honey, and boil them in a pot till it look red, and
being warm, make a taint or plaster, as the same shall require, renewing it
every day till it be whole, but to keep it from danger, the surer way is, to
thrust the hole full of this last salve, and to thrust after it a piece of
sponge to keep the hole open, and to draw forth the venom thereof, and so to
use it till it be whole: some would have you always thoroughly wash the hole,
with old chamberly, and bay salt, that has bin well boiled together, before
you taint it, and no doubt it is very good; but if the same be very vlcerous
and corrupt, then take lie, honey, roche allome, and mercury: sees them
together, and scour the same therewith to the bottom.

CHAP. 110. For the Nauellgall.
THe cures hereof are diverse, and so they ought to be, for medecin is to be
ministered according to the hurt, of more or less. If it be but galled, take
soote of a chimney and yest mixed together, and plaster it once or twice a day.

For the same if it be a sore.
TAke a pottle of veriuce, three penny worth of green Copporas, boil it to
the one half, and wash the sore therewith, then fill the sorewith red lead,
and let it not be dressed of 3. days, and then dress him as you see cause.

For the same.
IF the Horse back be sore hurt, so that it swell and is impostumed, then
lance it on the nethermoste part of the ulcer, so that the matter may have
issue downward, for if you should lance it aloft, then the corruption that
remains will fisttulate: if you find the concauity deep, then make a taint
of flax, and dip it in this salve: Take of decres suet, of wax, of Tar, and
of Turpentine, of each three ounces, and one ounce of Rozen, mingle them
altogether, and taint the wound, and if you see any dead flesh grow in it, then
sprincle the powder of verdigrease upon it, and then lay upon the head of the
taint a plaster of the yolk of an egg, honey and wheat flower, and thus dress
it evening and morning.

For the same.
IF it be enflamed, cut it round about with a sharp knife, even to the bone,
leaving no rotten flesh behind, then take the white of an egg and salt
beaten together, and lay it upon Tow plaister-wise, renewing it so for two
days together, then take a quarter of a pint of honey, and one ounce of
verdigrease, beaten into powder, and boil them together, stirring them till it
look red, and being warm make a plaster thereof with Tow, and wash the same
with vinegar or white wine, and lay that plaster on it, and when it begins
to heal, scatter the powder of burnt Oyster shelles on it or else the powder of
honey, and slict lime being made into a cake and baked, to dry it up.

CHAP. 111. For the sweying of the back.
THis hurt comes by some streine. The cure is, that so soon as he begins
to complain which is by reeling or rolling in the hinder parts, which is
easily discerned: then take a sheeps skin, as hot as it can be taken from the
sheep, and clap the fleshy side thereof along his back, and presently put
many clothes upon it, to keep his back as warm as may be, and so let it
continue till it begin to smell, then prepare another in like manner, and take
away the old, and so continue him for 21. days at least, and let him not be
traveled but still rest. And if this help him not, then draw his back with a
hot iron, right out, on both sides of the edge of his back, from the pitch of
the buttocke unto a handful within the saddle, and then overthwart: and let
not the strikes be deep but so burned as they may look yellowe, then presently
lay on it this charge: of pitch a pound, of rosen half a pound, of bole armony,
half a pound, made in powder, and half a pint of tar, and boil them
together in a pot, until they be thoroughly mingled, then being luke warm,
daub it very thick upon the burning, and clap on as many flocks of the Horse
color as you can make to abide, and let them remain till they fall off.

CHAP. 112. For the hide hound.
THe cause hereof is, a sudden cold after great heat, when the pores are
open, the cold enters, and makes an attraction of the sinews, soas the
Horse seems to go or travel with great grief, his skin being as if it were
starched, being shrunk and clung to his ribs. The cure is, to let him blood in
both the slanke veins, being next the girding place and the flanks. Then take
a quart of good white wine, and put thereunto three ounces of sallet oil, of
commin one ounce, of anniseedes two ounces, of licorish two ounces, beaten into
powder, and give it him warm, then let him be thoroughly rubbed from the huckle
bone along the back, and over the ribs, half an hour together: then
cover all his back with a sack, thoroughly soked in a tub of water, and the
water wrung out of it, and upon that cast many clothes, and gird them fast
unto him, to bring him unto a swet, which is the only and chief thing to
recover him, and keep him with good mashes, and every day let him be so used
for seven or eight days together, give him much sodden barley and beans for
his diet, and green malte on the floor, and after the 8. days end let him
blood in the two breast veins, about a pint, then give him a pint of sack, a
quarter of a pint of sallet oil, four penny worth of the best triacle, and
ride him until he sweat, then presently set him in a warm stable, and clothe
him very warm, and at night give him a good mash of malte, with the powder of
brimstone to the quantity of two spoonefuls.

CHAP. 113. For Surfeting with Prouender.
When a Horse has eaten more then the stomach can well digest, he is in such
pain as he is not able to stand, but lies and walloweth as if he had the
bots, the danger whereof I have formerly written. The cure is, to let him blood
and to draw his yard and wash it, to put a piece of a cloue of garlic into
it, to make him piss: also to rake him behind, and to give him a glister with
the water of sodden mallows, fresh butter and sallet oil keep him warm and
let him eat very little for 4 or 5. days after.

CHAP. 114. For the surfeiting, called, the foundring in the body.
THe cause of this disease, is overmuch eating after labor, whiles the Horse
is hot, whereby his meat not being digested, breeds evil humors, which by
little and little do spread through all the parts of his body, and at length
oppress the whole body; and do so take away his strength that he has not
power to go or move his joints, and being laid, is not able to rise, whereby
he wants the use of pissing, as also of dunging: for nature being overcome,
then does the humor rule the body to the utter destruction thereof: In lik^
manner, it is when the Horse being over hot with travel drinks so much as
the cold, thereof suppreseth his natural heat: The cause is, that the evil
humors being predominate according to their nature, being heavy and moist,
immediately resort down to the horse legs and feet, and there rest, whereof
there must be some dissolution, which if it be not prevented, make great gourdy
lims, as the pains, cratches, spauins, winde-galls, casting of the houes, and
such like: all which seem more then wonderful to the ignorant, because
ignorance, is the mother of wonder: The cure hereof must be according to the
effects that are wrought in the horse, as if it be espied, when the haier
begins to stare, that he be chil, and shrug for cold, forsake his meat, hang
down this head, quiver after cold water, and after two or three days, begin
tocough, then it is a sign, that his surfeit is not great and then he may be
cured thus: cover his belly with the glister last mentioned and give him this
drink: take of malmesy a puart of sugar half ^^atterne, of houy half a
quartern, of sinamon half an ounce of licoris and Anisseeds, of each two
spoonful beaten into fine powder put it into the Malmsie, and give it him
blood warm keep him warm, and with warm water, and 4. or 5. days after let
him blood.

CHAP. 115. For the yellowes.
THe cause hereof, is also the abundance of bad humors, the cure is plain: let
him blood, if you see it yellow a pottle, then cure him by giving a quart of
white wine, of saffron and turmerick of each half an ounce, and the Juice that
is wrong out of 2. handful of Selondine, and being blood warm give it him and
keep him warm, and with good mashes, wherein put two sponfull of the powder of
Brimston: some will give in this drink, the green order of geese strained. I
could now entreat of the dropsy in a Horse, but if you observe those few
rules I have set down, in the beginning of the title of cures, you will be
free almost from all diseases.

CHAP. 116. For the Colic.
The cause of this disease is 2. fold, either it comes through abundance of
humors or with wind, and herein the owner or or keeper may give good direction,
for if he knew the Horse to be clean within and orderly dieted, then it will
be probaly coniectured it is the wind, and although it be wind yet I judge the
origenal to beobstruction, of humor which will not suffer the vvind to have his
free passage, which otherwise nature would expel as his enemy, The cures
may be diverse, and because it is a disease that few Farriers, understand, I will
set down several cures, because if one thing cannot be spedily procured
another may, First it may be an obstruction, for that the horse has the stone,
and cannot stale: first take a quart of white wine, half a pint of burre
seed, beaten small, 2 ounces of parslyseed, of smalage Saxafrage, the roots of
philupendula, Grommell seed, and broom seed, of each 2. ounces beaten to fine
powder, a good handful of watercresses, and lay them in steep all night, and
in the morning strain them clean, and put to it a little black soap, and a
little butter, and ride him till he begin to sweat, then set him in your stable
with a great quantity of sweet litter under him, and cloth him warm and so
let him stand meatles seven or eight hours, then give him dried oats and
vvarm water, with a quantity of sallet oil to drink, and before he have
this drink let him fast all night. If he be a Horse there is nothing better
for him then to cover a Mare.

For the same, if you think it to come of wind.
THis comes when a horse is ridden hot and set up cold, he will pine away
and forsake his meat: keep him empty all night in the morning take a quart of
white wine, four ounces of Fenegreck, 7 ounces of baies, as much corn
pepper, an ounce of Grains, an ounce of Ginger, 2. handfuls of water cresses,
a handful of sage, a pound of Se^green, and wring out the iuce, another of
mints, stamp them, and put them into the wine and let them stand on the fire
till it boil, then strain it out and give it him blood warm with a little
honey.

For the same.
TAke a quart of Malmsie, of cloves, pepper, Sinamo^ of each half an ounce, of
sugar, half a quarter: and give it the horse, luke warm, and labor him upon
it one hour that he dung, and stale, and keep him with warm water: But if he
be a stond horse, there is not any better thing, then that he have his full
desirewith a mare, if he cannot piss, or be troubled with the Colic: it
helps many sicknesses and strengthens Nature.

For the same.
TAke a pint of white wine and stamp to powder three of four Cantharides, they
are a kind of flies, which you shall have at the Apothecaries, and when your
horse is very empty give them unto him being very well wrought, and brued into
the white wine luke warm, understand I pray you that these flies are a very
corosiue and eating through as poison, and they will not be stopped by any
humor: with twice giving, it would cure any cholick that had not bin very old.

After these many medicines for a cholick, to refresh your conceits, I will set
down two other cures, which I find in some Writers, and leave you to take so
long time as you think fit to credit them. The first is, if the Horse have a
chollick, if he look upon a Duck or any water foul, it will cure him, the
second is, if a maid strike him on the face with her girdle he is presently
remedied.

CHAP. 117. For Costiuenes or belly bound.
TAke of the decoction of mallows a quart, put toit half a pint of oil or
so much butter, an ounce of Benidicte luxature and power into his fundament with
a little horn, and hold his tail close to his fundament, whiles another does
lead him, and so keep it as long as you can, and after keep him warm and give
him warm water to drink.

For the Laxe. CHAP. 118.
TAke of Bean flower and Bole armony, of each a quarterne, mingled in a quart
of red wine, give it him luke warm, and after drink warm water, with bean
flower: but if that will not stay him, then give him half a penny worth of
Allom, beaten into powder, and Bole Armony beaten small, in a quart of milk,
stirring them til the milk be all of a curd, and this will stop him.

For the Worms. CHAP. 119
THey are engendered of raw and evil humors: there are 3. kinds of them; the
worm, the bot, the truncheon. The Horse will lie down and wallowe, which is
when they feed on him, his breath will stincke, and his mouth cla^my. The
cure, give him a quart of new milk, and half a pint of honey in it, blood
warm: this will make them rest from gnawing of him, because they wilsuck
thereof until they be ready to burst: then the next day give him this drink
following.

The cures that are pretended are diverse: first take a quart of wort, or ale of
the strongest, then take a quarter of a pound of fern, half a pound of Sauin,
half a pound of stone crop; stamp them, and put them together with two
spoonefulls of brimstone, and as much chimney soote, beaten to powder, and let
them lie in steep two hours, then strain them and give the Horse a little,
warm; then bridle him and let him stand 6. hours after without meat, and
there is no doubt but the Horse will be at quiet, for the strength thereof is
such, to stain the mawe as the bot will not meddle, but fly from it, but it
does not kill them: And so is it of all other medicines for the same, whereof
are infinite. Now if I may persuade you, or rather May. John Orpen, that worthy
Farrier deceased, after these former drinks given, the third day make him
purging pills, as has been before, viz. Take of lard a pound, laid in water two
hours; then take nothing but the clean fat thereof, stamp it in a mortar, and
thereunto put of Licoris, of Anniseedes, of Fenegreeke, of each beaten into
powder 3. ounces, of Alloes in powder 2. ounces, and of Agaricke one ounce,
knead them in paste and make 6. balls thereof, then having fasted over night,
give him the next morning 3. of these pills, nointed with honey, when you have
opened his mouth, catch hold of his tongue, hold it fast til you have hurld in
one, and thrust it down his throat with a rolling pin, and then let his
tongue go till he has swallowed it down, and so do with the rest, and keep
him close from all air, and at night give him a good strong mash, and warm
water 3. days after; my reason is, for that these balls will now purge out of
his body all the bots and worms, and all the humors that bred and cherished
them: so as your Horse will be perfectly clean: And you shall find most of the
bots alive, when they are purged; for you cannot kill them with medicine, but
only make them forbear vexing of him, so long as his mawe rests so bitter
and stinched, as they dare not feed on it, but upon other humors, whereby most
men think they have cured their Horse perfect: and the like reason is for
chickins gut, and such like: which being a pleasanter food then the horse mwe,
leave him aprest, to feed on them, but do not cure him, for in reason it
cannot kill them nor avoid them, and therefore the botts remain still in the
body.

CHAP. 120. For the Colt evil.
THe eure is to wash the sheath clean with lukewarm Vinegar, draw out his
yard, and wash it also, then ride him in some running stream up to the belly,
to allaye the heat, and thus do lustily a quarter of an hour, and so every
day after for three or four days.

CHAP. 121. For mattering of the yard.
TAke a pint of white wine, boil therein a quarter of Roche Alum, and with a
Squirt thrust up very far into his yard, squirt the same three or four
times to pierce and cleanse the bottom from the filth, and thus continue until
he be whole.

CHAP. 122. For the Foalling of the yard.
THe cure is to wash the same with warm white wine, and anoint it with oil
of Roses and honey mingled together, then put it up, and with a codpeece or
trusse, keep it still up, and dress him every day once till he be whole.

CHAP. 123. For the swelling of the Cod or stones.
THe cure is to let him blood on both sides, in the flank veins, then take of
Oil of Roses, and Vinegar, of each a pint, half a quartern of Bole Armony,
beaten into powder, mingle them together, and being luke warm, anoint the Cod
therewith with two or three feathers, and the next day ride him into the water,
and give him 2. or three turns, then bring him to the stable, and when he is
dry, anoint them again, and so continue till he be whole, but if the cods do
swell by means of any hurt, then cover the cods with a charge of Bole Armony
and Vinegar wrought together, renewing till the swelling go away; and if it
break, taint it with Melrosatum, and make him a breech, renewing it til it be
whole.

CHAP. 124 For incording or Bursting.
THis is when the rimme that incloseth the guts is broken, so that they fall
into the Cod of the horse, which is apparent to sight or feeling: the cure is
to put 4 pasternes on his feet, as the horse-gelders use, then bathe his stones
with warm water and butter, then raise them up from the body with both your
hands being closed by the fingers fast together, and so holding the stones in
your hands, work down the gut into the body of the Horse, by striking it
downward with your thumbes, one after another, until that side of the stone
be so small as the other, then having returned the gut into his place, take a
woollen list of two fingers broad, thoroughly anointed with fresh butter, and
tie his stones both together, or so nigh his body as maybe, not over hard, but
that you may put your finger betwixt; that done, in all quietness take the Horse
away, and let him not be stirred 3. weeks after, but the next day vnloosen the
list, and take it away, and then and every day after twice or thrice in a day,
cast cold water upon his cods, to make him shrink up his stones, and at 3.
weeks or months end, to geld him of that stone, which done, let him eat
little, and continually drink water but a little at a time, till three weeks
be ended.

CHAP. 125 For the Botch in the Grains of a Horse.
THe cure is, to take of wheat flower, Turpentine, and Honey, of each like
quantity, stirring it to make a stiff plaster, and to lay it to the sore to
break it, and then lance it, and taint it with Turpemine, and Hogs grease, as
before.

CHAP. 126 For grief in the shoulder that has been long time.
THe cure is, give him a slit on both sides, an inch under the shoulder bones,
then with a swannes quill put into the slit, blow up first the one shoulder
and then the other, as big as you can possibly, even up to the withers, and
with your hand strike the wind equally into every place of the shoulders, and
when they be both full, then beat all the windy places with a hasell wand, over
all the shoulders, then with a flat slice of iron loosen the skin within from
the flesh, that done rowel the 2. slitts or cuts with two round rowels of
leather with a hole in the midst, that the mattet may issue forth, and let
such rowels be three inches broad, and so put in as they may lie plain and
flat within the cut. Then take of pitch, and of rosen, each apound, of tar
half a pint, boil these together, and when it is somewhat cool, draw all
the shoulders very thick therewith; that done, clap on as many flocks as will
stick of the horse color: and every day cleanse both the wounds and rowels,
and put them in again, continuing so 16, days; then take them out and heal
up the wounds with hogs grease and turpentine molten together, renewing it until
the wounds be whole, but let the flocks lie until they fall off, and let the
horse run to grass at the least half a year.

CHAP. 127 Of wrinching the shoulder.
THis comes by a fall, sudden or short turning, rash running out of some
door, or by some stripe of a horse, a sudden stop or such like; which being
done, he will traile his leg close to himself as he goes. The cure is to let
him blood in the breast so soon as it is perceived or known (and the sooner
the better) three pintes at the least, and to keep all the same blood in a pot,
and thereunto put a quart of strong vinegar, six eggs broken, shelles and all,
and so much wheat flour as will thicke^ that licour; put theru^to 1. pound of
Bole Armony, beaten into powder, and 2. ounces of Sanguis Draconis, so as the
flower may not be perceived, and if it be to stiff, soften it with vinegar,
then with your hand daube all the shoulder from the maine downward, and betwixt
the forebowels all against the hair, and let not the horse remove until the
charge be surely fastened to the kin, the^ carry him into the stable, and suffer
him not to lie all that day, keeping him with a spare diet, 15. days together
at the least, and let him not remove out of his place but only lie down all
that time, and every day once refresh the shoulder point with this charge,
laying still new upon the old; and at the 15. days or 20 days end, lead him
gently to see if he be amended, the which if he be, let him rest by the space
of two weeks without travel, but if he be nothing amended, then rowel him
with a leather rowell upon the shoulder point, and keep him rowelled the space
of 15. days, renewing the rowell, and clensing the wou^d every other day, and
walk him up and down very gently, always turning him on the contrary side,
and if he go well, pull out the Rowell and heal up the wound with Turpentine
and Hogs grease, and a taint of flax, but if the hurt were so violent that all
this will not help him, then draw him Chequer wise with a hot iron, over all
the shoulder point, and let him go to plough every day two hours in soft
ground, and where he may not be overmuch strained, and if it be possible, let
him be let blood so soon as he is hurt in those plate-veines, and also in the
place, or as nere as is possible where the hurt or blow is, to the intent that
no blood congeale there, or that it tarrye until the flesh become black with
the bruise.

For the same.
IF the same be newly done, take a Fleame and prick thorough the skin before
the shoulder, between the spade and the mary bone, the length of a bean, and
then take a quill and put betwixt the skin and the flesh, and blow with your
mouth that the skin may arise from the flesh, and then thrust out the wind
again; and then take a pottel of stale piss, and sees it to a quart, and
then strain it, and put thereunto half a pound of butter, half a pound of hogs
grease, a handful of Mallows, as much of Tansey, as much of Veruain, as much
of red nettles, as much of Southerwood, as much of baume leaves, bruise them,
and sees them in the urine til they be soft, then anoint the point of the
shoulder therewith, about a hand breadth, every day, being first made warm,
until he be whole, but let him not stir out of the stable or place where he
stands, till he be well, which is easily perceived, by standing as boldly on
that leg as on the other, without sparing or favoring it.

CHAP. 128 Of splayting of the Shoulder.
THis comes by some slip, whereby the shoulder parts from the breast, and
so leaves a rift or rent in the flesh and filme under the skin, which
causes him to traile his leg after him. The cure is, to put a pair of
straight pasternes on his forefeete, and toilet him stand still in the stable;
then take of Dialthea one pound, of Sallet oil a pint, of oil de bays half
a pound, of fresh butter half a pound, melt them together in a pipkin, anoint
the grieved place therewith round about the inside of the shoulder, and within
two or thee hours after all the shoulder will swell, then with a fleame strike
all the swelling places, or with a sharp hot iron, the head whereof would be
an inch long, to the intent the corruption may run out: and still anoint the
same very often with the said ointment, and if it gather to a head, then
lance it where it is most soft, then taint it with Hog's Grease and Turpentine
and a taint of flax.

CHAP. 129. Of the shoulder pight.
THis is when the pitch or point of the shoulder is displaced: which if it be,
the point will stick out farther then his fellow, and the horse will halt
right down. The cure is to make him swim in a deep water some xi. or xii.
turns, if he be able to make the joint return to his place, then make two
tough pinnes of ashwood, the bigness of your little finger sharp, and thrust
in one of the pinnes, from a boue downward, so as both the ends may equally
stick without the skin, and if the pin of wood will not easilye pass
through, make it way with an iron pin, then make two holes cross to the
first holes, so as the pin may cross the first pin right in the midst with a
right cross, and the first pin would be somewhat flat in the midst, to the
intent the other being round may pass the better without stop and close the
iuster together, then take a piece of a line, somewhat bigger then a
Whip-corde, and at one end make a loope, which being put over one of the pins
ends, wind the rest of the line good and straight about the pins ends, so as
it may lie betwixt the pins ends and the skin, and fasten the least end with a
pack needle, and a pack-threed unto the rest of the cord, so as it may not
slip; but first annoint both pricks and cord with hogs grease, then bring him
into the stable, and let him rest the space, of ix. days, and lie down so
little as may be, and put a pasterne on the fore leg, so as it may be bound
with a cord unto the foot of the manger, to keep that leg always in the
stable more forward then the other, and at the nine days end, pull out the
pricks, and annoint the places with Dialthea, or Hogs grease, and turn him to
grass.

CHAP. 130. For swelling in the fore-legges.
THis comes after great labor, but the efficient causes are many, but
principally that he is traveled when he is to yo^g, before he be cleansed from
his humors: that he is traveled when he is full, that he has too much rest,
and is not kept with moderate diet, that he feeds on green meat, that he is
washed after labor and such like, as in the title of diet I have set forth.
But if he be naturally fleshy lymmed, he will never be free, but so soon as he
is cured upon travel he will swel again, and therefore such iades would be gelded
and put to cart, and never suffered to get Colt. The cure is diverse: take of
mallows three or four handfuls, Rose cake and Sage a handful, boil them in
water, and thereunto put half a pound of butter, and half a pint of Sallet
oil, and being made very warm, wash him twice a day for three or four days.

For the same.
TAke Hemlocke, and stamp it, and mingle it with sheep dung and Vinegar, and
having made a plaster, lay it all over the swelling.

For the same.
TAke Wine-lees and Comen, and boil them together, and put thereunto a little
Wheateflower, and charge all the swelling therewith, and walk him often and
fast to heat him, and if this will not serve, then take up the great vein
above the knee on the inside, suffering him not to bleed from above but from
beneath: if he be a clean and lean limmed, and used as I have expressed, a
little butter and beer warmed, and his feet well stopped with Cow Dung after
his great travel is sufficient: but if he be so fleshy limmed as this will not
help, cut his throat and wash him with his own blood, and he will never
after swell.

CHAP. 131. For soundering.
BEfore I enter to express the cure, I would have you diligently to note the
cause of this disease, for in the knowledge of the causes lies the knowledge
of the cures; and if you do observe those few rules I set down in the
beginning of this title of curing, and do diligently observe, assure your
self you shall be little troubled with curing: for having prevented the cause
of the grief or sickness, ye do evermore prevent the grief and sickness it
self. The causes of foundring are either from superfluous and overmuch eating
and drinking, from immoderate and extreme labor, or abundance and fullness of
humors: and because I have entreated heerof in the title of diet, as also in
the title of breeding, I leave you to the diligent consideration thereof, and my
rules formerly prescribed. The undoubted and infallible cure hereof is, Garter
each leg, immediately one handful above the knee, with a list (good and
hard) and then walk him to chafe him into a heat, and being somewhat warm let
him blood in both the breast veins, two or three quarts, and reserve the same,
continually stirring it with your hand to gather out the clods thereof: then
take thereof two quarts, of wheate-flower half a pecke, six eggs shells and
all, of Bole Armony half a pound, of Sanguis Dr^conis half a quarterne, and a
quart of strong Vinegar; mingle them all together, and charge all his
shoulders, breast, back, loins and forelegges therewith, and walk him upon
some hard ground, suffering him not to stand still, and when the charge is
dry, refresh it again, and having walked him three or four hours together,
lead him into the stable and give him a little mash of Malt, and some hay and
prouender, and then walk him again, for four or five days, renewing the
charge upon him as it dries, so long as it lasts, and keep it warm, and
with a thin diet. But if you see the Horse to be afraid to set his hinder feet
to the ground, and to be so weak behind, and to stand quiuering and shaking
and covet to lie down, garter him also above the hoofs, on the hinder legs,
and let him blood also in the thigh veins, to the quantity of a pottell, and
so double your charge in quantity, and therewith also charge both hinder legs,
reins and flanks, all against the hair, and if you find him feeble, by
drawing so great a quantity of blood, give him a quart of Malsmesey, a little
Sinamon, Mace and pepper finely beaten into powder, made luke warm, and let
him be walked and chafed up and down, if he be able to go, but if he be not
able, then tie him up to the Rack, and let him be hanged with Canuas and ropes
so as he may stand upon the ground with his feet, and not suffered to lie
down: then pare all his feet so thin, that the dew come forth, and tacke on
the shoes again, stopping the feet with branne and hog's grease boiled
together, and so hot as you may, and wrap them in clothes even to the
pasternes, tiing the clouts fast: Let his diet be thin, and give him no cold
water, and so soon as he is able, let him be almost continually walked, unless
he be so long gone that his hoofes begin to lose, or that it break forth at
the Cronets of the hoofes, then take two Eggs, and as much bole Armony and
beane-flower as will thick the same, and mingle them well together, and make
thereof plasters, such as may close each foot round about, somewhat above the
Cronet, and bind the same so fast that it fall not away, or be removed by two
days together, but let the soles of his feet be cleansed and stopped every day
once, and the Cronets but every two days, and not walked for loosing his
hoses: but when he amendeth, walk him upon some soft ground fair and softly,
but if it break out above the hoof, then take all the fore-partes of the sole
clean away, leaving the heels whole, then stop him, and also dress him about
the Cronet, as aforesaid if this grief be espied in time, it is justly cured.

CHAP. 132 Of the Splint.
THis soarance is known to al men: the cure is, wash it with warm water, and
shave off the hair, and lightly scarifie all the sore place with the point of
a rasor, so as the blood may issue forth: then take of Cantharides half a
spoonefull, and of Enforbium as much, beaten into fine powder and mingle them
together with a spoonful of Oil Debay, and then melt them in a little pan,
stirring them well together, so as they may boil over, and being so boiling
hot, take two or three feathers, and anoint all the sore places there with,
and let not the Horse remove from the place for two hours after.

After carrye him away and tie him so as he cannot touch the medicine with his
lips, and also stand without litter all that day and night, and within two or
three days after annoint the sore with butter for nine days after.

For the same.
TAke up the contrary leg, and gently beat the splint with a small roaling
pin of hasel, until it begin to be soft, then with a Fleame strike it in
several places, that the blood issue forth, then take the sharpestred Onyon
and cut off the head thereof, and in the middle thereof, put a piece of
Verdegrease as big as your thumbes end, and then lay the top or head of the
Onyon upon it, and wrappe it in brown paper, and cover it in the Embers,
until it be thoroughly boiled, and soft as pap; then open it, and being very
hot, lay it to the splint, and bind it fast with clothes, hard to the splint,
and so let it continue, until it fall away, and the splint will never grow
more.

For the same.
TAke an Onyon and pick out the Core, and put therein a spoonefull of Vnslict
lime, and four penny weight of Verdegrece, and half a pound of Launder seed,
and roste the Onyon until it be soft, and then cut the skin a little, that
the medicine may enter to fret the maladye out, and let the hair remain, and
let the medicine lie to it three days.

CHAP. 133. For the Malender.
THis is a sc^b growing in the form of lines, or strecks overthwart the bent
of the knee, in the knee, in the inside of the leg. The cure is, wash it with
warm water, and shave the scab clean away, then take a spoonefull of Soap,
as much Lime, and make it like paste, and spread as much on a clout as will cover
the sore, bind it fast, renewing it every day for three days together, then
annoint the same with oil of Roses, to cause the crust to fall away, and then
wash it with Urine, and strew on the powder of Oyster-shels.

For the same.
TAke a Barreld Herring with a soft roe, and two spoonefuls of black Soap, and
half an ounce of Alum, and bruise them together, and lay to the sore three
days.

CHAP. 134. For an upper Taint or over reach upon the back, sinewe of the
shanke, somewhat above the joint.
THis is a swelling of the master sinew which comes, for that the horse does
ouer-reach and strike that sinew with the toe of his hinder foot, the place
will swell and the Horse hault. The cure is to wash the place with warm water,
and shave off the hair so far as the swelling goes, and scarifie every part
of the sore lightly with a Rasor, that the blood may issue forth, then take of
Cantharides and Euforbium half an ounce, mingle them together with half a
quarterne of Soap, and with a slice spread some of this ointment over all the
fore, and let him rest for one hour after, and let him stand without litter,
and the next day dress him so again, and the third day annoint the sore with
butter nine days after, then take 3 handful of mallows, a handful of Sage,
and a Rose cake, and boil them in water, and when they be soft, put half a
pound of butter, and half a pint of sallet oil to the water, and being warm,
wash the place four or five days together therewith.

CHAP. 135. Of the nether joint.
THis is a blader full of Ielly, like to a windgall, not apparent, but by
feeling, growing in the midst of the pastern above the frush: it comes by
some streine, wrinch, or ouerreach, the nether joint toward the fetter lock
will be hot, and somewhat swollen: The cure is, tie him above the joint, with
a list somewhat hard, and that will cause the bladder to appear to the eye,
then lance it, and thrust out the Ielly, then take the white of an egg, and
Salt beaten together with a little towe, and bind unto it, renewing it once a
day for five or six days.

CHAP. 136. Of an ouer-reach on the heel.
TAke the white of an Egg, and Bole Armonye, mingled together with a little
flax, and renew it for four or five days.

CHAP. 137 Of the Serew or Serow.
THis is like a splint in manner of a gristle, as great as an Almond, it
grows on the fore-leg, sometime on the outside, and sometime on the inside,
in the middle of the leg. The cure, take an Onyon and pick out the core, and
put therein a spoonefull of Honnye, a quarterne of a pound of Vnslickt-lime,
and three penny worth of Verdegrease, and roste the Onyon, and bruise it, and
lay it to hot, having first cut the skin.

CHAP. 138. Of a false quarter.
THis is a rifte most commonly in the inside of the hoof, it comes by evil
paring the hoof, the Horse will halt, and the rift will bleed; the cure is, cut
so much away on that side of the shoe where the grief is, so as the rift may
be uncovered, then open the rift with a drawer, and fill it with a role of
towe, dipped in Turpentine, wax and Sheep Suet molten together, renewing it
every day til it be whole. When the rift is closed, draw him betwixt the
hair and the hoof, with a hot iron overthwart the place, whereby the hoof
will shoot all downward, and ride him with an other shoe till he be
thoroughly whole.

CHAP. 139 Of a Horse that is Hipped.
THe Horse that is hipt, is when his hip Bone is removed out of his right
place, and comes by stripe, stretch, slipping, slyding or falling; he will go
sideling, and the lower hippe will fall lower then the other, the cure is
speedilye to take of Oil debay, of Dialthea, of Neruall, of Swines grease of
each half a pound, melt them all together, stirring them continually, until
they be thoroughly mingled together, and annoint the sore place against the
hair with this ointment every day once for 15. days together, and make the
ointment to sink well into the flesh, by holding a broad bar of iron over the
place anointed, to make it enter into the skin, and if at the end of those
days it does not mend, then slitte a hole downward into the skin, an inch
beneath the hip bone, making the hole so wide as you may easily thrust in a
rowell with your finger and then with a little broad slice of iron, loosen the
skin from the flesh above the bone, and round about the same, so broad as the
rowell may lie flat and plain betwixt the skin and the flesh, which rowell
would be of soft Calfes leather, with a hole in the midst, like a ring having
a thread tied to it, to pull out when you would cleanse the hole: and if the
rowell be rowelled about with flocks fast tied on, and anointed with the
ointment of Hogs Grease and Turpentine boiled together, it will draw so much
the more: that done, taint it with a long taint of flax, dipped in turpentine
and Hogs grease made warm, and so renew it every day, for xv. days: and
before you dress him, let him be walked every day a quarter of an hour, and
as it heals, make the taint every day less the^ the other: and so soon as
he is whole, draw with a hot iron cross lines of 8. or 9. inches long right
over the hip bone, so as the rowelled place may be in the midst thereof, and
burn him no deeper, but so as the skin may look yellowe: and then charge all
that place, and over all his buttocks with this charge. Take of pitch one
pound, of Rosen one pound, of Tar half a pint boil them together, and
being good and warm, spread it with a clout tied to a stick, and clap on as
many flocks of the Horse color as will stick, and the more he may travel at
his own will, the better.

CHAP. 140 Of Stifling and hurts in the stifle.
THis is when the stifling bone is removed from his right place: but if it be
not removed, then the horse is hurt and not stifled. The cure is in all points
like unto the sholder pight, saving that the pins need not be so long because
the stifling place is not so broad, and standing in the stable, let him have a
pasterne with a ring upon his fore-leg, and thereunto fasten a cord, which
cord must go about his neck, and let it be so much strained as may bring
his forelegge forward then the other to keep the bone from starting out, but
if he be but hurt with some stripe or strain, then the bone will not stand out,
but perhaps the place may be swollen, then a moint the place with the ointment
last mentioned, in the chapter going before, every day for 15. days, and if he
mend not therewith, then rowel him with a herne rowel, and cleanse the hole
every day, by turning the rowel anointed with the said ointment.

CHAP. 141. For a wrench or strain in the Pastorne.
TAke a quart of brine, and sees it till the same arise, and then streine it,
and put to it a handful of tansey, a handful of mallows, a sawcerful of honey,
a quarter of a pound of sheep tallowe, beat them together and set them on
the fire, till they be well sodden, and then lay it hot to the taint, and sow
a cloth fast about it, and so let it rest 5. days: and if this prevail not,
wash the place and shave away the hair, saving the fetter lock, and scarify
it, and lay Cantharides to it, and heal it as the splint.

CHAP. 142 Of the dry spauin.
THis is apparently known. The cure is to wash it with warm water, and shave
off the hair so far as the swelling is, then scarifie the place, that it
bleed, and take of Cantharides a dosen, of Euforbium half a spoonefull,
break them into powder, and boil them together, with a little oil de bay,
and being boiling hot, with feathers anoint the sore, and tie his tail for
wiping it, and within an hour after, set him in the stable, and tie him so as
he lie not down that night (for rubbing the medicine) and within a day after,
anoint it every day with butter, for 6. days, then draw the sore place with a
hot iron, then take a sharp iron like a bodkin, somewhat bowing at the point,
and thrust it in at the nether end of the middle line, and so upward betwixt
the skin and the flesh, an inch and a half, and then taint it with turpentine
and hogs grease molten together, and made warm, renewing it every day once, the
space of 9. days: but remember that immediately after his burning, you take up
the master vein, which must be done in this manner: cast the Horse upon some
straw, then having found the vein, mark well that part of the skin which
covers it, and pull that aside from the vein with your left thumb, to the
intent you may slit it with a rasor, without touching the vein, and cut no
deeper then through the skin, and that longest wise, the vein goes and not
above an inch, then will the skin return again to the place over the vein,
then with a cornet uncover the vein, and make it bare, and being bare thrust
the cornet underneath it, and raise it up, and put a shooemakers thread
underneath, somewhat higher then the cornet, then the Cornet standing so still,
slit the vein longwaies, that it may bleed, and having bled somewhat from
above, then knit it with a sure knot somewhat above the slit, suffering it to
bleed only from beneath, a great quantity, then knit up the vein also
beneath the slit, with a sure knot, then betwixt these two knots cut the vein
a sunder, where it was slit, and fill the hole with Salt, then lay on this
charge: take half a pound of pitch, a quarter of a pound of Rosin, and a
quarter of a pint of Tar, boil them together, and being warm, anoint all
the inside of the joint, and clap on flocks of the horses color, and turn him
to Grass, if it may be till he be perfect whole, and the hair grown
again.

For the same.
CVt the skin over the veins, as aforesaid, and slit the vein, and cut it as
aforesaid, then where the spauen is highest, with a small Chisell the breadth
of a penye, strike off the quantity of an Almond, and no more, then take two
penny weight of Verdigrease, another of Naruill beat them small, and put it to
the spauen, and three days after wash the corsey with bark water or Vinegar:
then take Colman and Dyaclum upon a linen cloth, and lay it to the Spauen
every day, and for 7. days after a new plaster, then draw it with a hot iron,
as aforesaid, and also a charge and flocks as is before recited.

You must always observe in all your cures, that you never begin to cure any
soarance whatsoever, but when the Horse has been at long rest without labor,
otherwise it will be most painful, and peradventure make him complain ever
after, and therefore whenever you see any soarance begin in any part of his
body, of what age soever, take it away so soon as you can, and after he has
rested and is at quiet, and does not complain thereof, but never after present
travel, for then he is full of grie fetherwith, the which if it should be then
done, may be his utter spoil.

CHAP. 144. Of the wet or blood spauin
THis is commonly known, and some call it the thorough Spauin: it is fed by a
thin fluxible humor, by the master vein. The cure is to shave off the hair,
and to take up the vein in every part, as I have described in the cure of the
bone spauin, and then to cut the vein asunder, and draw it with a hot iron,
and to charge it, and to put on flocks, as I there described, and it will
perfectly heal and cure it, for I have proved it certain.

CHAP. 145. Of the Curb.
THis is commonly known. The cure is, take of wine lees a pint, a porrenger
full of wheatflower, of commin half an ounce, and stir them well together,
and being made warm, charge the sore place therewith, renewing it every day
once, the space of 3. or 4. days, and when the swelling is almost gone, then
draw it with a hot iron, and cover the burning with pitch and rosen molten
together, and laid on warm, and clap on flocks of his own color, and let
him rest, and come in no water 12. days.

For the same.
Take an iron and make it red hot, and hold it against the sore as nigh as you
may, but touch not the fore, and when it is warm, then take a Fleame and wet
him 6. or 7. places full of Neruill, then take a spoonefull of salt, and a
penny weight of verdigrease, and the white of an egg, and put all these
together, and take a little flax and wet it therein, and lay it to the sore.

CHAP. 146. Of the pains or cratches.
THis is a fretting matterish water, bred in the pastornes of the hinder legs,
sometime by foul keeping, but principally of liquid and thin humors resorting
to the joint, whereby the legs will be swollen, hot and scabby: The cure is to
wash the pastornes with beer and butter, which being dry, clip away all the
hair saving the fetterlocke, then take of turpentine, hogs grease, and honey,
of like quantity, mingle them in a pot, and put thereunto a little Bole Armony,
the yolks of two Eggs, and as much wheat flower as will thicken them, then
with a slice, lay it on a cloth, make a plaster to go round about the
pastorne, and bind it fast, renewing it every day, let him not come in any wet,
but stand still: and some will wash it only in Gun powder and vinegar.

For the same.
Make this ointment and keep it in the stable to serve at all times. Take 1
pound of Hogs grease, 1. penny worth of verdigrease, 2. ounces of the best
mustard, half a pound of oil de bay, a quarter of a pound of Naruill, half a
pound of honey, half a pound of English wax, 1. ounce of Arsenicke, 2. ounces
of red lead, half a pint of vinegar, boil all these together, and make an
ointment of it, and being bare from hair, lay this to it very hot: and this
will serve for kibed heels and such like.

CHAP. 147. Of windegalles.
THis grief every man knows. The cure is, wash the places with warm water,
and shave off the hair, then draw it with a hot iron, in this manner, ^ that
done, slit the middle line which passes right down through the windegall with
a sharp knife, beginning beneath and so upward, half an inch, and thrust the
ielly out, then take pitch and rosen molten together and laid on hot, and put
flocks upon it.

CHAP. 148. Of the Ringbone.
THis is a gristle growing about the cronet of the hoof. The cure is to fire
the sore with right lines from the pastorne to the coffin of the hoone, in this
manner, and let the edge of the drawing iron be as thick as the back of a big
knife, and burn it so deep as the skin may look yellow, then cover it with
pitch and rosen molten together, and lay thereon flocks of the Horses color:
some will eat it away with corosiues, as the splent.

CHAP. 149 Of the crown scab.
THis is a filthy stinking scab, growing about the cronets of the hooues: the
hair will stare like hogs bristles, and be always mattering, anoint it when
the hair is shaven away, with the ointment for the pains, and keep it from
wet.

CHAP. 150. Of the Quitterbone.
THis is a breaking out on the top of the cronet of the hooue, commonly on the
inside, and comes by pricking or grauelling, it will break out with matter,
or a little deep hole like a thistle. The cure, to burn it about with a hot
iron, then take of Arsenicke the quantity of a bean, beaten into fine powder,
put it into the bottom of the hole with a quil, and stop the mouth of the hole
close with towe, and bind it so that the Horse may not come at it with his
mouth, and so let it rest that day, and the next day if the hole look black,
it is a good sign, then taint the hole with hogs grease, and turpentine molten
hot together with a taint of towe, and cover it with a bolster of towe, dipped in
that ointment, continuing so til you have gotten out the core, and then see
whether the loose gristle in the bottom be uncovered, and feel with your
finger or a quill if you be nigh it; and if you be, raise it with a crooked
instrument, and pull it out with a pair of nippers, and then taint it with the
said ointment, and after take honey and verdigrease boild together till it look
red, and heal it therewith, laid upon towe, and take heed it heal not too
soon, or close up suddenly.

CHAP. 151. Of Graueling.
THe cure is to pare his hooue, and get out the gravel, then stop him with
turpentine and hogs grease, molten hot and stopped with towe, and beware he
come not out of the stable till he be well.

Be sure that you have searched and made the foot very clean, then take an
ounce of virgin wax a quarter of an ounce of Rosen, aquarter of an ounce of
Deeres suet, half an ounce of Bores grease, a head of Sinigreene, bruise them
all in a mortar, and set it over the fire to melt, then lay it hot thereunto
and it will help him.

CHAP. 152. Of Surbaiting.
The cure is, take off his shoes, and make his feet very clean, but pare no
hooue away, then tacke a hollow shoe on, then take half a pound of the sword
of bacon, a quarter of a pound of white soap a handful of burnet, a handful
of bay leaves, and 4. or 5. branches of herb grace, stamp them well and fry
them, and lay them to the feet so hot as ye may, both under and over the
foot, and keep him dry, renewing 4. or 5. times.

CHAP: 153. Of the prick in a Horse soote with a nail or otherwise.
THe cure is, cut the mouth of the hole, where the prick is, as broad as a two
penny piece, and search it clean, for else it is very dangerous; take a handful
of red nettles, and beat them in a mortar, put thereunto a spoonefull of
redvinegar, and a spoonefull of black soap, and 3. spoonefulls of bores gre
ase or salt bacon, beat them altogether and make a salve thereof, and thrust
as much into the sore thereof as you can, and stop it for falling out, and let
it tae knower, and it shall neuorrot further. Some will pour in hothogs
greaseand turpentine, and a taint of flax, and so cure it, but if it begin to
break out at the top of the cronet, then take half a quarterne of Bole
Armony, as much bean flower, and two eggs, and make a plaster of towe, and
bind it upon the cronet, and keep him dry, and the hole very open in the
foot, till he be well, and renew the plaster every two days, till it be
whole, and if after it should happen a piece of flesh like a fig to grow in the
bottom of the foot, pare it away with a hot iron, and lay hogs grease and
turpentine to it, to heal it.

CHAP. 154. Of the retreat or cloying the foot, with a prick of a nail.
THe cure is, to take turpentine, wax, and sheeps fuet, moulten together, and
pour into it: or the medicine beforeprescribed.

CHAP. 155 Of loosening the hoof.
THis grief if it be loose round about the hoof, then it comes by
foundring, if it be in part, then by some other anguish; if it come by
foundring, then it will first break in the forepart of the cronet, against the
toe, because the humor does descend right toward the toe, but if of a channel
nail or prick, then the hoof will loosen equally round, but if other hurts,
then right above the place, that is offended, which would be well observed of
the Farryar; But of what cause soever, be careful to keep open the hole in
the bottom of the foot, and restrain it above with the restrictiue plaster
of Bole Armony, beane-flower, and eggs, mentioned in the cure of the prick in
the foot: you may take three spoonefulls of Tar, a quarter of a pound of
Rosen, a handful of Tansey, a handful of Rue, a handful of Mints, and as
much of Southern-wood, beat them all together with a pound of Butter, and one
pennyworth of Virgins wax, and so make a plaster, and bind it to for seven
days, and it will be whole.

CHAP. 156. Of casting the hoof.
THe cure is, take of Turpentine one pound, of Tar half a pint, of
unwrought wax half a pound of sheep suet half a pound, of sallet oil
half a pint; boil all these together, until they be thoroughly incorporated;
make a boot of leather with a strong soale, sit for the Horse foot, to be
buckled about the pastern, then take a good quantity of flax or towe, and lay
this salve upon it to cover the foot, so as the boot may not any ways grieve
him, renewing it every day until it be whole: then let him stand in the stable
upon a bed of cowdung and snailes beaten together, which will increase the same
for 15. days, and then put him to grass. This receited ointment would be
always used to anoint the hooues.

CHAP. 157. Of the hooue bound.
THis is a shrinking together of the whole coffin of the hooue, whereby the
tuell of the foot, which is enclosed in the same, is so pinched, that the
Horse is very lame therewith, and especially after travel; and if you knock
them, they will sound as an empty bottle: and if both feet be not bound, you
shall apparently see the hooue that is bound to be less then the other. This
comes by suffering the feet to remain dry after great travel: and it
commonly comes to a Iennet or Ass hooue, because it is deep of hooue, but
not to the flat hooue, for that only wrinckleth and waxes brittle, and by
reason of the breadth and shallowness of hooue it cannot enclose the tuell of
the foot, to strengthen it, and yet it is the most worst hooue. The cure is
to open the feet in the quarters very much, so as you may well lay your
thumb betwixt the frush of the foot and the end of the coffin where it
principally binds, then raise both the quarters of the hoof, with a drawer
from the Cronet, unto the sole of the foot, so deep as you see the dew come
forth, and also two rases of each side, then open the foot within, and let him
blood in the toes, and if it be old, the blood will be as cold almost as
water, for that it has not bin fed with blood, wherein the vital spirit is,
and that is the cause of the coldness, whereby it is apparent, that the hoof
has not prospered, but starued, for you shall see the frush and all the sole of
the foot shrunk up and starued, then take away the sole of the foot, and
stop it with Nettles and salt bruised together gently, not over hard, renewing
it once a day for 9. days, and be sure every day twice, thoroughlye to
anoint the cronet of the hoof, with the ointment prescribed for casting the
hoof, and after the 9. days end, let his feet be stopped with Branne and
Hog's Grease boiled together, and bind to as hot as may be but still annoint
the hoof, and when you put him to grass, let him not wear any shoes, but put
him in a Marsh or medowe, deep of grass, whereby his feet will be always
wette, and so enlarged again: some ignorantlye call this dry foundering, when
as all foundering in that foot comes by descending of humors to the feet,
and this is clean contrary, and my experience has cured horses that have
been hoofe-bound four or five years, by this practice, which comes as much
by drawning blood in the toe of the foot, contiuually knocking the same until
you find warm blood to come forth.

CHAP. 158. Of the running of the frush.
THe cure is, pare away the corrupt places, until you see it raw, and where
the issue is, then take a handful of soote, and as much Salt, and the white of
three eggs, and beat them together, and having made the shoe hollow, and
tacked on, stop the feet therewith very hard, and renew it every day for
7. days, and let not the horse touch any wet, and when he is whole, be sure
after travel to keep that foot clean from gravel.

CHAP. 159 Of the Leprosy or universal Manginesse.
THe Horse that is infected heerewith will be full of Scabbes, rawenesse,
scuruye, and continual scratching. The cure is, first to let him blood the
first day on one side of the neck, and give him a quart of new milk, and
half a handful of the finest powder of brimstone, thoroughly stirred together,
for that will expel the mange, and in all his prouender and mashes continually
for 5. or 6. days give him brimstone, and in hot grains, but if he will not
eat it, give it him with milk, new ale or wort: then the next day let him
blood on the other side of the neck, at each time a good quantity. Within 2.
days after let him blood in the breast veins; within 2. days after in the
flank veins; within 2. days after under the tail, so as he becomes weak
therewith: keep his blood in a pale, then sees chamber-ly and bay salt
together, and let it be strong of the salt, then take a quantity of that blood
and stir them together, that the same be thick, then let him be rubbed all
over with a pease wispe: then when the same is hot, rub him in every part of
his body therewith: and let it dry upon him as much as may be, and the next day
more of the same upon the old, that it may be as it were plaistred with the
same, the which being done in the sun, will casely be performed. After the
same has rested upon him two days, take bucke-Lye, and black soap, being
very warm, and wash all his body clean: then give him a quart of sack, and
half a pint of the best treacle to drink, and anoint his body with this
ointment in every place. Take of Lamp oil a quart, fine powder of brimstone a
pint, 2. pound of black soap, a pint of tar, a pint of barrowes grease, and
so much 5 foot of the chimney, as will thicken it, compound them well together,
anoint him all over with the same, being very hot, and so let him rest till it
fall off from him, then when it is all gone, wash him clean with soap suds,
and thoroughly dry him, and then cloth him and put him into a sweat, and after
dry him and keep him warm and he will be perfect, and remember within one
month after let him blood a pottell at least, and it will bring him to
perfection of body, and health, with clean and sweet diet, and moderate
labor: and if any place be raw, throw thereuppon the powder of brimstone
only, and it will dry it and heal it, and then give him a purging drink, and
put him to grass so soon as you may.

CHAP. 160. Of the sarcyn.
THis ulcer is not unknown to any that have enjoyed Horses, and yet unknown
almost to all; I mean the true cause of the disease, and the cure: some say it
is a corruption of blood, some an outward hurt, as of spur galling, biting of
ticks, hogs lice or such like, some say an infirmity bred in the breast near
the heart, and in the side vessels or cod near to the stones, of evil humors
congealed together, which after disperse themselves into the thighs, and
sometimes into the head, and do send forth watery humors into the nostrils,
and then it is called the running Farcin. I have often said if the true cause
of a disease be known, the disease it self is easily cured. If any man of
understanding think that by healing the place grieved, that the same is
always sound and whole, he is deceived: for many times the sudden healing or
curing kills the body or makes that part which seems to be healed, to
become of little use for the help of the body: for the mange, the leprosy,
and this disease of farcin, are in a Horse especially most pernicious, for
often times it falls out that many Horses infected therewith, though they
live, and the disease seems to be cured yet are of small or no use: and as I
have elsewhere said, that as God created Adam Lord of all his creatures, to
rule, govern, preserve, and have the use of his creatures, the same right is
disce^ded upon us his children, so as all our government over his creatures,
must be according to the nature of man, governed and prescribed by reason,
because all creatures are deprived of reason, but only man: whereby it may be
probably coniectured, that where man does govern, there, and not elsewhere,
reason does govern, and then reason being the bounds and limitation of
mediocrity, we are to infer, that mediocrity is the center of all virtue, and
the same ought to be used in all the actions of man. Let us then consider of
the use and practice of this dise ase: does not every man's experience and his
own understanding (being his witness) tell him, that when a young or old Horse
that has long rested, being taken up from grass, that he is full and choked
as it were with abundance of humors? and does he think that when travel
disperseth those humors, as it will, that these humors do not fly into the air,
but remain in the several parts of the body, and does he think that the
greatness of humors being an enemy to nature, but that nature would expel them
if she could, or else keep them from the heart, the fountain of her life, and
so leave them to creep out of the body in some of the outward parts thereof?
or otherwise, if they cannot get out better to destroy that member then the
whole body? and does not the continual increase of humors, in the end by
disorder, become rulers and predominate over nature, so as nature is enforced
by their violence to yield her self to destruction? and does not most men ride
their Horses upon a full stomach, and cause nature against her will to digest
the same unnaturally, whereof many imperfect humors are bred? and does not most
men when their Horses stand in the stable and rest, give him continually more
then he can digest, which also breeds raw supersluous humors? and does not
most men feed them in the stable with new, raw, and green food, which
naturally breeds obstructions, and raw and filthy humors? and do not most men
when their Horses are in the stable, suffer them to rest and feed full without
moderate exercise? and do not most men when they travel, their Horse being
very hot, suffer them to drink their fill? and do not mostmen when their
horses come into the Inn very hot, the stomach the^ being most weak, suffer
them then to eat, before nature be able to digest? How then shall I express
the true cause of diseases, when all these abuses breed infinite causes of
disease, without which no cure can perfectly be effected, yet where man cannot
truly define, Reason leaves him probaly to conjecture: and therefore I
conjecture the cause of this disease to grow either from abundance of bad
humors, which corrupt the blood, or from great distemperature of the blood, by
a violent heat into a sudden cold, so as I have gathered it only to the
corruption of the blood, for otherwise I do not think that the bite of a
Horse or a lowse could so poison the whole body, as to become loathsome to
behold: and therefore to the cure: first let him blood on both sides of the
neck, 3. quarts at least, for it is most certain that the liver which is the
fountain of blood is corrupted, and so sends the same into every part of the
body, then give him this drink; take a gallon of fair water, put into it a
good handful of Rue, a good spoonefull of Hempseed, and a handful of the inner
rine of green elder, bruise them in a mortar together, and sees it till half
be consumed, and being cold, give it him to drink: evermore continue to let
him blood in that vein which is nighest to the sore place, a great quantity,
let his diet be thin, but very clean and sweet, viz. wheat straw, and dried
sweet oats, a few at a time, then take this approved medicine following,
which although the disease be never so foul, it will undoubtedly cure it.

Take of herb grace a handful, of Fetherfew a handful, of Chickweed of the
house a handful, of Kiks wood a handful, of herb Robert a handful, keep the
residue thereof in a pipkin close covered in the earth, stop the mouth thereof
close with herb grace and dock-leaues, and a green turffe laid upon it, that
no air come in, and every third day vnty his ears, and dress it with new,
and so continue it till all the farcin be dead; for undoubtedly at 3. or 4.
dressings it will kill it: wash all the herbs so clean as no dirt or filth be
on them: boil chamberlye and bay salt, with a little copporas and strong
nettles, to wash the sores if need be. But beware of burning them, either with
fire orother corosiue, for although it may kill the ulcer, yet being dispersed,
it will burn and scortch the Horse skin, for burning does purse the skin, and
makes it run together, so as the Horse will never after prosper. I would have
you get cases of leather; fastened to a head stall, made hollow like the shape
of a horse ears, to lace or buckle, that you hurt not his ears, or make them
laut eared, which thing the Sadlers will help you herein, for many times by
long binding, the ears are spoiled, so as they must be cut off.

After that you see the filthy ulcer killed and dead, yet you must know that
the blood is still putrifyed and corrupted, therefore every month at least let
him blood, but always in several places, and when you see the blood fine and
pure, then give him some good scouring drink, a quart of white wine, a quarter
of an ounce of ruebarb, laid in it in steep, in very thin slices all a night,
one ounce and a half of Alloes in powder dissolved therein, half an ounce of
Agaricke, an ounce of sense steeped in the wine al night, 3. races of Ginger
sliced and laid also in steep all night, and two ounces of sirrop of Roses,
but the Rubarbe, Senee and Ginger, take out of the wine but before you put in
the other simples, and then make it blood warm, and give it the Horse, and so
let him rest all that day, giving him nothing but Wheate-straw at night, and
the next day following give him a pottle of sweet strong worte, and a quarter
of a pint of Treacle, and then keep him warm and give him wheat-straw, and
good plenty of sweet Oats. After all this wash all his body very clean with
Buck-lye, and black-sope, and after cloth him warm, and give him a swet, and
he will remain a perfect horse, and hereof have no doubt.

CHAP: 161. Of the Cancker.
THis Ulcer likewise grows from the causes before said. The cure is, let him
blud abou^dantly in the veins that be next the sore, then take of Alu^ 1.
pound, of green Coporas 1. pound, of white coporas a quarterne, and a good
handful of Salt, boil them together in fair running water from a pottle to a
quart, this water being warm, put part thereof into a dish, and with a coult
wash the same till it begin to bleed, and let it dry in, then take of
black-sope 1. pound, and of Quicksilver half an ounce, and incorporate them
till the quicksilver be not seen, and always after you have washed the same
with a slice, cover the Ulcer with this medicine till it be whole, but be sure
still to let blood about the Ulcer, for many days together, and when it is
killed, then cast upon it the powder of vnslickt lime, or of brimstone.

CHAP. 162 Of the Fistula.
THis is a filthy Ulcer also, bred from some Ulcer not thoroghly cured. The
cure is to search the depth thereof, with a quill, or with some other
instrument of lead, for unless you find the bottom it is hard to cure, and
having found the bottom, if it be in place where you may boldlye cut with a
Rasor, make a slit against the bottom so wide as you may thrust in your finger,
to feel if any bone or gristle be perished, or spungie, or loose flesh, which
must be gotten out, then boil a quarterne of honny and an ounce of Verdegrease
in powder, stirring it continually until it look red, then taint therewith
and bolster it with flax that it get not out, but if the place be where the
taint cannot be conuenientlye kept in, fasten on each end of the hole a
Shoomakers thread over the bolster, to keep the taint in, renewing it every day
until it leave mattering, and make the taint lesser and lesser, and sprinckle
thereon a little slickt lime. But if you cannot come to taint it to the
bottom, then take strong lie, honnye, Roche Alum, Mercury, and sees them
together, and apply it to the bottom of the Fistula If the Fistula be in the
head, take the juice of Howselike, and dipp a lock of wool in it, and put the
same in his ears, and use it every day till it be whole.

CHAP. 163. Of a spungie wart.
THe cure is, if it be long enough, tie a thread about it very hard, and it
will eat it off, or else take it off with a hott iron.

CHAP. 164. Of Wounds.
THe cure is, take of Turpentine, of Mel Rosatum, of oil of Roses, of each a
quarterne, and a little unwrought wax, and melt them together, stirring them
continually, and so use it with taint or role, as occasion shall be.

CHAP. 165. Of pulling out shiuers or Thorns, and of swelling.
THe cure is to pull it out if it may be seen, but if it swell, and cannot,
then take wormwood, Paretorie, Bears foot, Hogs grease and honny, boil them
together, and being hot, make a plaster; it is excellent for any swelling,
so also is Wine-lees, Wheate-flower, and commen boiled together, which when it
is at a head, Lance it.

CHAP. 166 Of Sinews out or bruised.
TAke of Tar, Beane-flower, and oil of Roses, and lay it hot to the place:
so are Worms and Sallet Oil fried together: so is the Ointment of worms,
which you may have at the Pothecaries.

CHAP. 167. Of killing the fire either in burning or shot.
TAke Varnish or Oil and Water, beaten together, and annoint the place with a
feather.

CHAP. 168. Of Bones out of Joint.
THe cure is, to bind all the forelegs together, and to cast him on his
back, and then to hoyse him from the ground with his heels upward, so shall
the weight of his body cause the joint to shoot in again in his right place.

CHAP. 169. Of a Horse that stumbleth.
THis is called the cords: the cords is a sinewe that breeds amongst the
Sinews, the one end comes down to the Shackle vein, and so up thorough the
leg, and goes over the inner side of the knee, and so over the shoulder, and
so along the neck by the Wesant, and it goes over the temples, under his eye,
down over the snowt, betwixt both the nostrils and the gristle, there knit the
length of an Almond, take a sharp knife and cut a slit even at the top of his
nose, just with the point of the gristle, open the slit, and you shall perceive
a white string, take it up with a bores toth, or a Bucks horn that is crooked,
or some crooked bodkin^ and twine it about strait, and cut it a sunder, you
may twine it so much as you may rear his foot from the ground, then stitch up
the slit, and annoint it with butter, and the Horse doubtless shall be cured.

CHAP. 170 Of curing a hurt.
TAke wax, Turpentine, rosen, and Hogs grease of like quantity, and half so
much Tar as any one of the other simples, melt and boil them together, and
keep it ready for any accident.

CHAP. 171. Of repayring a broaken hoof to make it grow.
TAke of Garlic heads, 7. ounces, of herb grace three handfuls, of Allom
beaten and sifted 7. ounces, of Barrowes grease that is old 2. pound, mingle
all these with a handful of Asses dung, and boil them together, and annoint
the hoofes there with.

CHAP. 172. Of a horse that cannot piss.
TAke a pint of white Vinegar, half a pound of Simgreene, bruise it small, and
wring out the juice, take a handful of Fennel, a handful of Foxe-gloues
leaves, or the flowers: 2. ounces of Gromel seed, and half a pint of sweet
honey, stamp them well together and strain them into the Vinegar, let him
stand without meat and drink 24. hours.

CHAP. 173. Of sretting in the Guts.
TAke in the morning a quart of good Ale, 4. ounces of Fenegreek, 7, ounces of
Bayberries, as much long pepper, an ounce of Ginger, two handfuls of
Watercresses, a handful of Sage, another of Mints, beat them altogether in
the Ale, and sees them in the Ale, then streine it, and give it him
blud-warme, rope all his legs, and tie him that he lie not down, and put him
into a sweat, and keep him warm, and drink no cold water for three days
after, and give him dried beans and Oats for his prouender.

CHAP. 174. Of the dangerous galling of a Horse.
TAke a pottle of vergis, two pennyworth of green coporas, boil it to a pint
and a half, wash and search the hole there with, and fill the hole with red
lead so let it remain three days untouched, then wash it with the same, fill
it again with red lead, this will heal it, though it be galde to the body.

CHAP. 175. Of sinking a Thistula or windegall.
FIrst seere the Thistula, then take Rosen, sheep tallowe and Brimstone, and
boil them together, lay it on hot with a cloth, and it will sink down.

For the windegall, slit out the ielly; and lay it not so hot on, and it will
keep the same clean.

CHAP. 176. Of a Blister.
TAke the juice of ground Iuy, so much Brimstone, a quantity of Tar, and so
much Allome, and lay it to the blister.

CHAP. 177. Of the pain in the head.
TAke a pint of malmesey, five new laid eggs, a head of bruised Garlic,
small Pepper, Sinnamon, and Nutmegges, beaten sine and give it him to drink,
three days together, and fast six hours after.

CHAP. 178. Of a Farcin or sudden breaking out in any part of the body, to stay
it, and fill it.
TAke this ointment, and always have it ready in your stable: three ounces of
quick silver, put it into a bladder, and two spoonefulls of the juice of
Oringes and Lemons, shake them together, then take a pound of fresh hogs
grease, and of vergis one ounce, beat them all in a wooden dish, and work
them thoroughly together, then take a pound of fresh Hogs grease, and anoint
the same therewith, and slit the same if need be, then wash it, and then put
into his ears, the juice of Rugweede, and he will be perfect.

Of a wrinch in the Fetterlocke, or other joint that is suddenly done. Chap.
179.
TAke of Naruile, and black-sope, boil them together a little on the fire, and
anoint it therewith.

Of a Windegall that it shall not grow again. Chapter 180.
WHen you have cut the skin, take a spoonful of Oil de bay 1. spoonful of
Turpentine, one penny worth of Verdegrease, the white of an egg, and a quarter
of an ounce of red lead, boil them together to a salve and lay the same to the
place.

Of the stone in a Horse and Cholicke. Chap. 181
TAke a pint of white wine, half a pint of burseed, and beat them small, two
ounces of parselyseed, half a handful of I soap, half an ounce of
black-sope, half a handful of unset leckes, and half a handful of water
Cresses, mingle them together, and stamp them and strein them, but put the
burseed and parcely seed to it after it is streined, and then warm it, and
give it him to drink.

Of a horse that pisseth blood. chap. 182.
TAke Barley, and sees it in the juice of Gomfollye, and give him the barley to
eat, and the juice to drink.

Of Ripening an impostume. Chap. 183.
TAke Mallow roots, and Lilly roots, and bruise them, and put unto them
Hog's Grease, and lyn-seede meal, and plaster wise lay it to.

To bring hair a gain. Chap. 184.
TAke the dung of Goats, some honey and Alum, and the blood of a Hog, boil
them together, and being hot rub the place therewith.

To make a white mark on a horse. Chap. 185.
TAke a Tile and burn it to powder, take dasie roots, and the roots of a white
bryer, of each a like, dry them, and make powder thereof, then shave the place
that you will have white, rub it very much with the powder, then wash the place
with this water: take a quantity of Hony-suckle-flowers, and a quantity of
honey, and the water that Moles have been sodde in, and wash the place, and rub
it very sore therewith: do this five days, and keep him from all wind, and
it will be white.

To make a horse he shall not neigh. Chap, 186.
TIe a woollen list about the midst of his tongue and he shall not ney so
long as it remains.

To make a horse follow his Master. Chap. 186.
TAke one pound of Otmell, a quarter of a pound of honny, and half a pound of
Lumary, and make a bag thereof, and bear it about you next your skin, and
labor therewith till you sweat, and wipe the swet with the bag, and keep the
Horse a day and night fasting, and give it him to eat, and also use to give
him meal and branne, and he will follow you.

Lastly observe in all cures, that the only sure way is to give fire to the
wood, if possibly you may without danger of the sinews, and beware that you do
not cure but when the horse has rested, and that it be not done when he is in
any grief or pain, but in cases of necessity. I had once purposed to have
set out the medicines of all cures as they are used in most christian Nations,
but time would not permit, and therefore I refer it as God shall give life and
leisure. In the mean time, assure thy self if thou will read this tract at
advisedly, temperately, and with deliberation, thou shall find sufficient for
thy full instruction.

The Epilogue.
IT appears by this treatise, that the perfection of all generation,
creation, preservation, and long life of horses consists wholye in the true
composition of the temperature of the four first qualities, heat cold,
moist, and dry, and is the truest and most proper continet cause thereof, and
therefore the true knowledge thereof (being the only root from which all
Horsemanship springs) is of all knowledge most to be desired, and attained,
and is (of the learned) truly and rightly termed Nature, for that according
to the quallity thereof, every horse works, and not according to Art, for
Art is but a hand maid to nature, appointed to deliver precepts to direct the
manner of the action most pleasing, and practice to act and perform the same,
through long use with ease and facility, as appears in many places of this
Tractat: and because those, whose besome the hand of heaven has richly
furnished with all virtues heerin, and to who^ of right the seat of judgment
(in the true knowledge of horsemanship) apperteineth, and from whom the heroical
spirits and generous issue of this kingdom, are to receive instruction, have
the edge of their industry clean abated by force of pleasure and security, and
thereby lately fallen into a deep slu^ber, or rather into a deadly sleep of
silence, whereby many indau^ted corages and choice wits of this kingdom, have
thought nature to have dealt nigardly, and to have made her staple and
storehouse of horsemen and horses, only within other Nations, and to have cut
all trade and traffic with little England, and that the true knowledge of
Horsemanship has not been native therein, but only in foreign Nations, and
this English Nation to have been in all ages mortallye wounded with the
strangers Goade. My self (envying none, nor detracting any) have adventured by
the true knowledge of natural causes, to undermine the strongest holds of al
Foreign force, whose foundations are only set upon the deceivable sands of
erronius practice: and for that purpose have couched this Aphorism or
principle of the true knowledge of horsemanship, in the circuit of a small
Period, although the knowledge thereof comprehends sufficient to fill great
volumes. I do presume of all indifferent and equal judgments, that this my
labor shall never be held vainglory, or needelesse curiosity, but with such
as shall not peruse these my labors, with them, inauditi tanquam nocentes
pereunt, et hic baculum fixi, and as to those who have not yet learned either
to speak or do well, I leave them this farewell.

Face vel tace.
FJNIS

