TWO HOMILIES CONCERNING the means how to resolve the controversies of this
time.

First written in French, by Ph. Mornay, and now translated into English.

AT OXFORD, Printed by Joseph Barnet 1612.

To the Reader.
THou have here (gentle Reader) two homilies (for so the author himself,
whosoever he be, entitleth them) written first in French, and now for thine
understanding translated into English. Two homilies indeed very necessary in
these times, not only for the authors countrymen and such like, who live
amongst open Papists, but also for us of England, amongst whom it is to be
feared too too many Papists do lurk. The author by his writing shows himself
to be a Frenchman, and that a true, religious, and zealous Protestant, a
French man he may be thought to be because he writs in french: as also the same
may be gathered out of his second homily wherein in some two or three places he
speaks according to the discipline of the reformed French P. 84. and 134.
Churches, which have no Bishops over them, and wherein no clergy man has any
temporal jurisdiction. A Protestant he is, for how would he else have thus
written against the errors of the Romish church? and that a true, religious
and zealous one; for how could he else have written them with such
earnestnes, and soundnes of doctrine? The homelies themselves need not be
commended unto thee; they will commend themselves sufficiently, if thou will
but take the pains to read the^ over advisedly. Farewell.

HVNC AVDITE Matthew. 17. v. 5.
YOU Christians, that are perplexed in your minds amidst the controversies of
this time, hovering between the choice of that which is Divine, and that which
is humane, of that which is Authentical, and that which is Apocryphal, of that
which is true and that which seems to be true, two only words out of the holy
Gospel are able to put you out of doubt, and to cause you to see the
difference between them. And behold, here is one of them for you; Hunc au
dite, Hear him. Him, and no other. Our Lord Jesus had now taken apart three
of his disciples, Peter, James, and John, and brought the^ up into an high
mountain. There had he been transfigured before them, his face shining as the
Sun, his clothes being beco^e as white as snow. which in this baseness were as
pledges of his future glory, of that glory, which he took again, when it
pleased him, and which he had never put away. There were Moses and Elias seen
by his disciples talking with him Moses and the Prophets: as in a manner giving
up there charge into his hands. his indeed which was the mark and the end, the
perfection and accomplishme^t both of the law and the Prophets. Here Peter
comes in, as it were, in opposition, Master it is good for us to be here. Being
already ravished and drunken with the show of this glory, and these spiritual
delights. Let us make here three Tabernacles, one for thee, and one for Moses,
and one for Elias. And we doubt not, but in this first he reserved a room for
himself and his fellow-disciples. But as he spoke, and knew not, says both S.
Mark and S. Luke, what he said, Mar. 9. v. 6 Luc. 9.
God from heaven directed him. Out of a cloud, that shadowed them, came a voice
saying, This is that my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased, Hear him.
No longer Moses, no longer Elias: the old things are come to an end; I bring
you new tidings, good new tidings. There is here no longer any need of
Tabernacles or that we should pass from one figure to another. She has from
henceforth a place where she may rest. She is to be built on the firm ground.
Will thou Peter, will ye, my disciples, one day enjoy this glory, and possess
eternally that which you have seen as in a glimpse, behold here the means,
the only means, to wit, my welbeloved, your happiness, and all my delight:
But, Hear him. For it is he of whom Moses, the same which you have scene
talking with him, which did here come to render homage unto him for the whole
law, told you heretofore very near two thousand years ago. (See how the Lord
fulfilleth his sayings in their due time, Deuteronomy. 18.1.18.
) The Lord said unto me, I will raise them up a Prophet from amongst their
brethren, like unto thee, and will put my words in his mouth, and he shall
speak unto them all that I shall command him: And whosoever will not harken
unto my words, which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. It
is the^ profit to hear him, and danger to turn the ear from him. It is he
of whom I spoke unto you by Esaias my Prophet, Esaias, 42. v 1.
Behold my servant, he is mine elect, I have put my spirit upon him. And do
not stand upon his lowness, or his humiliation, in that he will not cause his
voice to be heard in the street, nor will not make much noise. For so much the
rather ought you to harken unto him; whatsoever you see him to be, yet he shall
bring forth judgment in truth. And is not that it which you ought to look for
in these days? He shall not fail nor be discouraged, Verse, 4.
til he have set judgment in the earth: till he have instructed the whole
world. Finally, it is he of whom John the Baptist, that Elias which you looked
for, which you have seen, spoke unto you in these days: he being not the
word made flesh, unto the which you ought at this time to harke^, but the
voice which cries in the wilderness, the forerunner of this word. Not that
light which lights every man that comes into the world, but a lamp that
bears witness of that light. This is he of whom I said, he that comes
after me was better the^ I: oh. 1.15.
for he was before me. Before me, in as much as he is the everlasting word.
After me, in as much as he is the word made flesh. V. 16.
Of his fullness have al we received, Moses, Elias, all the Prophets. V. 17
For the law was given by Moses; the law that entertained us with figures, us
every one bound over also to sin, and therefore to death; Grace and truth is
come unto you by Jesus Christ. And again therefore, Hear him: the rather
truly, because no man has seen God at any time. No man can tell you any thing
concerning divine matters, concerning things that appertain to your salvation,
but by him: But the only son, more then any other, and after another manner.
For as much as he is from everlasting in the bosom of the father. Prove. 8.
From everlasting and before all ages. That eternal wisdom which was with him
in the creation of all things, and in the which he took his delight. She which
cried so long ago, Give ear, for the opening of my lips shall teach thing,
that be right, Prove 8. v. 6 and 7.
my mouth shall speak the truth. But at this time condescending to our
weakness, made bone of your bones speaks unto you mouth to mouth And
therefore the Lord breaking through the thick cloud of all these precedent
witnesses spoke thus unto us, (And who will not give heed unto this voice?)
Hear it. Hear him. The Lord then will have his son harkened unto: Jesus
our Lord; his well beloved son, harkened unto, as being the teacher of
salvation, but farther, let us see by whom. It is said, that he had taken
apart, Peter, John, and James, the cheifest among the Apostles, for to make
them partake of that vision, and by a co^sequent of this lesson; and in their
persons so much the more all the rest. Gal. 2.9.
James, Cephas, and John, says S. Paul, counted among the pillars of the
Church. Taking the^ for afoundatio^ of their doctrine this lesson, this word:
James, and John, those whom Christ himselft has honored with the name of
Sennes of thunder, not being able to make a sound, nor to thunder, but
according to the voice, which he gives unto the^. Peter himself, on whose
confession he built his Church; what greater honor could he receive? Bound by
his Apostleship to hear him; to hear him for to teach it unto others, and not
any thing of his own. Otherwise being subject to this Anathema pronounced by
God; Whosoever will not harken unto my words, Deuteronomy. v. 19.
which he shall speak in my name, I will require it of him. And to harken is
to obey; for an Apostle and minister of the Gospel, it is to cause others to
obey. An Anathema, which has since been doubled and expounded by S. Paul even
in the cause of S. Peter. Gal. 1. and 9.
Though that we, or an Angel from heaven, preach unto you otherwise, then that
which we hauepreached unto you, let him be accursed, Anathema. And indeed when
the heaven has spoken, God through the heaven; all the Angels of heaven what
have they to gainsay? Yea what can they say? Tou ching Gods matters, to speak
after God, after the son of God which was sent and came down expressly to
declare them unto us? Who can do this, but the king of pride, and the Angels
of darkness transformed into Angels of light?

You will say then, let us hear him: but are you of opinion that we ought to
hear him alone? Yea truly, alone: For it is not without a mystery, that it is
noted by the Evangelist, that as the voice was a speaking, Jesus was left
alone. Moses and Elias being retired and giving him place; how much more al
other reachers, all other men? And if it be forbidden so expreslie upon so high
a pain to add to or diminish from the law given by the ministry of Angels;
how much the rather is it forbidden concerning the Gospel pronounced by the
mouth of the Son of God, light of light, the word, the everlasting wisdom of
the Father, whose doctrine cannot choose but be perfect, perpetual, eternal?
Alone, more over, for who will be so presu^ptuous, as to dare set hand to his
workmanship, and after him to teachvs any way of salvation; to prescribe us any
rule thereof: and after him to disclos unto us any mystery of Religion, or any
thing that might be expedient for a heavenly life? Lastly, alone, because
there was but one Son, whom it behoved to set an end to all the Law givers of
Judah: and one Prophet by excelle^ce poiuted out to Moses, by who^ God might
reveal himself to the world and open unto us the depths of his justice and of
his mercy. This Christ, said the Samaritan woman, Ioh 4.25.
which when he is come, will tell us all things. And therefore says this voice
from heaven unto us, Hunc audite, pointing him unto us as it were with a
finger, hear him. Him alone, whom so many former ages, so many herald, have
gone before, and have continually by succession preached unto you: if that we
ought to have learned the way of salvation from any other, by what path so ever
he brought us thereunto, to what purpose then need we have come unto him,
unto him alone without interruption ever since the beginning of the world? if
any one might put in never so small an helping hand with him: to what end then
is it, that the law and the Prophets do aim at him alone; that Moses and
Elias were swallowed up in him, and vanished out of sight before him? This
furniture of glory, this voice from heaven, God in his own person being
present at this charge, was all this for to tell us some thing either common or
communicable to another? Hear him, my well beloved son; Him, in whom I am
well pleased, but for this time only, but without prejudice to them that shall
come after, but with a reseruatio^ of other rules of well believing, and well
doing, which shall from time to time be taught unto you; but if the meaning had
bin, that they should have rested here, was there any need of this solemn
transfiguration, of so maiestical a preface? As therefore when S. John says
unto us of Jesus; Behold the Lamb of God; we consider in this Lamb all the
typical and Sacramental Lambs both ended and, accomplished: after this
Lamb, we do no longer settle our minds and hopes upon any other, that can
take away or bear the sins of the world. In like manner, and that far more
strictly, when God here says unto us, hear him; This Jesus, this Christ, this
Emmanuel, God with us, my well beloved long before promised, at this day
exhibited, the teacher of salvation, the author of life, and that by his death
for us. Let us think, that in this Teacher, in this Lawgiuer al others are
accomplished and take an end: let no man presume so far, as to bring his lamp
into the Christian church, if he have not lighted it at the beams of this
Sun, all humane inventions and rules being set aside; as before times all
strange fire was far from the Lords Tabernacle, from his altar, from the
censer, from the Priest, on pain of being devoured.

A strange conclusion, will some man here say unto us, preve^ted by so many
positive laws, by so many new examples, and so many good rules. We will there
fore let him hear the Fathers. Tertullian; Let us then hear him, Tertul. l. 3.
advers. Marcione cap. 22.
of whom God had from the beginning declared that he ought to be heard in the
name of a Prophet, because that for such an one he was to be esteemed among
the people. But was he alone so to be esteemed? S. Cyprian Tertullians
scholar, and which very likely had learned if from him, says. That we ought
to hear Christ alone, the father has recorded it from heaven, saying, Cypr*
ad Cicil. de sacrament Dom. calicis Ep. 63 in edit Pamelia na.
etc. Hear him. Wherefore if we ought to hear Christ alone, then ought we not
to mind, what an other shall think fit to be done before us, but what Christ
the first of all, which is before all, has done; because also we ought not to
follow the customs of men, but the truth of God. And to the same purpose does
he bring in many places out of the holy Scriptures both before and after. The
reason thereof is to be sound in S. Ambrose. Ambr. de fide l. 1. c. 5.
Because that no man comes to the Father, but by the So^, be it what it will
that thou meditatest concerning the Father. Chrysostom Homil 57 in Matthew.
And likewise thou can think nothing touching divine matters, but by the
Son. Whereupon Chrysostom. says, Hear him in all things. In all, without
exception; that from hence forth, Hiero Matt. 6.17
says S. Hierome, we might no more pitch any taberna cle but to him, obey
none but him, no longer Moses, nor Elias; they are but servants; it is no less
their duty then ours, to raise him up a tabernacle within their hearts. He
that spoke thus of the^, what would he have said of such as are com since? of
all those founders of new orders? unto which notwithstanding we erect as well
as to Christ, yea in some sort above Christ, temples, al tars, and sacrifices:
and obey the^ rather the^ the law, the Gospel, or the Son of God himself.

But pass we this over, not to anger the world. Yet truly we see that this
lesson, as being engraven with the finger of God in their souls, does remain
deep he imprinted in all there writings* whereas James tells us; there is one
lawgiuer, I am. 4.12.
which is able to save and distroy, who art thou that iudgest another man, that
take upon thee to give him a law (how great so ever thou art) that may bind
his conscience, and give or take from him life everlasting. 1. Ioh. 1.
And S. John That which we have seen and heard of that word of life, declare
we unto you. we have learned it both for you and for our selfs; that you might
have felloship with us and that our fellowship might be with the father and
with his son Jesus Christ. This is the reward of hearing him. Far different
from that which once they asked, to wit, his right hand or his left hand here
on earth. S. Peter also alleging for a reason this same vision; 2. Pet. 1.8
16.17.
For we followed not deceauable fables whenwe opened unto you the coming and
power of our Lord Jesus Christ, but with our eyes we saw his Majesty, when
there came such a voice to him sent from that excellent glory, This is my
beloved son etc. and then making a difference between the doctrine of the
law and that of the Gospel, between Moses and Elias, which he had seen, and
that Jesus whom he was commanded to harken unto: he goes on thus, We have the
word of the prophets, V. 9.^
to the which ye do well that ye take heed. But as to what? as unto a light,
that shines in a dark place. and how long? until the day dawne, and the day
star arise in your hearts. This Jesus the Son of righteousness, the true
light of our souls, of the which all the Prophesies are but little sparks;
this Jesus, of whom Peter said, when he had known him, To whom should we go?
Lord, thou have the words of everlasting life. Thou have them, that is to say,
none has them, but thou, but by thee: thou art the only headspring spring of
them; all others (...) but stinking cisternes. In son^ other place perhaps we
might find the words of life, but of a temporal life, Hear him. S. Paul was
not at this vision, and yet sticks not to taker the same lesson for himself
also, Heb. 1. v. 1 and 2.
God (says he) having at sundry times and in diverse manners spoken in the old
time to our fathers by the Prophets, in these last days has spoken unto us by
his son. 2. I 16.
In these last days, says he, that is to say, for the last time, and for
good reason, since that by this son, the heir (as he adds) of all things,
by whom also he made the worlds, that everlasting wisdom that assisted him,
when he ^epared the heavens, Prove. 8. v. 27.
when he ^et the compass upon the deep. ^eing descended nevertheless
^ratiously from heaven, from ^he bosom of the father, for to set us aright in
his ways. For which cause also he relates not unto us these visions and
reue^ations of his, which he had seen, 2. Cor. 12.
taken up into the third heaven, into Paradise, those words which cannot be
spoken. (What could not he have told us, if he would but have entertained the
time with such discourses?) But those things barely, which he had learned of
our Lord, for the salvation of the Churches, that is to say, of the assemb lies
of the faithful of all sorts, men, women, children, learned, and unlearned,
unto which he did write; 1. Cor. 1 v. 23. and 1 v. 3.
I have (says he) received of the Lord that, which I have delivered unto you;
I have delivered unto you that which I received; the Gospel whereby you are
saved, if you keep in memory, after what manner I preached it unto you. If
you keep it still the same, that I gave it you, without adding thereunto any
thing of your own. And the rather, because I neither received it of man, Gal.
1. v. 12.
nor was I taught it, but by revelation of Jesus Christ. Is not that man
therefore very arrogant, that dares pass beyond that, within which these great
Apostles do keep themselves, and bound both their preaching and writings? And
after, yea and besides, this well beloved Son, this Son in whom the Father is
well pleased, to teach and expound unto us, what the pleasure of God is, and
with what service he is pleased; and thereupon to add somewhat of his own
mind, and display his own fancies and inventions? Does not this deserve that
God should say unto us? Who has required these things at your hands? Not to
be allowed, not to be approved in your accounts? It is in vain that you
serve me to please men, and according to the inventions of men? He are him,
whom I have sent you, him of whom I have told you long since, that whosoever
will not harken unto his words, I will require it of him. Deuteronomy. 18. v. 19. and
20
For the Prophet that shall presume to speak a word in my name, which I have
not commanded him to speak, even the same Prophet shall die, shall incur
everlasting damnation. And here let these look to themselves, which against
their own knowledge and conscience do preach unto the simple people so many
things, which they have not heard from our Lord Jesus Christ, no nor from his
Apostles; which are grounded only upon visions in the air, upon pretended
revelations, and certain tales far worse then Apocryphal. These
notwithstanding are articles of belief, more to be believed and observed, nay
more indeed believed and observed, then the word of Christ and the holy
Scriptures.

But it may be that this is spoken to those three only, those three, which
were taken apart by our Lord, and were to learn some particular mystery
thereby. But that which is only spoken to one of them (says our Lord) is
spoken unto all. The mysteries and the secrets of God are not of the same
nature that others are of; They are spoken in the ear, but to be preached on
the house tops. And indeed thou see, that S. Paul did not stick to apply
these words to himself, and the fathers have told thee that it concerns all
the Apostles. And if all the Aposties, then also all their disciples and
successors, all such as have believed their word, and have received from them
their calling to teach the word, we may say, all Christians, all the
faithful, all the sheep of our great shepherd. For (says he) my sheep
hear my voice, Ioh. 10.
they understand not the voice of a stranger, they fly back from him. We may
say, the very Catholic and universal Church: For it is said unto her, Harken
o daughter, Ps. 45.10.
and consider and incline thine ear. And how often has it bin told us, that
that which is said to Peter, is said to all his successors, and to the whole
Church? And for what reason should it not hold herein also? To be short, when
our Lord says unto his Apostles, Hoc facite, do this, thou drawest from thence
a perpetual institution of a Sacrament, of a sacrifice: when God therefore
says here solemnly, Hunc audite, Hear him; What right have thou to restrain
it to these few, and to some peculiar mystery, to the end that all things may
be lawful unto you? With what face can thou deny, that these words do
contain a lesson, which is to be continual and universal unto the end of
the world, how to limit the faith and life of a Christian within the compass
of Christ his voice, of Christ his law, of Christ his school, which is the
only Lawgiuer, the only Master and only teacher in his Church?

But there is more in it yet, for this lesson is more necessary for us, then it
was then for them or at any other time whatsoever since his Apostles. For us, I
say, on whom the last ages are come; for us, whom so many ages, and by a
consequent so many forestalled in their judgment, have prevented by anticipat
opinions, by inueterated customs, by presidents of antiquity, by renown and
majesty, which will offer to part stakes with the Godhead. and make themselves
to be heard above the son of God, above the Father himself. For is there
almost any age, that has not brought forth its own teachers? Any teacher, that
would not have his private opinions, his own inventions? I might say, heresies.
And is there any of them, that has not built his own stubble on Christ's
foundation, and sown his own tares in Christ's field? And how may all this be
remedied? Only by this word alone, Hear him, hear none other; let every
other voice be suspected by you. Unto him that sear cheth for the truth,
doubts of his way, and seeks life; he, who is the truth, the way and the
life, which also will teach them, does of his own accord offer himself. And
where then shall we seek him? This again was an easy matter for his
Apostles* which had him at hand. which were daily in his company, and did as it
were draw it out of his breast. For S. Paul likewise, to whom it was yet
granted to hear him, though in lightning and in thunder. But whither sendest
thou us to hear him? He which is ascended into heaven, and fitteth at the
right hand of the Father, will not descend from thence, until he comes to
judge the world. And in the mean time what shall become of our doubtings? Await
patiently; our Lord is not so far from thee as thou imaginest. Say not in thy
heart, Romans 10. v. 6 7. and 8.
who shall ascend into heaven? That is to bring Christ from above. Or, who
shall descend into the deep? That is to bring Christ again from the dead. The
word is near thee. This is the word of faith. The Gospel which we read by the
grace of our God, and which we preach. Jesus Christ has not left us Orphans.
He has not been prevented by death, having death in his own power; He is
not dead without making a Testament, nor gone from earth up into heaven without
a last will. By his Testament he speaks yet at this day, and did speak in
all the ages past, and gives his law to his family. A Bastard he is or
unthankful, that does not hear him; It is his Gospel, and his holy
Scriptures, in the which he lives, and teaches, and judges, and bears rule
in his Church. This Gospel, by whose rule he directs the faithful,
corrects and reproves the heretics and unbelievers, and puts a
difference between the one and the other; Of which S. Ireneus tells thee; That
Gospel which the Apostles have preached, have they since given and delivered
unto us, tradiderunt, in the Scriptures by the will of God, to be the
foundation of our faith. Then is it not by occasion only, or by their own
instinct, as some would make us Believe, August de ^on^en^. ^vang. l. 1.
S. Augustine; All that; which our Lord would that we should have concerning
his ^^tie^s and his sayings, he has commanded, says he, to his Apostles to
write it, as with his own hands. As if therefore he had writtten it himself,
if we read it, we hear himself. And S. Cyrill adds; All that, Cyril. l.
12 in loh c. 68.
which they have thought to suffice as well for manners as for doctrine: Will
we be more able then they? S. John also the beloved Disciple of our Lord; Ioh.
20. v. 31.
These things are written not casually, not by humane instinct, but that you
might believe that Jesus is that Christ that son of God, and that in believing
ye might have life through his name. And this believing truly presupposes
hearing, according to the words of the Apostle: Faith is by hearing, and
hearing by the word of God. The Gospel has succeeded the law, but as the
truth succeeds the shadow, and manhood infancy, that the doctrine might be
made clean, and the condition of the Church amended. God not being content
that his law had bin written with his own finger, commanded also that it
should be written in a book, that they should look in it, that every household
from their first years should be instructed in it. Truly Christ the son of
God, our only lawgiuer, has in like manner provided for his Gospel; being to
leave this world and to withdraw his voice together with his flesh from us.,
he has perpetuated it unto us in his Gospel. He has given us Eua^gelists
and Apostles, whose pens he has inspired. In them, and by them, if thou will,
he speaks unto thee, thou need not climb up into a mountain for it, or
enter into a cloud, or be overtaken with fear; thou need only his
bountifulness and grace alone; of him, I say, speaking in these Evangelists,
his heavenly father tells thee as well now as then; Hear him, ^^are him in
them. As well as our Lord at every table where his Sacrament is celebrated
according to his institution, tells thee yet throughout the whole world, Hoc
facite. Do this. And communicates unto thee on the one part his Spirit in his
word, on the other his body, his flesh, and his blood in his holy table. Which
also is the reason, why every one of these good ancient fathers in all those
conflicts of heresies did in times past betake themselves to this testament,
did therein take counsel from the mouth of Jesus, as in old time from God in
the Arc and did therehence carry away healthful answers to the peace of
their conscience, and the pacification of the Church. Miserable men, that we
are, if some me^ had said unto us, hear Plato, hearken unto Aristotle, we
would understand it so, Opt S. Aug.
that he had directed us to their books, and would go to buy them at the
Stationers: nor would we any way trouble our selves to seek their persons
either in Hell or in their feined Elisian fields. But when it is said unto us,
Hear Christ, we begin to waver make as if we were very idiors, but indeed are
malicious, and ask where he is? Hereupon mark what Optatus says, that great
African Doctor, contesting against the Donatists. Opt. Milevit. l. 5. contra
Parmen.
You Donatists say, yea: we Catholics say, Nay. In the midst of your yea and
our nay, men's souls are in doubt. None will believe you, nor. us also; because
therefore that we are at ods, we must seek judges. The Christians, says he,
are the parties themselves, the heathen cannot conceive our mysteries. And
therefore can there be found no judgment on earth. Must we seek it in heaven?
Note here the question, and mark how he answers it. But what go we to seek
for in heaven, seeing we have a Testament in the Gospel? So long as the father
is present, he charge every one of his children, what they are to do. There
is as yet no need of any testament. And so Christ gave to these Apostles their
charge, whilst yet he was on earth. But as an earthly Father seeing himself
to be near the grave makes his will, for to prevent and end all controversies
betwixt his children; and then men go not to seek him in his tomb, but in
this will, wherein he speaks as if he lived, and though dumb yet is
understood: so indeed, Christ, he, that has made the Testament, is in heaven,
but let us seek his will in his Gospel, as in his testament. For even these
very things, which some of you do now, he did even at that time see you do
them. And as at that time he did foresee them, as being God everlasting, unto
whom all things are known from eternity, so without doubt he has manifestly
provided against them; he has prevented all chances, and anticipated all
tricks and cauils. hear also S. Augustine, Optatus his Countryman, which
either had learned it of the other, or was inspired by the same spirit. We are
brethren, why strive we one with another? Our father died not without a
Testament; he made a will, and then died; died and rose again. Men do plead
concerning the succession of the dead, until the will be brought forth; It
being brought forth, every one is silent, that it may be opened and rehearsed.
The Judge harkeneth at tentiuely, the Advocates hold their peace, the Cryers
cause silence, the people stands in suspe^se, whilst that the words of the
deceased are a reading, who lies in his tomb^ without feeling, and yet his
words have their force. Christ is seated in heaven, and shall he be
contradicted in his Testament? August. in Psalm. 21.
Open then, and let us read* we are brethren, why are we at variance? Let us
appease our anger: our father has not left us without a Testament. His
Gospels; A Testament. says S. Basil, Basil. de Fide.
unto which nothing ought to be added. It would be false; nay sacrilege. The
Apostle, says he, by a worldly example forbids us exprestie to add any
thing to the holy Scripture, when he says; And notwithstanding no man
rejects the Testament of a man, or adds any thing thereunto, if it has
once been established. Wherefore we have always known, that we must fly
from every voice and all meanings, which are beside the doctrine of our Lord.
Beside, says he, and not against. And now in the mouth of these three
witnesses, shall not our speech be confirmed unto you? God will have it, and
has appointed that his well beloved Son should be heard. Heard here beneath,
so long as he conuersed here in his own person: and heard in his holy Gospel,
sealed unto us by his Apostles by the will of the Father, and the commandment
of the Son, since that he has been lifted up from this world.

Heard, do you tell us, in his Gospel? I and you to hear him. Then behooves
it us to read. May we do so, without being excommunicated or anathematised? A
book so dangerous, full of ambushes, full of snares? HOW the world is changed,
nay even the very voice of the Church since the time of these good fathers?
That the law of our Lord, which is to decide all our controversies should be
esteemed of in these days as a matter of question; and this Testament which
ought to bring to an agreement the most contentious brethren, as a bundle of
contradictorie clauses. Could this Testament ever have been altered? Seeing
that we agree in this, that it could not, what remains then, but that this
alteration proceeds not from the truth of the thing, but from the malice of the
persons? Thy father has made a will: does it not concern thee to see what he
leaves thee; and under what title; to know also what things he charge thee
to do? Were he the greatest stranger in the world, would thou not be so
curious as to read it? He that would conceal it from thee, yea and keep
thee from reading it, could thou believe he did this without fraud? And being
curious in every other thing, will thou be negligent in this? Thou that seemst
to be a quick fellow, and would be esteemed of for such a one in all thy
business; will thou in this be an idiot, and less then a babe? Can thou
do this without a contempt to God? Can thou do this if Gospel, and an
eternal life? Tell me in thy conscience, if thou had lived in the time that
our Lord conversed here in his flesh, and had had the grace to acknowledge
him to be that Christ that Son of the living God; would thou have made any
difficulty, or thought it to be any grievous fault, or an execrable deed to
hear him preach? Would thou not on the contrary, have gone to seek after
this divine word, even in the midst of the wilderness (Whatsoever the Scribes
and the Pharisees had said unto thee) would not thou have had thine attentive
care linked to his sacred mouth? And behold, when he was to ascend up into
heaven, for to lift you up thither after him, he has sealed the same unto you
in his Scriptures, in his Gospels, which for the greater part are nothing but
his Sermons; his speeches set down by writing, that thou may read them and
read them again more distinctly and more clearly, chew and chew them again
at your ease; written expressly by sundry Evangelists, that for thine
instruction the one may give light and serve for an interpreter to the other.
And yet shall men make you believe that the pen and style of his Evangelists
and Apostles, though led by the same Spirit, by that Spirit, which was
promised unto them, was to bring into their memory all that which he had told
them, has connected this saving, this quickening word, into a dead letter, a
murdering and condemning letter; that thou might abhor it, and fly from
it, and cast it into the fire, I and thy self because of it? why then what
needed this word have bin given unto us in writing by the will of God, as S.
Ireneus told us before, and by the commandment of Christ, as S. Augustine
repeated it, but that it might be read? And why should it be read less, then
the law and the Prophets, by all believers. S. Peter called Prophesying a
candle, but the Gospel a Sun, a full midday, such a light as can admit no
increase. Truly our Savior wrought miracles enough, in the which his divinity
appeared both effectually and evidently; And for all this yet sends he the
Jews to the law and the Prophets. Search says he, the Scriptures. Ioh. 5.
And we find not that they reply unto him: we are forbidden them. S. Paul also
exercising his Apostleship among the Jews comes into a Synagogue of the
city of Berea; Act. 17.
and as he was powerful in the holy scriptures, he preached unto them that
Jesus is the Christ. What do then those of Berea? They were not ignorant of
that so notorious vision which S. Paul saw in the way to Damascus, they might
likewise have laid a foundation on such signs and miracles, as confirmed his
sayings. And nevertheless the Evangelist Saint Luke tells us, that they
received the word with all readiness, but by what means? Searching the
Scriptures daily, whether those things were so: to wit, as S. Paul had preached
unto them. And this is the reason, why S. Luke tells us, that they were more
noble men then those, which were at Thessalonica: by this live lie faith, which
they with a zeal mixed with knoweledge, did draw out of the reading of the holy
Scriptures. Whence also it is that he adds that many of them believed, and
of honorable women which were Grecians. Women therefore at that time were not
reproved, but commended by the Evangelist, by the holy Ghost himself, for
having read, conferred, and searched the holy Scriptures; And that also, that
they might judge of the doctrine and preaching of S. Paul that excellent
Apostle. Now what is it that the Gospel could since have done unto us, what
evil has it done to Christendom, that we should fear or abhor the reading
thereof? Truly when as S. John tells us, these things are written that ye
might believe: Ioh. 20. v. 31.
He tells us consequently, that they are written, that ye might read them,
and read them for to believe them, and therefore they may be understood of us,
they are not ambiguous, they are fit of themselves to persuade us, and to make
us believe. Whenas also S. Paul directed his Epistles, to the churches of
Rome, of Corinth, of Galatia, of Ephesus, of Philippi, etc? which consisted of
al ages, sexes, and conditions; his purpose was not to exclude any one from
them, he has admitted al of us thereunto: unto those Epistles notwithstanding,
in the which he treats most deeply and profoundly of the deepest and
profoundest articles of the Christian faith; and none of us will wrong him so
far as to think, that his intent was thereby to destroy them, he being so
powerful and so zealous in their instruction. The like is also to be thought
of S. Peter, and S. James, and the other Apostles. But speak we also of the
church in these primitive times. Of what folly do we accuse her, which took
so great a care, to cause the new testament to be translated into all
languages, that all me^ might be able to understand it? Into the Latin, the
Syrian, the Arabian, the Egyptian, the Ethiopian, the Persian, the Indian, the
Scythian, the Sauromaticke, and the Goths language. And for what manner of men
shall we take S. Hierome, and S. Chrysostom, which turned it into the
Sclavonian and Armenian tongues, commending so expressly the reading thereof
unto all persons? Chrysostom. Hom. 3. de Lazaro. In Ioh. Hom 29. De verbo Esaias
Hom 2. In opere Imperf. Homil 42 In Matt. Hom. 2. In Ioh. Homil. 16 In Genes.
Hom. 12.13.21.
The one of them so far as to say, that they are the instruments of every
Christian man's trade, that he ought, and can no less want them, then an
artificer the implements of his shop, that he must spare no cost for to buy
them, that he ought to have the^ always in his hand, and not refer himself
either to Monk or Clergy man; but on the contrary he ought to prejudice and
judge the sermons of the Preachers, I and his own too, Ad Col. Hom 9 and ad
These. Hom. 3.
by reading before hand the same place, which is expounded unto them: ought
also to arm himself against the Arrians, and all other heretics, because it
shall so happen (says he, and repeats it at sundry times) that then when
Antichrist shall be come with his army of heresies, there shall be left no
other means to know the truth or true Christianity by, but only,
tantummodo, Chrysostom. in Opere Imperf. Hom 9
by the Scriptures: No more at all by visions, nor by miracles. The reader may
find on that same subject many homilies, in the which he can never be cloid,
almost whole ones together, which we need not bring in here. Origin, S. Basil,
S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Hierom, say every one the same also. When as the^
men spoke of of the Scriptures quite otherwise at this day; and use as many
inhibitions for to remove us from them, as these good Fathers had exhortations
for to bring us near them: when as men tell us, as unto little chrildre^, take
heed thereof, the wolf is there: can we hear this, and not have cause to
suspect them? And what then is more likely, then to believe rather that our
Church is much changed, since that the voice of our teachers is quite different
from that of these holy Fathers: and that they set our candlestick under
abushel, for fear we should perceive these deformities and gaps, or seek
after a reformation, or call them into the law, at least to repentance?

Therefore, Hunc audite, Hear Jesus our savior, hear him in his Scriptures.
But to make use of them: Hear him with due reverence: Think with your self,
when you alight upon this new Testament of our Lord, that you enter into the
temple of God, into his sanctuary; that Christ preaches unto us therein, that
it is his voice, which is the truth and the way: that it is not for naught,
that the Church has called these Scriptures Canonical, that is to say
Regular, they being rules directing our faith and our salvation. ^nter
therefore with invocation of Gods holy name, by the same Jesus, requiring of
him his holy Spirit, that may inspire you, enlighten you, and gine you an
access to his mysteries: being void of all passions, and full of holy
affections, hungring after salvation, and covetous of his glory. And doubt not,
but that seeking him there, for there he is, he will be found of thee; and
knacking at this door he will open unto thee, he will prevent thee, and draw
thee unto hinn The Eunuch of the Queen of the Ethiopians, Act. 8.
read Esaias the Prophet in his chariot; read him but understood him not. And
yet found he there Jesus, whom he scarce sought after; Philip running unto him,
being carried by the Spirit, for to be his trucheman, his interpreter. Thus is
God at hand to those that seek his Son in the Scriptures. Thus also is the Son
himself delighted in being sought after here, and in offering himself to be
found here in his school. Which being risen and glorified, coming to his
disciples at Emmaus, when he might have shown them his wounds, tokens of his
mortality and also of his Godhead, had rather resolve them in their doubts by
Moses and by the Prophets. Did not our hearts, said they, burn within us, while
he talked with us by the way, and when he opened unto us the Scriptures. Why
then simple people and idiots as we are, you will say, (for I speak even unto
them also) in these Scriptures what are we to do? Thou Christian, that have thy
conscience doubtful about the controversies of this time: thou shall consult
with Jesus thy Savior in this his word on them. In a matter of great doubt
thou co^sultest with thine Advocate, and wilt believe his writings therein. What
wrong then shall thou do to thy Savior, in a matter of thine own salvation,
if thou will not hear him, if thou will not believe him? Thou shall also in
reading it see before thee the chief points of thy Religion, whereof thou art
in doubt; Those, that above others are commanded and commended unto you; of
which either the belief is more strictly prescribed unto thee, or the practice
in special urged upon thee: for to observe or not to observe those, which are
told thee to procure greater sin or greater reward. Thou shall observe in
these holy Scriptures the words of thy Savior, and the rules of thy salvation;
if there be any mention made of them, and in what manner, if in the same
manner, as men teach them unto thee, as they are celebrated in thy church,
though not in name, yet at least in effect, though not in express terms, yet
at least in such as are equivale^t. In brief, if in the reading of these holy
Scriptures thou can find out the belief, the doctrine, the discipline, the
face the visage, and lineamentes of thine own church* and of that, which is
taught, believed, and done in thy church. Truly if thou can perceive all
this, call then thy self happy, think that thou art in Paradise, where the
voice of Jesus, where his word is heard. From this church be thou never
desirous to depart. But say with the Apostle, who shall separate me from this
church, wherein is felt the love of Christ? Shall tribulation, Romans 8 35
or anguish, or persecution, or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword? No,
neither death, nor life, nor Angels, nor principalities, nor powers. For what
greater consolation can there be in this conflict of opinions, then to have
peace in his conscience; and in these so dangerous occurrents, the^ to be
assured of his way? Of the true faith warranted by the word of his God, and, by
a consequent, of his salvation? But on the contrary, if thou find nothing
therein of the most part of that which men preach unto thee, and make thee
believe, and inioine thee to do; if in the inward and in the outward, in the
doctrine and in the discipline, thou find altogether a different voice and
different hue; have not thou the^ cause to doubt, that thou art straied from
the Sheepefolde of thy Savior, where thou knew not his voice, but the voice
rather of a stranger, in words and doctrines so strange, that it is now no
longer the true temple of God, seeing that it is an other then our Savior,
that causes his voice there to sound, and has seized on the chair thereof?
And what remains then, but that with the spouse in the Canticles thou say
unto him, Show me o thou whom my soul loves, Cant 1.6*
where thou feedest, where thou lie at noone: for why should I be as she
that turns aside? Psalm. 25. and 23.
Show me thy ways, o Lord, direct me in thy truth, se^d me thy light, let it
lead me, let is bring me into thy Tabernacles. Tabernacles in deed in regard
of that stately building of this temple, wherein I find my self to be, and
of a small show, and very contemptible. But be they what they will yet are they
the tabernacles and boothes of that chief. Shepherd, which I seek for, whose
skins and cords he will stretch out when it shall please him; and in the mean
time I shall be sure to find there my Shepherd, I shall not want. Psalm. 23.
That good Shephearde, which lays down his life for his sheep, Ioh. 10.
and lifts the^ all up even the little lambs, into his bosom; Esa. 40.11
does wash them in the poole of Siloa, feeds the^ to the hand, and nourishes
the^ up with himself into life everlasting. Whereas in this fained Temple I
was fed with nothing but smoke, with wind, with sound, with pride, with
rumor with luxury; I laid out, as the Prophet says, my silver and my labor
for that which neither did nourish nor satisfy: Esaias. 55.
in idle suffrages, in vain services, and erroneous indeed because vain.

Here again is another stop. What then? The Religion of Christ, the true one,
the only religion, does she not admit of any increase or change? May not men
add thereunto some Laws, some articles, some new ceremonies? Learn this my
friend, that the true religion, as a man from his first birth, has all his
members, all his ioints, any the least part cannot be taken from it; (thou
find it so in thine own body,) without maiming it; any the noblest, that
thou can imagine, cannot be applied unto it out of the work, with out
disproportion, without deformity, without wronging the whole frame: if any
thing be in it more then should be, it is extuberancie, or some unnatural
flesh that grows out; because that Religion is not a thing invented by man,
but by a divine Law, and the rule of Gods service, and of man's salvation; and
none other but God can give or enioine it unto man; because that his thoughts
are above the thoughts of man, and are higher then the heavens that are above
the earth; Cor. 2.1.
because that no man knows the things of a man save the spirit of a man; not
one man of another man, though they have the same offspring, and do consist of
the same faculties and like parts; but every one of himself. And with much
more reason then; no man has known, no man has ever been able to know, the
things of God but the spirit of God. Who art thou, Esa. 40 13
says the Prophet, that instructest the spirit of the Lord; or art his
cou^sailour to teach him any thing? And hence it is that we see, all those
authors of religions among the heathen, to have bin so childish and ridiculous
in their ceremonies; and can we imagine, that, when we undertake to add any
thing to that religion, which was ordained from God by Jesus Christ, we should
be less so the^ they were? can we think, that the dirt and dust, and smoke,
which we cast upon it, can any way honor, nay can it choose but disfigure or
pollute his work? And nevertheless, do not thou think therefore that the
Doctors in the church are unprofitable, or that they are not very profitable,
that the church and her members all and every one of them cannot help or grow
up. Truly the right Religion can grow both in it self and in thee, has
grown heretofore, and can always go on in grouth. But learn also how she
grows. She grows in her self, and even in thee also, (if thou can make
thine use of it,) when the old Testament has taught thee that it behooved the
Christ of God to die and rise again; and the new, that he has died indeed,
and is risen again. And behold a sufficient cloud of witnesses, of holy
martyrs, which many ages ago, by hundreds and thousands together have died for
the witness of this death, of this resurrection; and by their sufferings and
deaths have subdued the world unto him, and knit together under the banner of
his cross those which he has separated from the world: do not thou think
that these articles, I believe that he rose again from the dead; I believe the
resurrection of the body, are very well perfected by them, well grown, and
strengthened both in them and in thee, so far as to believe them, and to embrace
them even to the death for this faith, seeing that by this faith thou art to
live? Behold also, the law has told thee, that this Christ should be the son
of God and nevertheless be borne of a Virgin: and the Gospel, that he is that
Jesus that son of the living God, God of God, and there fore from everlasting
as the Father; and that word nevertheles made flesh, conceived in the womb of
the Virgin Mary; God and man, both together. Sundry heretics, Arius and
Nestorius above the rest, begin they to call in question some his eternity and
Godhead, and some his manhood and mortality, and by a consequent the Character
of the Savior of the world; whereupon the Almighty through his spirit
stirs up many great doctors from al quarters, powerful in the Scriptures,
which by the same do overcome and convince them, do demonstrate with
efficacy in one only person as well the one as the other nature; both the
wills as well the one as the other to be necessary for our salvation; the one
working without prejudice to the other. And that by places well expounded and
as well applied, and by arguments drawn from them, both strong in themselves
and, as strongly urged; so that after many cumbats the field is left to the
truth, the victory and glory to the simplicity, and to that seeming weakness
of the Gospel. Do not thou think that these articles of our creed, I
believe in Jesus Christ the only son of the Father Almighty our Lord, borne of
the virgin Mary, conceived by the holy Ghost; these very same in number, as
they use to speak in the schools, have bred in thee a new impressio^ and in
themselves new forces? The like also is to be thought of so many others, for
all that the heretics do set upon the^, which harden and make themselves
strong against them; and we by them, as wrestlers against the skirmish,
according as the heretics do trouble and vex the^. Those articles of the fall
of man by himself, of his restitution by one Jesus alone; of the grace of God,
of free justification, for all that Pelagius, Celestius, and their consorts,
either lay battery against them or undermine the^: stand fast notwithstanding,
with out once moving thence, where the Master Builder placed the^, make no
breach in the proportion of the building, and stir not from their first
conformity, to the which nothing ca^ be added, but in the manner of a botch,
quite contrary to the nature of the first Law giuers intent, and to that Law,
in the which nothing can be altered without high treason, and from which
nothing ca^ be derogated without sacrilege. Vincent. Lirinen. contra hreti cos
Hear thereupon, what says our Vincentius Lirinensis; (for in such matters I
speak not willingly without mine author; and such an author as may please
thee.) The Canon, says he, of the Scriptures is perfect, and more then
sufficient in it self for all things. What the^ shall it not be lawful to put
somewhat of our own there unto? Timothy, says he, thou that art a Doctor of
the Church, Depositum custodi, keep that which has been trusted unto thee,
thou have received it of gold, give it up again of gold, I will have no lead
nor brass or base mettle from you: God has he endowed thee with his spirit,
or with learning, then be thou a Bezeleel in his spiritual Tabernacle, in his
church, cut and square these precious stones of his divine doctrine, set them
cunningly in some work, give a luster unto them, and a sparkling, and grace.
But go no farther then he did, presume not to change any thing either in the
matter or the form, which the Lord has prescribed unto thee: unto this
Bezeleel God had prescribed of every thing, even to the very badgers skins, and
the loopes of the Tabernacle, he had left him nothing to do after his own
mind. For what serves then both his and our industry? That by thee, says
he, men may understand that more clearly, which before they believed more
obscurely. One and the same article of faith, more clearly, but no new one,
none of thine own head. That in teaching that, which thou have learned, thou
may say the same things after a new manner, with a new grace or method, but
no new things; nothing, that is not in this rule of holy Scripture; nove (says
he) non nova. And he adds, that this is not said unto Timothy in particular,
but to the whole Church, to the whole body of those that have any charge
therein, because that this Depositum, is a thing which has been commanded
thee, and thou thy self have not invented; which thou have received, and thou
thy self have or forged. It is no work of chine own wit, but it was taught
thee; it is no matter of private usurpation, but of public grant. In respect
of which lastly, thou ought not be the author, but the keeper, not the
ordainer, but the follower; thou ought not to lead others, but to follow.
And to speak truly, what need is there of all these inventions, and of so
many careeres, as we give, vnvnprofitable to our own wits, for to beautify
the Religion, to our own fancy? As if, says he, it were not an heavenly
doctrine, and suffised to have been once revealed; but an earthly institution,
and could never be perfected but by a continual amendme^t, according as men use
to deliberate together of one thing to day, and to morrow of another. After
him, which flourished about some twelve hundred years ago, all wearied and
tired by the inventions of his own time, what is there that we may not now
say? Shall we esteem of it as heresy, or a lust after schism, to call the
Church back again unto Christ, unto his holy word and unto his holy
Scriptures? Therefore, Hunc audite, Hear Jesus, hear him, ye which have
heard so many others, and that to your great harm; hear him, and shut your
care unto them, which was too open to humane teachings, and is from hence forth
to be reserved for his voice alone. But because that our cares are
uncircumcised, and filled with fat, let us beseech this everlasting Son,
that by his spirit he would cleanse them and pearce them even unto our hearts,
and unto our souls, for to hear and understand our Jesus, and his voice, in
his word, and in his doctrine, and that he will grant, that we may hear it,
to believe it with our hearts; that we may believe it, to confess it to
salvation; and that we may profess it to the edification of our neighbors and
his Church. But above all, because that in his language to hear is to obey,
and that truly to believe and to do well, do naturally follow the one upon
the other: let us make our supplication unto him, that he will give us the
grace, to be of the number of those, which harken unto his word and keep it;
and being consequently built, and laying our foundation on that Rock, which
all the waves of the sea can never shake, and the gates of hell with all their
endeavors can never approach un to; we may then be assured, that as he has
granted us here beneath to be of the number of his true disciples, so he
will make us in heaven above, (not upon this earthly mountain) partakers of
his full glory; because that there we cannot say, as S. Peter did, Let us make
here three Tabernacles, as being ravished with the sense of a light shadow of
this heavenly glory; but rather as being both better in our wits, and better
instructed and that by himself, we are to hear him, and to depend on his
sayings, and to seek him in his word, wherein he makes us to understand him,
as being the finisher of the law, and the author of salvation in his Gospel,
yea himself being that salvation; that so, when the earthly habitation of this
our abode shall come to be destroyed, we may be carried up into that building
and everlasting house, which was never made with hands, but has been prepared
by the father for his Disciples. Now to him be all honor and glory with the
Son and the holy Ghost for ever and ever.

Amen.
NON SIC FVIT ab initio. MATTHEW. 19. v. 8.
WE have told you that two only words out of the Gospel were able to decide
the most part of doubts, that are at this day in Christendom; and we have
already expounded unto you one of them, Hunc audite, Hear him, that well
beloved Son, that Son and Christ of God, in his word, in his holy
Scriptures. Whereby are cut off all forged articles of faith or of religion,
that have no foundation all in this his word. Now follows the second; Non
sic fuit ab initio: From the beginning it was not so. Which banisheth out of
the Church, and consequently blotteth out in our consciences, whatsoever the
invention or imitation of man, either in imitation of the Jews and Pagans, or
in love of their own fancies, has added to those very articles, which are
grounded in the holy Scriptures, in so much, that we have need from time to
time to recall them to their first institution, and beginning, it belonging to
the same divinity, and being of the same kind, nature, and consequence, to
invent new articles of faith, or to cast the old ones anew, to institute a
religion in the whole, or in some parts. Jesus Christ therefore being asked by
the Pharisees, which came to tempt him, whether it be lawful for a man to put
away his wife, answers them by the law of God; Have ye not read that he which
made the^ at the beginning, made them male and female; and would have them
twain to be one flesh? And let no man therefore put asunder that, which God
has coupled together. Here was wherewithal to stop their mouth. But they
nevertheless reply; Why then did Moses command to give a bill of divorcement?
This proud nation opposing Moses to God, the servant to the master, the
creature to his Creator. But what answers our Savior, which was even
meekness and humblenes it self, but yet for all that abated nothing from the
glory of the father? Moses because of the hardness of your heart has suffered
you to do so. A number of things have either bin brought in or tolerated in
the Church under this pretense; But from the beginning it was not so; Such was
not the institution of marriage ordained by God, that great lawgiuer; to this
original it is that he calls them, without any respect of their
prescriptions. I say therefore unto you, I which was present with God, being
coeternall with him, when he made them, when he coupled them together, when
he blessed them, which know his meaning, and the reason of the law, which
also will cause it to be followed, Whosoever shall put away his wife, except it
be for whoredom, and marry another, commits adultery. How many things
might the Pharisees have to say hereupon, in a matter wherein Moses was touched,
that great captain of Gods people, which had spoken to him face to face, had
received the law from his hand, authorized by so many miracles? By a
prescription of two thousand years? By so long a forbeara^ce? And that under
so many kings, Priests, and Prophets? And yet they stand here at a stay, and
yield without once co^tradicting this sentence; From the beginning it was not
so; In Paradise this was ordered otherwise. If then this hold in a law that
concerns only civil society, how much more in Ecclesiastical laws, which
concern religion, and Gods service? the articles of our faith, the salvation
of our souls, and things spiritual? Wherein the natural man discerns
nothing, nor the spiritual man perceives an^e more, then as far as the Spirit
of God guides him, and being guided by the spirit of God ca^ go no farther,
then as he keeps himself to his word; how illuminated soever he either be or
seem to be, he ca^ add nothing to Gods work, to his commandment; whatsoever
he puts to it, is but imperfect and full of filth. And hence it is that the
Politicians do so often rehearse unto us, that to the upholding of the laws of
any commonwealth, it is necessary that they should be recalled from time to
time to their principles; to wit, against all tricks, and side-stroaks as it
were of such as wrest and de praue them. And therefore for a greater cause was
Gods people enioind so carefully to know the law of God and his service at
their fingers end; that so, as many men as there were of the^, so many
co^trollers there might be in the church, for to keep her in and call her back
again to her bounds. And therefore was it that Esaias cried so loud: To the Law
and to the Testimony, Esaias. 8.20
if they speak not according to this word, it is because there is no light in
them. No salvation for this people. The^ is this a rule, which is to be
received for the direction of Gods church, and to contain all whatsoever
concerns the true religion, the whole duty of man toward God, and his own
salvation: and for such a one has it indeed always bin used, as often as
there was in hand any reformation of the Church.

David had established Gods service, in the midst of his people, according to
the ten or of his law. And many of his successors, either dronken with the
service of false Gods, or neglecting the service of the true God, had partly
corrupted it, and partly suffered it to go to decay; and now that good king
Iosaphat, moved with a true zeal of God, is about to restore it again: It is
said, 2. Chron. 17 v. 3. un to the 9.
That he walked in the first ways of his father David. He stood not upon that,
which his father Asa, though a godly Prince, had either done or tolerated, and
stood as little also on that, which so many other in all this while had done,
for to draw a president from their example: but turned back even unto David,
unto the first ways of David, unto his best years; and those very best ones
yet did he examine by the law of God: when it is added, that he sought the God
of his father; not that which his father had done, but that which the God of
his father had appointed to he done; he walked in his commandments, and not
according to that which Israel had done; he ordered himself according to the
law, and not after the usual custom of the church, he took away the high
places and the groves out of Judah, which had bin tolerated amongst them by most
of their best kings. To a young and tender king this toleration might have
scrued for an excuse. And that his people might also seek the same ways, he
sent Priests and Levites, as also some of the chief men of his Estate to
assist them, That they should teach those of Judah, But how? Having the book of
the law of the Lord with the^, for to recall their faith to this belief,
their worship to his ordinances, their crooked and depraved ways, to this
square, to this rule. And we find not, that in all this circuit, which they
make, any one does once object unto them either the tradition or the authority
of the church, or the toleration of the Fathers. So well had every one of them
learned and remembered, even in the midst of that corruption; that there,
where the God of their fathers spoke, was no place at all to hearken unto
either the Church of Israel, or all their fathers together.

Likewise Hezekiah when he came to the crown; he had had to his father king
Ahaz, which had broken the vessels of Gods house, and shut up his temple; that
is to say, had cast down his service, 2 Chronicles. 28. v. 24.
and built up altars to the false Gods in all the cities of Judah; instead of
the true Altar, many thousands of false ones, as superstition of its own
nature does multiply; all this might have been a great stumbling block to
this young Prince, but yet he goes on farther. Even in the first year of his
reign, he opens the doors and repaires them; and which is more, does send
for the Priests and Levites those which ought rather to have prevented him, and
commanded them to cast forth the filthiness. By filthiness he meant all kinds of
strange services. All what was not in the law, that counted he to be strange;
and because they might have said, as we at this day; have not our fathers lived
as well as thou? what will thou the^ do? He cutteth the^ short with this, our
fathers have trespassed, 2. Chron. 29. v. 6.7.
and done evil in the eyes of the Lord our God, and have turned away their
faces from him and turned their backs; they have quenched the lamps of the
Temple: What light the^ can we look for, or what darkness ought not we to expect
from them? And therefore did they arise at this word, and gathered their
brethren, and being convicted and sorrowful in their hearts sanctified
themselves, cleansed the house of the Lord, and carried the filth thereof out
unto the brook; that it might never at any time be remembered. And all this was
done according to the commandment of the king, as it is said there? But what
is added? V. 15.
By the word of the Lord: as before was said of Iosaphat. And that for to
abolish all false worshippings. He begins afterward to establish the true
worship, and the manner of their sacrifices, by the same authority, and in the
like method, according to the commandment, says he, of David, and Gad, and
Nathan. V 25.
This might seem enough to content them, seeing these were such excellent
prophets. But does he stay there and thinks he thereby to have satisfied them?
No, but he takes it yet higher. In the church of God, wherein we must not live
after examples or the commandments of men; for the commandment, says he, V.
25.
was by the hand of the Lord, and by the hand of his Prophets. And we must not
think that all this while Hezekiah was attended upon or assisted by others in
that manner, as so good a work might have required. The Priests, in the very
reformation of these sacrifices, are found to be but few in number. Those,
which have the chiefest charge in the church, are not always the first that do
reform it: for want of them, he was constained to set a work the Levites; we
in our days might say for want of Bishops, the Priests or Deacons, those which
are less bound to prevent and forbid these corruptions. The Levites, says
the holy story, being found to be, V. 34. and 35
more up right in heart for to sanctify themselves, then the Priests, etc: And
so the service of the house of the Lord was set in order. In the like manner
does Hezekiah proceed to the reformation of the sacraments; he publishes a
passover to be kept throughout al Israel and that such a passover, says the
author of this holy story, as for a long time before they had not celebrated,
after that manner as it is written, to wit, in the law of God. For a long time
before, says he; This might have been enough to stop all reformation; and if
we had lived at that time, we had bin ready to tell them, have not our fathers
done it on this manner? Are they all damned? What need is there then of such a
change? will we be wiser then they? wifer the^ the Priests? wifer then the
church it self? But what then would Hezekiah have told us? The same truly,
that he told them: 2. Chron. 30.16.
Ye children of Israel, turn again unto the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob. It is no time now to stay still in these Abuses. And he caused this to
be cried every where throughout the land. V. 7.
Be not ye like your fathers and like your brethren, which trespassed against
the Lord God of their fathers. What proportion, I pray you, is there between
that respect, which you owe to your earthly fathers, and that duty, which you
owe to the Lord God of you and of your fathers also? There were not wanting,
says be some men in Ephraim, Manassen, and Zebulun, that mocked them, being
now grown old in their filthiness; nevertheless the greater part submitted
themselves: In Judah especially, with one heart, V. 12.
according to the word of the Lord. They take away therefore the altars that
were in Jerusalem, and all those for incense took they away, and they
celebrated the passover, according to the Law. Some at legth of the Priests
were asha^ed, and sanctified the^selus, the Levits supplying the places and the
duty of those that were obstinate against the^. And the like thing the like
passover, was not seen in Jerusalem since the time of Solomon and of David,
V. 26.
for many ages together. And it follows in the same place, that as soon as
the passover was finished, by the same commandment, all the people being
inflamed with a new zeal, went out, and brake the images, and cut down the
groves, and brake down the high places and the altars. But behold, they did
more yet; at the same time also, (for it is to be read in the same verse, the
Author makes not two narrations of this and that which went before, 2 King 18
v 4. Numb. 21 v. 9.
) he brake in pieces the brazen serpent that Moses had made by the express
commandment of God, for a present remedy against the bitings of those fiery
serpents, to him that did look on it; as a sign of Christ the Son of God,
which was to be lifted up on a tree, for a remedy against sin, the biting of
that old serpent, to him that would turn the eyes of his faith toward him.
Because that now indeed, of that present use, which remained no longer, they
had made an abuse: of the sign and sacrament of Christ which was to come, they
had made it as the thing it self, and had given unto it divine honors: and
had lastly converted this so healthful an image into an abominable idol.
Wherefore also, when he brake it, he gave them to understand, that it was but
Nehushtan, a piece of brass contemptible in it self, and hereafter for ever
unprofitable, I and dangerous too, by reason of that relation which it had unto
Christ, seeing they abused it. And he was very highly commended for it by the
Spirit of God, for having done uprightly in the sight of the Lord, and because
he trusted in the God of Israel: for having laid aside al humane
considerations, that he might retain or restore the purity of his service.
And indeed by reason of the condition of the church wherein we observed her
to have bin at that time, as also by reason of the co^nivence the slacknes and
corruption of the Priests, which then were; it is not to be doubred, but that
he met with some that contradicted him; and then is it not said here for
naught, that he trusted in God, to wit, against the murmuring of the people;
And, unto those days the children of Israel burned incense to it; alleging
without doubt, a prescriptio^ of so many years, but especially, that this
serpent was instituted by God and erected by Moses himself. But against all
this, that answer which our Savior gave here to the Pharisie; stood him
insteede: Non sic fuit ab mitio, From the beginning it was not so. It was
ordained to be a remedy for you against the biting of he serpents in the
wilderness; and now you are no longer in that ^ase. For a sign, that on that
Christ which was to come, the son of the living God, did depend all your
health both temporal and spiritual; and you now have attributed all that to
this image, and transferred the honor of the Creator to the creature, of the
ordeiner himself to the thing ordained by him. And therefore has he now
brought it back again to his first nature. And I would to God we had not
many things in our Christian Religion, which have very great need of the like
remedy.

Josiah likewise is renoumed amongst the kings of Israel, 2 Chronicles. 34. and. 35.
because he had reformed the church: and that on good grounds for Manasseh had
defiled all the service thereof, and had brought in false Gods in steed of the
Almighty, and Amon his son, the father of Josiah, had not done much better
then he. 2 King. 22 and 23.
Josiah began this reformation, by repairing the ruins of the Temple, whereof
he laid the charge on Hilkiah the high Priest. It happened so, that Hilkiah
amongst many other old registers, 2 King, 22
which he sought for, found the book of the Law in the Temple. You may imagine
to what a straight the church was brought, when the high Priest himself
finds this book but by a chance. No sooner had he found it, but he sends
it to Josiah by Shaphan the Secretary, which read it be fore him; therein he
finds, that it was a thing of nothing to build up again the Temple of God,
unless he also would establish again his service; that it rained not only on
the horse top, as they say; but that the inside also was posaned, and the
Sanctuary filled with Idolatry. And hereupon begins he now to detest the
sin of the Church: rent his clothes, takes counsel with the Prophetess,
and humbles himself. Here the Priest might have comforted himself with this:
that he knew his lesson by heart, and might have contented him with the
tradition of the Church; which never fails, never lies; but what do'es he?
He gathers together the Priests and the Levits in the house of God; all Judah,
all Jerusalem, from the very least to the greatest. At that time was it not
the fashion to get a dispensation for to read the holy Scriptures? In the
midst of them all he causes this book to be read: which being read, he
makes a covenant to observe it, and binds therewith all the people. And
after all this, he purges the Temple from all idolatry and superstition, and
drives out all the Priests thereof, he casts their vessels into the fire,
and breaks down the high places, even those that were in the cities of Judah,
having been tolerated by so many good kings, and in the which the Priests of
the stock of Leui those that had their lawful calling, did sacrifice unto the
true God. And hereupo^ there might have been much to gainesay: what is there
wanting to these sacrifices? Are they not offered to him and by those, to whom
and by whom they ought to be offered? Is this therefore any thing else, but a
desire of noveltie. And put the case, that there is some defect in them, is it
not for all that tolerable, having already been tolerated by so many good
kings, by so many high Priests, for so many years to gether? And is it not in
this, that that law of policy is to take place, that a thing once well settled,
though it be evil, ought not to be taken away, but to shun all
inconveniences it ought to be left still in his place? And nevertheless our rule
makes him not stick at all this; Deuteronomy. 12, v. 11.
From the beginning it was not so. There shall be a place (says Moses) which
the Lord shall choose to cause his name to dwell there; thither shall you bring
all your burnt offerings and your sacrifices, etc. Take heed, V. 1^.
that thou offer them not in every place that thou see, and which thou
think to be fit for thy purpose. As if he said, for I will not take any of
thy pretended supererogations for sacrifices or worshipping. I will be
worshipped, according to that which I have commanded thee, and not after thine
own fancy. Because indeed that God, the very reason and cause of all things,
has his end in all whatsoever he ordeineth; for to direct all nations to the
sacrifice of his only son alone, he would have but one temple, one
sanctuary, and one altar, whereas thou do darken and confound his meaning,
by thine own inventions, by thy pretended good purposes, and by such a
multitude of thine high places and thine altars; every sacrifice of thine is a
wrong worship. Therefore also is it said, in that which follows; that he
commanded the people to keep the Passover. But how? As it is written in the
book of the covenant; 2 Kin. c. 23
according to the word of the Lord delivered by the hand of Moses. He sends
them to the original, to the old form thereof; and indeed it is added, There
was no Passover holden like that from the days of the Judges that judged
Israel, V. 22.
nor in all the days of the kings of Israel and of the kings of Judah; not in
Samuels time, no nor in the time of Hezekiah himself. So necessary a thing
did he esteem it, to keep himself exactly to the law of the Lord, and to
his holy Scriptures.

In the time of the captivity of Babylon, the Church of God, Gods Israel, in
the midst of the Chaldeans, those great masters of ceremonies and patrons of al
idolatry and superstition, could not possibly have stood out so long without
being corrupted. What does then Esdras in this case, when he brings back the
people into Jerusalem? How does he proceed to set them in order again? Truly
it is said that, as soon as they were come into Jerusalem, Ieshua the son of
Iozadak, with his brethren the Priests, and Zerubbabel the son of Salathiel,
the captain of the transmigration, Builded the altar of the God of Israel to
offer thereon, Esd 3 v. 2
not according to their own fansy, nor according to that which they might have
learned in that medlie of the heathen; but, says he, as it is written in the
law of Moses, the man of God. As if it were said, that they calling to mind
the punishment of the sons of Aaron, which were consumed by the fire of the
wrath of God, for having offered unto him a strange fire; they reestablish
after the same manner the service of God in Jerusalem, as it is written in the
book of Moses; they are not ashamed to go and learn their lesson therein. And
yet are we not to think, that they wanted amongst the^ such men as were of
courage, and had in the^ presumption enough, to add somewhat of their own
thereunto. Lastly, to apply somewhat nearer our text to this purpose; Esdras the
restorer of the Church at that time, was fully informed, how that many of the
cheifest of the people, yea and so^e Priests also against the express law of
the Lord, had taken unto themselves strange wives, Chap. 9.
of those nations which were forbidden them; whereupon he rent his clothes,
plucked of the hair of his head and of his beard, fell on his knees, and
confessed both his own and the peoples sins in the presence of God; V. 7.
from the days of our fathers, says he, have we been in a great trespass
unto this day. The longer that the sin had lasted, the greater does he
acknowledge to be the fault: so far was he from taking thereby any right
occasion to continue it. But did he stay here only? No, he returned* to his
principle; Thou had forbidden us to do so, Levit 18. ^. 25 27.
says he, by thy servants the Prophets, Deuteronomy. 7.3.
etc. And now shall we return to break these commandments? Shall we go on
still, o Lord, in these abominations? So that being strengthened by the
assistance of honest men, and amongst others by Shechaniah the son of Iehiel,
he caused the people to swear and bound them with a new oath to the keeping
of Gods law, that law especially, which forbad all these incestes; whence
ensued forth with the putting away of all their strange wives, and that by the
common consent of the people and of the Priests themselves, which at the
reading of the law were convicted of their faults. This was a hard sentence you
will say, as also an harder execution, to part asunder so many households, and
to rent in two the wife from the husband, the children from the mother. And
what became then all this while of Esdras his wisdom? Was there no Pope
amongst them in those days, that might have dispensed with them for this? But
rather if thou beleevest the Lord, when he has spoken, would thou have had
him cast Gods people again into that furnace from whence they were but newly
come; and that the wrath of the Lord for disobedience (they are the very words
of the law) should waxhot against them, Deuteronomy ^, 4.
and destroy them suddenly? So certain is that maxim in all good divinity,
that we ought to obey God without looking back; and in a matter of reformation
we ought to do nothing by roate, but have always recourse unto this book.

Our Lord therefore, which was come in our flesh to reform the Church, does
give us also the same rule, a rule indeed pronounced by him in this one case;
but yet it extends it self over all whatsoever concerns Gods service, and
therefore is it herein so much the more to be put in practice, as this is a
matter of greater mystery and weight. As also we learn the same in Gods law
concerning his service. So says he in another place, where he instructs his
Disciples: Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the Prophets: Matthew.
5. v. 17.
The reformation of the church has always bin subject to this slander. I am
come to fulfill them, to recall the law unto his right observation, to restore
unto it his due and natural interpretation, and to keep it from all
traditions, inventions, and Pharisaical glosses, the which under a color of
giving light unto it, do indeed darken it: insteede of establishing it, do
destroy it; instead of honoring it, do make a mock of it. You have heard
that it was said by them of the old time, your Doctors, and your Fathers, Thou
shall not kill, for whosoever kills shall be culpable of judgment. V. 21.
For to avoid this judgment they have taught you, that it was enough not to
kill at all; likewise it was said; Thou shall not commit adultery. V. 27.
And they have made you believe, that you were free from this law, if only you
kept your selves from acting this sin. Like wise; V. 43.
Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy. And in like manner all
the other commandments. But I say unto you I that am the true law giver, that
know the meaning of the Father, of that eternal Father, the creator of
bodies and spirits, which gives his law alike to the one and to the other;
That whosoever hates his brother has already killed him; whosoever looks on
a woman, to lust after her, has already committed adultery with her. And, if
so be you do not help your greatest enemies, even those which persecute you,
then are you not his children, but the children of hell. Calling them back in
this manner from their Fathers (as we have observed throughout in the state of
the church of Israel) to the God of their Fathers; from the gloss, to the
text; from the letter, to the spirit, to the right purpose of the Law giver,
and to the reason^ of the law. And this did the Pharisees say we, to blaspheme
the Temple, and to call Moses in question; in these days amongst us men would
say it were, to condemn the Fathers, and to overthrowe the Church. Behold
therefore this rule, which our Savior gives us: from the beginning it was not
so. This was not the will of him that made the Testament; let this rule but be
stretched out over the building of the church; and then, whatsoever shall be
found to be out of this line, or out of the squire, let it be censured to be
also out of the work, let it be condemned to be battered by the hammer, and
to be cut of from the faith and doctrine of the church. Let S. Paul be an
example unto us even in those first times. For men, in matters of religion, can
never go on very far without straying, unless they always take this guide
along with them. Eve^ in his time was the holy supper of the Lord profaned
amongst the Corinthians; in this church of God, by the^ that were sanctified in
Christ Jesus, Cor. 1.2.
and Saints by calling: for so he terms them. But what says he to them?
Every man, when they should eat, (...). 11. v. 21
takes his own supper before, etc. And one is hungry and another is drunken.
This is not to eat the Lords Supper. This is not to celebrate that holy
Sacrament, it is rather to despise his church. Here then is a remedy for it. I
have received, says he of the Lord, V. 23
that which I also have delivered or taught unto you. Theodor i^ 1. de (...) ^.7
And hereupon does he rehearse unto them at large the whole institution of the
Lords Supper, in the same manner as we find it in the Gospel; As I have
received it, even so have I delivered it unto you; It is now your duty, if you
will be Christians, to observe it accordingly. S. Peter also perceiving that
he was now shortly to leave this world, Gelas. Cilic. in Act. Conc. ^ic
does not tell the churches to the which he wrote; after my decease, do not
much trouble your selves about that which you are to do; I will instruct you
sufficiently by revelations, and visions; there shall scarce be one week in
the which I will not give you some new Article of faith, or deliver unto you
some new ceremony or other. But on the contrary he says; Seeing I know that
the time is at hand, that I must lay down this my tabernacle, 2. Pet 1. v.
14, and 15.
I will endeavor therefore always, that after my departing ye also may be able
to have remembrance of these things, that is, of the doctrine of salvation,
which opens unto the^ an entrance into the everlasting kingdom of Christ
Jesus. To wit I my self beating this doctrine into you so deep, whilst I am
yet amongst you in this Tabernacle, that, after I shall have left you, you
cannot forget it. Which also was the reason, why that great Emperor Constantine
in the midst of all the hard contentions of his time went no where for help
but thither. There is nothing more unworthy said he to the Bishops of his
time, then to wrangle one with another about the controversies of divine
matters, seeing that we have the doctrine of the holy Ghost in writing. And,
the books of the Evangelists and Apostles, together with the Oracles of the
ancient Prophets, do teach us evidently, what we ought to conclude about
divine matters, and therefore laying aside all discord, let us take the
decision of all our controversies out of those words, which were inspired by
God.

What then? Is it now behouefull to reduce the Christian Church to this rule?
The church truly has always fitly been compared to a ship: and no ship can
keep his right way without a compass to direct it; if at some time it be not
looked upon, how good and skillful soever the Pilot or the Mates of the ship
be, we are not to think it strange, if she be much out of the way. This ship
also has floted up and down for many years together, and has run upon many
strange coasts: it were then a marveile, if she were not soiled, or had not
gathered on the out side much moss, many worms and shells; and in the inside
much corruption, contagion, and all kinds of vermin; or if she did not leake
for a long time already on so many places, where every one brings his
superfluities, and leaves his excrements, but no man in all this time has
taken the beasom in hand or set hand to the Pumpe. It were a miracle indeed if
there had bin left any thing entire. And wretched me^ that we are, being our
selves full of nastinesse in the midst of all this filth; yet do we cry out
blasphemy, if any one smell it; and curse him, that will take it away. She
has moiled her anchor within the have^s, yea and in the mud also and owze, of
Jews, Pagans, Philosophers Peripatetiks, Academikes, both old and new. She
has been fraighted with their merchandise, with their inventions. From the
one, she has put on the ceremonies, which from henceforth ore without any
mystery; and from the others, she has borrowed their superstition and
Idolatry: from the one, by a forcible imitation, she has confirmed the
presumption and merits of man, contrary to the end of the whole law and
Gospel; from the others they have received fables for truth, Poesies for
history, Mythology for Divinity: for these ten or twelve hundred years
together, we have had no other trade, no other traficke, being always
mingled, (like unto the people of Israel, not once looking on the law) with
strange women; and yet do we find it strange, that our progeny, our religion,
is become bastard? can we believe, if the Apostles of our Lord, if all those
Apostolical men, of the next age, should come hither once again, that they
would find as much as one step of the old discipline and Christian policy;
Amongst us truly has now been verified that tale, which goes about, of him
that took a prisoner, but was carried away by him himself. We have converted
many Jews and Pagans unto Christ; but they have perverted us: we have baptized
them; but they have plunged us in their filthiness: and from henceforth, if we
now convert one amongst t^em, we make them twice as much the sons of hell.

Come thou then hither, and question with our Lord Jesus Christ, not as a
Pharisie to te^pt him, but as a true Christian with a good conscience to learn
of him. Master, teach me how to pray; I know, that I ought to call upon God, but
I am told, that I ought also to call upon the Angels and Saints, and set them a
work as intercessers unto thee. Is this lawful? He will tell thee with out
doubt, (for he cannot do otherwise, being neither contrary to God nor to
himself,) Have thou not read, that which is written; Call upon me, and I will
hear thee, and thou shall give me the praise. And know thou not that he,
in whom men believe, is one only God, according to thy Creed, the Father, the
Son, and the holy Ghost? And how often is it rehearsed unto thee, that there
is but one only Mediator between God and men: he alone, that could make their
peace with the Father and their propitiation in his blood? And hereupon as thy
Pharisees, thou can not choose but make reply on this manner: why then does
such or such a father direct us to this or to that Martyr? But he will answer
us again: For the hardness of your heart, and out of the weakness of theirs,
was this so done. You come but new and fresh from the service of false Gods;
These good men thought then to have gained much, when they had caused you to
put the^ away, and to take the Saints for a change insteede of them; But from
the beginning it was not so. For the space of 4. or 5. thousand years
together, men spoke not of calling upon any other in the church, but on God
alone; the Angels were co^versant with the Patriarks: does any one call upon
them? Henoch and Eliah were taken up into heaven; Noe or his children, Elisha
or his other disciples, do they come unto them? Of so many Psalms of David,
which are as so many prayers, in all that diversity of matter, is there any one
only that has any other object of his faith, and of his prayer, but him alone?
And am I come to derogate from his glory, I the beloved Son from the Fathers
worship, or rather to establish it, and so much the more to glorify him? I
then tell you that which I long since told to Satan; Thou shall worship the
Lord thy God, Marth. 4.
and him only shall thou serve. And invocation is one of the chief parts of
his worship, of his service. From the weakness of some of my servants do not you
take al your stre^ght: out of their wants, do not you seek a supply either of
the law of God, or of my Gospel: and from my patience by reason of my long
forbearance, do not you make a law, nor think to plead prescription against
the true religion and pure worship. That which the Lord has reserved unto
himself alone, do not you turn it away upon the creature, do not part it.

Let another come, and say thus; Master, we are al in doubt amidst al these
controversies. Is it lawful to reverence, to adore the Images of the Saints,
of the Virgin Marie, thine own, that also of the holy Trinity? And he will
answer doubtless, he which is come to establish the law and not do destroy
it; Have thou not read what is written in the law; in that law, which was given
by the ministry of the holy Angels? Thou shall not make any grave^ image;
Exodus 20.
thou shall not bow down to them, neither serve them. Do thou not look for
some plainer or more express speech? Or is it need, that you should have a
gloss hereupon? There follows therefore the reason of it. For says he, I am
the Lord thy God; a mighty and jealous God. And can his nature then be changed
now? And yet thou will not be ashamed to reply: why the^ have our Masters
given the^ unto us for books instead of the Gospels? When we guild them, cloth
them, perfume them, worship them, call upon them; is there any thing in all
this, whereof God may complain? To whom does this honor redounde but to him,
his Saints being glorified in their images, and he in his Saints? But know
thou (will he answer thee) that God, as he is a Spirit, so he will have such
as worship him in spirit and truth; he will be worshipped, as he himself has
commanded, and not after the fancies of men. Know also that an image is a
teacher of lies, Habak. 2, v. 18.
and makes of men beasts, and confou^deth those that are inclined thereunto;
and as for those Masters that have given you images insteede of Masters, they
did this since the time that they are become ignorant and careless and have
bin dispensed withal for not preaching my Gospel, dumb Pastors as they were
themselves they have give^ thee these dumb preachers. But from the beginning
it was not so, before the law and under the law, for the space of four
thousand years, the church of God has had no images. To have them or not to
have them, as some particular liverie, did then put a difference between the
believer and the infidel. Yea and for eight hundred years together, since the
time that by me grace was come into the world in the better part of Europe, in
France it self, there were none of them. I therefore say unto you. Of the
ignorance of your Masters do not you make your knowledge; make not your
Christianity of the imitation and emulation of Paganism; The word of the Lord
stands fast for ever. That which once he has ordained, he never
superannuateth nor disanulleth.

Let another proceed, I know Lord, that thou art the Lamb, which take away
the sins of the world. But we are told also of a certain fire, at our going
out of this world, wherein we must be purged, and must for all this pay and
make even our rekoning; what must I believe in this matter? And thereupon he
will tell thee all that, which the holy Scripture teaches us: have thou not
read, what my Prophets say, That I was wounded for your transgressions, Esai.
53. v, 5.
and broken for your iniquities, and that the chastiseme^t of your peace was
upon me. God which is al justice, all mercy, will he have the same debt paid
twice? Zachary says, There shall be a fountain opened to the house of David,
Zachary. 13. v. 1.
to the Church, for sin, for every uncleanness whatsoever; and I verily am
this fountain, a fountain that never dries up; to what purpose serves thy
fire if this water do suffice? And that this water is not sufficient, who can
say it without blasphemy. But yet if thou will have a fire also, hear what
John the Baptist says; Matthew.
I baptize thee with water and with fire. Thy spirit indeed with a spiritual
fire, even with mine own spirit. And here thou will reply (for thou art for
bidden to yield) But S. Augustine, and S. Gregory do not they speak of a
fire, to the which we must go when we depart out of this world? Do not they
say, thee it is not altogether incredible that there is one, and that it may be
true? And at all adventures has it not been a good thing to keep the souls
in such aw? For how many fair Churches have been founded thereby, how many
cloisters, Chapels, and Masses? And will you then have the old doubts of
those men to be unto you as articles of faith? The fables of Platonikes as
truth? The fictio^s of Poets, as sound divinity? Our Lord moreover will say
unto thee. He that believes in the Son, has life everlasting, he is already
gone from death to life; he that believes not in him, the wrath of God
remains upon him; he is already condemned, and shall not see life. Between
these two where can thou find any place for this Purgatory? And then will
the Son of God say unto thee again; Do not stand upon that which the
Doctors tell thee thereof; They could never create it. From the beginning it
was not so. If it had been from the beginning, there is no question but the
Church of Israel would have made use of it; by so much the more, because that
fountain, for the cleansing of sin, was not as then opened. And yet for
four thousand years together, is there any one word spoken of it? Amongst so
many sacrifices, and those of so many fashions; is there any one word spoken of
such sacrifices, as were for the dead or for their sins? And if it had been
created since that time, would then the Apostles have hidden it from us? would
they have told us. Blessed are they that die in the Lord, from henceforth they
do rest from their labors. If we confess our sins God is faithful and
just; The blood of his Son Jesus Christ does purge and cleanse us from all
sin. This Purgatory then is a strange fire in the Church; such a one, as
quenches her natural heat, her confidence in the merit of the Redeemer. And
therefore; That which the Lord has paid and quitted for us so dearly, so
fully, the faithful man needs not to buy it again; Let no servant of God
therefore sell it him again.

Let another also come, that perhaps has looked more deeply into it; and say,
Master, I know that thou have bin made an oblation on the tree of the Cross,
and wiped out, and utterly abolished the handwriting that was against us. And
nevertheless we are told, that thou art every day offered up, every day
sacrificed in Mass; and hereupon is all this stir; To what opinion therefore
shall we stand fast? and hereupo^ he will tell thee Have thou not read, what Esaias
says of me; His soul shall be made an oblation for sin; The soul of the
Son of God. At what rate the^ do thou reckon her? and know thou not that
I have given my flesh for the life, and my blood for the remission of the sins
of the world? In comparison of this price, all your pretended. Oblations can
amount to nothing. Know thou not also, that likewise all the other
sacrisices of the Law, are fulfilled and abolished in this one only? And here,
either blown up by tradition, or forestalled by custom, thou will reply; but
would then our Fathers for so long time together have made so great account of
the Mass, and all for nothing? Why then, art thou not then, really with thy
flesh and bones, sacrificed therein every day? Did not men speak of this
oblation, even in the time of good S. Gregory, not above six hundred years
after thine incarnation. The ill disposed facility of men in accommodating
themselves to infidelity, has brought in these things; And this carnal
wisdom, has been found to be but natural, and is rightly convicted of folly
before God. The outward worship of Jews and Gentiles consisted in sacrifices;
and when they have been brought to the Christian faith, they were willing to
content them with the word of sacrifice taken in a large sense; with this word
did they qualify the christian service; their prayers, their Sacraments, their
Alms. How far safer had it been, to keep them in their own propriety; and
to teach them the right end of the old sacrifices; that is, their end in my
cone only Sacrifice? I had also appointed for a sacrament of this one sa
crifice, of my flesh crucisied and of my blood shed for you, That bread which
you break, (...). Cor. 10 (...). 16.
the Communion of my body; that cup which you bless, the Communion of my
blood. The real communication in sum of all the blessings and benesittes,
that redound unto you by this sacrifice. And in as much as their devotion did
wax cold, instead of making my people participate of them, they have thought it
enough only to she we them unto them, they have also taken my cup from them.
But I say unto you, that From the beginning it was not so. Do but read the
Apostle; Without sheading of blood is no remission of sin. Heb 9. v. 22.
And will thou therefore for the remission of thy sins take unto thy self
the place of the Jews; will thou once again shed my blood? Read on further
that which he rehearses unto thee so often; Christ has appeared once to put
away sin by the sacrifice of him self. V. 26.
It is not then for naught, that they show him so many times unto thee?
Again, We are sanctified by the offering of the body of Ie^sus Christ once
made. C. 10. v. ^0
With one offering has he consecrated us for ever. and iffoneuer, V. 14.
why then do we begin again every day? That therefore, which I have fulfilled
at once, effectually, and perfectly, do not thou accuse it of imperfection by
reiterating it; do not darken the truth, nor belie the virtue thereof, by the
frivolous repre sentations. That which I have given thee for a Sacrament, and
thanksgiving, of that unspeakable benesit, do not thou account it as a
Sacrifice. That which God has joined, seeing I have joined them, to wit, the
sacraments in my holy Supper; thou man, under what color soever it be, do not
separate them.

But lastly, could our Fathers then oversee so grossly? These good kings,
Iosaphat, Hezekiah Iozia^, those good servantes of God, Hilkiah, Esdras, and
others, did never make this question. Seeing they had the book of the law, and
did know, that therein they had the ordinances of God, they rent their clothes,
beat their breasts, confessed both their own and their fathers sins before
the Congre gation; they exhorted, and by their own example brought, the whole
people to repentance. What therefore, could our Savior ever leave us as
Orphans, and his bark without a guide? On the contrary, has he not left us a
lieuetena^t general, a vice-God, this man God on earth? Else what becomes of
that, Tues Pe trus, Pasce oves meas, Thou art Peter: and, feed my sheep. But
here our Lord will answer thee. I am that everlasting word, that was made flesh
for thee. The on ly Emmanuell, God with thee; with you, by my Spirit in mine
holy word; I am with you until the end of the world. Ma^th. 28
As for lieuetenants, I have as many, as there are good Pastors and holy
dispensers of my word and Sacraments here on earth. But as for General, or
Vice-God, there ought none to be over my state because I am every where
present, I have no need of any; how much so ever the man be limited to a
certain place, or be he as quick as he will or is able to be. I have said
indeode unto Peter, one of mine Apostles, and unto one for all. Thou art Peter,
and on this Rock will I build my church. On this Rock, that is, on his co^
fession; for he had confessed unto me, Matthew. 16
Thou art the Christ the son of the living God. And thereupon have you placed
under an Altar at Rome, the supposed Relics of Peter, and have called them
the confession of Peter. On this pretended confession have you built S. Peter's
church. It was not so that this holy Apostle understood it, when he told us,
Pe^* 2. v. ^.
Be ye as lively stones made a spiritual house. But upon what? truly not upon
this your confession, but upon his own, upon him that is that living stone,
rejected by me, and yet the chief Cornerstone, elect and precious in Gods
eyes. I told him also, the gates of hell should not prevail against it; and all
the power of Satan shall be found weak against it. And you have thereby
gathered, that it must be a temporal, puissant, and invincible Empire. But
Peter understood far better this my style and language; He that shall believe
in it in this living Stone, in me that am the Rock of Israel, shall never be
confounded. I had likewise said unto Peter, I will give thee the keys of the
kingdom of heaven, Ioh. 22.
whatsoever thou bindest on earth shall be bound in heaven. And I gave them
indeed unto him, and unto all his fellows, after my resurrection; to wit, the
ministry of reconciliation by the preaching of the Gospel. And thence you
have concluded Thou art Peter; Ergo, the Bishop of Rome is the universal Bishop
of the world; he shuts, and no man opens, he opens and no man shuts,
He has in his hands al power both temporal and spiritual, he opens heaven,
he shuts hell, and quenches the fire in Purgatory, he commands the
Angels he keeps in awe the Devils, he saves or da^neth men, at his own
pleasure; he gives dispe^^ations contrary to the law of God, and to his
Gospel; being not so much in the place of God as against God himself. And yet
are we bound to believe, that God is changed in opinion when he is altered in
his. But between these two propositions; Thou art Peter, and The Bishop of
Rome is Vice-God, nay more then God. What a gulf is there to be filled? And
whence can it be filled, but from that bottomless deep? How much better did
the holy Apostle understand this: Feed my sheep, that is with my word. Feed,
says he, you Priests my fellows in the Priest hood, the flock of Christ
which is committed to your charge not as bearing rule over the inheritance of
the Lord, be they of the Clergy or laymen, but so, that ye may defend the
flock. And when the chiefe^ shepherd shall appear, you shall receive that
incorruptible crown of glory. And not here on earth a triple crown or
kingdom. This therefore was the meaning of the Lord, far different from thy
gloss, and yet Peter himself is the interpreter. And therefore would he have
answered thee here, as before. From the beginning it was not so. The first
Bishops of Rome, for the space of 300. years, under the Heathen Emperors, for
the most part were all Martyrs, and knew never what this temporal jurisdiction
meant. As for the 400. years following, under the Christian Emperors, they
were humble servants; they obtained from them their grants, immunities, and
privileges, and held as it were from them their chief authority: so far
were they from once speaking of giving the^ any, or making the^ their feudarie
vassals. As for the 300. ensuing years, they begin to embrace them, to
undermine them, and by tricks and smooth dealing defeat the one by an other; do
at the length set themselves in their place; they seize upon their dwellings,
they put on their scarlet, inuest themselue^ with their crown, set footing
upon their Empire, bewitch their subjects, and with their feet they spurn at
their own persons. A long time after, and, as it were, through a long wood,
come in by degrees the Iubilies, Indulgences, and Faires or Markets of sin, the
banks of Pardons; the Agnus Dei, the hallowd grains and every day some new
bables or others. In so much that for these 600. years and more, the most
learned and flourishing years of the Christian church, she could not look so
deeply into these mysteries, as to understand (eve^ the Romish church it
self, as much Latin as she was) the virtue and force of these two Latin words;
ecce duo gladij, Behold here two swords. (What likeliehood is there in it?)
Therefore he that uses them with both his hands at this day, though he have
no other Mission, no other Commission, yet shall be unto us a Vice-God? And what
else can he be, being he will have himself to be so, and calls himself so, if
he be it not?

Thus therefore by this one word; Non sic fuit ab initio. from the beginning it
was not so, does our Lord here call us back to a reformatio of the abuses of
the church, in all her parts, according to his first institution, according to
his word. And let these few points serve unto us for scantlings; as one beam
of the Sun; one drop of the Sea. You may after the like manner run over all
the rest. And would to God that in good time we had practiced this rule in
Christendom; how many contentions, schisms, wars, massacres, and co^fusions,
might we the^ have spared and avoided? of the which we are culpable, and
hereafter must give account. Whereas at the sighs and groans of so many
great and holy persons, throughout all Christendom, for so many ages
together, we have out of pure pride only answered them with this. It was
impossible the church should err she cannot err. What conscience was there
in this? And had not they the^ cause enought to be leeue, that this was the
voice of that woman in the Apocalypse, I am a Queen, and shall never be a
widow? Say we therefore with the Prophet, We have departed from thy precepts
and from thy judgments. Our Kings, our Priests, Dan. 9. v. 5
our fathers, all our people; and let us not stand any longer upon our
reputation, or think to mainetaine our credit. V. 7.
Unto thee belongs righteousness and unto us open shame, Unto thee, o Lord be
the glory of our repentance, of our confession, of our confusion, and of our
shame; to the edification of thy church, and the salvation of our own souls,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

Soli Deo gloria.
Errata.
Page 18. lin. 4. for give read give. p. 31. l. vit. for clean r. clear. p.
42. l. 31 for connected r. converted. p 52. l. 22. for see r. set. p 58. l. 7.
for extuberacie, r. an extuberancie p. 62 l 4 for they r. then. p. 67. l. 19.
for unprofitable r. unprofitably. l. 21 for to our r. and to our p. 68. l. 8.
for all r. already. p. 87. lin. 6 for take r. took p. 93. l 4. for rent r.
rents.


