AN INVECTIVE AYENSTE the great and detestable vice, treason, wherein the
secret practices, and traitorous workinges of them, that suffrid of late are
disclosed.

made by Richard Morisyne.

A preface to the reders.
I DOVBTE NOT gentle reders, but that if ye have been conuersante in old
histories, and so perceived both how many moo princes have been endaungered by
treason of their famylyer servants, then by open war of their enemies, and
also seen, what end they come to, that venture upon so dangerous an
enterprise, ye woll think my labor not evil employed, which tends hole to
this end, that all subjects ones being brought into hatred of treason, may
at the last fall in love with their duty, and seek truly to serve, where god
has appointed them so to do. For as the incommodyties, that treason brings
into a common welthe, be exceeding many, and are often times the utter undoing
of rich and welthy realms, so, that kingdom must needs prosper and
flourishe, where all men strive, who may best do his duty, best serve his
country in that god and his sovereign lord has called him unto. We have
had often experience, how euylle they speed, what infamye comes to them,
what end they make, which at any time attempt treason against their
sovereign lord and king. These, which of late, lost their honor, lands,
and lives, are not the first, that have been moved with to many benefits, to
become traitors, no nor yet the first that came to shamfull death, for so
foul an enterprise. They have companyons, which though they be not able to goo
cheek by cheke with them, yet they comme not far behind.

Perennius, a man that had received wonderful many benefits of Co^modus
the emperor, where as he saw, but oone above him, thynkyng that he might by
treason, bring him down, and set up him self, trayterousely conspired the
death of Commodus, his lord and maker.

Plautianus an another, of all men most bound to Seuerus the emperor,
sought also to dystroye him, not that ever he had received any injury or
displesure at his hands, but that the blind desire he had to the Empire,
wrought much more in him, than could al themperours benefits.

Seianus as much bound, as any of the other two, even upon like cause, thought
to have slain Tiberius the emperor, his lord and master. But they came even to
such end, as did the Marquis, the lord Montacute, and such other, as by
their exaumple teach all men, that be not yet werye of their lives and
honesty, to be ware of treasone. Certaynely who so wayeth, how hard a thing it
is, to enter with any manne in treason, how full of ieoperdies, how few
there be, that a man may trust, how soon men may be deceived, taking
some to bear them much greatter love, than they do, how no experience can so
utter one man his heart to an another, that in such a case, he may leave life in
his hands, he woll, I suppose, much wonder, to see any man, though the fine
for it, were but the loss of goodis, so mad to venture upon treason. Many
chances make treason, when it is kept most secret, to appear. An heart, that
stylle feleth the stinge of treason, must needs at one time or an other, make
the tongue and countenance parttakers of his grefe.

Lucilla, sister to Commodus the Emperor, had appointed oone Quintianus to
slay her brother. This traitor waited for the Emperor at the entering in to
the Amphitheatre, and whenne he saw Comodus all most come to the place, where
he intended to have slain him, his hand, his tongue, his gesture, his
countenance, could suffer his heart to be no longer hyd. No, he having his
dagger ready naked, cried out, before the Emperor camme under the struck, This
the Senate sends the. Upon which words, he was taken, and Commodus
nothing hurt.

Likewise, Marcus Antonius of Uolterra, was set to kill Laurence Medices, and
had so done, but that he cried before, o traitor, which voice saved Laurence,
and disclosed as many as were of that conspiracy.

The same morning, that Brutus, and the rest of his fellows, had determined
to slay Julius Caesar, it so chanced, that Caesar commened a greatte space with
Gneius Popilius, oone of those that had conspired his death. Brutus and many mo
of his companions were bye, and were cast into such a fear, that they wyste
neither what to do, ne what to think. They all were a frayde, lest Popilius
had uttered the treson unto Caesar, and would even there have set upon him,
sauinge that they perceived Caesar his countenance nothing moved, ne his
color any thing altered. And yet if Caesar had read the letter, that was
delivered him, not half an hour before his death, he had known his
enemies counsel, and might have brought them all to their confusion.

The day before, that Sceuinus thought to have slain Nero, he put an old
rustie daggar, that had layne long by him, to gryndynge. He made his
testamente, he made all his bond men free, he gave every one of the^ a
certain sum of money, he caused rollers to be made, to wrap wou^des in, by
which tokens Milichius his servant, gathered, he went about some naughty
purpose, and so accused him unto the emperor. Sceuinus streyghte confessed
that his intent was to have slain Nero.

This I bring in, not so much to show that treason woll out, as to make men
see, how god plucketh wit and prudency from malyciouse traitors. He has done
so, where treason was intended against Nero, one of the worst princes, that ever
the world had, and trow traitors, he woll suffer Henry the eight, his chosen
king, a prince that chyefelye above all things, has sought and seeks, to
set forth his glory, to restore his holy word, to put down hypocrysie, to
banishe idolatry, and finally to bring this ones to pass, yt al his people,
may be as they are called, that is true chrystians? Read this little inuectiue
that follows, I trust by things past, ye shall perceive it, very unlike,
that any traitor here after may or can hurt his highness. Ye shall see who is
his gracis protector, from what dangers, he has preserved him, and thereby
gather an assured affyaunce, that traitors can but work their own confusion,
when so ever they seek to do his highness any displeasure. God hitherto has
wonderfully trodden down his graces enemies, still showing him self to be of
his side, if he be so stylle, as our trust is, he wol be ever, be traitor who
woll, he knows his end.

ALL BE IT I acknowledge my self neither so able as I am willing, neither so
meet as I am redye to write in such a matter, as I now have taken upon me,
yet trusting where my will is to do well, that though I faylle of thank,
I shall not mysse of pardon, I can not but admonyshe al my countray men in so
plentiful an occasion, that as the benefits of god be great, strange, and
almost every day cast upon us, or ere we can look for them, even so we woll
with thankful heart show our selfs to see and feel his godly goodness, And
where as such his fatherly love is much above our deserts, that yet we
agnise it, and as much as in us lies, endeavor our selfs abundantly to
thank him for it. God is never weary of doing good to man, but when either he
woll not se it, orels seeing it, refuses to thank him accordyngly. Can he ask
less for so many his benefittes then a few bareyn thanks, which do pleasure
only to him for this cause, that he thereby is made ready and much provoked to
laade us with some new kyndenesse, with some new benefyttes, with sum new
his gifts. He often lays sore to his chosen and elect people forgetfulness of
his benefitis toward them, commandynge in sondrye places, Moses, Iosue, Esaies,
Hieremias, Ezechiell, with the rest of the prophets, to rehearse his goodness
showed to them, and their unkindness uttered unto him, thinking as I take it,
that nothing could sooner bring them to love him, than thofte remembrance of
his benefytes, nothing more allure them to repentance and change of life,
than the just reproach of their unthankful heart in such a throng of his
gifts. I purpose not to stand long in old places of scripture, and yet I
can not without some hurt of my matter let all examples alone. wherefore I
will use a few in place of many. Moses called all Israel to him, Deuteronomy. 29.
and said in this wise to them: ye have seen what god did unto Pharao for
your sake: what he did to Pharao his host, and all the rest of his servants,
ye have seen many miracles, many strange wonders, and yet god has not given
you hearts to feel his goodness, eyes to see his tender love over you, ne ears
to here of any of both. I have led you forty years in the wilderness, and yet
your clothes are not worn: ye had neither bread ne drink, and yet to
the intent ye should remember god to be your lord, in lacking both, you were
peyned neither with hunger ne thyrste. Sehon king of Hesbon, and Og king of
Basan came with mighty power against you. They are slain, and you the lords of
their lands and possessions. etc.

God also does expostulate with the people of Israel by his messanger
Hieremias, Hierem. 2.
saying: What unfaithfulness found your forefathers in me, that they
departing from my laws and love, follow lightness and vanite: They have not
ones sithe^s their deperture thought in their hearts, where have we left the
lord? the lord that brought us out of the land of Egypt, the lord that
led us through the wyldernes, through the deserte, a rough, dry, and deedly
land, a land that no man had passed before, and where no man had dwelte.
I brought you into a land passing full of pleasure, adourned with gay and
gorgious buildinges, you enioyinge the fruits and commodities thereof, went
and defiled my land, and brought mine heritage to abomination. The pristes
them selfs (they were even then as many of ours be now) said not ones,
where is the lord. The sheperdes offend against me, the prophets do service
unto Baall, and follow such things as can do them no service. Esaias in many
places does also commemorate god his benefits toward the chyldern of Israel.
God does show him self very glad and wonderful desirous to employe his
benefitis upon them that seek to give him thanks for so doing: and can scarce
be brought to leave such as he has ones taken to his favor. For though their
sins be great, and their offenses many yet as long as he may bear with them,
he sticks not to forgive, so they be not dangerous and coy of their thanks.
Dauyd lacked no sins, as al me^ know that traueil in scripture, he lacked
none: and yet he had ever one yt forgave him al. And not only forgave him al,
but still laded him with new benefitis. Dauyd forgottethe not this synguler
goodness of god toward him, he suffers not goddis love to make any end
with him, he still increases his favor not so much by any merits, as by
praisynge the undeserved love of god. Love not sold unto him for works, but
given him, that he thereby might work. His psalms well testify, that he does
acknowledge what god did for him. He syngeth often thankful dities unto god, as
among many other, thus in the second of the kings, Cap. 22.
The Lord is my rock, my castle, my deliverer. God is my strength, and and in
him wol I trust: God is my shield, my fortress, my refuge. O my keeper, keep
thou me from wrong, I will praise the, and call upon the o lord, and so shall I
be kept from mine enmies. Who so lists to read all that follows, may when he
will, I have showed him the chapter. I must now follow present occasion, and
talk a while with my countraye. England, haste thou no cause to follow David,
to make himnes and dities of thanks unto god? when wolt thou perceive goddis
love toward the, if thou yet perceive it not? When wolte thou give him, or to
use a more apter term, when will thou pay him thanks, if thou now deny
thy self endetted to him? Thou must confess debt, thou canste not deny it,
without thy greatte shame. There be to many witnesses for thy nay, to take any
place: All nations wonder at thy felicity. All men know what ieoperdies thou
have escaped, how nighe sorrows brinke thou have ben brought, and straight
how sone thou haste ben made glad. I will not call to remembrance things
past many years syns, mark but the procedinges of god with the and thin these
four or five years. Way well the accidents, the chances, the progress, and
the end of things, that have fortuned, and than England see, whether thou have
not mo causes to think that god tendereth the health, welthe, and honor of
thy governor, and our dear and dredde soueraygne lord: than ever Israel
had to think so by king David, or any other. He must be well seen in feats
of arms, that shall find a place open, to wound him, whom god is buckeler
unto. God wolle not suffer his purposes, to be altered. Man may seek to
destroy, that god wolle have saved, but he shall do as much, as they that
seek to make strong rocks fall, with a knock of their hedes. For as these
labor folyshely, and do but break their own brains, so do they that think
to pull down a prince, whom god has chosen to reign over his people, both
declare their folly, and alsoo the goodness of god in preserving whom he
loves. There is none that trewely serves god, that can say, he has been in
distress, and not found succor at his hand, and yet compare them all with
our most fortunate prince, they have all found him no more propence and ready
to help them: then he has been to help his highness. 3. Reg. 19.
God left not his servant Elias fleinge the wroth and displeasure of
Iezabell, no he being without hope of life, and much desiring to dye, he
sent him an angel to comfort him, and food to refreshe him self withal, not
content with that, but spoke to him, him self, as ye may read, if ye desire to
know what god said to him. Daniel. 6.
Danyell was cast into a den of lions, god sent his angelle to stop the
lions mouth, and so Daniell was hurt in no part of his body. Iudic. 6.
God sent his angel to good Gedeon, when the Madianites had almost over
thrown the children of Israel. He talks long with Gedeon, abydinge his
sacrifice with many his tentations. Read the place, ye shall perceive how god
louethe, where he lyketh. Iosue. 5.
Iosue also saw a man standing anenst him, with a swerd ready drawn in his
hand, unto whom he went and said, Art thou our friend, or do thou take the
part of our adversaries? Answer was made: I am the chief of the lords
band. Judith* 13.
Judith also had an angel to her companion and guide, when she went to slay
Holofernes. I could bring in many mo examples, if my purpose were to enlarge
my mattier that way. As how god sent his angel to conducte the hooste of
the Israelites, when they passed the sees, and also how he sent his angel into
the furnace, where the three children lay in fire, and felt no heat. I could
show in what battles god has made his angels soldiers, but that is not
mine intent. I must make comparysons, and yet I trust they shall not be
odious. Read all scripture, and ye shall find no person that god preseruid
more tenderly, than he did his chosen and elect king David. For he being as
yet no king, but rather a poor subject of a mighty king, was in many
places persecuted of him and his host, and yet the goodness of god was such
toward him, that he escaped all the snares that long set malice had laid for
him. A puyssant prince desired a poor man's death, it would not be. Mighty
Saul miste of his purpose against sely David, and could not hurt his little
finger. Some percase woll think, here to take hold of me, and say, if god
could preserve a subject against a prince it is no marvel, if he preserve a
prince against a few his unnatural subjects, a realm ayenste a few
traitors. I must say as they do, it is no great marvel, that god so
does, and yet I say as I said first, our sovereign lord king Henry the
eight, has much more cause to give God thanks, than ever had king David, or
David not yet a king. For as he knew that king Saul sought his destruction,
and thereby might do what lay in him, to escape his hand, and also by often
intercession, obteyn help and succor of god, so the kings highness of late
stood in case far unlike, and in much more present danger then he did. His
highness was in great peril, and neither saw it, ne could mystruste any such
thing. For if nature, if blood, if most ample benefits, could have wrought
in some, as they do in all natural and honest hearts, whom might his grace
have taken for his more trusty servants, for his trewer subjects, then Henry
Corteney, late marquis of Exetter, then Henry Pole late lord Montacute, than
Edward Neuell, late of his graces privy chaumber? I will talk with the
rest, when I shall come to the place, which I reserve for them. What
subjects were more bound to their soueraygne lord, I say much more, what men
were more endetted to man, than were all these three to his highness? Who in more
danger than his grace, which neither could mystruste them, ne yet without
his great peril trust them. God promisynge aid to them that call upon him*
seldom suffers innocents, as Job says, to peryshe. Wherefore David having
cause to call for help, and God by his promise bound to succor him, could
not but find god good to him. But our most fortunate king, was in most
danger, and in no fear ne suspicion of lest. How could his grace suspecte
them, whom of all men he knew had greattest causes to love him, to desire
his highness prosperytie and long reygne? His grace did not use them as
men, whom he mystrusted, no he used more familiarnesse with few of his
subjects, than he did with the Marquis, and sir Edward Neuyll. Wherefore as
his grace could not are help ayenste them, whom he took to be the rediest of
all men to spend their blood, if need should require, them so to do: Even so
god saying what was in hand, thought it high time such rank and ripe
traitors to be reped up. He saw, the less his highness mystrusted the more
peril his graces person stood in, the farther they were from suspicion, the
nigher they were to work mischef. Our lord be thanked, they have in one hour
rydde this realm of many dangers, taking their leave of life, with such
shame, as it becomes al trayters to do, and as for the most part god be
thanked, they are all wont to do. If laws were gone, or of no strength at all,
would not men only moved by the heynousnesse of treason, think all deaths to
few for these abhomynable traitors, all tourmentes, all pain, all vilany to
little for them? I am ashamed, that ever it should come into writing, that there
have been among men, some, that receiving so high favor, and so great
benefytes, sought to make him away, of whom they received them, more ashamed,
that such exaumples should be found among christian men, most of all, that
it happens so often here in our countreye. The civil law, is much to be
commended, that the master may call him ayene to bondage and servitude, whom
he has made free, if at any time after his fredome, he show him self unkind.
The Macedons and Athenians also, had an action, a comune plee in the law,
ayenste such as were but in trifles blotted with unkindness, as ayenste men,
that in deed are enmies to al them, which have need of other men's help. One
unkind person, is oftentimes the cause, that men have no will to do good,
where they may fear the like. And if it be true, that Gratitude, which is a
perpetual memory of benefittes received, and alsoo a desire to recompense
them, be as a mother of many virtues, Forasmoche as there comes from her,
love and fear of god, love and fear of our prince, love toward our
countreye, love toward our parents, frendshyp between man and man, veneration
of those that bring us up, and do either norysshe our bodies or instruct our
minds, we must needs gather it to be true, that Cicero writes to his friend
Atticus, Ingratis vitia inesse omnia, that is, all vices to be in them, that
are unkind. This vice is much better named in our tongue, then it is, as me
thinks in any other. Unkyndnesse, is a fytte name for so unnatural a vice:
they that fall into it, go from the kind of men, they lose that state and name,
that nature put them in, and are turned into cruel and unnatural beasts.
Now if unkindness be such a vice, in what hatred of all men, ought traitors to
be, and traitors to their prince, and such their prince of whom they had
received so innumerable benefits, and which, so many ways had declared his
synguler favor and love toward them?

For to come at the last, to the archetraytour, and to speak some what of him,
whom god hates, nature refuses, all men deteste, yea, and all beasts to,
would abhor, if they could perceive, how much viler he is, then is even the
worste of them, what man would ever have thought, that Reynold Pole could have been by any gifts, by any promotion, by any means in this world, brought
from the love, which for so many the kings high benefittes, of all men, he
ought his grace the most who wol yet believe, that knowith it not to be true,
that a man so bound to love, can hate, so bound to serve, can bread
traitors, stire sedition, intend his death, for whom he ought with all
heart to have shed his best blood, reckoning the loss of his own life well
spente, so that his highness might thereby be preserved, I wol not say from
death, but from peril and danger. How many fathers have been more tender over
their sons, than has his grace been in bringing up the, thou false Pole,
thou shameful and shameless traitor, from thy chyldhode, even till within
these two years? What letters wrote his highness in thy favor to the Uenetians,
at thy first goinge into Italye? what credyte, what estymation could thou
have been in there, if thou had come alone without his gracis commendation?
what was in the, at thy first going thither, beside thy famylye, worthy any
great estimation? Thou might have come with thy birth and family, and have
found few there that would have esteemed the for them, saving for his gracis
sake. His gracis favor, whom at that time the bishop of Rome and his
adherentes, honored above all princis in Chrystendome, won the thy friends
there, if they may be called thy friends, whom thou so take to be, not
knowing who be thy friends, and who thy foes, being thy self of all men most
enemy to thy self. Thou suffredst thy self to be callid the king of
Englandes nephewe, this title being falls, wrought much, and made many in
love with the for thy nobilities sake. And yet thou gottest not so many that
way, as thou dyddest by reason it pleased the king of his goodness to give
the, beside thine own revenues, yearly an hundredth pound out of his cofers.
It is a wonderfulle thing to see the diversity of nature, how grate and
kind (...) be, and how unnatural and unkind some other be. Many think them
self to owe life, and all the rest, to him that does but a mean good turn
for their friend, and canste not thou, receiuyng so many, so great benefits,
thy family, thy mother, thy brethern, so many ways bound to his hyghenesse,
avoid treason? Thou have read many notable hystoryes, that might have kept
thy cancred nature, at the least from treasone, if they could a wrought no
farther in the. How many slaves do we read of, that have lived with their
masters in great servitude and misery, which yet so loved their masters,
that they chose either to dye for them, or else to dye with them.

Philotimus a servant and a slave, a little before his master dyed, was made
heir of all that he left. Mark his true stomach, thou must needs condemn
thyn unfaithful falls and traiterous heart. When the deed corpse was cast into
the fire, he remembering what a true servant owes to a good master, forgate,
not only the goods that were bequethed him, but also contempnynge his own
life, lept into the fire, thinking true service not to end where life
remains. Here as I do not like this Philotimus to hot love, or to say as I
ought, his rash death, so I doubt not but there be in England many
servants, that would a thousand times hasarde their life, rather than their
master should be in any ieoperdy of his.

Marcus Antonius being overcome of Augustus the emperor, delivered unto Eros
his servant a sword, requirynge to be rydde, ere his enmyes should take him.
Eros took the sword, and quickly turnyng it thought it less shame, yea,
less hurt, to kill him self then to kyl his master. I could tarry and fill
mine oration with such examples, but neither to the, Pole, it needs, nor to
the, such a traitor, it boteth: thou have red them as well as I, yea thou
know, that very dogs, unto whom their master could never give more then
meat and drink, have often died for their master, often slain them that slew
him. I will bring in an example or two, not that I think they can do the any
good, but that they may set our thine abhomynable unkindness, to thy shame and
confusion. It is notable, that authors write of king Lisymachus his dog,
which never left his lord and master, but was in all huntynges, in all
wars, in all ieoperdies at hand with him. At the last when he saw his master
deed, and cast into the fire, as the manner of burial was then, the dog a great
while mornefully yowling and lamenting the death of his master, cast him
self even into the fire also, and there died by his master. Pliny writes,
that Hiero king of the Syracusans, had a dog, which did even the same. It is
more notable, that writers leave in memory of a Romans dog, which Roman
was put to death when Titus Fabinus and his famylye were slain. This dog
would away from his master, for no strypes, for no whyppynge, but lay by the
deed body, and still howled wonderful mornyngely, many of the Romans
standing about and much meruaylyng at the true faith and heart that that sorye
worm bare unto his inayster. At the last, when they thought the dog
hungrye, one of the sta^ders by gave him meat, which he straighte carried to
his masters mouth, and left it there. Shortly after the body being hurled into
the floudde of Tyber, the dog lept in after, and gate hold of his master,
keeping him above water as long as he could. If the laws had provided no
pain for treason: were not these examples enough, to make men tear such
traitors, as thou art with their teethe? If men would spare the, would not
dogs pursewe a beast thus overwhelmed with all kind of treason? A beast so
false to his soueraygne lord, and such his souerain lord? How be it, if thou
be as I surely think thou art, he is much more thye friend, that wysheth the
ded then a live. Treason can never lie alone in a traitors heart, it has
such a rablemente with it, that death is pleasure, if it be compared with the
gripes, the woundis, the tossynge and turmoylyng, the heauyng and shouyng, that
traitors feel in their stomachs. As god help me, I can not think, but god
even of very purpose reserueth the alive, only because thy life has many mo
tourmentes, much more shame in it, then any cruelle death can have. God by
thy life declares what rest thy traiterous soul shall have after the eternal
shame of this world, For he that has to dwell where thou art sure to be,
except thou amend, must be exercysed with such panges as thou art, and ever
in his life learn what hell has, what interteynement they have that take up
their lodgyng there. What greatter tourmente can be wyshed unto the, tha^ all the world to know, that thou by these abhomynable treasons, haste cast away
thy famylie, which might have continued in honor, disteined thy blood,
which before was myngled with a kings, and now is far under a colyers? what
greater shame can comme to the, then to be the dishonor of all thy kynne, a
comfort to al thine enmies, a death to all thy friends? All men that love
truth, allegiaunce, and honesty, must needs be thine enemies, all men must
hate the, yea, thy mother her self shall think her self worthy death, if she
hate not the above all creatures. All they, whom frendeshyp and affinity had
in time paste knitte unto the, wyshe for no traitors death so much as they
do for thine. O Pole, o hurl pole, full of poison, that would have drowned
thy country in bloudde, thou thoughtest to have ouerflowed thy prince and
soueraygne lord, thou thoughteste with thy traitorous streams to have over
rounne all to gether. But god be thanked, thou art now a P^le of little water,
and that at a wonderful low ebb. Can I wysshe the any more hurt, than that
thou may live long in such shame, in such infamy, as I think never
traitor was in? I think as obstinate a wretch as thou art, if the fall of
thy familye nothing move the, that yet the voice of thy country, which
sommetyme wishes the deed in thy first cloutes, sometime hanged, sometime in
hell with thy great master, the dyuelles vycar about thy neck, were enough
to make the chose a tree, and there to do as Judas the capitayn of traitors,
whom thou trayterousely folowest, did. Have not thou much greater cause to say,
as Job did, than ever had Job? Who ever might better say, than thou? who ought
sooner to cry tha^ thou? Cursed be that day that I was borne in, let that day
perish, and the night also, in ye which it was said, there is a knave child
conceived. let that day be turned in to darkness, let god never regard it, let
never light shine upon it: but even to the worlds end be it covered with
eternal darkness. Let the dymme cloud fall upon it, let it be lapped in
with sorrow, let the dark storm overcome that night, let not the day that I
was borne in, be rekened among the days of the year, nor counted in the
months. Let them that dispice that nigt, and curse the day, curse also the
morning that followed my birthe, let it look for light and see none, because it
shyt not up the womb that bare me. Alas why died I not even in my birth?
why did not I perisshe as soon as I came out of my mothers womb? why set
they me upon their knees, that now do bring them all either to death, or
shame, fellow to any death? Why gave they me suck with their breasts, that
now have left no blood ne life in their bodies? Wherefore is light given to him
that is in misery, and life to them that have heavy hartis, life to them that
long for death, and search for it more than ever they did for any treasure?
Thou may o wicked traitor say, what thou list, but thou canste think
lyttel better of thy self, thanne all thy country thinkith. This I know, thou
have causes mo than a thousand to say all this and more to. The bishop of Rome
and his godly sowers of treson, thought they had spun a wonderful fine threde,
and weaued a gay piece of work, when they gate this Raynarde to play the
traitor in a Cardinals apparel, thinking, ye and knowing by their long
experience, no garmente so fit for oone that would take such an enterprise
upon him. This is a wede, that seldom gro wethe, where any good corn is, but
it has the ouerhand and distroyeth it gayely. He was made, yea marie was he, a
great legate, sent with much authority, but he returned as wise as they that
thought he could have wroughte miracles. The sword was sent to the king of
Scottis before, we being than enco^bred with sedition and rebellyon at home,
this gay legate rydeth after, to se whether ne were able to make the king of
Scotts to pulle it out of the sheath, and use it according to his intent
that gave him the gift. was there ever beast, so maliciousely set to undo his
country, for the which many men have gladly dyed? or ever any stonye heart,
that so enuironned with a kings benefits, would let none of them enter into
it? so blind, that in such a number could see none? so ungrate, that saying
so many, would be moved by none of them? What can thyn ennemies, which are
not only all englyshemen, but as many as ever knew whatte honesty means,
what can they all wyshe the wors, than that thou may never dye, and ever
feel that, that traitors of thy sort are sure to feel? But percase, as all
our country men do deteste and abhor this pestylent Cardinal, as the
vnnaturallest beast, that ever prince bestowed benefit on: so, few or none
do know, how much the marquese of Exetter, and the lord Montacute, this
traitors brother, were bound to the kings highness.

First the Marquise of Exceters father, by king Henry the.vii. most noble
father to our most dradde soueraygne lord that now reygneth, was for
certain treasons committed to prison, where he lay in teoperdie of loss of
lands and life, until the death of the said king. And not withstanding
there were great and weighty matters laid against him, yet our sovereign lord
that now is, did not only pardon him of his life, and restore him to his
lands and honor, but took this his son into his privy chaumber, using
him there much more like a companyon, than a servant, always encreasynge his
lands and revenues after such sort, that if he had not been to unnatural,
he could never have loved his own life half so much, as the kings wealth and
honor. A cruel change, for most love, to render grettest hatred. O fondnes,
who might not have been content to serve such a master, to be subject to
such a prince, yea, what man being the one and not the other, being a subject and
not a prince, would not rather desire to do his duty to so noble, so gentle,
so high a prince, so loving a master, then for to take from him his majesty,
yea, though he were sure to bring his traiterous purpose to effect? But what
thing does not blind ambition attempt? his mouth was ever full of these
pratye sayings, I trust to see a change of this world, knaves rule about
the king: but I trust one day to give them a buffet. he can be no subject,
that shall buffet rulers about a king, no, he thought to be none, when he
commanded Kendall his manne to make as many men in a redynes as he could,
which might serve within an hours warning. He thought to have worn the
garlande, when he told his friends, I trust to have a fair day over these
knaves that rule about the king: I trust to se a merry world one day. But yet
se how he was. deceived, god that has wether at will, would not so much as
give him a fair day to dye in, all his mirthe is ended for this world, al
joy is paste, he is gone, and has left to his son and heir nothing but
sorrow, nothing but myserye, except the king of his mercy bear him more
love then his father did. These be the fair days that god sends unto
traitors, this is the myrthe that they come to: our lord send all traitors
the like myrthe. Surely they that be as these were, do but deceive them
selfs, if they look for any better end then they had. God punissheth none so
soon as ungrate persons, because he would have us not ungrate unto him. And yet
he has evermore grievously punisshed such as should rebel and work sedition
against their hedes and rulers. Chore Dathan and Abiron, may make all men that
can learn to aduoyde their own hurt by their neighbors, obey, where they
ought to obey, serve where they ought to serve, and not to repine, ne to take
upon them rule, where god has appointed them to be ruled. You may read how
god scurged these three, how the earth brake under their fete, and swalowed
them up with their tabernacles and all their substance, how they went alive
into hell, there testyfyenge what punishment god has prepared for rebels,
for traitors, for men disobedient to their hedes and rulers. What lost our
first father Adam by his gay enterprise, which thought to have a fair day,
a merye time? What lost he for ones disobeinge, for theatynge of an apple? a
small thing, but even all mankind. He was in Paradise a place pleasant,
beyond all pleasures, almost all hours talking with god almighty, the
eating of an apple brought him, that he durst not show his face. God cries
to him: Adam where art thou? out of what pleasure haste thou put thy self?
and in to what myserye? I may say, O Marquis, where art thou? where is the
fair day thou lokedest for? where is thye garlande? Some men perchance woll
say, they have suffered for their trespass, they should now be at rest. I
answer, things are written not so much for malice to the men, as for the
hatred that every man owes to treason. There is no writer that can set their
name and fame in worse case then it is. All shame is in them, whom treson has
defiled. The ransom of treason is more tha^ loss of life and goods. Men's
tongues and pens, when death has done what she may, are bound to work
ayenste traitors as much as they may. Traitors are even still to be rated, no
less then if they were a live and still in fulle purpose to bring their
tresons to pass.

Now on the other side, was the lord Mountacute nothing in the kings debte?
was not also his mothers lands lost, she a poor gentle woman, dwelling
among the systers of the Syon, he a poor gentle manne, not having a foot of
land toward his living? was it not a thing worthy thanks, to comme from
nothing to.iii. or.iiii. thousand mark land, his mother to have this for
her life, and he to enherite it after her decease? had not this traitor cause
to have been a true subject to his prince, a true seruante to his master? was
he not bound above a great sort of men, to love the kings welthe and honor,
to serve his majesty with all loyal heart and obeysaunce. Might not this
fond or rather detestable traitor, have talked and dreamed of other things,
then of the kings death, which our lord keep of, even as long as nature
with his help may maintein life, and all other that would other wise, to follow
Montacute and his fellows? Might not he have been content with this world, and
the state he was now in, leauyng his lewd prophecies of the world to come of
the time that should make him and his merry, if he might tarry it? he might, if
god had not ben as content to leave him, as he was desyrefull to flee god, and
to keep down his word and testament. For as gods joy is to be with men,
that take joy of his presence, so being left and forsaken, though his desire
be to do otherwise, he leueth and forsakes. This I dare say, if these men had
not ben enemies to the gospel, haters of goddis word, they could never have
fallen in to such an abhomynable sort of treasons. Who knows not how these,
that are now deed, how the Marquis and Montacute abhorred not only all
reading of scripture, but al so all reders of it. It was a crime judged great
inoughe for to put any their servants out of seruyse, if they were spyed with
a new testamente in their hands. whether Reynolde that traitor, put this in
their heedes, or whether god thought it best, that they had chaplayns according
to their hearts, men desyrefull to keep them still from the knowledge of their
duties, from the light of god dis word, which they hated above all things, I
woll not discuss: the saying is, they both did well their parts. As for
Reinolde, I am assured, he ceased not to keep his brethren in error, which
sent his mother word, that if he knew her to be of the same opinion, that ye
king is of, he would tread her under his fete, mother his, as she was. What
beast could use such langage to his mother, except he had utterly forgotten
the reverence, that nature techeth all creatures toward their parents? what
pestilent heart reigns in him, that has such a rancour to goddis word,
such a stomach ayenste the truth? Thou, thou Raynolde art the very pole, from
whense is poured all this poison. Thou haste slain thy brother, the Marquis
and thine other brother was at deaths door. But for as much as it pleased
god to save Geffreys life, and to turn the vyolence of the knyfe to his
salvation, to the safety of the kings highness, and to the welthe of the hole
realm, the kings grace takethe it to be goddis pleasure, that Geffrey yet die
not, and has pardoned him all his offenses so that his cleme^cie has saved
Geffrey, whom thy knauishe letters and messangers had brought to the galowes.
Great pity it is, so says he, and all the rest, that ever thou sawst light.
Say what thou can, pour out thy poison, semble, dissemble, the wrath of god
lays up sorrows for the, thou shalt never escape his hands, thy cappe, thy
hatte wolle cover treason no longer than he lysteth: they will bear of but
easylye, when he begins to smite. I plainly protest, I am thyn enemy, and
sommetyme would feign here tell, that thou were served as thy demerites he:
sommetyme I wyshe the to live ever, never out of shame, always in infamye,
with all the rest of such companyons as wait upon traitors. The bishop of
Rome, great captayn of errors, has as fit a chapleyne of him, as he could
have picked out in an hole world. The bishop would nothing to be written
ageynste such abuses, such idolatry, such heresies as he maynteyneth.
Reynolde wolle in no case read any thing, that does not maynteyne al three,
they both agree in this, to make their abode, to stick and utterly cleave in
that, they sucked in, of their erroneous nurse, Long Custom.

There be many in England, that know Reynolde right well, there is not one of
them all, that can say and lie not, that he wol either abide any writer, any
preacher, or any private co^moner, that swarueth from his trade.

Alexander being al his life in wars, took it to be an exceeding folly for a
judge to pronounce his sentence, hearing but the one party, and had in custom,
when any tale was brought to him against any man, to stop one of his ears,
saying to them that asked him what he meant by doing so, I must keep one
ear for his answer, that now is accused. Pole has read much, which
thing does steye a man in error, and not help him out of it, if he chaw the
sense of scripture, as he list, and wrynge out such juice, as his fantasy
corrupted before, there now seeks. Saint Paul had readde much, even when he
persecuted Christis flock, and of no thing so much as of scripture. You see
men could never turn his heart. God him self was fain to put to his voice,
to stryke his body blind, and to enlyghten there with his soul. Saint
Augustine had read much, and was very conversant in the scriptures, and yet he
was a great while in the heresies of the Manichees, and thought that scripture
was of his side. Many disputed with him, they all found, that stubburnesse
does no where so much hurt, as when it lyghteth upon great wits, furnished
with much lerning. Plato says, small wits do never much hurt in a common
weal, the great be they that do the great hurt. The bishop of Rome thought
Pole both of great learning and of great parentage, so that even polycie
taught him a ioly point of folly. The bishop thought to work by him a feate
mete for oone in his place. Pole came somewhat to late into France, at the last
commotion. If he had comme in season, he would have playde an hardier part than
Ask did, he would surely have ieoperded both his eyes, where Ask ventured
but one. He would have had not only a foot in their bote, but in spite of Ask
and his company, would have ruled the stern. He came to late, great pite, he
had not put Ask out of his office. How be it when he sent Holland with his
message to Geffreye his brother, that they should not stir while he came, he
thought to be at the beginning of the breakefast, to the which the Marquis was
bydding still his gestes. He would have brought in that merry world, which his
brother Montacute still looked for, evermore afraid lest he and his should not
tarry that merry time. Why was he afraid trow ye? he was no sick man, his
years were not so many, but he moughte have lived for age a great season. He
feared, it would chance as it now has done, he thought treson could not so
long be kept close. O Reynolde, you have tarried to long for him. He may wyshe
as many a man does, that ye had been hanged the day before, you sent that
message home. he woll not stir, while you come. God put it in your hedde to
take your viage shortly. Thy capitain and thou both, with his hole cloutry of
Carnalles, weep I dare say yet, to remember the Northern insurrection, to here
such a rage, such a fury of people, so swaged, so quietted, no stroke
stricken. You fear, you fear, ye have good cause so to do, lest other princes
do gather thereby, both the synguler love of god toward our most godly king,
and also the hatred that he bears to your pestylente ambition, abominable
lives, and doctrine much worse then your living. Certes to say as I think, it
were great pity ye should live any better then ye do, except you would
first agree, that god and his word might reygne, and you serve your princes
according to it. He that had dwelte in the stynkynge chanal of Paul Bishop
of Rome, his bosom, or in the synke of Pole and his fellows stomakes, that
day, that the news were brought to Rome, of the end of our hurly burly in the
North, he should have seen them stryken in a wonderful dompe, he should have
seen griping at their hearts, syghes walking to and froo, at sorrows
commaundment. Surely they had no myschaunce this many years so great, as was
that our good chance, to them. There came no plage of god this long season
upon them, that moved them more, then that so manyfeste the goodness of god
showed upon us. Ah lord, thy providence is wonderful, thou blyndest, thou
geuest light, thou hardnest, thou do enter where thy pleasure is. Some run
fast, and yet come short, because they lose the way: some tarry long, and yet
be formest. thou appoyntest a time to call in thine elect, that wander, thou
turneste their hearts to the, when thy pleasure is, that straied among the^,
which were and be ferdest from the. Of all the miracles and wonders of our
time, I take the change of our soueraygne lords opinion in matters concerning
Religion, to be even the gretest. There was no prince in Christendom, but he
was far liker to have changed then our soucrayne lord, he was their pyller,
and bare them up a great while: they gave him fair titles for his so doing,
and honorid his name in all their writingis, was it not a wonderful work of
god, to get his grace from them to him? To make him their overthrow, whom they
had chosen for their defe^sour? I have often hidden my countreye men to mark
the procedynges of god, sythens this change, with HENRY the VIII. his chosen
lieutena^t in England, and our only lord and heed under Christ and his
father, I still say, as I have said, who so marketh, how tenderlye god
preserves his highness, he is either exceeding blind, or else he well perceyueth
god to be enemy to all the^ that love not his grace. Wherbefore he was called
king, and yet had against all right and equity a ruler above him, which
always enforced him self to keep his highness, and all the rest of his
subjects in servitude, error, and idolatry. God has made him, as al his
noble progenitors of right ought to have been, a full king* that is, a ruler,
and natruled in his own kyngedome, as other were. God has delivered his
highness from the bondage of the bishop of Rome, his subjects from errors,
his realm from the foul sin of idolatry. Ignorance, a child that the
bishop of Rome left here, with his monks and friars to be fostred, and made
strong, is taking her leave, would god her passeport were made, and she sent
from whens she came. But she has been so cherished, so made of in this realm,
that loathe she is to depart. She has many friends, and trustethe by the help
of them to be made denyzen, and so to change her apparel, and to do much
more hurt in parish churches, tha^ ever she did in cloisters. But I trust, as
god has showed what hurt comes of her and hers, so he will provide a way,
to see, that she and hers have less to do. The people begin to know what
they that be curates ought to preach, and what they arbou^d to follow, and
yet they do but begin. Would god some were appointed to take them forth new
lessons. They have long since begone to know their duty toward god, their
obedience to their prince, the love they ow unto their neighbors, and yet they
be still at the beginning. For if they were fully taught, but in these.iii.
points, I dare promise, my life to lie upon it, the fruits of this knowledge
should be such, as would enforce all christian princis, to follow the steps of
our noble prince. I remember how king Iosaphat sent many of his nobles with
prechers, that is, true setters out of the word of god, through all Jury,
and how all the world feared his power, after that god was preched in his
king dome. I trust as our most prudente king ceasseth not to send his
wholesome and godly proclamations abroad, that so one day men shall be sent after
them, to se what effect they take, what success comes of them, where they
work, and where they be idle, where they have fre passage, and where they be
stopped. But leauyng new occasions, which lead me to new purposes, I wol
return, and follow that I took in hand. This last sedition, beside many
other commodities, that it wrought in this realm, has made the people, and
in especial those where it reigned most, very glad to here, very desyrefull to
make amends to God and their Prince, for that they offended both before. I
have herd diverse men say, that three or four preachers may do more good in
the north cou^tray in two or three months, than has been done in these
southe parties, these two or three years, only because the people be so ready to
take what so ever the preacher shall offer unto them: so that if the people
be naught still, the fault is no more theirs, for they would fain be good. They
se god louith no rebellions, no disobedience, if god had done nothing for the
king, sythens that time, was not that one benefyte inoughe, to bind his
grace, and all them that love this his realm, evermore to think upon goddis
goodness always to give him thanks, and yet still to think thanks vngyuen?
All books can show, no such sedition so quieted, no such rage so peasibly
assuaged, and yet at the first, as al men lyked the end, so was there an
other thing, that men, which favor the peace and quietness of our country,
thought somewhat amysse. Men were wonderful glad, that harneys was put of,
and weapons laid down, but they were sorry, that the deceyuers of the simple
and pore subiectis, had after their pestilent pilgremages, pardon. It is often
to be remembered, how god provided both for the sort deceived, and also how
upon new treason committed, he would the rank capitaynes, to testify upon
the gallows, that traitors must come to shamefulle death. And yet is there
more, even concerning the same matter, to be marked. where as it plesed the
king of his clemency and tender love, that his grace bears to the life of his
subjects, to satisfye the rigor of the laws, with a few of their dethes, god
has this last summer by strange kind of sycknes, well declared unto the
commons of the north, that he was not contented so few were punished, where
so many offended. And as the sickness plagued them sore, so I think god pycked
a great sort in other countries, such as he knew had hearts evil enough,
though their deeds were unknown. It is not to be left vnspoke^, that a
general plague reignyng in all the north, and in many other parties of the
realm, London, a city for the more part yearly visited with great death,
had in manner no syckenesse in it. Let other men lay the cause where they
think best, I do surely suppose, that as god punyshed them for their
treasons, so he showed unto the Lo^doners, that the way to have him merciful
and good to them, is that that they are in, though not settled, yet a great
part of them well entered. All be it we be forgetful, and have still need of
some, to put us in mind of goddis goodness toward us, yet I woll not now
speak of the tresure which he gave this realm, what joy and comfort he sent
to all true english men, when he sent unto our sovereign lord, his dear and
noble son, our dear and noble prince Edward. I trust it nedith not, I trust
there be none of us, either so blind, that we see not, how much England
owes unto god, for his birth, for his preservation, for such his towardnes, as
was never seen in child, by all men's assent the like, either so ungrate, but he
herynge of this noble princis growyng, and waxing to a king, to the scepter of
this his right inheritance, woll with all his heart, desire god both to keep him
long from the scepter, and longer in it than ever was his father before him.
I say, I will not speak of his grace, neither of the goodness of god powered upon
us, and all ours, by his birth. No, I woll make as foul a change as ever ye
saw or herd of. I wolle go from him (whom the love to god and his father
reserved) we ought to love, above all things, and entreat of them, whom, if
they were alive, all Englyshmen ought above al creatures to hate. And yet I will
not so gladly talk of them, as of the goodness of god shewid to us by their
occasion. O lord, in what danger has the kings highness been, these xiii.
or.xiiii. years? For even all this space, there have been in his gracis privy
chaumber, that from time to time have not only vttred the secrets of his
counselle and chamber, but also have practiced with his most enemies, and done
what they could to hinder his graces godly procedynges? Was it not a syngular
prouydence of god, that the Marquis of Exettour, was put out of the preuye
chaumber, upon no deserte, I think at that time known, but even that god
put it in the kings heed so to do? Is it not to be meruayled, that he and
Edward Neuyll, a couple worthy all men's hatrede, a couple joined in
traitorous intentes, being so long together about his highness own person,
did no more hurt? Is it not more marvel, that the one being put out of the
privy chaumber, the other attempted nothing? Men that know not the goodness of
god toward his elect rulers, may marvel at al these things, but let us
laud god for them all, and assure our selves, that god woll not suffer a
prince, whom he has chosen, to greatter affairs, than gross heedes can
attain unto, to be vyolated of his traiterous subjects. God has joined with
the majesty of a king, such a fear, that false hearts have no power, to
offer wrong to a prince, though all oportunities seem to serve them: wherefore
if we list to meruail, let us a little while intrete of the disclosyng of these
tresons.

Sir Geffry Pole was committed to the tower, neither the kings hyghnes, nor
any of the counsel suspectynge either the Marquis, either the lord Montacute
his brother, or sir Edward Neuyll, of any of al these things, that they were
found guilty of. Geffrey being in the tower, having his breast full of
witnesses against him self, against his brotherne, against the Marquis, was
brought into such a thronge of thoughts, into such a conflycte of pensiers,
that blood and nature, workinge on the one side, god and conscience on the other,
he was carried into such a perplexity, that he could, neither condiscende to
accuse his brother, his cousyn sir Edward Neuyll, and him self, chyefe of
all, endaungeryng all four, with the gylte of treason, nor yet utterly
withstand, the workynge of god and his conscience, within him: which often put
in his mind, rather to suffer them and him self to, bodily to be brought to
death, then to goo body and soul to the devil. This motion ran often in his
heed, but the dyuell, continual aduersarye to goddis honor and man's welthe,
put in his foot, and so toste this wretched soul, that of many euelles, he
chose even the worste of all, which was a full purpose, to slay him self. The
commodities of his death were many, as the dyuel made them to the show, his
brother should live still, their famylie continue in honor, the lord Marquis
should have great cause to love all his blood, which had killed him self
to save him, with many such fantasyes, as desperate men find, to help them
to their end. He was fully persuaded to slay him self. Desperation had
wroughte her feate, now see how opportunity made all things redye for him,
his keeper was absente, a knyfe at hand upon the table, he rysethe out of his
bed, and takes the knyfe, and with full intent to dye, gave him self a
stabbe with the knyfe upon the breast. The devil lacks strength, where god
has any thing to do, and can better begin things, then bring them to
effect. The devil had played his part, now se how god, as he often does,
turned all the deuels hole work, to his glory, and Geffreyes salvation. The
knyfe was blunte, and so did perse: but the wound as god would, was not
mortal, and yet for as much as blood came after the wound, Geffrey began at
the last, to fear god, to fear hell, to remember into what case the devil had
brought him, and then began to deteste the slaughter of him self, to wish he
had opened al to gether, rather then to have lost his body and soul after
that sort. He now began to cast, which way he might apease the wroth
and vengeance of god, ready as he thought to hurl him in to hell. He now cast
his count after an another sort, dread of death which as he thought would
have followed the wound, began to teach him a new lesson, his brother, his
cosen, sir Edward Neuylle, now waied as much with him as they ought to do,
he saw before him the loss of his soul, and thought it much better, they
lost their hedes: he saw in what danger he should leave his soueraygne lord,
whose benefyttes, began now to muster before him, and the vele of malice
laid aside, to turn his heart: he saw the damages, the slaughters, that
might come to his country: he saw it not possible, that god should be any
thing good to him, which should conceal the destruction of so many. In so
much that now he, which would have dyed, to save his brotherne and cousyn,
desired life, for no cause so much, as yt he might bring them to that they
had deserved: and thereupon of his own mind, no man requirynge him to it, no man thinking of any such thing, he desired to speak with the lieutenant
of the toure, and after to speak with some of the kings privy counsel, to
whom when they came, he as a man still lokynge when the wound should have ended
his life, disclosed all the hole treasons. Thus the dyuels subtyl provision of
the knife, of his being alone, of persuading him to abuse the knife to his
destruction, utterly deceived the dyuell, all his gynnes, al his craftis, now
being turned against him self all the hurt that might have come to his
adversaries, god and those that love and seek his glory, now redoundyng upon
his own heed, will ye have a sure token, that this is the work of god? ye
have herd of the message, which Reynold sent to his brethern, that is, yt they
in no wise should stir until his coming. ye may know, who was author of so
godly a message. Who but the devil, author of al dissension, al rebellion, all
treason, could be either of counsel with him that sent such a message, or
with them that would keep it secret. If he were thautor of it, tha^ could he
not be the vtterer of it also: his kyngedome must needs fall, if he fight
against him self. God, god brought it to light, as one that has taken upon
him to defend his true and faithfulle ministre, king Henry the eight. God
has disclosed all, using such ways, that all men may know, it is only
he, that could do such a thing. A man would think it impossible, that where
no force, no violence, no tourmentes are used, flesh, bloudde, and nature
could suffer one brother to bring the other to his death. Some woll say, he
lacked no torments, as long as he had treson waltrynge in his heart. A
traitor whether he be so taken or not, can lack no scourginge, when he is
most alone. He has his whyppe in his bosom, and plays the tormentour him
self for lack of an officer. I wol not say, but Geffrey Pole, felt such
torments, no I must needs grant, he was shreudly scourged, that thought it an
ease to rydde him self of it by death.

They be of like no small peynes, that make the pacient glad to slay his body,
and damn his soul for the arrydance of the^. But yet as I said, he had no
outward torme^tis, no racking, no manicles, no he was put in fere of none of
al these peines, but enforced by god, as I take it, and as he him self said
at the bar it was, frankely uttered, not only ayenste his brother and
cousyn, but ayenste such, as when they came to the bar, granted them selfis
guilty, without any verdite of quest. But of these last, I will nothing speak,
all be it I take them to be as worthy eternal infamy as the first, but great
men of birth, because blood is disteined by treson, and their family taken from
them, ar those that ought to be set forth in their colors. It is I say again,
a wonder to se, one brother bring an other (much love being between them, and
no cause of hatred) to his death. It were a wonder surely, if one had not
taken the matter in hand, which can when him lust, both vanquishe nature,
and trede the devil with his hole power under his fete. They two kept those
treasons under lock and key. God is and ever has be^ lord of nature,
conqueror of the devil, and can compel both when him lusts, to set forth his
glory. But now, where we see, whose goodness it is, that treasons are known,
and traitors made away, let us not forgette to give him thanks, that thus
waketh, and in manner wayteth, to save us harmeles. Is it possible, that a man
not forced, should swear upon a book, him self to be a traitor, him self
of al men to be most worthy death. Sir Geffrey has often taken this oath, So
has Croftes and Colyns also: the other, all the time of their arraynement,
stood styffe, with castyng up of eyes and hands, as though those things had been never herd of before, that then were laid to their charge. The Marquis,
of all the rest stack hardest, and made as though he had been very clear in many
points, yet in some he staggered, and was very sorry so to do, now chalangyng
the kings pardon, now taking benefytte of the act, and when al would not
serve, he began to charge Geffrey Pole with frensye, with folly, and madness.
It is much to be noted, what answer Geffrey made to the Marquis in this
point. Some men, says Geffreye (as I here) lay to my charge, that I should
be out of my wit, and in a frensye. Troth it is, I was out of my wit, and
in a great frenesy, when I fell with them in conference, to be a traitor,
disobediente to god, false to my prince, and enemy to my native countraye. I
was also out of my wit, and stryken with a sore kind of madness, when I
chose rather to kill my self, tha^ to charge the^ with such tresons, as I knew
would cost them their lives, if I did utter them. But our lord be thanked,
god wrought better with me, then I thought to have done with my self. He has
saved my soul at the least. the knyfe went not so far as I would have had
it gone: his goodness it is, that I have not slain my self: his mercy, that I
was delivered from that frensye of killing my self: his work, that I have
declared my self, my brother, the Marquis, with the rest, to be traitors. And
where I thought, said Geffrey, rather to have put my soul in hasarde, for
the saving of these men, god I thank him, so wrought in me, and so changed my
mind, that if I had had ten brothern, yea ten sons, I would rather
bring them all to this peril of death, than leave my countreye, my
sovereign lord, and mine own soul in such danger, as they al three stood in,
if I had kept these treasons secret. Let us, let us dye, we be but a few,
better we have according to our deserts, tha^ our hole cou^trei to be brought
to ruin. O what a lord is god, whom can a traitor trust, when one brother is
so desyrefull to utter an others treason? yea when ye traitor him self, no
man compelling him, vttreth his own treson? whom may we trust, wha^ we our
selves, desire to disclose our selves? Treson can not lie longer hyd, tha^
while it ripeth, for if it be ones melowe, the savor straight, for the most
part, bewrays the howrde. Geffrey has never been taken for any pleasant or
sage talker, his wit was wont to serve his tongue but so so. I dare say, they
that were the wisest of the kingis most honorable counsel, did much wonder
that day, to here him tell his tale, and looked for nothing less, than that he
should have so handlyd him self. God is a meruayllous god, he can make both
when him lust, and whom he wol eloque^t, wise, pithie. He can make the to^ges
of the domme serve his elect, when his will is. The Marquis was styffe at the
bar, and stood fast in denial of most things laid to his charge, yet in some
he foiled and staggerde, in such sort, that all men might see his
countenance, to avouch that, that his tongue could not without much foltring
deny. But at the scaffolde, when he saw, men's oaths, with a multitude of
witnesses taken, and his sturdy denial not to save his life, he began either
to way dishonor less than he did at the bar, or else to think, that
dishonor standith in doing traitrously, rather than in confessyng of it, when
it is known to be so, death at hand, taught him and his fellows, to provide
for the safety of their souls, and to leave the regard of honor there on the
scaffolde with their bodies. They did all three acknowledge their offenses
toward the king, and desired all men that were there present, to pray god to
forgive them. They be gone, our lord I trust, which gave them repentance, wol
also take them to his mercy, and yet save their souls. The thing they
feared, is come upon them, they might not tarry the time, they plowed treason,
they sowed sedytion, no marvel if they reap death. Wherefore let us,
which in one hour, have escaped so many sorrows, so present calamities, so
imminente mischeues, say as Judith said, when she returned* with Holofernes
his heed in her lap, Laud and praise be given to the lord, that forsakest
not them that put their trust in the. Let him be gloryfied for ever of us, that
uncalled is thus preast and redye to defend them that were nigh the brinke of
pardicion, and saw it not, until he plucked them by the sleue. Hitherto ye
have hard, how traytrously these unnatural traitors ente^ded, you have seen
how the goodness of god, as well now, as in many other things, has preserved
the kings hyghnes, and brought his enemies to shameful death, now this thing
remains alone, what cause could move them, that were so much bound to
their lord and master, to fall into such horrible treasons. He lives not I
dare say that can find any just cause for any subject to be a traitor to
his soueraygne lord. And I am well assured, all men that have any spot of
honesty in them, wol think these worthy to be taken for traitors, if they
had but ones thought hurt unto his person, of whom they had received so
many benefyttes. There is no cause, and yet me thinks I find one, which
although it be not just, yet is it of such strength and efficacy, that it
can work almost no less then it did in these. I say and think, who so ever
is of their opinion in matters of relygyon, that he can love the kings
hyghnes, no better then they did* who s^^ is a papiste, an enemy to goddis
word, he may well lack power, or stomach, to utter treason, but he can not
lack a traiterous heart. what so ever he be, that thinks the bishop of Rome
supreme head of our church of England, can never bear the king such an
heart, as a true subject owes his souerain lord. No, I say more, he can in
no case love his highness, he can not chose but be a traitor. It is to be
sorowed and lamented greatly, that noble men woll thus fondely cast them
selves away, great wonder, greater pity, and greatest shame, that they, having
the word of god in their own tongue, woll not yet learn, what a king is, and
what a bishop, what lords owe unto the one, and what they may require of
the other. My purpose was to have handled a good sort of places, which I have
gathered out of the scripture, and doctors both, making for the mayntenance
of the kings supremytye, and also shaking down that arrogante and usurped
power of the bishop of Rome. I had so done, but that I saw this book, some
what with the longest, and well perceived, yt the other would have been much
longer, then this is. I have differred it for a while, but god willing, I woll
as soon as I can, for the service I owe unto nobility, and the rest my country
men, follow that which god will prycke me to, though feeble wit and weak
power draw never so fast back. In the mean season, I humblye beseech all
men, so to take these my labors, that I may with courage set upon the other,
which as they woll be much greatter, so my trust is, they shall be much
more profitable. They may so be, and shall so be, if it please him, which
works all that well is wrought, unto whom be all honor, al glory, for ever
and ever. Amen.

Londini in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad
imprimendum solum.

ANNO. M.D.XXXIX.


